- CERTAINTY IN GLOBAL MARKETS FOR THE U.S. AGRICULTURE SECTOR
[Senate Hearing 116-173]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-173
CERTAINTY IN GLOBAL MARKETS
FOR THE U.S. AGRICULTURE SECTOR
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,
NUTRITION, AND FORESTRY
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
JUNE 13, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov/
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
38-312 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, NUTRITION, AND FORESTRY
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas, Chairman
MITCH McCONNELL, Kentucky
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
PATRICK J. LEAHY, Vermont
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
JONI ERNST, Iowa
AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota
CINDY HYDE-SMITH, Mississippi
MICHAEL BENNET, Colorado
MIKE BRAUN, Indiana
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
ROBERT P. CASEY, Jr., Pennsylvania
CHARLES GRASSLEY, Iowa
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
JOHN THUNE, South Dakota
RICHARD DURBIN, Illinois
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
James A. Glueck, Jr., Majority Staff Director
DaNita M. Murray, Majority Chief Counsel
Jessica L. Williams, Chief Clerk
Joseph A. Shultz, Minority Staff Director
Mary Beth Schultz, Minority Chief Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
Thursday, June 13, 2019
Page
Hearing:
Certainty in Global Markets for the U.S. Agriculture Sector......
1
----------
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY SENATORS
Roberts, Hon. Pat, U.S. Senator from the State of Kansas,
Chairman, Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry....
1
Stabenow, Hon. Debbie, U.S. Senator from the State of Michigan...
3
WITNESSES
Doud, Hon. Gregg, Chief Agricultural Negotiator, Office of the
United States Trade Representative, Washington, D.C............
5
McKinney, Hon. Ted, Under Secretary for Trade and Foreign
Agricultural Affairs, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Washington, D.C................................................
7
Johansson, Robert, Ph.D., Chief Economist, Office of the Chief
Economist, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.....
7
----------
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Doud, Hon. Gregg.............................................
36
McKinney, Hon. Ted...........................................
40
Document(s) Submitted for the Record:
Smith, Hon. Tina:
Prepared Statement Submitted for the Record from Greg Fynboh.
46
Prepared Statement Submitted for the Record from Janet Kubat.
47
Prepared Statement Submitted for the Record from Marlin Fay..
48
Cooperative Network, prepared statement for the Record.......
49
The Minnesota State Cattlemen's Association, prepared
statement for the Record...................................
50
Leahy, Hon. Patrick J.:
Prepared Statement Submitted for the Record from Patrick J.
Leahy......................................................
53
Question and Answer:
Doud, Hon. Gregg:
Written response to questions from Hon. Pat Roberts..........
56
Written response to questions from Hon. Debbie Stabenow......
59
Written response to questions from Hon. John Boozman.........
59
Written response to questions from Hon. Deb Fischer..........
60
Written response to questions from Hon. Patrick J. Leahy.....
60
Written response to questions from Hon. Michael Bennet.......
61
Written response to questions from Hon. Richard J. Durbin....
62
Johansson, Robert:
Written response to questions from Hon. Debbie Stabenow......
65
Written response to questions from Hon. John Boozman.........
66
Written response to questions from Hon. Patrick J. Leahy.....
67
Written response to questions from Hon. Richard J. Durbin....
68
McKinney, Hon. Ted:
Written response to questions from Hon. Pat Roberts..........
69
Written response to questions from Hon. Debbie Stabenow......
71
Written response to questions from Hon. John Boozman.........
76
Written response to questions from Hon. Deb Fischer..........
77
Written response to questions from Hon. Patrick J. Leahy.....
77
Written response to questions from Hon. Michael Bennet.......
79
Written response to questions from Hon. Tina Smith...........
80
Written response to questions from Hon. Richard J. Durbin....
83
CERTAINTY IN GLOBAL MARKETS FOR THE U.S. AGRICULTURE SECTOR
----------
THURSDAY, JUNE 13, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:33 a.m., in SR-
328A, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. Pat Roberts,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Roberts, Boozman, Hoeven, Ernst, Hyde-Smith,
Braun, Perdue, Grassley, Thune, Fischer, Stabenow, Brown,
Klobuchar, Bennet, Casey, and Smith.
STATEMENT OF HON. PAT ROBERTS, U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF
KANSAS, CHAIRMAN, U.S. COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, NUTRITION, AND
FORESTRY
Chairman Roberts. Good morning. I call this meeting of the
Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry to
order.
Ambassador Doud, Under Secretary McKinney, and Dr.
Johansson, we are happy to have you all back again before the
Committee to discuss the need for certainty in our global
agriculture markets.
International trade policies and their impacts on the
United States' agricultural economy has been a topic of great
interest over the last few years and more particularly the last
few months.
In fact, this is the second time in the last year that we
are hearing about the efforts being made at the Office of the
United States Trade Representative and the Department of
Agriculture, efforts that I hope eventually will result in
long-term, reliable markets for United States agriculture.
A great deal has happened in the 9 months since you all
last appeared before this Committee. Perhaps the most
significant to our members, was the successful passage and
enactment of the 2018 Farm Bill with the help of everybody
here.
Much like negotiations with international trading partners,
the path to a final Farm Bill agreement was not easy. There
were many challenges and differences to overcome, and the final
bill had to bring together members of both the House and Senate
who represented incredibly diverse populations and regions of
agriculture.
Ultimately, with the support of my partner, the Ranking
Member, Senator Stabenow, and other members of this Committee,
we persevered and accomplished a strong bill, with historic
bipartisan support, a bill that provides certainty and
predictability to farmers, ranchers, and growers across the
country, including through strengthened and increased
investment in our agricultural export programs.
I know that the USTR and USDA have also been very busy
since we were last together.
The Administration has been moving the United States-
Mexico-Canada Agreement, or the USMCA, through the Trade
Promotion Authority process. Recently, the Section 232 tariffs
on Mexico and Canada were lifted, and producers look forward to
Congress progressing with the consideration of USMCA.
In addition, there have been positive outcomes for the
United States at the World Trade Organization in the cases
against China on trade-distorting price supports and tariff-
rate quotas for grains as well as the restoration of full
access of United States beef into Japan.
There are many good examples of the work you both have been
doing on behalf of U.S. agriculture around the world, and the
Committee looks forward to hearing about your continued efforts
to eliminate trade barriers and grow market access for our
products. We simply have to get that done.
However, these positive steps cannot truly be felt by our
producers until certainty and predictability is achieved in our
global markets.
Everyone around this table understands what our producers
are facing back home. On top of the already low prices for
their crops, fifth year in a row, producers are working through
floods, tornados, and weather events too numerous to list, and
of course, challenges of retaliatory tariffs.
I was in the northeast part of Kansas, on a platform
overlooking the Missouri. I have never seen the Missouri River
from 8 to 11 miles wide. It looks like the Caspian Sea,
although I have never seen the Caspian Sea, but that is what I
think it probably looked like. Unbelievable.
Fortunately, the Farm Bill is in place to ease some of the
uncertainty felt in farm country. However, I continue to be
very concerned about the overall impacts, like everybody on the
Committee, on U.S. agriculture as a result of the use of
tariffs as a policy tool.
An agreement with the United States and China is a critical
piece of that certainty. It is time for both countries to
remain at the table and reach the best possible deal. Gregg, I
know you have been working overtime on that. In fact, there is
a great deal of potential around the world for U.S.
agriculture.
It appears from your testimonies that each agency is
engaged on negotiations with Japan, so please share your
outlook on achieving a strong and timely agricultural agreement
there. There is much to gain from a strong agreement with
Japan, where we currently face a significant disadvantage to
TPP countries, such as Australia and Canada.
It is time to look forward to the future. While an update
of activities is certainly appropriate, today I hope to also
hear about the future of U.S. agriculture trade policy. This
includes not just restoring certainty to our markets that the
U.S. either had through negotiated agreements or as a
traditional, competitive supplier, but what will be done to
improve access to those same markets and broaden them to
others.
The question is, what is being done today that will enable
us to be a reliable supplier again around the world tomorrow?
How can we continue to strengthen trading relationships that we
have worked for, for years, to establish, while also building
new opportunities around the world?
Ambassador Doud, Under Secretary McKinney, and Dr.
Johansson, thank you all for your work on behalf of United
States agriculture. I look forward to your thoughts regarding
not only what has been done, but what will be done on behalf of
American agriculture.
I recognize now the distinguished Senator from Michigan,
Senator Stabenow, for her remarks.
STATEMENT OF HON. DEBBIE STABENOW, U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN
Senator Stabenow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
really important hearing. Ambassador Doud, Under Secretary
McKinney, Dr. Johansson, welcome back to the Committee. We
appreciate your efforts and appreciate you being here today.
It was, in fact, exactly one year ago that we sat around
this table and passed our bipartisan Senate Farm Bill in order
to provide certainty and predictability to our farmers and
ranchers.
However, today that certainty is being undermined by this
Administration's chaotic and unpredictable trade agenda,
despite your best efforts, and I would underscore that because
I know each of you are working hard. The reality is we have
chaos and unpredictability going on right now, and it is no
secret that it is a very challenging time for American farmers.
Low prices and poor market conditions continue to plague
our agricultural economy. Extreme weather events, from tornados
to bomb cyclones--we now even frequently have new words to
define weather events because of the intensity of what is
happening in the weather--are damaging crops and livestock.
Unseasonably cool and rainy weather has made it next to
impossible for farmers in Michigan and across the Midwest to
get their seeds in the ground for the upcoming crop year.
Facing great unknowns has always been part of life for farmers
and ranchers. However, right now we are in uncharted territory.
In the past, agriculture exports have been a bright spot
for the economy, supporting more than 1 million American jobs,
including over 22,000 jobs in Michigan.
Unfortunately, the Administration's reckless approach to
trade has taken a toll on our ability to export agricultural
products.
Michigan lost 230 dairy farms last year, the highest
percentage of any State, in part because dairy products
suddenly faced retaliatory tariffs in some of our most
important export markets.
Michigan's dry bean industry lost customers in European
markets due to tariffs, while buyers in Mexico are looking for
sellers elsewhere because they now view the United States as an
unreliable supplier.
Michigan's tart cherry industry simultaneously has dealt
with unfair imports from Turkey and tariffs from China.
Meanwhile, the Administration says our tart cherry growers have
not suffered sufficient trade damage to qualify for help.
In addition to the very real impacts we are seeing today, I
am concerned there will also be long-lasting harm. Farmers have
already spent nearly $1 billion of their own money through
checkoffs over the past two decades to establish Chinese
markets that are now gone, and may be impossible to rebuild.
A short-term trade disruption can create a permanent loss
in market share for American farmers. We know that happened
during the Nixon Administration's ban on soybean exports, which
Chairman Roberts witnessed firsthand as a congressional staffer
just a couple of years ago.
[Laughter.]
Senator Stabenow. The USDA recently decided to announce a
second round of trade assistance that, if anything, is adding
to the confusion and uncertainty for farmers.
While I understand the desire to help farmers weather the
Administration's chaotic trade agenda, the proposed aid is
creating more questions than answers.
I have strong concerns that these payments will not be
distributed in an equitable way between regions and crops.
The timing of the announcement, combined with widespread
prevented planting decisions, could make our farm economy even
worse.
Additionally, the Administration's actions are certainly an
unprecedented use of the Commodity Credit Corporation funds,
which are not guaranteed. That raises some questions with
Congress.
Also, it is outrageous that foreign companies are profiting
from assistance that is supposed to be for our farmers. After a
Brazilian company received millions in taxpayer dollars, we
recently learned that aid has also gone to a Japanese company
with a troubling criminal history of corruption and bribery.
The USDA needs to immediately take action to prevent
purchases from benefiting our foreign competitors. While I
agree we need to hold countries accountable when they break the
rules, this Administration's strategy on trade has been to
throw everything against the wall and hope something sticks.
Meanwhile, farmers, businesses, and consumers are being
hurt. Ultimately, our farmers want trade, not aid. We all know
that. They want to build markets, not burn bridges. They want a
thoughtful strategy they can trust, not haphazard proposals
announced by tweet. This uncertainty has gone on long enough.
Ambassador Doud, Under Secretary McKinney, Dr. Johansson--
you were before the Committee to discuss this same topic 9
months ago, and despite what I am sure are your best efforts,
the situation has only gotten worse. So I look forward to your
discussion today on how we can change course and give farmers
the markets and the certainty that they deserve. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Roberts. We want to welcome our panel of witnesses
before the Committee this morning. Our first witness is
Ambassador Gregg Doud, who serves as our Chief Agricultural
Negotiator in the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative.
Gregg was raised on a farm in Mankato, Kansas, and
graduated from Kansas State University. From his time working
to develop markets for the U.S. Wheat Associates and later the
National Cattlemen's Beef Association, he certainly has an
understanding of the importance of trade's impact on
agriculture, and that goes without saying.
Finally, he worked on another important issue, the Farm
Bill, as a staffer on the Senate Agriculture Committee during
my time as Ranking Member, when the person to my right was the
Chairperson, obviously, and we passed a bill pretty quickly. It
hit a brick wall over there in the House. That seems to be the
case with a lot of things.
With the Ambassador's experience on global agriculture
trade--and I really want to emphasize that--I am really glad to
have him representing the voices of U.S. farmers and ranchers
in his current role at the USTR.
So we welcome you back, Ambassador Doud. I look forward to
your testimony. I do not know anybody that has been working any
harder to restore markets and a reputation as a reliable
supplier, more especially with the Chinese.
Next, we have Under Secretary for Trade and Foreign
Agricultural Affairs, Ted McKinney, who coordinates
agricultural trade across the Department of Agriculture. Under
Secretary McKinney formerly served as director of Indiana State
Department of Agriculture, worked for 19 years with Dow Agro-
Sciences and 14 years with Elanco as director of Corporate
Global Affairs.
Under Secretary McKinney hails from Tipton, Indiana, and
graduated from Purdue University in Agriculture Economics.
Welcome back, Mr. Under Secretary. Good to have you here. I
look forward to your testimony.
Dr. Rob Johansson is here to answer questions. He is not a
participating witness, but we thought we would have him come. I
thank you for taking the time to do that, Doctor.
He serves as the Chief Economist for the U.S. Department of
Agriculture. As Chief Economist, Dr. Johansson is responsible
for the Department's agriculture forecast and projections as
well as advising the Secretary on the economic implications of
alternative programs, regulations, and legislative proposals,
probably has something to do with the mitigation payments as
well.
Dr. Johansson received his bachelor of arts in Economics
from Northeastern University, his master of science and Ph.D.
in Agriculture Economics from his home State's land grant at
the University of Minnesota.
Welcome, and thank you for being here today, Dr. Johansson.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE GREGG DOUD, CHIEF AGRICULTURAL
NEGOTIATOR, OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE,
WASHINGTON, D.C.
Mr. Doud. Chairman Roberts, Ranking Member Stabenow, and
other distinguished Committee members, I want to thank you for
the opportunity to testify today on President Trump's
agricultural trade policy agenda. Ambassador Lighthizer and my
colleagues at USTR and USDA have been working around the clock
to address agricultural trade issues with our trading partners
and increase export opportunities for our farmers, ranchers,
workers, and agribusinesses. I look forward to highlighting our
efforts in multiple areas.
The United States is the world's largest exporter and
importer of food and agricultural products. U.S. agriculture
has posted an annual trade surplus for well over 50 years.
Overall, U.S. farmers and ranchers export more than 20 percent
of what they produce. In 2018, agricultural exports reached
nearly $145 billion, an increase of 1.4 percent over 2017.
Every day this Administration and the men and women at USTR
and USDA work to expand export markets for American
agriculture. Whether it is poultry and beef to North Africa,
pork to South America, grains and horticulture to Asia, dairy
to Chile, the list goes on and on.
Let me focus my remarks, however, on major trade
initiatives to this Administration. First, passage of the USMCA
is an absolute necessity for U.S. agriculture. Since the
implementation of the North American Free Trade Agreement in
1994, our agricultural exports to Canada have increased 289
percent and exports to Mexico 311 percent in agriculture,
creating our first and second largest export markets in ag in
2018, worth a combined $41 billion out of this $145 billion in
total ag exports last year.
In accordance with our TPA requirements, USMCA created new
market access for U.S. dairy, poultry, and eggs into Canada,
above and beyond existing access under both NAFTA and what was
negotiated in the TPP. USMCA maintains duty-free access to
Mexico, allowing U.S. producers to build upon the $19 billion
in ag exports to Mexico in 2018.
There are many other improvements of USMCA over NAFTA
including provisions that address ag biotechnology, including
new technology such as gene editing, procedural safeguards for
recognition of new geographical indications, and Canada's
commitment to ensure that British Columbia eliminates its
discriminatory treatment of U.S. wine in grocery stores.
The urgency to pass USMCA cannot be overstated for U.S.
agriculture, due to the size of the Canadian and Mexican
markets for U.S. ag exports.
A tremendous amount of work has gone into negotiations with
China since President Trump and President Xi met in Buenos
Aires on November 30th. The Administration has negotiated in
good faith since then, twice delaying the scheduled increase in
tariff rates due to progress in the trade talks. However,
because China backtracked on significant commitments it has
made during the course of negotiations, including on
agricultural issues, President Trump directed USTR Lighthizer
to increase the rate of duty on $200 billion of Chinese imports
from 10 to 25 percent on May 10th.
The U.S.-China economic relationship is very important, and
the Trump Administration is committed to reaching meaningful,
fully enforceable commitments to resolve structural issues and
improving trade between our two countries. I can say an
important element of our negotiations has been to resolve a
large number of unwarranted and longstanding trade barriers to
U.S. ag exports.
I hope that China will make real structural changes across
the range of unfair policies and practices that yield actual,
verifiable, and enforceable results. If we are able to have an
acceptable agreement, President Trump expects substantial and
immediate purchases of U.S. ag products as well as the removal
of technical and regulatory barriers that impede such
purchases.
With respect to Japan, in 2018, the U.S. exported over $13
billion in ag goods to Japan. The President, Ambassador
Lighthizer, and I all understand the urgency to advance
negotiations with Japan as soon as possible for U.S.
agriculture.
We have also published our negotiating objectives for trade
agreements with the EU and UK upon its exit from the EU.
The WTO provides multiple tools for the U.S. to build
coalitions or act alone to aggressively counteract trade
concerns that negatively impact U.S. production and jobs. We
have major concerns that countries are failing to properly
notify their agricultural domestic supports. We, therefore,
have started submitting our own counter-notifications of other
countries' excessive domestic support, and we are holding
countries accountable for their excessive trade-distorting farm
subsidies.
We litigated on a major dispute to a WTO panel on China's
excess farm supports for grains, and we won. A cornerstone of
U.S. trade policy is to promote the adoption by our trading
partners of transparent, predictable, and risk-appropriate
regulatory methods that are based on science. We are working in
the WTO, Codex, and with several like-minded countries to
advance these objectives.
Thank you. I look forward to working with the Committee to
implement the President's trade policy agenda, and I am happy
to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Doud can be found on page 36
in the appendix.]
Chairman Roberts. We thank you, Ambassador. Under Secretary
McKinney, please.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE TED McKINNEY, UNDER SECRETARY FOR
TRADE AND FOREIGN AGRICULTURAL AFFAIRS, UNITED STATES
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, WASHINGTON, D.C.
ACCOMPANIED BY ROBERT JOHANSSON, Ph.D., CHIEF ECONOMIST, OFFICE OF THE
CHIEF ECONOMIST, UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
WASHINGTON, D.C.
Mr. McKinney. Chairman Roberts, Ranking Member Stabenow,
and distinguished members, thank you for the invitation to be
here, and it is a pleasure to testify with my colleague, USTR
Ambassador Gregg Doud. We welcome the opportunity to share any
and all of the goings-on that we have at USDA with you.
First, I want to thank you as well for your work in the
2014 Farm Bill that created the opportunity for this position.
I hope we are honoring the vision that you and so many others
had. I think 350-or 400,000 miles might be one indication. More
on that later.
As Under Secretary, I fully support the Administration's
strong commitment to our farmers and ranchers in providing them
the opportunity to export across the globe under fair and
reciprocal terms of trade. As we work to level that trade
playing field, we are using programs you helped to create
through the 2018 Farm Bill and those before it, partnering with
ag trade associations, cooperatives, State regional trade
groups, small- and medium-size businesses.
Through these programs, we share the costs, help focus the
marketing and promotional activities that build commercial
export and markets for U.S. agriculture. In fact, the return on
the taxpayer dollar is at minimum $28 to one in return, and we
can give you more detail on that and proud to do so.
A word about USMCA, it is clearly the top legislative
priority for the Administration, as it is, I think, for all of
U.S. agriculture.
I noted yesterday or the day before yesterday that a letter
came out from some near 1,000 agricultural farm, trade
association groups that noted their support for USMCA, and I
suspect you all have seen that. It was incredible.
USMCA, as Gregg said, does allow for unprecedented market
access for U.S. dairy farmers into Canada and eliminates
discriminatory grading of U.S. wheat. There is a modernized
chapter on SPS issues that could be the greatest benefit of
that, brand-new language, first ever on biosciences and
biotechnology, that I think can be used in other negotiations.
Mexico has committed not to restrict market access for U.S.
cheeses, very important, and we hope and we think there will be
elimination of the discriminatory treatment of retail sales of
U.S. wine and spirits in the province of British Columbia, and
we encourage its passage.
A bit about China. President Trump has taken tough, but we
believe, necessary steps to confront China's unfair trade
practices. There are challenges. We see that. We have lived it,
but we are confident, and we hear from our U.S. farmers and
ranchers that they are willing to take that pain to return on
some gain in terms of long-term benefits.
A bit about support of farmers, the Administration is
committed to our farmers, and one example is President Trump's
very quick direction to Secretary Perdue and he to us and my
colleague, Rob Johansson here, to create a relief strategy to
sustain this mitigation that allows agriculture producers some
income while the Administration continues to work on free,
fair, and reciprocal trade deals.
ATP, or Agricultural Trade Promotion, too is a part of that
now and is assisting now, and will assist exporters in
maintaining and developing new export markets. I am happy to
talk about that.
My challenge. I embrace Secretary Perdue's charge to be
agriculture's unapologetic advocate around the world, and I
hope I am doing that. My most important role, though, is
building personal relationships with foreign buyers, government
officials, farmers, ranchers, here and abroad, and so many
others that results in facilitating trust, understanding, and
progress. I think we are making headway. I am happy to discuss
that more if you wish.
I just returned from an ag trade mission to Colombia last
week. Thanks to you all and many others for the Colombia Free
Trade Agreement, all is going well there. There are always
issues we address, but it was a wonderful exchange, and we are
seeing the returns from those kinds of deals.
The Foreign Agricultural Service represents a group like
none other across the world, and in collaboration with USTR,
Commerce, and some others, we are working hard. I would add
that ag trade missions, or ATMs like last week, are building
exports. I am happy to address that more.
A request of you, a very quick one, I encourage you to
reach out or remind your State departments of ag that we have
some terrific programs, these Agriculture trade missions and
numerous food shows around the world. We facilitate those, and
we have a great deal of interest from most of your States but
not all of them. So to the degree you want to encourage them,
we are always there.
We have completed two agricultural trade missions, Taiwan
and Colombia, and we have five more. That will be a record high
in the history of the Foreign Agricultural Service--seven this
year, six last year. 2016 and prior was three per year on an
average. They do work.
Ones we have planned for this year include Canada, Vietnam,
Japan, Ghana, and Mexico, and that does not include the one-on-
ones that we will go to.
So I want to thank you for what you have done on the Farm
Bill and so many other programs that create and allow for
programs like the Market Access Program, the Foreign Market
Development Program, TASC, which by the way, a bit
underutilized, and then EMP, also a bit underutilized, and we
are working on that because they are fully operational and very
helpful.
You know the value of these programs to U.S. agriculture.
Know that we are there with you.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement. Thank you very
much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McKinney can be found on
page 40 in the appendix.]
Chairman Roberts. Thank you very much.
Ambassador Doud, let us just start right off. USTR has been
working hard--I know you have; you have been keeping me fully
apprised--finalizing the USMCA for congressional approval. We
must do this. I know that negotiations with Japan are under way
as well.
I think the worry that we have is that we are trailing
behind our competitors now that the Comprehensive and
Progressive Trans-Pacific Partnerships, CPTPP--wouldn't you
know that we would add two more letters to TPP?--is inforced,
as well as other agreements around the world with trading blocs
like the European Union.
So my question is, going forward, how will the USTR ensure
the United States is on the proverbial level playing field with
countries that have already forged strong agricultural
agreements, most especially countries like Australia and
Canada? Please.
Mr. Doud. Mr. Chairman, thank you for your question.
You are exactly right. The strategy is USMCA, China, Japan,
and then we have got other places to go.
With regard to USMCA, I think the best thing we can do at
this point is to pass this agreement through Congress. It is a
solid agreement. There is not anything in this agreement in
agriculture or across the board, for that matter, that is not
the same or better than it was before, and so we need to get
that job done.
Mr. Chairman, we have spent hours and hours and hours with
China. It has truly been--my counterpart has said on many
occasions, and there has been historic discussion.
The way I have had that conversation with them is last
year, you imported $124 billion in agricultural products. That
compares to our 145. China's total imports are 124.
In a good year, we have only done 20 of that, and I have
made the point repeatedly that 20 out of 124, given our
capacity to export agricultural products around the world, just
is not going to get it done.
You look down the list here. We have not sold them a pound
of poultry since 2015. We were blocked in beef since 2003. They
are importing now well over a billion dollars a month in beef,
pork, and poultry. In the month of April, our share of that was
$36 million, and that is not retaliatory tariffs. We just do
not have access because of these structural and non-tariff
trade barriers. These are the things that we have been talking
about. With Japan, we are actively talking with them.
Chairman Roberts. When I was in Beijing about 2 months ago,
Senator Alexander had a CODEL talking about fentanyl and China
trying to clean that up, but we were also talking about trade.
I called you, and I said I was talking to your counterpart, the
tall one, and then the shorter one who does agriculture. They
are most familiar with you.
They want to trade with us. That is what they indicated.
They want to be trading with a reliable supplier that has the
best quality of food in the world, and yet here we are in a
situation that can be reconciled. From 2017 to 2018, the value
of exports from the U.S. to China decreased, despite all your
efforts, 53 percent, from $19.5 billion to $9.2 billion. For
nearly a decade, China has consistently ranked either first or
second in export destination for our ag products; however, in
2018, they fell to fourth.
I guess my question is--I do not guess. My question is,
when negotiations with China conclude with a strong enforceable
framework for agriculture, what is the future strategy to
ensure that the U.S. is able to regain the market share that
has been lost as a result of the current trade situation?
Mr. Doud. Senator, the answer to that is we have to fix
these structural issues, and the document that we have worked
on--and we have argued over every sentence--is sizable.
We also have to diversify our portfolio, and I have to tell
you that we have one of the great public servants of all time
in Sharon Bomer Lauritsen here, the folks at FAS. They have
worked over time. We have got a list of over 30 places that we
have expanded exports around the world.
This is an all 24-hour-a-day effort to expand in every
place that we can possibly find, including these conversations
with Japan.
Chairman Roberts. Under Secretary McKinney, as you well
know, ag trade is critical to the U.S. farm sector, especially
in today's farm economy.
I would say to my colleagues, I ask for your deference
here, just to ask at least one question of the Under Secretary.
I know I am over time.
It creates jobs for rural America, generates much needed
demand for the crops that farmers produce. At the same time,
the global marketplace is becoming more competitive. In light
of today's trade environment, how will the USDA help position
U.S. agriculture in a manner to retain current market share in
traditional export markets as well as to increase market access
to new and existing markets?
Mr. McKinney. Sure. Thank you for your question, Mr.
Chairman.
Well, first, I would say that we are fully aligned with the
three priorities that Ambassador Doud laid out. On any given
negotiation--and USDA was involved in all 21, the trips to
Beijing, them to here, and the digital videoconferences--and
happy to provide at any one time in the room, we were two to
one because we have the depth and glad, always glad, to support
Team USTR. So getting those three right is our first priority,
and I think we have lived up to that.
The creation of this position was intended--and I hope we
are fulfilling that--is to go open new markets; hence, the
travel that we are undertaking, last week to Colombia. That has
been my second or third trip there. So we are pursuing all
these other markets so that we can develop new markets,
diversify the portfolio over time.
Now, to be sure, there are choppy waters right here where
there is a gap. I do not want to deny that, but I hope we are
setting the stage, we at Team USTR--USDA, with the support of
USTR and others, so that we can look back in hopefully a few
years and be glad that we have diversified the portfolio. That
is what we are doing.
Team USTR and our team separately set up a list of
countries we wanted to go to. We are going through that list
starting last year, and we want to sustain that.
Chairman Roberts. Thank you for that. I know it may take a
few years.
What we worry about is 2019 has been tough. 2020 looks like
it is going to be tough. I do not know how long this goes on.
It would be seven years with low prices, and I understand that
the previous bar was we had high prices. Some farmers are not
going to make it. That is the rub of it.
Senator Stabenow?
Senator Stabenow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with
you, and I appreciate the reaching out.
I was just on a bipartisan CODEL in both South Korea and in
Vietnam and in meetings with the trade officials in Vietnam.
There are certainly opportunities. They are actually opening
markets to blueberries right now, which would include Michigan
blueberries, which I was very glad to have conversations about.
There is more to do, but as the Chairman is indicating, we
are in a very, very difficult situation right now, and there
needs to be economic certainty for farmers right now.
Dr. Johansson, we will give you a moment to speak here. I
want to ask you a question regarding the second round of trade
payments because I am very concerned that they are not going to
be fair or equitable to producers.
It seems like there could be wide disparities between
counties. So even farmers in neighboring counties that grow the
same crop could receive wildly different levels of support.
It also seems that a farm that experienced flooding would
be disadvantaged relative to a neighbor who was able to plant--
since the program requires a crop to be planted.
Most of all, I am concerned about the disparity between
crops. You are no longer making payments based just on
retaliatory tariffs. Can you clarify what specific problem USDA
is trying to solve? Is it mitigation of trade damage, low
prices, or both?
Mr. Johansson. Senator Stabenow, those are really great
questions. As you noted, producers are looking for certainty
right now during a period of unprecedented uncertainty, for a
number of reasons, some weather related, and of course, as we
have heard, moving forward with a lot of potentially beneficial
trade agreements, and trying to get those across the line, I
think, will also provide certainty to our producers.
Regarding the second round of Market Facilitation Program
payments, I think we did put out a press release a couple days
ago that did answer some of those questions, and of course, the
rule is over at the Office of Management and Budget right now
as part of the interagency process. So I am somewhat limited in
how much details I can go in, but I will certainly try and
provide an answer to some of your questions. Those that we do
not answer, perhaps we can get back to you in writing on, once
that we are a little bit more open to be able to provide those.
I guess the main difference between last year's program and
this year's program, I would characterize as the timing of the
program. Last year's program, we were able to pay for actual
production, and of course, producers that suffered losses last
year were unhappy with that component of the program. We, of
course, wanted to point toward crop insurance as the safety net
for losses that were incurred last year.
This year's program was being developed, and we wanted to
make it clear to producers that they should not look at news
media stories or look at what universities were saying and sort
of hypothetical types of program payments that may come out and
have that actually incentivize producers to change their
planning decisions.
So we have been very clear that the program is agnostic to
the crop planted for the row crop component of the program,
such that producers would not expect to receive. For example,
last year's program payment for soybeans was larger than the
other row crop payments, and so if a producer thought that this
year, they may be incentivized to plant for soybeans, expecting
to get a larger payment, we certainly did not want that to
occur, particularly when we are sitting on record levels of
soybean stocks right now in the countryside.
So we wanted to make the program again not market
distorting to the extent that we could, and that is why we have
developed a county-level approach for providing payments. A
producer in a county can receive the county rate multiplied by
the acres planted of any of the eligible crops that are listed
under the Market Facilitation Program portion of the row crop
payment system.
Now, of course, we have other payments for producers of
some specialty crops. Last year's program, there was sweet
cherries and almonds that were in the MFP component, and a lot
of the other specialty crops were in the Food Purchase and
Distribution Program. The Secretary asked us to look back at
last year's program and to try and learn from that and to
determine what worked and what did not work from last year's
program, and one of the things that we felt appropriate was to
move some of the specialty crop commodities, the tree nuts and
some of the fruits, into the Market Facilitation Program
component as opposed to the Food Purchase and Distribution
Program, so----
Senator Stabenow. I am going to jump in at this point, to
ask about the Market Facilitation Program. Some row crops that
have had price declines, as you mentioned, are now moving into
the Market Facilitation Program and getting relief through that
program.
I just want to say that specialty crops like Michigan
asparagus that have had a 20 percent price decline compared to
last year due to trade challenges other than tariffs--may not
even be eligible for trade mitigation purchases. I have great
concerns about these disparities.
As far as I am concerned, we passed a Farm Bill with a
thoughtful commodity title, based on risk management, but now
it seems to me the whole thing is being thrown up in the air by
payments that have nothing to do with what we put together in a
five-year Farm Bill, and these payments are not just for one
year. It is now going on for a second year and second round of
payments.
I want to ask just one more quick question. I know I am out
of time, Mr. Chairman, but it goes to the money behind this
because I want to ask Under Secretary McKinney, who is one of
the seven board members on the USDA Commodity Credit
Corporation. The Commodity Credit Corporation is using $30
billion of borrowing authority to pay for both rounds of trade
mitigation assistance. However right now, the CCC has roughly
only $7.7 billion left before it reaches the $30 billion cap.
How are you going to pay for $16 billion in assistance? Are you
assuming Congress is going to authorize the additional amount?
Mr. McKinney. Well, the CCC has to get replenished, to your
point, and we do have that amount.
The view was, as we heard from so many people, certainly
starting with the President and the Secretary, but also many of
our constituents, there is help that is needed now. So we are
going to take what we have and use that and of course, as we
have to do every year or periodically, come back to Congress
because that is the way that works.
Senator Stabenow. Does that mean, Mr. Under Secretary, that
you are going to commit $7.7 billion now and wait for the rest?
Or you are going to commit $16 billion and hope we appropriate
it?
Mr. McKinney. Right now, that rule is at OMB, and we are
working through that together. There is not an answer now, but
we would not presume anything if you all have not authorized
that, so let me be clear.
Senator Stabenow. I would certainly say, looking at key
appropriators right across from me, that it really was not
within the USDA's purview to be obligating funds that have not
been made available to USDA.
Mr. McKinney. I do not think funds have been obligated yet
that are not there. So we respect the role of the Congress,
absolutely, ma'am.
Senator Stabenow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Roberts. Senator Fischer?
Senator Fischer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador Doud, I would like to followup a little bit with
the Chairman's comments at the beginning of this hearing when
he was speaking about China but also about Japan.
As you know, I am a family rancher. I know firsthand that
we have to continue to improve on the efficiency of our cattle,
and we have seen ranchers as well as farmers that are adopting
this cutting-edge technology in order to produce beef and our
crops all across this country.
The technology on beef includes growth hormones. We are
looking at China, where they have basically an import tariff
that is 47 percent on U.S. beef. There is a 12 percent base
tariff. We are looking at the 25 percent retaliatory tariff, 10
percent value-added tax. So the tariffs are bad enough, but
then we see the Chinese not allowing our animals in their
country because of their restrictive policies.
You told the Chairman that we are talking to them. Can you
tell us anything more positive than we are talking to the
Chinese? How are we going to be able to address these non-
tariff barriers?
Mr. Doud. Senator, thank you for your question. I will
elaborate as best as I can, but these are obviously ongoing
conversations.
Senator Fischer. I understand that.
Mr. Doud. First, let me start with Japan. We, all of us in
the beef industry, know how important that Japanese beef market
is. That is a topic that, quite frankly, Senator, keeps me up
at night.
What I want you to know is that Ambassador Lighthizer
absolutely understands the importance of getting a trade deal
in agriculture with Japan as soon as possible, and these
conversations are occurring. They are ongoing, and that is all
I can say about that.
Senator Fischer. With the Japanese, it is a little
different, though, on what we are looking at with the Chinese.
Mr. Doud. That is right.
Senator Fischer. Obviously, we have seen the Administration
was able to get the lifting of the BSE restriction, and now we
are just looking at the restrictive tariffs that are there with
regards to the TPP. So it is a little different situation that
we have.
Mr. Doud. We are just trying to stay even with our
competitors in Japan.
Senator Fischer. Right.
Mr. Doud. With regard to China, you are absolutely right.
The way I describe it is after 15 years, because of their
restrictions on traceability hormones racked up, I mean, we can
get a thimble full of beef into China.
Senator Fischer. Exactly.
Mr. Doud. They bought $5 billion in beef last year--$5
billion. We have had hours of conversations about this,
Senator, with them. We can say that these conversations have
occurred is all I can say at this point.
Senator Fischer. You mentioned--and I appreciate that you
are in negotiations, and that makes it difficult. When you say
that we need to diversify our exports, that does not help a
cattle rancher. That does not help a farmer whose livelihood is
based on pork production. While farmers may be able to--
depending on where they are located be able to diversify crops,
that is not always that easy either. So I hope you obviously
will keep that in mind as you are working through these
negotiations.
Both you and Under Secretary McKinney have been in
Nebraska. You have heard our producers and the concerns they
have with this. So I know you will keep that in mind as you go
forward on your negotiations.
It was just a couple days ago that we saw the President
sign an Executive Order on agricultural biotechnology, and you
guys are now going to be tasked with creating a strategy that
is going to address those unjustified really--the unjustified
trade barriers that we have. Can you comment on how the
Administration plans to address some of those issues in order
that we can support the innovation that we see domestically
continue to move forward when it comes to biotechnology?
Mr. Doud. Let me take a quick stab and lead Ted into this.
That conversation goes to USMCA, where for the first time
we had a biotech component that--and what we are really trying
to help people understand is gene editing, CRISPR technology,
the new technology, and USDA and USTR working around the world
to get countries where they need to be with regard to the use
of technology in agriculture.
Mr. McKinney. Thank you, Senator Fischer.
I have covered biotechnology in all its forms on every
single government-to-government visit I have had, and that
includes industry. Ambassador Doud is right. USMCA's language
is a great start; hence, the importance of that.
We are also having those discussions completely one-off,
and this gives us added impetus to make the statement we are
working with like-minded countries, as we have in the past, but
we have doubled-down on that.
When Secretary Perdue was in Japan with the G20, he pulled
together a group of five--Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Mexico,
U.S.--the ministers of ag. They made a commitment to double-
down on this kind of thing. The world needs these technologies.
We are going to address that. So it is really all-of-the-above
strategy.
We have yet to miss an opportunity where we have not
covered that very topic, but you are right. USMCA is the best
place to start. Thank you.
Senator Fischer. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Roberts. Senator Smith?
Senator Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I want to first thank all of you for being here today,
especially my fellow Minnesotan, Dr. Johansson.
Senator Roberts, you started out by talking about the need
for certainty, and, Ranking Member Stabenow, you talked about
the challenges we have with the chaos and the unpredictability.
Despite the best efforts, I truly believe of those of you on
this panel.
When we were planning on this Committee hearing, I asked
Minnesotans to give me a sense of where they are on all of
this. Of course, I talk to Minnesota farmers all the time, and
I want to just read one letter that I got from Greg Fynboh. He
said to me in part, ``I am not happy about the tariffs that
have been implemented, especially this year because of weather
conditions. I have been at a loss as to what I should plant or
even if I should plant a crop so late in the spring into poor
conditions. Not having a secure market complicates decision-
making in an already difficult situation. Should I bother
adding to burdensome supplies and lose equity because of
production cost over what the crop is worth? Should I take
prevent plant, which barely covers land rent, and lose equity
while fighting weeds all year?''
One certainty of the current Administration's policy to
destroy all markets through tariffs and tough talk is that
farmers will lose money, time, and peace of mind. That has been
my experience so far.
Mr. Chair, I would like to ask permission to enter these
letters into the record.
Chairman Roberts. Without objection.
Senator Smith. Thank you.
[The following information can be found on pages 46-52 in
the appendix.]
Senator Smith. You know, I read that letter because my core
value here is that we need fair trade policies that lift up
American farmers and lift up American workers, and I completely
agree that there have been unfair trade practices that have
hurt American farmers and businesses and workers. So I am
grateful for the work that you have been doing to try to break
through some of that.
The problem is--I mean, you must feel like you are working
with one hand tied behind your back right now, and I am not
going to--I cannot even imagine what it is like.
Let me just ask one question. Last week, I was down in Rock
County when there was this latest threat of tariffs on Mexico.
That was removed in the nick of time, though I think it
probably took months off the life of a lot of farmers who were
trying to figure out how to--what they were going to do next.
What can you tell us about this large quantities of
agricultural products that the President said that he has
gotten commitments on from Mexico?
Mr. McKinney. Well, we are waiting to hear the specifics on
that, but let me just say we at USDA have teed up, as we always
have teed up, opportunities that we could use to fulfill that.
Until we get some specifics on that, we are waiting.
You should know we have a very good relationship with our
friends at the Mexican Department of Ag. We have been in
discussion----
Senator Smith. I am sure you have.
Mr. McKinney [continuing]. with them to lay those
opportunities out.
Senator Smith. I know that you do, and I appreciate what
you said about the importance of good relationships,
longstanding relationships that are at the root of good trade,
which is why I am so disturbed about what is happening because
the reliability of America as a trading partner is the
challenge that we are dealing with here.
I hope that there is an agreement on large quantities, but
I will believe it when I see it.
This raises something that I am personally very interested
in. It has to do with the possibilities of expanding trade into
Cuba. This is something that my colleague, the senior Senator
from Minnesota, Senator Klobuchar, has worked on also with
Senator Enzi.
Cuba is a perfect trading partner for the United States in
so many ways because what they are good at and what we are good
at is a perfect match. We do not grow a lot of chocolate in the
United States or in Minnesota, and they need our corn and
beans. Yet again, just last week, the President re-upped
additional barriers between the United States and Cuba.
I went to Cuba when I was Lieutenant Governor to lead the
exact kind of trade mission that you are working on, Under
Secretary McKinney, to expand markets.
So could you just tell me what--would you agree that the
President's ban on additional connections between the United
States and Cuba makes it even harder to build these
relationships that we know are so important?
Mr. McKinney. Well, thank you for the question.
I would answer it this way. There is still agricultural
product flowing to Cuba, notwithstanding----
Senator Smith. It is so challenging. Right. I mean, there
is, but there are so many barriers. There is no credit access.
I mean, it is--you know this.
Mr. McKinney. Well, there is no credit access to the U.S.,
but there is credit access through other areas, for example,
Canadian banks. I checked even this morning, and there is still
agricultural product flowing. Now, it may have slowed. We have
not checked with everyone.
I think the beauty of this is that you all created through
the Farm Bill the opportunity to now use market access program
funds to go there.
We had already closed out MAP grants when the Farm Bill
passed, but we are preparing, if that opportunity creates
itself, to allow folks to do that. So we are aligned with you
in that regard.
Senator Smith. Would you not agree that this additional
barrier is not helpful to the cause of expanding access to
agricultural products in Cuba?
Mr. McKinney. I am not going to say that because trade is
still flowing, and so far as I know, it has not slowed. I am
still checking on that.
I think the larger issue, though, is we have--at one time,
Venezuela was the number one export market in South America,
and I hope that some of that conflation of what Cuba is doing
with Venezuela might provide for an opportunity someday when
the gates open to go back into Venezuela. I think there is a
long-term play there, ma'am. Thank you.
Senator Smith. Well, thank you.
I am out of time. I appreciate the work that you are trying
to do to open up markets and the work that you are doing,
Ambassador Doud, to try to nail down these incredibly difficult
negotiations, but I do feel so strongly that one hand does not
know what the other hand is doing, or if it--I think one hand
does not even know what it is doing itself.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Roberts. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Braun?
Senator Braun. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Interesting to always listen to these discussions here. In
the short time I have been here, they get politically charged
quickly. I think of any of the members on this Committee, I am
one of the few that is actually involved in farming, been
involved in it for 40 years, as a poultry producer from the
late 1970's to tree farmer and actively involved in row crop
production.
All I can tell you, as a farmer and as one that speaks to
many every weekend when I go back, they are happy that someone
is finally here taking on the key issues of restrictions to
markets. This did not happen from 2016 to the present. This has
accumulated over many, many years. When you look at the total
amount of imports, for instance, that China takes and how small
a share ours would be to them--and that is typically across the
world where there are structural restrictions to agricultural
products because everyone knows from the farming side that it
is the most protected part of the economy across the world.
So I want to applaud the Administration for finally
addressing these issues, where, yes, it is going to incur some
short-term pain in running a business.
The other thing I have done over the years, I have never
found where you are going to go in the right direction if you
do not address issues for long-run betterment and you have got
to entertain a little short-term pain. I think that is what we
are going through.
I think the problems facing agriculture go so far beyond
tariffs. I think when you look at our agricultural capacity--
and we export so little--as being the agricultural engine of
the world, that tells you all in a nutshell that, thank
goodness, you are finally tackling issues to open up these
markets.
China is alluring because it is large. It has got so many
people. I think one of you said that, basically, of the $145
billion or so that they import, we get just 20- to $25 billion,
somewhere in there. Is that correct?
Mr. Doud. Senator, their imports last year were $124
billion, and on a good year, we do about 20. Last year, I think
we did about 9 of that.
Senator Braun. Okay. So that has been the dynamic for
years, and that tells you exactly what one country, which is
going to be somewhere down the road, the biggest potential
importer of everything with their population, if they keep
growing as an economy. So, again, it points out that this is
all laid on the doorstep.
Before 2016--and anyone here, any politician, anybody
involved with policy, I think shoulders the blame. Thank
goodness, we are trying to rectify it.
I think there might be another round of questions, which I
am going to stick around for, but I want to throw this out
there for you to think about.
Acreage expansion, I think, has occurred more so over the
last decade across the world than at any other time.
Competition, which is the other variable that in any business--
my logistics business, distribution, farming--competition is
important, and it looks like our competitors want the best of
both worlds. They want us to buy from them, and they do not
want to take any of our products.
I want you to think about which countries, including the
ones in Europe and others, that are the culprits that are the
hardest to deal with.
Then the other thing I want you to think about would be our
own industry when it comes to--normally, when you are in a
pickle like agriculture is, where you are struggling to sell
what you produce, you do find new markets, and in anything,
biotechnology was talked about earlier.
Do we have more potential there--and I am going to start
with this question--than raw commodity exports? In other words,
do we need to enhance those markets so that we are not dealing
with what everyone else around the world is going to try to
start producing and selling themselves, which is corn and
soybeans? Is our ticket to sell more of what we produce through
the higher tech end of the biotech industry?
Mr. Doud. Senator, I will try to answer that in 7 seconds.
First of all, you should talk to Dr. Johansson about the
strength of the U.S. dollar relative to other countries,
particularly the Brazilian reals, and there are competitive
factors there.
We think about ethanol and meat and value-added
opportunities around the world every single day, and the place
in the world that gives us fits is, without question, the
Europeans. They are actively fighting us every step of the way
with regard to the use of technology.
Senator Braun. Noted. Anyone else want to comment on that?
Mr. Johansson. I think you brought up really good issues.
We did see a lot of expansion of acreage globally, particularly
in sort of the high-price years of about seven years ago that
the Chairman referred to. Particularly, in South America, we
saw a lot of expanded acreage in Brazil and Argentina, and they
are actively competing with us right now.
They are big adopters of tech as well, so that is a good
thing. We are like-minded in that sense.
As the Ambassador and, I am sure, the Under Secretary can
highlight, we are continually facing a different level of
standard from the Europeans who argue, I think, contrary to
improving food security. They are actually depressing food
security globally.
Mr. McKinney. Senator, I want to respect your and the
Chairman's time management. I will come back and answer that
later, if you wish.
Senator Braun. Thank you.
Mr. McKinney. It is up to you two.
Chairman Roberts. The Senator from Indiana is recognized
for an additional 5 minutes.
Senator Braun. Thank you, Chairman.
Go ahead.
Mr. McKinney. We are somewhere between 7 and 9 billion on
the planet, 7.3, on our way to 9. Some say 10 by 2050. We have
to use every single tool to address that, and we have for the
last many, many decades.
I think, by and large, technology around the world is still
being adopted, but there are now headwinds--and I think
Ambassador Doud said it very well--led by Europe with
objections. So it is a constant battle that we have to face,
and it is technologies of all sorts.
We talk about biotechnology. It goes well beyond that, and
you know many of those from your own experience in Indiana, but
our goal is to continue to press for these kinds of
technologies. The way we do this is through many fora.
In early July, I will be in Geneva for the Codex
Alimentarius meeting, where we talk about scientific standards
for pesticides, biotech, food additives. The list goes on and
on, and it is the world against Europe in many cases to fight
to keep those very rigorous scientific-based standards rather
than default to say a region of the world and their view of
what science is or should be determined. That is just one.
Team USTR has been majestic at working the WTO. We support
them in a lot of that data analysis, and the list goes on. So I
will not go through ad nauseum, but we have to use every single
one of those. That is why the attention we are paying to
international organizations--soon we will elect a new director-
general at the FAO. That is a very, very important election
because they have strayed in a major way from even considering
technology, just take it out in many cases. So these are the
things we are trying to do around the world, sir.
Senator Braun. Thank you.
Team USTR, keep it up because I think what you are doing
needed to be done a long time ago, and again, if we do not fix
it now, it is just kicking it down the road. I think most
farmers know that we need to go through some transformation and
are happy that you are doing what you are doing.
I want to finish up with this, and I said it the last time
or two. When it comes to helping farmers, as one, the thing
that I have noticed that has been very seldom talked about, but
it is the high cost of production. It would be the high cost of
variable inputs, and all I can say is from 1909 to 2013, when
we had great incomes, it seemed like the cost of inputs
mysteriously went up.
We are now dealing with many huge corporations, where it
used to be local suppliers, and I am really most worried in the
long run, the fact that an acre of soybeans, an acre of corn is
nearly doubled or tripled to put out the crop each year. That
is the hardest piece of arithmetic that most of us farmers deal
with.
I want to address this to Secretary McKinney and then maybe
a comment from Dr. Johansson. Where do you think the
responsibility of the industry is to help farmers get through
this tough stretch? Do you think it is doing enough to where
everyone seems to be okay at the corporate level, and we buy
all of our inputs now from larger entities? Do they have a
responsibility to help farmers out rather than looking to
government to do it?
Mr. McKinney. Thanks for the question.
I think we all have a role there, and you should know that
we talk to the industries of all types a great deal. They make
their way to here, and I think they usually make their way to
USTR and elsewhere. So everybody has a responsibility.
The best thing we can do and what we are trying to do is
work on these non-tariff trade barriers to help them keep their
costs low, so that they do not have to pass on costs, which is
the norm, as you know in business.
The time that Ambassador Doud and his team and my team
spent on biotechnology with China--and frankly so many other
countries as we make our way around the world--is simply
enormous, and so we think that is the best way that we can do
that because we are Government are not going to get involved in
pricing and all the things that go with that. There is a
respect for the business community out there.
Senator Braun. Maybe jawboning, though?
Mr. McKinney. Well, we have done that.
Senator Braun. Yes.
Mr. McKinney. That is what we are trying to do is try to
get rid of these non-tariff trade barriers that cause such
disruption in costs of all sorts. I think that is the simple
answer.
Senator Braun. Thank you. Doctor?
Mr. Johansson. Great question. Of course, we look at IMPA
costs going up every year. That is not universal. Of course, we
have seen fuel prices come down since their high-water mark a
couple years ago. So that is a benefit to producers. By and
large, I think what we are more concerned about is making sure
that we do have the ability for producers to get a good price
for their crop, and that is continually linked to trade but
also to lowering transportation costs. For example, we know
that the Mississippi system right now is under a lot of siege
from all the water that is coming through it, and that is
slowing things down. That is going to add to cost. We have
lowered cost on the rail side, so that is a benefit. It is
something we are always looking at.
Of course, on the input side from the chemicals and seed
companies, there has been some consolidation. The economic
literature points to different things regarding whether that
lowers prices, on the one hand, but also reduces competition on
the other. So it is something we are continually looking at.
Senator Braun. I think everything and the kitchen sink
because farmers are truly struggling. Thank you.
Chairman Roberts. Senator Brown?
Senator Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I cannot wait until I need that extra 5 minutes, one of
these days.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Roberts. I hesitate----
Senator Brown. Let us see. Senator Klobuchar and I have
been on this Committee a combined quarter century, and I do not
remember ever getting an extra 5 minutes----
Senator Klobuchar. I do not think so.
Senator Brown [continuing]. under Democrats. So maybe we do
not have the relationship with the Chairman that Senator Braun
has, but I am going to explore that.
I have milked----
Senator Klobuchar. Are you going to give the Chairman a
second to respond?
Senator Brown. No, never mind. All right. Let me--thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I have used already 30 of my precious
seconds.
I cannot count the number of people I have heard----
Chairman Roberts. You just took 30 seconds off your time.
[Laughter.]
Senator Brown. I cannot count the number of people I have
heard saying how important it is that we have certainty in
business and farming. We know agriculture, particularly, is an
inherently risky business.
We have seen farm income at 10-year lows, commodity prices
declining. The Administration continues, as you know--you
probably do not really want to say this, but continues to
inject more uncertainty into American agriculture.
The President tells farmers to trust him, yet every day
farm bankruptcies increase. Another small dairy closes, a
family farm is sold to an out-of-town investor.
Ohio farmers are near the breaking point. I want to share
just three or four lines from an article written by Tom Henry
for the Toledo Blade, which is sort of the paper of record in
much of rural northwest Ohio. As of June 2nd, only 33 percent
of Ohio's corn acreage, 18 percent of the State's soybean
acreage had been planted. By this time of year, at least 90
percent of corn should have been planted, 79 percent of the
soybean crop should have been planted. That is based on the
most recent five-year coverage date. Farmers will tell you, as
you know, Mr. Under Secretary, that years before this, they
would go into the fields earlier, typically. So these numbers
are worse than they have been over five years, which is worse
than it used to be. Ohio was down 61 percent from its most
recent five-year average for planting soybeans as of June 1st,
and as farmers will tell you, even if their farms dry out
enough to plant corn in another week or two, the growing season
has been so compressed, that smaller yields are inevitable.
One farmer who has been--who is in his 60's said, ``I have
been farming 36 years. This is the first year I may not have
one acre of corn.''
So my questions are this. You can understand my concern
with Secretary Perdue's announcement that Market Facilitation
payments will not be applied to unplanted acres, as we have
seen these problems get worse and worse with climate issues.
USDA provided a list of crops that need to be planted. USDA
has been unclear on whether these can be planted for cover or
after the typical late planning period.
From the number of inquiries my office gets from farmers
sitting on their combines waiting for the water to subside,
they want to know details. They are now forced to make
decisions based on rumors and heightened uncertainty.
My two questions are for Dr. Johansson, if you would answer
these, and I will give them both to you, and then take your
time.
Will USDA provide flexibility for farmers to plant later
than normal for cover and be eligible for MFP? Similarly, hay
and forage is expected to be in short supply due to the wet
weather, of course. Will Federal crop insurance provide
flexibility to allow the earlier grazing or harvest of forage
or hay from cover crops without penalty?
Mr. Johansson. So one of the--I mentioned earlier to the
Ranking Member's questions that we did not want to affect
planting decisions with the new program, and, of course,
complicating that is the situation you mentioned with regard to
prevent plant. We are in a very late planted--late, delayed
planting, and a cool wet spring is affecting much of the corn
crop as well as other commodities across the United States. We
are behind in wheat. We are behind in rice. We are behind in
soybeans, of course, as well. All of that will contribute to a
likely higher than normal prevent plant number.
Of course, the crop insurance program does anticipate
prevent plant, and there are a lot of conditions and a lot of
provisions available to producers that are, unfortunately,
faced with prevent plant for some of the producers in Ohio that
you mentioned.
So, again, as with last year's program, we wanted this
year's program to not affect the safety net provided by crop
insurance, and so there are the prevent plan rules, and
eligibility requirements are remaining in place. I know we have
been asked to look at the two components that you did talk
about with respect to late plant and with respect to hay and
grazing, and those are components of the program that we are
continuing to evaluate of this period under which the rule is
still undergoing changes at the Office of Management and
Budget. So we will continue to look at that.
I would point out also, as you know, the President signed
the supplemental disaster bill, which also does call out
prevent plant in it, and so there is an interaction as well
with a program that may come out following that. That is again
early in its development at the Department for the WHIP 2.0
program that is authorized by everyone here for the disasters
we saw in 2018, the hurricanes and wildfires from last year,
but as well as the 2019 prevent plant issues for this year.
So I do not have any hard and fast answers to your
questions, but certainly willing, as I mentioned to the Ranking
Member, that we can get back to you with answer.
Senator Brown. We will be in touch on that. That is really,
really important and particularly northwest Ohio agriculture.
Mr. Chairman, I will just ask another question, but because
of time, I will just ask Dr. Johansson to give us this one in
writing too about Lake Erie.
Because of the rain and the late planning and all the
runoff that has happened, algae blooms are likely again a major
problem come July, August, in the western basin of Lake Erie.
This part of the lake is only 30 feet deep, as contrasted with
Lake Superior that Senator Klobuchar and Senator Smith look at
often, is 600 feet deep. So we know the vulnerability there.
With the number of unplanted acres in the western basin, I
wonder if USDA has considered utilizing conservation funds to
fund cover crop plantings or increase buffers in places like
Ohio. You can answer that in writing, if you want.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Roberts. We thank you, Senator Brown, for asking
that question that is on the mind of every member.
Senator Ernst?
Senator Ernst. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I would just like
to thank our witnesses for being here today as well. You have
been great advocates for our farmers, and I really do
appreciate that very, very much.
Right now, they are just undergoing that perfect storm of
circumstances, low commodity prices, lost access to farm
markets due to trade disputes, and very, very wet--you can look
at Nebraska. You can look at Iowa. Very, very wet conditions
due to a set spring and the flooding issues that we have had.
So this really is time for the Administration to bring
together these trade deals. We would love to see them done
soon. We want them done right, but we would love to see them
done soon. Our farmers really do need a win.
Ambassador Doud, if I could start with you, please, sir.
First off, I believe that Iowa farmers stand behind the
President. I have heard many of them just over the course of
this past week, and they know when it comes to China, we need
to hold them accountable for years of very, very bad behavior
on the trade front.
In fact, at the end of last year, I had one farmer that
came up to me after a meeting, and he made the point. He
understood why the President was doing this, but he said, ``I
do not understand why we did not have a President that did not
address this before this one.'' This has been going on for such
a long time, and President Trump is finally standing up to the
Chinese and their bad practices.
That being said, the spread of African swine fever through
China does have the potential to be a big opportunity for our
exports to meet their additional demand as they are going
through culling their herds.
The problem is, with the ongoing trade dispute, China still
has 50 percent retaliatory tariffs on our U.S. pork exports,
and the additional duty has meant a loss of about $8 per hog or
$1 billion per year to U.S. pig farmers. All of our Iowa
farmers want those free markets. They do.
What is the path forward with China, and when can Iowa
farmers really expect some of the normalization in our markets?
Mr. Doud. Senator, thank you for your question, and there
is no question that this African swine fever issue is truly
remarkable in terms of its global implications.
I would just simply say that with regard to pork exports to
China, our biggest hurdle is this structural issue of their ban
on ractopamine, and it is something that has--internationally
accepted. It has a maximum residue level internationally.
Everybody in the world uses it, with the exception of--a couple
of exceptions here and there, but China does not. We have spent
hours talking about this.
I would also point, just quickly make the point, in terms
of certainty, the first thing we can do is pass USMCA, and then
from there, we work on Japan and China and get these things
done. In terms of historical issues, I would say that there has
been work on China historically, and we have just recently won
two of the biggest WTO cases in the history of agriculture
against China.
Senator Ernst. I appreciate that because I do think the
USMCA needs to be done right away as well, and we just need to
continue to encouraging our House Members to be supportive of
that action. It is very, very important to the folks in Iowa
that I talk to.
So just very briefly, the USMCA, while we are on that, it
would create huge economic growth and jobs across the United
States in many of our industries, and it would secure a top
market for all of our U.S. agricultural commodities.
There are many achievements, I think, that are within the
USMCA that do not get talked about. We talk about tariffs. We
focus on tariffs, and certainly, for you, Under Secretary
McKinney, if you would address some of the improvements that
exist within the USMCA that we do not necessarily talk about,
things like sanitary and phytosanitary standards and biotech.
Can you speak on how those issues are being addressed in USMCA?
Talk about some of the wins that we are not necessarily talking
about.
Mr. McKinney. Sure. We talk about dairy access, wheat
equities across the borders, those things, more poultry access.
I know how much poultry you have in your State. So, yes, those
catch a lot of attention.
I still think--and I have said very publicly many times--
that the rewrite of the sanitary, phytosanitary chapter may be
the greatest gift out of USMCA. It is not quite a cut-and-paste
into other trade agreements, but boy, it is a great starting
point. That has been the soft underbelly. That is where we have
not seen free, fair, and reciprocal trade over these many
years. So I think that is perhaps the greatest gift.
Right on its heels, I would talk about biosciences, the
biotechnology chapter. That has been an enormous boon to
productivity, quality improvement around the world, helping
African farmers, cotton farmers in India, et cetera. So that is
a new chapter that can also be used as a starting point in
other negotiations.
I still think, though, the biggest one, is the message that
passage of USMCA will send to the world. If we do not get this
done, we are in deep trouble in terms of other negotiations we
seek to do because this is a good deal. We must deliver on
this. Those are just two things, ma'am.
Senator Ernst. Thank you. No, thank you very much. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Roberts. Senator Klobuchar?
Senator Klobuchar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My State is the fourth largest ag-exporting State in the
country, and I appreciate the work you have been doing during
some difficult times.
Many of us up here were relieved that the Administration
did not end up imposing the five percent tariff on Mexico, as
threatened, but the approach of using tariffs in response to
non-trade issues is concerning and could open the floodgates to
widespread use of tariffs to potentially settle all kinds of
potential policy issues.
Maybe one of you, Ambassador Doud or Under Secretary
McKinney, could answer this. Where does the Administration draw
the line on the use of tariffs for non-trade ends?
Mr. Doud. Senator, I would just simply say that in my time
in Washington, DC, I have never seen a President create more
leverage out of thin air than this President has.
Senator Klobuchar. Okay. Well, I think that what we learned
later was that that agreement had been made a few months before
the tweet went out, but we can leave that to the history books,
I guess.
My first question along the lines of your work that you are
doing, which I appreciate, with the Market Facilitation Program
would be this is good in that our farmers need the help, but
one of the things I have heard from a number of them is that
this goes on longer and longer as we try to get China to the
point of an agreement is that a lot of countries that are
buying soybeans now from other places are getting longer-term
contracts with them. So it is going to be harder once there is
an agreement for our people to get back in the market.
I do not know if that is you, Dr. Johansson, or anyone that
wants to answer that, if that is true, with your University of
Minnesota degree.
Mr. Johansson. I will comment on this, and I think the
Under Secretary and the Ambassador may also want to add.
Certainly, we know that, to a degree, trade is fungible.
With soybeans, of course, we typically export to the Chinese
during our season, and then the South Americans export during
their season. It makes for a reliable trade for the Chinese,
and they are having to renegotiate their contracts. They are
looking at doing so right now.
Of course, if we get a good trade deal in, we will go back
to providing them with the good quality U.S. soybeans. We have
a good transportation system to get them there through the
Pacific Northwest as well as through the Gulf.
Senator Klobuchar. So in order to meet the supplies, if
they are going to other countries, they are just doing short-
term contracts right now or longer?
Mr. Johansson. Well, I would imagine that they are likely
entering into a number of contracts that are both short term
and long term, and as we have seen with us and I am sure with
other countries, they are willing to break those contracts
pretty easily if they find a better price somewhere else.
Senator Klobuchar. Market Facilitation Program. When will
the payment rates on each commodity that is eligible be
released?
Mr. Johansson. So the rule right now is that at OMB, once
it is done at OMB, we will put the rates out there and start
sign-up as soon as we can. It takes a couple weeks to get
through that process, and we are making adjustments as we
discuss this with folks over there.
Senator Klobuchar. As I think has been discussed before,
some areas are hit harder, depending on where their soybeans
are going. It hit Minnesota hard because about 60 percent of
our State soybeans are shipped to the West Coast by rail. Will
you be giving consideration to regional shipping disparities
within each commodity for the second round of Market
Facilitation payments?
Mr. Johansson. That is a great question that you asked last
year as well, and we will continue to look at basis effects.
Right now, we have looked at the basis effects for the
Upper Midwest and the Northern Plains and have seen a lot of
those diminish. Of course, we would expect, depending on how
negotiations go, that we may see some above-average basis
impacts. As we head into the fall, we will continue to follow
that, and of course, the Secretary is continuing to monitor
progress on trade as well as other economic effects on
producers that are affected by the current situation.
Senator Klobuchar. Okay. So here is an opportunity right
now. We know the threat of foreign animal disease and its
potential impact on farmers can hurt us here or it can help us
if it happens in another country, and of course, we would
rather not have this happen at all because it eventually comes
to our shores. I have worked hard with Senator Cornyn to
include a vaccine bank in the last Farm Bill.
An outbreak of African swing fever in China has
significantly reduced their hog production, and some economists
have noted that China may lose more pork than the U.S.
produces.
Dr. Johansson, do you believe that U.S. pork producers
could expand their market in China if there was a negotiation
with China and that would relieve from that country's 62
percent import duty on pork products, it would help us?
Mr. Johansson. Yes. I think there is a lot of uncertainty
about how bad the ASF outbreak is in China right now. There has
been widespread speculation that it is 20, 30, even greater
percent of their herd is going to be affected and destroyed as
a result.
That will open opportunities for pork suppliers across the
globe to get into that market in a larger extent. I think the
U.S. hog producers will also benefit from seeing that with or
without tariffs. We will either backfill what other countries
are sending them, or we will get in there as well.
Of course, with the tariff, we would be able to sell more
pork products into China as well.
Senator Klobuchar. Ambassador Doug, are turkeys included in
the negotiations right now with China? We are number one for
turkey in our State. Do not laugh.
Mr. Doud. Senator, everything is on the table.
Senator Klobuchar. Okay, good.
Mr. Doud. We have had conversations with a multitude of
commodities.
Senator Klobuchar. Okay, very good.
I will first just want to end, Mr. Chairman, so I can do
the extra minute, just to thank Under Secretary McKinney. You
recently led a trade delegation to Colombia, and I know Thom
Petersen was there, our agriculture commissioner, and enjoyed
the trip.
Mr. McKinney. It was a very big group from Minnesota, and
we enjoyed having him. I think they left with some
opportunities in mind.
I should add. You raised turkey. You should know that
turkey has now found its way into India, of all places, and
this is a result of the WTO case, and we are thrilled with
that.
Senator Klobuchar. All right. Thank you, all of you.
Chairman Roberts. Well, Coop, you are up.
Senator Thune. Almost high noon, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
and thanks for having this hearing.
Let me just say to our panelists, thanks for being here,
and thanks for the work you are doing, but remind all of you
that our farmers and ranchers would much rather get a check
from selling their products than they would from the Federal
Government.
My concern in all of this is that we are losing global
market share, and that is why I think it is really important
that we close some of these trade deals out.
This hearing is designed to provide certainty to farmers
and ranchers with a specific focus on trade, and when I travel
in South Dakota, what farmers and ranchers ask me is when are
these trade issues going to be resolved. So I am asking you,
Can you give me and our farmers and ranchers a timeline
regarding China? Mr. Doud?
Mr. Doud. Senator, I understand those concerns, and believe
me, they are talked about at USTR every single day.
We circulate ag commodity prices in the building every
single day of what is going on.
I think in terms of the China discussion, I do not--no is
the answer. We will have to see. The meeting, I believe--there
will be a meeting that occurs between President Trump and
President Xi here toward the end of the month, and I think that
is our next line of demarcation here to see how this is going
to go.
Senator Thune. Can you give us any kind of timeline at all
regarding Japan, the bilateral bill?
Mr. Doud. Senator, I cannot. I can only tell you that the
conversations with regard to agriculture and trade between the
U.S. and Japan are ongoing as we speak.
Senator Thune. Given the Administration's interest in
negotiating bilateral trade deals instead of multilateral
agreements like TPP, in addition to the two we have just
discussed, can you share with us the status of any other trade
agreements the Administration is pursuing?
Mr. Doud. Well, in addition to USMCA, we have also
through--the TPA process here on Capitol Hill indicated U.S.
interest in negotiating with the European Union, the UK--and
the UK. I do not know what the Brexit process is going to be,
but obviously, the UK is something that we are taking keen
interest in.
The other part of the world that is of enormous interest is
Africa, and we all know that there are other countries in the
world that are taking an increase in that as well. I want to
assure you, Senator, that USTR is interested in that part of
the world as well.
Senator Thune. Is there any, though--when you talk about
discussions with the EU or the UK, is it anything more than
that at this stage? I mean, are we talking about very
embryonic-type discussions, or are we actually in a process of
negotiation with any of these potential trading partners?
Mr. Doud. Well, obviously, with the UK, we have got to wait
and see what the Brexit timeline is.
Senator Thune. Right. How about the EU?
Mr. Doud. Well, with the EU, I will tell you, quite
frankly, that they have been very frank in their interest in
saying no agriculture, and our point has been very simple.
There is no way to come to Congress and do a deal that does not
include agriculture. So how are we going to rectify this?
Senator Thune. Well, we support that position, but I think
there is great potential, obviously, with China, great
potential with Japan, and again, if the EU would drop some of
their tariff and non-tariff barriers and really, seriously
enter into negotiation on agriculture, that also would be a
great market for American agriculture.
I would just urge you to just understand the sense of
urgency, I think, out there in farm country. These are really
tough times, and not only now do we have all the trade issue,
but we have got weather piled on top of that in addition to
chronic year after year, year over year, low commodity prices
and producers who are increasingly operating below the cost of
production. It is a situation we cannot sustain and keep these
farmers in business.
In that vein, I just very quickly want to touch on the MFP
program, and the June 10 USDA press release provided--and I
quote--``If you choose to plan a cover crop with potential to
be harvested because of this year's adverse weather conditions,
you may qualify for a minimal amount of 2019 MFP assistance.
You must still comply with your crop insurance requirements to
remain eligible for any indemnities received,'' and that is end
quote.
I guess the question is, if you are eligible for a minimal
amount of MFP assistance, why wouldn't USDA make a more
equitable MFP payment to producers, comparable to the MFP
payment that would be paid if that producer has been able to
plant and harvest crop? Dr. Johansson?
Mr. Johansson. So, as I mentioned earlier, we are trying to
balance--trying not to incentivize market distortionary
decisions. We want farmers to plant for their operation, for
their--what works best for them, given the current prices we
are seeing out there as well as the current economic conditions
that they are seeing on their operation.
Senator Thune. I get that. We are not talking about--we are
telling people that already have them planted.
Mr. Johansson. Right.
As with last year, we are viewing the current situation
with respect to prevent plant as something that, by and large,
would be covered by the prevent plan conditions that are part
of their normal crop insurance contract, and that while if
producers do plant an eligible cover crop, they will receive a
component of the MFP payment for that planting.
By and large, their incentive payment will be coming from--
their recovery payment or their safety net will be coming from
the prevent plant, not from MFP. The Market Facilitation
Program is obviously designed to address trade issues and not
designed to address weather issues.
Again, as I pointed out earlier, there is also the disaster
bill that we are looking at, the supplemental disaster that
also calls up prevent plant, and so, again, that is another
balancing act that we are undergoing right now in the
Department.
Senator Thune. You figured out how to spend the $3 billion
in that yet, the supplemental?
Mr. Johansson. The supplemental has, as you are aware, the
prevent plant provisions that were added to that. They were
added after the amount of the supplemental had already been
determined. So, of course, as the Secretary has pointed out,
there were the hurricanes and wildfires from 2018 that
certainly are intended for being compensated to the extent that
they affected producers in the Southeast in terms of the
hurricanes and in California with respect to the wildfires. Of
course, there is other disasters in there as well, volcanoes,
included.
Then, of course, we are looking at how this interacts with
prevent plant and what additional flexibilities can be provided
to producers as a component of that supplemental disaster bill.
Senator Thune. All right. Be equitable. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Roberts. Senator Hoeven?
Senator Hoeven. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
both, for having the hearing. Thanks to all of you for being
here.
Also, Mr. Secretary, to you and the entire crew here as
well as everybody at USDA and the Administration, thank you for
moving forward on the MFP second round. I worked hard on that,
as did others, and we appreciate the responsiveness on it.
I thank the questions and comments by our--my distinguished
colleague from South Dakota highlights the need for it in farm
country. It is a tough time in farm country, so we are very
appreciative of that.
Dr. Johansson, we want to learn from round one and do a
better job in round two, just like Senator Thune was talking
about.
One of the questions that Senator Klobuchar brought us is
an important one. She termed it in terms of regional
differences. I have talked about it in terms of basis, and as
you know very well brought this up last go-around. Please
comment on your effort to include that in this MFP. It is a
very important issue.
She talked about 60 percent of her soybeans going to China.
In North Dakota, we sent $1.5 billion worth of soybeans to
China on a regular year. It did not happen this year. So that
tells you how there are regional disparities, which creates
basis, which costs our farmers a lot of money.
Mr. Johansson. Yes. The basis effects are certainly
something we did note last year, and you had asked about it. We
continued to follow that. I think that is going to be also
another key pieces of information that the Secretary is going
to consider as we move forward with the implementation of MFP.
Of course, there are other key considerations as well. Some
of that includes the progress we do make with China on reaching
a deal, and of course, he has made it clear----
Senator Hoeven. You mean in subsequent rounds, rounds two
and three?
Mr. Johansson. That is correct.
Just as an example, of course, we do not include the tariff
impacts that would have been occurring under the tariffs from
Canada and Mexico. Those have been removed from our
calculations since we have reached a deal on that component.
Looking forward to the basis effects, we have looked at
basis right now, and right now, things look within sort of the
average for this time of year. Of course, the major basis
effects that we are likely to see occur right at harvest in
Northern Plains, for example, and we are going to continue to
follow that to see if they do fall outside that range of sort
of average basis that you would expect, given the size of the
crop, and we will certainly keep that ability to adjust the
program as we get more information in again.
So we are very aware of this. We know that producers in
those areas are susceptible to more, higher impacts from the
basis component, depending on which crops they produced and
where they are selling them to and where----
Senator Hoeven. I know you are aware of it because I have
been bringing it up, and I am not going to stop, so----
Mr. Johansson. Yes. So I do not have an answer for you
right now that I can give you, but it is certainly something we
can look at and respond in written form.
Senator Hoeven. Remember, Dr. Johansson, that these crops--
I mean, yes, this is market facilitation based on exports, but
you have a lot of crops that move with those exports, even if
they are not fully exported, canola moving with corn. That is
an important factor too, as you look at that county average
payment, so that you do not end up with some counties that do
not just grow corn and soybeans that are in a hurt bag and you
are not giving them the assistance.
Mr. Johansson. Yes. We certainly are very aware of that,
and we think that the program that we have designed will help
offset some of those criticism that we got last year.
Senator Hoeven. Good, good.
I would like to turn to Secretary McKinney, Ambassador
Doud. What are we doing, prior to the G20, with China on
facilitating or negotiating with China, leading up to the G20
on trade? You are heavily engaged, right?
Mr. Doud. We are heavily engaged above my level, Senator.
On the agricultural side of this equation, we have worked
constantly for days on end to put together a very thick
documents, and now, hopefully, this can be carried forward, and
we can get a deal.
Senator Hoeven. Can you get a deal with Japan? Can you get
a trade deal with Japan?
Mr. Doud. Senator----
Senator Hoeven. Can you get it reasonably soon? If you
could get a trade deal with Japan and we could pass the USMCA,
it puts pressure on China, does it not? I mean, we have got to
start getting some of these other agreements as a way to put
pressure on China too.
Obviously, a trade deal with Japan, there are huge
economic--forests in the Pacific Rim, it would make a huge
difference. So how are you doing there?
Mr. Doud. Senator, that is exactly how you would draw it up
on the chalkboard. How is that?
[Laughter.]
Senator Hoeven. Good. I know Secretary Perdue was over
there. I think that is great. Good job on the 30 months for our
livestock, for our cattle. Boy, I would think it would put
some--I mean, it would be a real shot in the arm to get a deal
with Japan.
Go ahead and talk for a minute about how important it is we
get USMCA across the floor. It has to start in the House. We
would sure like to see it going. Why don't you talk about how
important it is for our farmers.
Mr. McKinney. Well, I think you said it very, very well. I
think USMCA is the template for the rest of the world on a
full-blown FTA, and so we must get that right, and so we are
here to help you in whatever information you or the House needs
to move that through. It is a good deal. It is well done.
Senator Hoeven. Yes. I mean, it just seems to me you create
momentum one step at a time. If we could move USMCA, if we
could get something in August with Japan, I mean, it is a way
to continue to put a real push on China with some of our
allies, and so I am hopeful that we can do that.
One final--with the indulgence of the Chair, one final
question--or question or comment or thought for you,
suggestion. To the extent that we can access those cover crops
on PP acres prior to November 1st, it is a very cost-effective
way for you all to help our livestock producers, so I hope you
are looking at that.
So go ahead, whoever wants to take that one.
Mr. Johansson. Yes. We certainly have received that
comment. Again, we are looking at flexibility in terms of that
November 1st date in hay and graze as well as the potential
ability to harvest, but again, we do not want to affect the PP
provisions, per se, but we do have some flexibility that you
have afforded us under the supplemental disaster. Certainly, we
are also considering that on the MFP side as well, but right
now----
Senator Hoeven. Well, your openness to that helps make sure
that people do make good decisions out there rather than trying
to force something in the ground just to get a payment, so that
is helpful, and we appreciate it.
Again, I think it is a real cost-effective way to give the
livestock guy some help, and obviously, they are a much smaller
part of this overall trade assistance package.
Mr. McKinney. Senator, I just wanted to add one thing.
Clearly, we are all focused on the key countries that you and
Ambassador Doud and so many have focused, but I beg of you not
to forget these other countries.
We had a very good ag trade mission in Colombia. Sales are
growing there, Peru and so many other countries, where we
have--or in some cases, we do not have ag trade missions.
You have some peas, pulses, and lentils up your way, a lot
of them.
Senator Hoeven. Right a lot.
Mr. McKinney. I had two members of your communities talk
about the joy of having gone to Guatemala, of all places, last
year, and that has recovered a lot of the sales that they lost
rather dramatically in India.
So we will sustain the focus on these major crops because
they are the here and the now--or these major countries, but I
just want to make sure you know we are making progress in a lot
of these other countries.
Senator Hoeven. Well, that is good because of what India is
doing to block them out.
I have got to say the EU is going to be a tough-to crack.
We were over there for the 75th anniversary of D-Day at
Normandy. I mean, you look at their small fields and all that,
and the idea that they could go head to head with us if they
did not have their restrictions in place, you realize it is a
different world.
At the end of the day, no one can compete with our farmers
and ranchers if we get a fair shake, right?
Thanks for your great work. We appreciate it.
Chairman Roberts. The distinguished Ranking Member is
recognized.
Senator Stabenow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador Doud, you were talking about the WTO at various
points. After the first round of $12 billion trade mitigation
assistance was announced, our trading partners certainly took
notice. In 2018, our country emphasized that it was one-time,
short-term assistance that was not expected to have production
effects because it was announced when commodities had already
been planted or produced.
Given the timing and size of the recently announced $16
billion in new assistance, are you confident that we are still
abiding by our WTO commitments? Is there any possibility we are
creating future problems for our farmers and ranchers at the
WTO?
Mr. Doud. Senator, I thank you for your question, and it is
an important one. The answer is that USTR and USDA have ongoing
conversations about this, and at this point, Senator, I can
assure you that USTR is confident that we will and are abiding
by our WTO commitments.
Senator Stabenow. That will be interesting to watch.
Thank you.
Chairman Roberts. I do want to thank you, all three, for
your commitment. These are tough times, and these are tough
jobs, but you have put your shoulder to the wheel and really
work very hard to accomplish things at a difficult time. I
mean, that is just where we are, which is most unfortunate.
To my fellow members, we ask that any additional questions
you may have for the record be submitted to the Committee clerk
5 business days from today or by 5 p.m., next Thursday, June
20th.
The Committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:18 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================
A P P E N D I X
June 13, 2019
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
June 13, 2019
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
June 13, 2019
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]