- EMPOWERING U.S. VETERANS THROUGH TECHNOLOGY
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
EMPOWERING U.S. VETERANS
THROUGH TECHNOLOGY
=======================================================================
JOINT HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY &
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MAY 22, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-61
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-324 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HON. LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas, Chair
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
ZOE LOFGREN, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama
DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
BILL POSEY, Florida
AMI BERA, California
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
RANDY K. WEBER, Texas
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
DONALD S. BEYER, JR., Virginia
BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
JERRY McNERNEY, California
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
GARY PALMER, Alabama
PAUL TONKO, New York
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
BILL FOSTER, Illinois
ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
MARK TAKANO, California
ROGER W. MARSHALL, Kansas
COLLEEN HANABUSA, Hawaii
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
CLAY HIGGINS, Louisiana
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona
------
Subcommittee on Research and Technology
HON. BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia, Chair
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
AMI BERA, California
ROGER W. MARSHALL, Kansas
DONALD S. BEYER, JR., Virginia
DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona
EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas
------
Subcommittee on Energy
HON. RANDY K. WEBER, Texas, Chair
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas, Ranking
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
Member
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ZOE LOFGREN, California
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
JERRY McNERNEY, California
GARY PALMER, Alabama
PAUL TONKO, New York
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
BILL FOSTER, Illinois
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
MARK TAKANO, California
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas
C O N T E N T S
May 22, 2018
Page
Witness List.....................................................
2
Hearing Charter..................................................
3
Opening Statements
Statement by Representative Barbara Comstock, Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........
4
Written Statement............................................
6
Statement by Representative Daniel Lipinski, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........
8
Written Statement............................................
10
Statement by Representative Lamar Smith, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..
12
Written Statement............................................
13
Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson, Ranking
Member, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House
of Representatives.............................................
15
Written Statement............................................
16
Witnesses:
Dr. Dimitri Kusnezov, Chief Scientist, National Nuclear Security
Administration, U.S. Department of Energy
Oral Statement...............................................
18
Written Statement............................................
20
Mr. Christopher Meek, Founder and Chairman, SoldierStrong
Oral Statement...............................................
30
Written Statement............................................
32
Ms. Martha MacCallum, Advisory Board Member, SoldierStrong
Oral Statement...............................................
37
Written Statement............................................
39
Mr. John Wordin, President and Founder, Project Hero
Oral Statement...............................................
42
Written Statement............................................
45
Dr. Matthew J. Major, Research Health Scientist and Assistant
Professor of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Northwestern
University
Oral Statement...............................................
64
Written Statement............................................
66
Discussion.......................................................
77
Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Dr. Dimitri Kusnezov, Chief Scientist, National Nuclear Security
Administration, U.S. Department of Energy......................
98
Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record
Statement submitted by Representative Randy K. Weber, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Energy, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................
102
Statement submitted by Representative Marc A. Veasey, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Energy, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................
104
EMPOWERING U.S. VETERANS
THROUGH TECHNOLOGY
----------
TUESDAY, MAY 22, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology and
Subcommittee on Energy,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Barbara
Comstock [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee on Research and
Technology] presiding.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Comstock. The Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recesses of the Committee at any time.
Good morning, and welcome to today's hearing titled,
``Empowering U.S. Veterans through Technology.'' I now
recognize myself for five minutes for an opening statement.
The impetus for today's hearing goes back a year or so to
May 2017, when I first met one of our witnesses, John Wordin,
at a Ride 2 Recovery event for veterans in my district in
Manassas, Virginia. I heard firsthand from John about the
HEROTrak system and the wearable health-monitoring device with
software designed to help veterans suffering from post-
traumatic stress disorder. I was fascinated by this technology
and the research going on with it and its potential to help our
veterans.
My district as so many others are home to so many research
and technology companies on the forefront of technological
innovation, so I am particularly pleased, also with a large
veterans' population, to chair this hearing today to profile
technologies to help our dedicated veterans who have served our
nation. By shining a spotlight on cutting-edge technologies
designed to help combat-injured veterans, the Science Committee
can help spread the word about the wonderful efforts in which
our witnesses are engaged, and their impact on the lives of our
brave men and women whose sacrifices deserve our care and
attention.
I also look forward to hearing more about the joint
Department of Energy and Department of Veterans Affairs
collaboration that will leverage DOE's high-performance
computing and machine learning capabilities to analyze health
records of more than 20 million veterans maintained by the VA.
The goal of this partnership is to arm the VA with data it can
use to potentially improve health care offered to veterans by
developing new treatments and preventive strategies. This win-
win enterprise could revolutionize quality of health care for
veterans, while simultaneously providing Department of Energy
with unique insight and information to support development of
next-generation technologies.
We also have representing SoldierStrong Mr. Meek, who will
describe the SoldierSuit and his efforts to purchase and donate
this transformational robotic exoskeleton device comprised of a
number of devices. Amazingly, it can help provide paralyzed
veterans the ability to once again stand, walk, and hug a loved
one eye-to-eye, a point eloquently emphasized in Ms.
MacCallum's testimony. And Ms. MacCallum is probably more
familiar being on the other side, being an interviewer of us,
is one of our witnesses today, and we really appreciate her
being here and her work for veterans.
Now, I mentioned John Wordin, who founded Project Hero ten
years ago to help veterans and first responders affected by
injuries including traumatic brain injury and PTSD through the
programs such as Ride 2 Recovery. While the success of the
program and the therapeutic benefits of cycling, which is one
of the main activities that he's engaged in with the Ride 2
Recovery have benefited thousands of veterans, but I also
appreciate the opportunity to highlight today how the HEROTrak
monitoring system can benefit veterans with PTSD, including how
it can help generate more data on best practices to improve the
lives of veterans.
And since we did get together with Mr. Wordin with a
veterans roundtable in my district yesterday, I can just tell
you, and I know this will apply to all of the others testifying
today, how excited our veterans' services organizations were to
hear about these new technologies and how we can partner with
them. For example, we have a lot of equine therapy groups that
service veterans in my district, and they understood how when
we can get more data here, they can now demonstrate how
impactful the equine therapy is for our veterans. They know
that instinctively but now we have a way of demonstrating that
through data.
And I also welcome Dr. Major, who will describe his very
important research on motor control related to veterans and
service members' prosthetics and orthotics and the underlying
factors of falls.
An added important benefit of today's hearing is that the
technologies, research and federal programs we will hear about
have promising implications for the population at large.
I thank all our witnesses for joining us today, and for
your service and efforts to help improve the lives of our
nation's veterans.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Comstock follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Comstock. I now recognize the Ranking Member of
Research and Technology Subcommittee, the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Lipinski, for his opening statement.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you for
holding today's hearing. I was just looking up Honor Ride on my
iPad here seeing when one in Chicago is, so it's good to have
you, Mr. Wordin.
We're only six days away from Memorial Day, and it's the
busiest day of the year for me for public events in my district
because of the importance my constituents and I place on
honoring the men and women who serve in our armed forces.
I'm sure my colleagues on both sides of the aisle in the
subcommittees present here this morning agree that supporting
technologies that improve the lives of these men and women
should be a high priority.
Unfortunately, many face an uphill battle to overcome the
physical and mental toll of war once they return home. That's
why this hearing is so important.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here to share with
us their efforts to provide veterans with the latest
technologies to improve their quality of life for our veterans.
Almost 20 million U.S. veterans are living today and just
under half are enrolled in the Department of Veterans Affairs'
healthcare system. The health records generated from decades of
care provide a trove of information that may lead to more
accurate diagnosis and treatment of certain conditions and
diseases. High-performance computing can help analyze this
massive amount of data to make it useful for delivering better
healthcare outcomes not only for veterans but also for the
general population.
The federal government has made strategic investments over
the years to advance data analytics and data science research
and development. I look forward to hearing from Dr. Kusnezov
about the progress of the Big Data Science Initiative being
conducted by the VA and Department of Energy, some of which is
taking place in my district at Argonne National Laboratory's
Leadership Computing Facility.
I'd also like to hear about the privacy and security
measures the agencies are taking to protect our veterans'
personal information.
In addition to the diseases and chronic conditions that the
VA-DOE collaboration will address, veterans who survive combat
may have to adapt to civilian life with limited mobility due to
physical injuries sustained in war. A number of federal efforts
support research in related areas, including advanced robotic
prosthetics and full-body exoskeleton suits. For example, the
National Science Foundation funds work examining the interface
of brain and machine for mind control of robotic prosthetics,
and the National Institute of Standards and Technology has
established an international committee to bring together public
and private sector stakeholders to define standards for
wearable robotics.
While the physical wounds of war can be seen, the mental
scars are below the surface. Combat and other traumatizing
experiences may result in long-term damage for veterans.
Homelessness and suicide may be manifestations of these mental
wounds. Eleven to 20 percent of veterans from the most recent
combat operations suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder,
or PTSD. These figures are similar for Gulf War veterans, and,
unfortunately, even greater, 30 percent, for Vietnam veterans.
I look forward to the witnesses' testimony about their
efforts to provide physical and mental rehabilitation
technologies to our deserving veterans who have already
sacrificed so much for our nation. I also look forward to
hearing the witnesses' ideas about what more the federal
science agencies can be doing to accelerate the development of
such technologies.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I look forward to hearing the
testimony, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lipinski follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you, and I now recognize the
Chair of the Committee, Mr. Smith.
Chairman Smith. Thank you, Chairwoman Comstock, for holding
such an interesting and important hearing today.
Today's hearing will highlight some fascinating
technologies and efforts that will empower veterans.
The Titan supercomputer at Oak Ridge National Laboratory
can process a quadrillion calculations per second. That's a
number followed by 15 zeros. Thanks to collaboration between
the Department of Energy and the Department of Veterans
Affairs, this computer will be used to analyze the health
records of 24 million veterans in order to provide improved
care. The partnership between the VA and DOE could transform
the delivery of healthcare to our veterans as we use complex
computer models to learn more about the causes and warning
signs of various diseases.
The VA has identified three priority areas of focus for
early delivery impacts: suicide prevention, prostate cancer,
and cardiovascular disease. By providing DOE with access to a
large-scale database, the VA will help the Energy Department
develop next-generation algorithms and modeling capability
while ultimately providing the VA with data it can use to
improve veterans' quality of life.
One of the witnesses today, Mr. John Wordin, is
collaborating with a Texas A&M University professor on a
wearable device to help veterans suffering from post-traumatic
stress disorder, and we also welcome Dr. Farzan Sasangohar,
Assistant Professor in the Department of Industrial and Systems
Engineering at A&M. Thank you and your team in Texas for your
hard work and efforts to support our veterans.
I would also like to thank Mr. Chris Meek and Ms. Martha
MacCallum for their respective efforts on behalf of
SoldierStrong. In January, SoldierStrong donated a robotic
exoskeleton to the Audie Murphy Memorial VA Hospital in San
Antonio, which I represent. This donation will help the
facility provide state-of-the-art rehabilitative care to
veterans.
One of the benefits of hearing from the experts today is
that the fruits of their labor are not limited to helping
veterans, although they do that so well. They can be applied to
people all over the country and the world who suffer from
similar ailments or injuries.
In addition to this hearing, the Science Committee approved
legislation last November to help veterans overcome obstacles
as they reenter the workforce. H.R. 4323, the Supporting
Veterans in STEM Careers Act, was introduced by Representative
Neal Dunn of Florida, a member of the Science Committee. The
bill promotes veterans' involvement in STEM education, computer
science, and scientific research and employment. It passed the
House in December and awaits action in the Senate.
To me, the subject of the hearing shows yet again how
technology can meet the world's challenges, and we look forward
to our witnesses' testimony today and to finding out more about
how that technology can help not just veterans but, as I said,
people around the world.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and yield back.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Smith follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Comstock. And I now recognize the Ranking
Member, Ms. Johnson.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much, Chairwoman Comstock and
Ranking Member Lipinski for holding this hearing to learn more
about technologies that are being developed to help improve the
quality of life for our injured veterans.
This is a topic close to my own heart. Before I ran for
political office, I served as the chief psychiatric nurse at
the VA Hospital in Dallas where I actually helped to start that
service. I saw up close the toll that serving in a combat zone
can take on our men and women in uniform. I developed a deep
appreciation for human frailty and strength alike, and I
carried those lessons forward into my political career.
I regularly meet with veterans in my district in Dallas to
learn about the challenges they face reentering civilian life
and to discuss what the veterans--what the federal government
can be doing better to help ease their transition.
Today there are about 20 million veterans in the United
States. Advances in medical response and technology in the
battlefield have meant that more veterans are surviving and
returning home with traumatic injuries that meant certain death
in earlier generations.
The protracted conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan resulted
in many of our veterans serving multiple deployments in combat
zones. Even if they survived these deployments without any
visible injuries, some almost certainly suffer in other ways.
Veterans experience mental health disorders, substance use
disorders, post-traumatic stress, and traumatic brain injury at
a disproportionate rate compared to their civilian
counterparts. Eighteen to 22 American veterans commit suicide
daily. Younger veterans are at the highest risk. While an exact
count is hard to come by, approximately 40,000 veterans today
are homeless. These are statistics that should alarm us all.
Technology will not solve all of these challenges. However,
technology can go a long way to aid veterans suffering from
both physical injuries and mental health disorders. Continued
advancements in prosthetics and exoskeletons will help improve
the quality of life for veterans who have lost limbs. More
accurate and wearable predictors of PTSD attacks will help
veterans keep themselves and their loved ones safe, and better
understanding of the range of conditions that occur in the
veteran population will help medical professionals and
policymakers alike develop more effective interventions.
I look forward to hearing more about the technologies that
today's witnesses are working on, and I look forward to a
discussion of the role that our science agencies such as the
National Science Foundation and the National Institute of
Standards and Technology can play in advancing these and other
technologies to aid our U.S. veterans. Our veterans deserve
nothing less from our nation and our government than our full
dedication to helping them repair the wounds of war that they
suffered on our behalf.
I thank you and yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Johnson follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you, and I'm now going to
introduce our witnesses but before I do, I did want to
recognize Steve Jordan of the Northern Virginia Technology
Council, who has worked for the Veterans Employment Initiative,
which has been an initiative of our technology companies in
northern Virginia, which has just done wonderful work with our
veterans, and I really appreciate having you here today, Steve,
to hear about these great technologies, and both private and
public investment, which I know NVTC has already been great
with public-private partnerships. So thank you.
Okay. Now, first our first witness today is Dr. Dimitri
Kusnezov, Chief Scientist at the National Nuclear Security
Administration at the U.S. Department of Energy. Prior to NNSA,
he served as Director of the Office of Research and Development
for National Security Science and Technology. Dr. Kusnezov
earned a bachelor of arts in both physics and pure mathematics
from the University of California at Berkeley. He also holds a
Master of Science in physics as well as a Ph.D. in theoretical
nuclear physics, both from Princeton University.
Our second witness today is Mr. Christopher Meek, Founder
and Chairman of SoldierStrong. SoldierStrong helps America's
servicemen, -women, and veterans take their next steps forward
by identifying and filling gaps in the traditional systems
supporting veterans and members of the military. Originally
called SoldierSocks, SoldierStrong stems from Mr. Meek's first
project organizing donations of socks and other supplies from
communities and businesses. Mr. Meek holds a Bachelor of Arts
in economics and political science from Syracuse University and
a Master of Business Administration and financial management
from Pace University in New York City.
Our third witness today is Ms. Martha MacCallum, Advisory
Board Member of SoldierStrong. She's here in that capacity
today. Of course, we also know her as a Fox News anchor, where
she has highlighted numerous military achievements on her show,
The Story with Martha MacCallum. Ms. MacCallum's coverage has
included the accomplishments and personal stories of the Green
Berets, Navy SEALs, and medal winners for extreme bravery in
Afghanistan. She earned her bachelor's degree in political
science from St. Lawrence University. She also studied at the
Circle and the Square Theater School.
Mr. John Wordin, our fourth witness, is President and
Founder of Project Hero. His work to improve suicide prevention
and help veterans and first responders has earned him national
recognition. He began his career as a professional cyclist,
participating in three U.S. Olympic Trials and earning a bronze
medal in the 1989 U.S. National Championships. Mr. Wordin was
also President and Founder of the Fitness Challenge Foundation,
which was the genesis of Ride 2 Recovery founded in 2008. Mr.
Wordin holds a Bachelor of Science in finance from California
State University at Northridge.
And I did want to mention, someone just told me that the
Vice President tweeted about the hearing this morning. I know
when we first met, you had started your Ride 2 Recovery at the
Vice President's house, so I guess he's watching to catch up on
this too, so thank you again for joining us today.
Our final witness is Dr. Matthew Major, Research Health
Scientist and Assistant Professor of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation at Northwestern University. Dr. Major's research
focuses on improving mobility and function of veterans with
neurological and musculoskeletal pathology through
rehabilitation technology and therapeutic intervention. He
holds Bachelor of Science and Master of Science degrees in
mechanical engineering from the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign as well as a Ph.D. in biomedical engineering
from the University of Salford-Manchester in the United
Kingdom.
So I now recognize Dr. Kusnezov for his five minutes to
present his testimony.
TESTIMONY OF DR. DIMITRI KUSNEZOV,
CHIEF SCIENTIST,
NATIONAL NUCLEAR SECURITY ADMINISTRATION,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
Dr. Kusnezov. Thank you, Chairman Smith, Ranking Member
Johnson, Chairwoman Comstock, Chairman Weber, Ranking Member
Lipinski, and Ranking Member Veasey and distinguished Members
of the Subcommittee on Research and Technology and the
Subcommittee on Energy. I thank you for taking up this
important issue and for the opportunity to address the members
and share what the Department of Energy in collaboration with
the Department of Veterans Affairs is trying to do at the
intersection of next-generation artificial intelligence,
supercomputing, U.S. innovation, and veterans' health.
At the Department of Energy, driven by where our missions
are heading, we work at the forefront of technologies, and
today we are embracing artificial intelligence. This coincides
with diminishing returns from Moore's Law, where squeezing the
most of our 70-year supercomputing paradigm remains important.
This post-Moore's Law era necessitates novel artificial
intelligence, or AI, inspired architectures to navigate an
increasingly data-driven world. I believe that a cornerstone
for progress will be how rapidly we embrace a next generation
of AI-enabled predictive supercomputing tools.
Precision medicine data can accelerate this technology
change by driving the development with likely the world's most
complex data. This brings with us subject-matter experts and
unique opportunities to rethink many of our traditional
approaches from post-Moore's Law hybrid architectures to
uncertainty quantification to computer codes.
Our work with the VA is underpinned by several
opportunities for innovation that were captured in the 21st
Century Cures Act, the Cancer Moonshot in 2016, and the
National Strategic Computing Initiative in 2015. More recently,
Secretary Perry's commitment to technology in the service of
veterans as well as this Administration's commitment to
veterans' issues has allowed the rethinking of traditional
paradigms and facilitated novel approaches on how to solve
complex problems.
The VA has a unique dataset of medical records, whole
genomes and imaging data that is one of the most comprehensive
in dimensions of time, scale, and breadth, and in many aspects,
this dataset is considered to be the largest and most
comprehensive in the world. Both the VA and the Department of
Energy are alert to the unique privacy and security
sensitivities of the veterans' health data.
Today, our artificial intelligence-driven Big Data Science
Initiative includes MVP-CHAMPION and a complementary effort
called ACTIVE.
Last year in April, VA and DOE scientists, physicians, and
leadership came together to develop technical roadmaps for
driving high-performance computing and artificial intelligence
while developing solutions to priority issues and caring for
our veterans. VA priorities that were identified that could
deliver early impacts were patient-specific analysis for
suicide prevention, helping doctors make decisions around
prostate cancer, and enhanced prediction and diagnosis of
cardiovascular disease. Since then, additional areas of
interest from polypharmacy to traumatic brain injury have
surfaced. The fiscal year 2019 VA budget request includes $27
million to support these initiatives.
We recognize the critical role of the private sector in
this effort. Recently the VA and DOE held a meeting with
technology startups focused on precision medicine to understand
the direction of the technology in the commercial sector. As
with the Human Genome Project or the exascale initiative today,
partnerships with labs, academia, and the private sector are
important. A concerted effort here will lead to innovation tied
to design and development of DOE's next-generating
supercomputing that will merge big data, artificial
intelligence, and high-performance computing; to better
healthcare via our strategy for precision medicine through
supercomputing and artificial intelligence that could inform
when and how to treat our veterans to improve outcomes and
control costs; to better science via a cadre of researchers and
clinicians who specialize in healthcare with DOE experts in big
data, AI, and high-performance computing; and to better
government via interagency collaborations bringing to bear the
full capabilities and expertise within public and private
partnerships.
Thank you, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Kusnezov follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you, and we now recognize Dr.
Meek for his testimony.
TESTIMONY OF MR. CHRISTOPHER MEEK,
FOUNDER AND CHAIRMAN,
SOLDIERSTRONG
Mr. Meek. Chairwoman Comstock and Ranking Member Lipinski
of the Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Chairman Weber
and Ranking Member Johnson of the Subcommittee on Energy, and
members of both Subcommittees, thank you for having me here
today.
On September 11, 2001, I was running floor trading
operations for Goldman Sachs at Ground Zero in New York City.
As I watched the first responders running into the carnage of
that day, I resolved to do something to give back to those who
serve. I'm still a financial services executive, now at S&P
Global, but in the years since that day, my passion project has
become SoldierStrong.
SoldierStrong is a 501(c)(3) charitable organization
committed to improving the lives of our servicemen, women and
veterans. I chair the organization, and accomplish most of its
work from a cell phone and an iPad on my daily commute to New
York.
SoldierStrong's work started with a request from a forward
operating base in Afghanistan to send basic supplies like tube
socks and baby wipes for our forward deployed troops. Over the
years, we assembled and sent over 75,000 pounds of supplies to
73 units in Iraq and Afghanistan.
As the wars wound down, we contemplated closing down until
one of our board members asked whether the troops we had served
had everything they needed when they came back home and began
life anew as veterans.
In retrospect, one day in particular would bring this
question into focus for me. April 27, 2011, was my daughter's
fifth birthday. We celebrated, like many families, with cake
and ice cream and without a care in the world. Six thousand
eight hundred miles away, Army Sergeant Dan Rose was being
medevac'd from the battle field to Kandahar. The vehicle he was
in had hit an IED, and his injuries would rob him of the
ability to walk again. Dan's experience that day was a personal
reminder of how much we owe our veterans, and how their
sacrifices allow all of us to take for granted the lives we're
blessed to live here. Two years after his injury, Dan would
become the first recipient of our SoldierSuit, empowering him
to walk once again.
Today, SoldierStrong finds the most advanced mobility
devices and prosthetics on the market and makes them available
to injured veterans who otherwise would not have access to
them. The collection of devices we currently fund comprise the
SoldierSuit, which covers full-body, upper-body, and lower-body
mobility devices. One example is the Ekso Suit, which allows
paralyzed veterans to stand and walk again with robotic
assistance.
The physical and psychological impacts of being able to get
up out of a wheelchair and stand at eye level with the world
again are profound. In fact, we are partnering with the Denver
VA to conduct a formal study on the mental health impacts of
access to this technology.
Another example is the Luke Arm, which is the first and
only prosthetic arm that replaces the full range of motion from
the shoulder, through the elbow, to the wrist to the fingers
and the hand. It is the first arm that works just like the
original equipment.
As with many advanced technologies, these devices tend to
be extremely expensive, with our average device costing nearly
$100,000. Two of our more capable devices cost nearly $200,000
per each.
We've learned over the years that most of these devices
were first evolved for frontline servicemen and -women via
DARPA.
America's commitment to putting cutting-edge technology on
our warfighters is exceptional, is a point of national pride,
and should extend, but currently does not, to our veterans who
bear the physical consequences of service to our country. We
work closely with more than a dozen VA medical centers around
the country which have received one or more of our devices. The
people of the VA care very deeply about our veterans, but are
sometimes held back by arcane regulations that have not kept
pace with modern technological advancement. Thanks to
SoldierStrong, nearly 25,000 veterans have access to one of
these devices. We believe every injured veteran has earned the
right to the best technology American ingenuity can provide.
Yet one of the tragedies of the post-9/11 veteran care is
that too many veterans must rely on charitable organizations
like ours for the access to the medical help they need.
Though it sounds like science fiction, it really hits you
that these capabilities are quite real when you see a veteran
roll into a room in a wheelchair, but stand for the first time
in years and actually walk back out of that same room.
I have with me a short video showing how this technology
works. This video was made during one of our device donations
to the Richmond VA.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman, the video concludes my remarks
today. I look forward to answering questions from the
Subcommittee. Thank you.
[Video Playback]
[The prepared statement of Mr. Meek follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you.
I now recognize Ms. MacCallum.
TESTIMONY OF MS. MARTHA MACCALLUM,
ADVISORY BOARD MEMBER,
SOLDIERSTRONG
Ms. MacCallum. Chairman Comstock, Chairman Smith, Ranking
Member Lipinski, and Ranking Member Johnson, Members of the
Committee, thank you so much for having me here today.
In my work, I am fortunate to speak with generals, military
leaders, and Pentagon officials, Navy SEALs and Green Berets as
well as many other great men and women who serve or have served
our country. In fact, yesterday I spoke with Vice President
Pence, who was very interested in the subject matter of our
discussion here today, and in particular the work of Mr. Wordin
and also the work of SoldierStrong and the U.S. technology that
can grow and benefit our veterans and other members of society.
Like most of us, as a citizen, I am enormously grateful to
them for their service and humbled by their sacrifice, knowing
that as much as I love my country, I could never live up to the
measure of their bravery and heroism. Like most of us, I want
to show my gratitude to those who put their lives on the line,
those who make the sacrifices, who face the danger, who go to
the frontlines to protect us, and the freedom that we cherish
as Americans.
SoldierStrong was born out of 9/11 out of Chris Meek's
desire to prove to our patriots that we are forever thankful,
that what we can do as citizens and as a country--through what
we do as citizens and as a country is to make sure that we are
willing to move forward in combat and that they will now be
able to move forward in life. Whatever they lost on the
battlefield or in injuries after they've served, we can help
them overcome to the greatest of our ability.
9/11 was a day that changed us forever. As a lifelong New
York/New Jersey resident, I watched the Towers come down, and
with them, the lives of people I knew: the families of those
who were lost, 13 fathers and one mother from my hometown. I
vowed that day to tell the story of the war on terror and the
battles that continue, and to support those who heard the call
of President Bush when he said, ``the people who knocked these
buildings down will hear from all of us soon.'' The men and
women of our armed forces made that message heard loud and
clear. Some paid the ultimate price carrying that message to
our enemies.
So when Chris Meek came to see me about the organization
that he had started with the simple mission of sending basic
supplies to our troops to show them we cared and how that
mission evolved into opening up a world of possibility for our
injured patriots when they came back home, I was in. I joined
the Advisory Board in 2014 and have been dedicated to using my
voice and the platform that I have through my work to raise
awareness and support and to spread the word about the cutting-
edge technologies emerging in this field and the life-changing
impact they could have for those to whom I owe so much.
The response has been incredible. I believe our viewers and
Americans across this country want better for our veterans,
better than a system that leaves gaps and does not allow them
to the ingenuity of these new devices.
I will never forget the day that Sergeant Dan Rose came to
our studio to demonstrate how his SoldierSuit allowed him to
get up from his wheelchair and take the steps that he never
dreamed he would be able to take again. The look on his face
said it all: will, possibility, and promise.
As Americans we must make sure that we give back but give
back in a way that is uniquely American, that relies on this
cutting-edge technology, and never taking no for an answer. As
JFK once said about the U.S. space mission, ``We choose to go
to the Moon not because it is easy, but because it is hard.''
We live in a time when Ironman is not just a movie. It is
moment when technology made in America can rebuild arms with
full mobility and allow bodies with severed spinal cords to
stand up and walk. Companies like Ekso Bionics, Bionix, Mobius
Bionix, and Myomo are leading the way.
But there is still a long way to go, and we will do it, not
because it is easy, but because it is hard, and because it is
the right thing to do.
Embracing this technology is a winner for the United
States, for our military and for those who will benefit from
the growth of these industries and the jobs that it creates
here at home as well. It makes sense on every level.
Thanks to the work of a very lean and dedicated team,
SoldierStrong operates on a budget that puts just 9 to 12
percent towards operating costs. More than 80 percent goes
directly to bringing this technology to more than 25,000
veterans at rehab centers and VA facilities across the country
so far. SoldierStrong has donated more than $2.5 million in
high-technology medical devices that directly help our injured
armed forces and $500,000 toward scholarships for those whose
way forward is through education that opens doors for their
next steps in their lives.
I encourage you to think about how the funding that
supports our fighting forces in the field can be extended to
support the extraordinary research that's being done with
taxpayer funding that will ensure that our injured veterans
have access to the scientific advances that come from it.
I thank you very much for your time today and look forward
to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. MacCallum follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you, and we will now hear from
Mr. Wordin.
TESTIMONY OF MR. JOHN WORDIN,
PRESIDENT AND FOUNDER,
PROJECT HERO
Mr. Wordin. Good morning, Chairman Comstock, Chairman
Weber, and Ranking Members Lipinski and Veasey, and
distinguished members of the Energy and Research and Technology
Committee. I'd like to introduce Dr. Farzan Sasangohar,
Industrial and Systems Engineer at Texas A&M, and we also have
with us some veterans from the Project Hero Walter Reed hub
program here today.
Project Hero is an organization that brings our nation's
veterans and first responders together through sports,
activities, and community, helping them overcome challenges
associated with their visible and invisible wounds.
Being the catalyst for the adapted sports movement, Project
Hero continues to be the industry leader. Dedicated research,
including a Georgetown University study, of Project Hero's
methods confirms that the work being carried out since its
inception is changing and improving the lives of tens of
thousands of veterans, first responders, and their families.
Remember, the veterans volunteer; the families are drafted.
Our mission is to save lives by providing hope, recovery,
and resilience to America's finest. We've had a tremendous
impact. Sixty-two percent of our program participants reduce or
eliminate their prescription drug use including opioids and
antidepressants. PTSD-related stress attacks as measured by the
HEROTrak are reduced by 83 perfect. The annual Project Hero
participants saves the VA more than $9,000 including
prescription drugs and healthcare costs annually.
A soon-to-be-released report reviewed 3,000 suicides to
evaluate the cause and effect, and recommend steps to improve
care to our veterans and provides data to show why 20 veterans
commit suicide each day. What are the risk factors, diagnoses,
and family components that are at the root cause of suicide?
The review found that the diagnoses most common in all suicides
are depression, PTSD, anxiety, and alcohol use disorder with
the average suicide having multiple diagnoses. The top risk
factors are pain, access to firearms, worsening of health
status, relationship problems, hopelessness and decline in
physical ability. Most of the suicides were not identified as
high risk in their medical record. Of the 20 suicides per day,
only three were receiving VA mental health services at the time
of their death. The reasons: inconvenience, long wait times,
paperwork, transportation, and stigma.
The top recommendation of this report is to come up with an
enhanced suicide risk assessment and safety planning capability
that addresses the complex care needs of our veterans,
utilizing technology, clinician training, and extending more
into the community. There is a need for a more systematic
assessment tool that can document risk.
The HEROTrak initiative solves this vital need for a
technology-based objective solution for suicide prevention and
mental health care. Currently, no PTSD tool exists with remote
capabilities to complement ongoing treatment.
The HEROTrak will be a FDA-approved device that will allow
continuous monitoring and detection of PTSD triggers using
physiological sensors and machine learning algorithms and can
measure frequency, severity, and duration of a PTSD episode
within two to four seconds. The HEROTrak is a wearable monitor
developed by Texas A&M and Dr. Sasangohar and tested
exclusively at Project Hero events to learn a user's
physiological cues.
Our goal will be to prevent and eliminate suicide in
military, veteran, and first responder population, provide the
active-duty component with a long-term focus on improving the
overall readiness of the force by providing better health and
healthcare analytics, and provide support for survivors of
sexual trauma and other mental health diagnoses with the care
they need. The result will be better therapeutic outcomes at
less cost.
Using a combination of heart rate and heart rate
variability monitoring, the PTSD alarm will identify triggers.
The tool creates a personalized profile that monitors patterns
and variability to infer a PTSD episode. If an episode is
detected, an alarm vibration goes off with a visual prompt that
the user will set up four options of support: self-resilience
tools; they can connect to a NoVetAlone peer-to-peer network
that they program into the watch themselves, which can
including family, friends, or clinicians; it can automatically
call the VA crisis hotline or 911. The device pairs with a
smartphone and can interface with a website to offer more
features including direct connect to peers, military command,
or clinicians either by phone or video as desired. The user
will also be able to share information with peers in their
social network that they wish to create for their own personal
support system.
The device can best be utilized when a person first joins
the active-duty military to create a baseline and then
constantly and consistently collect data on the mental and
physical health, report stress events/traumas during their
service. The advantage is to maintain objective rather than
subjective data and feedback and integrate this information
into one's electronic medical records.
This biometric collective data can then provide a medical
clinician with the complete mental and physical health picture
whenever the participant visits their healthcare provider,
thereby understanding whether the prescription drugs they've
been using are actually working or whether the care path that
they've been put on by their VA or active-duty clinician is
actually working. The overall advantage is a more
comprehensive, objective measurement of their disability
metrics that will lead to increased abilities and a better care
continuum.
For the patient, it's a creative way for them to have--for
them and their family to understand the environment and
surroundings that cause stress episodes in their life. They can
look back at the minute, the five minutes, the 30 minutes prior
to a PTSD episode and understand what was the trigger.
Up on the screen, we have some of the screenshots of the
app that the device pairs with so you can see your data. On
here you can see your heart rate, your resting heart rate, your
physical activity, the number of stress events, and your--and
also your tools.
They will be provided accurate information on the mental
and physical state of mind. It will be a patient-centered
design that provides a 24/7 support network with medical,
resiliency and peer-to-peer support if you have a PTSD episode.
It's GPS-enabled so if you become disoriented or pass out, the
person who's been alerted to your PTSD episode will be able to
know exactly where you are. Peer-to-peer support can provide
motivation, feedback, and the support of knowing that you are
not alone.
For the clinicians, it provides a complete mental and
physical healthcare picture of their patients, a more
comprehensive measurement with disability metrics, which lead
to increased abilities and provide a more informed care
continuum. Up on the screen we have actual data that was driven
from one of our testing where you can see how a PTSD episode
would look to a clinician. It starts out during sleep, and then
you can see the spike in their heart rate that causes the alarm
to go off, and it also knows the difference between physical
activity and an actual episode.
For the DOD, it creates a baseline that consistently and
constantly collects data on their mental and physical health so
that they can know the readiness of their troops before going
on deployment. It maintains objective data and feedback on the
overall readiness of the force, and that information could be
integrated into their electronic medical records.
The most important need we have right now as a nation is to
prevent more suicides and improve the mental health of those
who serve our country. Although the conflicts may be winding
down, there is a lifelong commitment we owe to these men and
women. The HEROTrak is vital to that commitment to assure that
they can see their children grow up in a supportive community.
We all understand the need to reduce suicide and improve
mental health for veterans that live and work in each of our
districts. There are veterans in your district right now that
can be saved by utilizing the HEROTrak.
Thank you very much for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wordin follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Comstock. And we'll now hear from Dr. Major.
TESTIMONY OF DR. MATTHEW J. MAJOR,
RESEARCH HEALTH SCIENTIST
AND ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF
PHYSICAL MEDICINE AND REHABILITATION,
NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY
Dr. Major. Thank you. I'd first like to thank Chairman
Barbara Comstock, Ranking Member Daniel Lipinski, Chairman
Randy Weber, and Ranking Member Marc Veasey for the invitation
to testify. I also want to recognize Chairman Smith and Ranking
Member Johnson for joining us this morning.
There exists a large and growing number of veterans with
neurological or musculoskeletal pathology who rely on VA
rehabilitative care for functional restoration. When medically
indicated, an inter disciplinary clinical team delivers custom
prostheses or orthoses and implements therapies to train
veterans on how to use these devices effectively and ensure
long-term rehabilitation success.
I currently conduct studies on the factors that underlie
balance and fall risk in persons with upper and lower limb
loss. We do not yet fully understand why nearly 50 percent of
community living persons with limb loss fall at least once per
year, many of whom experience a fall-related injury.
This has considerable implications to veteran qualify of
life and VA healthcare costs. My studies aim to identify
factors that are useful for fall risk screening and modifiable
through balance targeted interventions. Uniquely, these studies
utilize technologies for assessing how prosthesis users respond
to walking disturbances. Moreover, these platforms can deliver
therapies to train users on how to manage disturbances and
avoid falls.
I'll provide two examples. In this first example, we use a
robot that applies a controlled pull to the pelvis through a
system of motors and cables. We're interested in the lessons
that can be learned from the unique strategies of the
individuals you see here.
In the second example, we see use of an interactive system,
which provides both virtual and augmented reality as a means to
deliver walking disturbances. This system is used to deliver
physical training that requires controlled movements and is
combined with cognitive behavioral therapy as part of a
holistic treatment.
The remaining projects focus on development and evaluation
of prosthetic devices. We're addressing the unique prosthetic
needs of women with limb loss and developing prostheses that
can accommodate changes in footwear. We're also developing a
new method to deliver personalized prosthetic feet and knees
based on an individual's body structure and activity level.
Finally, we're designing technology to suspend prostheses
from the amputated limb using vacuum suction to improve
mobility and limb health.
While prosthetic and orthotic technology is advancing
rapidly due to progress in robotics and material science, the
most critical aspect to successful rehabilitation are the
veterans using these devices. Research and development has
granted us the ability to empower veterans with functional
impairments but understanding how veterans interact with this
technology is crucial. Therefore, we should support parallel
research efforts on development of technology and its clinical
application. The success of the rehabilitation process is
dependent on clinicians' use of evidence-based practice, which
is generated from quality clinical research that considers the
holistic needs of patients.
Furthermore, veteran rehabilitation does not end once they
are fitted with a device and deployed into the community. Real-
world use of this technology provides a window into
rehabilitation progress and quality of life. Advances in
wearable sensors have improved our ability to collect data on
community-based outcomes such as activity level and
participation. Research is needed to explore ways in which we
can best integrate sensors into devices to monitor user status
with minimal interruption to daily living. We also need to
examine how these data can guide device designs and
rehabilitation strategies to better support independent
function.
Overall, veteran rehabilitation research must continue to
be interdisciplinary to accelerate its progress, integrating
science from engineering and medicine. I argue that we still
lack a thorough understanding of the interaction between the
human element and rehabilitation technology. More research is
needed to better understand: A, how the body responds to
different prosthetic and orthotic designs; B, which therapies
are most effective; and C, what the long-term outcomes of
rehabilitation are on veteran health and quality of life.
Filling these gaps will improve personalized rehabilitation
interventions and help close the loop between technology and
clinical practice.
Ultimately, I believe that technology is driving us towards
a future where we can fine-tune rehabilitation interventions
with extreme precision, accuracy, and speed. Devices and
therapies will be personalized based on individual patient
characteristics and smart prostheses and orthoses will collect
diagnostic data through onboard sensors. Clinicians will use
these data to monitor rehabilitation progress and design
interventions while the devices themselves will automatically
adjust in real time to meet the demands of daily activity.
Combined with advances in telehealth, therapies will be
administered remotely without traveling to a clinic and thereby
improving access to care.
Real-time monitoring and remote intervention delivery will
promote rehabilitation of veterans while permitting continued
community engagement. Our end goal is to restore the greatest
level of independence, ambulation, and quality of life to
veterans which reflects a main priority of the VHA.
I once again thank the Research and Technology Subcommittee
and the Energy Subcommittee for this opportunity to testify,
and I'm looking forward to the discussion. Thanks.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Major follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Comstock. Great. Thank you all so much. What
inspiring work you're all doing, and the innovation is really
exciting.
So I kind of picking up from when we had our veterans'
roundtable yesterday, one of the things was how we can
integrate these services. First of all, Mr. Wordin, and then I
wanted to kind of ask everyone this question, what three things
can we do, and maybe give us some action items for each of you
to get what you're working on advanced and out to more of our
veterans.
Mr. Wordin. Well, the first thing is easy. It's funding. I
mean, the technology groups I think in all the speeches talked
about funding and the need for more technology for technology
because it has such a--it'll have such a large impact. I mean,
we talked yesterday in the forum about how, for example, people
are trying to justify or understand how valuable equine therapy
is. Well, if every participant was wearing a HEROTrak device,
you'd be able to tell immediately the overall mental and
physical impact that that therapy was having on that particular
person, and so then you can make better informed decisions as
both a patient, as a clinician, as a Congress on where to
appropriate and prioritize that funding.
Technology will continue to evolve, and I would say that's
the second issue is as technology evolves, particularly our
device will become even more powerful. As phones become more
powerful, as the wearable technology becomes more powerful,
battery life improves, the reliability of the algorithm
improves, the device will become even more efficient and even
more valuable.
And then the third thing is just being able to work within
the VA system, which I think is the biggest source of
frustration for veterans. In that study that was quoted where
they talked about inconvenience, long wait times, paperwork,
transportation and stigma, you know, the VA has its challenges
and--but also the way that VA treats nonprofits, outside groups
and how can we interact with them is very, very complicated. I
mean, we're lucky. We're one of the few--we were the first with
Secretary Shulkin to be an authorized mental health and suicide
prevention program of the VA, but even with that official
designation, we still have a hard time working with individual
VA Medical Centers. And so how can we fix--I don't even know if
fix is the right word but how can we make it so that while it's
a lot easier to deal with active-duty component with DOD, it's
very, very complicated with the VA, and it's still the federal
government. There's still supposed to be one rulebook.
Chairwoman Comstock. And Ms. MacCallum and Mr. Meek, what
has been your experience in working with the VA and how can we
help advance--and obviously I think we all agree getting more
funding directed to this but how can we integrate better?
Ms. MacCallum. Just looking at the VA request for 2019,
$198 billion, $727 million of that request is for medical
prosthetic research. So funding is clearly one of the big
issues. And when I think about SoldierStrong, there's 170 VA
Medical Centers in the country--and this goes to what Mr.
Wordin was saying--we have devices in 12 of them so far. So the
issue of scale and scaling up so that these devices are more
available to veterans across the country is clearly one of the
big goals here, and then, you know, in terms of what I do, I
just think communication and helping people to understand
across the country what our veterans go through when they get
home. I mean, I think that's a message that we need to continue
to spread and that's something that, you know, I would like to
see more news organizations spend more time on, and that's an
effort that I would make.
You know, I look at one of the quotes from one of the
veterans that we've spoken to. He said, you know, you feel like
a burden and you avoid social situations, so that alone is such
a hampering factor to moving forward. So we want to find a way
to, you know, help veterans feel, especially when they're using
these devices, that they're not in the way, that they're
normal, that they're part of society, and I think raising
awareness through great communication is something that will go
a long way to that.
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you.
Mr. Meek. I think I'd agree with Mr. Wordin. I think the
two things that you can do are first to pass legislation making
this technology available to all veterans, and more importantly
is funding the appropriations. It's one thing to pass a bill,
but if you can't pay for it, it's not going to do anybody any
good.
You know, there's several great organizations up here all
doing some great things, but at the end of the day, we're all
fighting for the same private sector, private donor dollar.
There's only so much of that out there, and so getting help
from people like yourself and this Committee will really help
transform the lives of those veterans who need it.
Chairwoman Comstock. And I think one of the things I think
you've all demonstrated in testifying, when these devices and
these things are made available, it's lowering PTSD, it
improves lives, and we actually do have long-term savings here
as well as obviously improved quality of life and the right
thing to do, so there is a win-win result from this.
Mr. Meek. Well, and as you mentioned before, a lot of these
devices were originally funded through DARPA, and what we're
finding now is that there's no DARPA for veterans when they
come back home, and so that's why I think organizations like
ours are trying to backfill here is to step up and fill that
void.
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you very much. I see my time is
up.
I now recognize Mr. Lipinski.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, and I want to thank all the
witnesses for their testimony. A lot of interesting work in
different areas to help our veterans with technology.
I wanted to start with Dr. Major. You mentioned the
potential of smart prostheses that can incorporate onboard
sensors and real-world data to improve rehabilitation progress
and design interventions. What are the current challenges that
the field faces in achieving the goal of smart prostheses and
what federal resources are needed or could be leveraged to
reach this target?
Dr. Major. Thank you for the question. Yeah, I think in
terms of the challenges that we face this early, it's difficult
actually to find ways to effectively integrate these sensors. I
mean, there are a lot of sensors that are available.
Miniaturization of these sensors actually helps provide the
ability to be able to include them in such devices like these,
but again, I think what we're lacking is once the sensors are
actually included is trying to essentially use that mapping
between the data that is being derived from real-world use and
what it essentially means and how we should direct that to how
these devices either interact with the patients, help the user,
learn from the user, and improve their mobility essentially. So
I think there's still some gaps that are missing in terms of
research. A lot of this is essentially basic research in the
sense that again once the data is available, how do you
effectively use it, and I think we need to make certain that
research is being directed in a way that we can answer some of
those questions to fill those gaps. Because, again, the sensor
technology has improved dramatically and it's rapidly advancing
because they're getting smaller and smaller, and our ability to
include them in devices such as prostheses and orthoses at this
point is much improved. I don't necessarily think that's one of
the bigger challenges.
Powering those devices, powering those sensors, that is a
challenge of course because they do require onboard battery
power as well, and obviously in advances in battery power and
miniaturizing that technology will obviously help in this case,
but again, research does need to be directed to answer those
questions on how we use the data effectively, how we can do
that, collect the data, how clinicians can then use the data
but at the same time also protecting the privacy of the patient
because once you have all this data that is streaming in, one
of the important things obviously is to make sure that patient
privacy is being considered in that case.
Mr. Lipinski. Are we training or have we trained the next
generation of scientists to do this work that's needed that
reaches across a lot of different areas? Do you think we're
doing an adequate job of that? Do we need to do more and
focus--well, do we need to do more there?
Dr. Major. I'd be hesitant to speak more broadly but in my
experience, I think we are. I think one of the benefits of this
type of research is that it is interdisciplinary and we need to
make sure that it continues to be so, right, because again, it
is this combination of engineering and medicine but we need to
start of course integrating other disciplines as well, whether
that's material science, robotics, psychology, whatever it
might be, but we need to make sure that we're still promoting
that type of integrative, interdisciplinary research to make
sure that we're staying competitive and we're advancing the
process of this particular science.
So I think we are doing an excellent job. Of course we can
always do better, and as long as we continue on this track, I
think this particular research will remain competitive and
we'll be able to take the steps that we need to elevate this
type of technology.
Mr. Lipinski. Moving on, it's great to see, Mr. Wordin, the
work that you're doing with HEROTrak, and we still--veteran
suicide data is inconclusive. We're still trying to understand
this. What does your--you know, what does HEROTrak really
provide in that direction and what else more do you think can
be done to leverage commercial technologies in order to do
this?
Mr. Wordin. Well, this report that's about to come out is
pretty clear on what the root causes and diagnoses of suicide
are, and when you get into depression, anxiety, hopelessness,
you know, those are all factors, and what we found in our
research so far in our testing of the HEROTrak is that veterans
feel like they have a support system with them 24/7 right on
their wrist because it can connect to a loved one, a clinician,
a family member or a peer so that if they have an episode,
they're able to get help immediately and it's something that
they direct so they're in control. And so the feedback that
we've been getting from our focus groups has been really
remarkable in the acceptance of being able to wear basically a
technology monitoring device that understands what's going on
with you mentally and physically. And so that power helps
alleviate that hopelessness. So if you are feeling depressed,
you know, hey, if I have an episode, you know, it automatically
will text-message my buddy from Iraq or my wife or my
girlfriend or my father or whatever, you know, you particularly
program in, and that ability really creates that sliver of hope
that's the difference between suicide and not suicide.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you very much. My time is up. A lot of
things to talk about here but I thank all of you for the work
that you're doing.
Chairwoman Comstock. And I now recognize Mr. Weber.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, Chairwoman.
Dr. Kusnezov, in your prepared testimony, you talked about
how the DOE national labs have a history of research
collaboration and the ability to confront short- and long-term
complex science challenges. Hold that thought in mind for just
one second.
Ms. MacCallum, you said you talked to a vet who felt a
stigma when trying to interact with----
Ms. MacCallum. Going out and socializing and being in a
wheelchair and trying to get around people and feeling that he
was, quote, in the way.
Mr. Weber. Perfect. Mr. Wordin, you listed all of the
causes of suicide, and do you have that list available for us
where we can get that later? Anxiety, depression. Was stigma
one of those causes?
Mr. Wordin. No, but stigma is one of the reasons why they
don't receive VA medical services.
Mr. Weber. Okay. Thank you.
Now, Dr. Kusnezov, back to you. The DOE has a history of
working with some of those other agencies where you said
earlier, I think quite frankly, and Mr. Wordin, you said that
the VA has trouble working with outside groups. Well, I would
proffer up the point that the Department of Energy does not,
and they do a lot of good research, so I'm coming back to you,
Doctor. I've got a point to this dialog here. How does the
Department and the national labs benefit from performing data
analytics and computational research on behalf of the VA, and
then how do we meld this problem together? We'll come back to
you all later. Go ahead.
Dr. Kusnezov. Thank you. That's the right question to ask.
For us, the data with its unique complexity that comes with
subject-matter experts, that is curated by experts brings with
us a team of specialists that allows us to attack the
artificial intelligence and technology challenge with our
experts. And so the meeting, the intersection happens at that
place where we look at the priority questions that the Veterans
Administration to surface. We bring together the technology
specialists, the hardware, the software, the engineers and ask
how do we answer those questions.
Mr. Weber. And many times, those are outside industry and
groups. Keep going.
Dr. Kusnezov. Yes. So the nexus is the two agencies coming
together. We draw from the breadth of the laboratories. We
engage the private sector and academia as needed. We bring in
as many people as we can because we recognize it's going to be
an all-of-the-above type of activity to answer these priority
areas the Veterans Administration has defined.
Mr. Weber. So I mean, actually, that's a perfect marriage,
if you will, in that we have that ability and we're able to do
that and thereby do away with the stigma, do away with the non-
ability to work with outside groups and to make this as
seamless as possible. I'm still going to come back to you for
one more.
These research partnerships have the potential to
accelerate scientific breakthroughs and healthcare delivery
systems and biosciences. Should the Department replicate this
model in other fields of research, and what steps can we as
Congress take to facilitate that?
Dr. Kusnezov. So I think the answer is yes in terms of
replication. Our focal point right now has been on the
veterans' health data and on the precision medicine dataset
because of its unique complexities because it comes with
annotations, with handwritten notes, with data streams and
imagery and collections of multimodal data that talks to a
situation in unique ways that was going to test how we develop
predictive technologies, artificially intelligent-based
computing. When we start to get our head around what those
hardware and software technologies are, these are ones we want
to apply to other areas but we find that the highest leverage
opportunity for us is around this dataset because it draws in
so many other partners who want to come, who want to
participate, and it's a force multiplier for our activities.
Mr. Weber. Well, that brings up another question, and so do
you see any problems with the DOE and the VA working together?
Dr. Kusnezov. No, not at all. In the beginning of April,
Secretary Perry and Acting Secretary Wilkie did sign a new MOA
to work together that we have started to implement now. It
identifies more data than we already have resident that we plan
to aggregate so we have a very nice path forward.
Mr. Weber. What process would you use to report back to
Congress, in other words, to say, this is working, we're making
huge steps in the right direction? How do we get that from you?
Dr. Kusnezov. I think at your discretion, coming to you
with the VA side by side would be an effective means to do
that.
Mr. Weber. Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm going to yield
back at this time.
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you, and I now recognize Mr.
Veasey for 5 minutes.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I wanted to ask a couple questions on data privacy and
cybersecurity. Dr. Kusnezov, the information collected for the
Big Data Science Initiative is obviously very sensitive
information. Almost 600,000 veterans have voluntarily given DNA
and other samples that can be used, and what I want to know is,
how is the VA and the DOE working together to implement federal
requirements for cybersecurity?
Dr. Kusnezov. Thank you very much. I would add to your list
of the veterans who have signed up the Secretary of Energy.
Secretary Perry also joined personally in May of 2017 donating
his DNA and his medical records to the set so security of
course is important. The personal health information enclave,
the initial one we launched at Oak Ridge National Laboratory is
what's considered moderate with enhanced controls under the
FIPS 199 standard that meets both HIPAA and HITECH Act
requirements. So we've set up an enclave consistent with the
protection standards, but in addition, through our CIO Office,
through our cybersecurity specialists and privacy specialists,
we do external reviews of the enclave. We also have engaged the
VA counterparts in the information security offices for their
assessment of how we protect the data.
In addition, we were very sensitive to appropriate use.
Housing the data is one thing but who gains access is done
through training program. We identify laboratory people who
will be engaged but we run that through the VA. We have created
teams, VA and DOE laboratory scientists, who are attacking the
key problems that the VA has surfaced. The members of the teams
that are allowed to access the data is controlled by the VA
once we go through the training requirements, and so just
housing the data doesn't give anyone access to the data. We
worry about the control. We worry about the use of the data for
the purpose and we monitor that through IRB processes as well.
So, you know, we've set up certainly an enterprise
sensitive to the use and protection of the data for the very
reason you remarked.
Mr. Veasey. With--you know, with you putting in all those
parameters to protect the information, are there any challenges
to accessing the complete medical records of veterans when need
be? I guess what I want to know is, is it easily accessible,
quickly accessible in situations where it needs to be?
Dr. Kusnezov. So there are two parts to your question.
Technically it is easy to access now in terms of the tool, the
infrastructure we've set up, hardware and software, the
learning environment. What is still a bit of a challenge is the
IRB process. You know, what we've been doing here is new. Every
step we take is new for everybody in terms of how we access
data, and I think as we try and create the IRB structure for
accessing veterans' data, we're sensitive to the fact that
machine learning and artificial intelligence will kind of
invert the world that people are used to. Normally when you
have a researcher looking at data, they will pull the specific
data they want to address a particular problem. If you're
trying to learn from more than 22 million veterans' health
records that span decades from genomic data, from images and so
on and apply machine learning, the way you access the patterns
of use are quite different than how anyone else has ever looked
at this data, and so walking through the IRB and setting up the
right protocols to allow access is a process that we're still
working through. So we've done some. We can technically access
the data. We have accesses and controls in place but the policy
side, we are still working through how we get everyone to think
about where the future is in terms of learning from data.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Comstock. And I now recognize Mr. Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, and thank you to our
witnesses today.
Let me just--this is not directly on technology, but it's
dealing with a VA issue. Some of the things that you're
describing that have motivated you to focus on trying to find
technological solutions like depression, sense of hopelessness,
et cetera, a lot of that can be traced, some of us believe, to
the use of opiates by the VA, and some of us believe that the
VA has taken the easy way out simply by prescribing opiates to
somebody with a problem, which when we you supply that kind of
drug, you're going to end up with somebody with serious
problems.
Now, should the VA be permitted to use cannabis? Should
they have that as an option rather than just opiates? And I've
got some other questions that go directly to technology but
could I have your opinions on that just a yes-no or something
like that?
Mr. Wordin. All right. I'll jump in.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. Should should cannabis be an option
for VA in terms of treatment of our folks rather than just
opiates--well, it's not just opiates? Do we know opiates----
Mr. Wordin. I understand your question.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay.
Mr. Wordin. Well, I've been doing this for 10 years.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Yes.
Mr. Wordin. And I've had over 30,000 veterans come through
my program, and I will tell you unequivocally that many of the
veterans in our program use cannabis and they use it as an
alternative to opioids, so----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Is that good?
Mr. Wordin. It seems to be working because they're all
still alive.
Mr. Rohrabacher. All right. Does anybody else have an
opinion on that? Okay. I won't force you into commenting
publicly on that. Okay.
Yes, there are controversial issues. I would suggest that
it is sinful that we do not permit our veterans that option.
The veterans, doctors that I know, countless--not countless. I
know a number of veterans who the doctors have had to pull
aside and go to them in an off-campus, you know, situation
where they could then recommend marijuana, and it's ridiculous
that we have to put doctors in a situation like that where they
can't even recommend what they think is the right treatment.
Mr. Meek, you mentioned that it is difficult for medical
devices to get approval. We find the same is true with
commercial items as well like the FDA and others as well as
other regulatory things. Could you give us a little more detail
on that?
Mr. Meek. Sure, and you talked about the FDA specifically
and I'll reference the Ekso Suit, which is the primary device
that we fund. You know, certainly you have to go through many
phases of the clinical trials. Then you have to go through
different phases for FDA approval, and that takes years, I mean
literally years.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And people are suffering during those
years.
Mr. Meek. Exactly.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And do you have an example of a device
that was left behind or delayed so much that people were left
to suffer?
Mr. Meek. Well, again, not to beat a dead horse, but the
Ekso Suit, you know, this has proven to--I mean, I know one
specific veteran from Iowa who was told he'd never walk again
and going through six months of rehab in the Minneapolis VA
with a device we donated, he was able to walk his daughter down
the aisle at her wedding. So it does work.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Let me just note that I had serious
troubles in my arms, and I know a lot of veterans get this as
well. Actually all of the cartilage was gone. I'm a surfer and
I ended up surfing all the cartilage away in my arms. I know
how painful that was, and what's really helped is, I have had
shoulder replacements that were, I believe, developed to help
our veterans and now they've helped all of us. Do we have a
situation where veterans are having to wait? Because I know how
painful that was. Are our veterans having to wait to use the
technology that we've developed?
Mr. Meek. I think the question is whether they're actually
getting the technology via the VA or through private
facilities. So private rehabilitation facilities will get it
much more quickly and it's much more accessible than going
through the VA process of them going through the FDA approvals
whether to get the funding or not, because it doesn't come from
the VA here in Washington; it's each individual VA has its own
budget and so it's up to them to figure out what they deem
appropriate or necessary for their veterans' care and so that's
where we step in.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, new technologies and new medicines
are really elongated in the process for us to use them, and
when you mentioned batteries, about how new batteries will
probably help and many of these challenges that we face are
helping the disabled.
Let me just note that there are new batteries on the way,
and Dr. Goodenough, the inventor of the lithium battery, has
had a major breakthrough that should have an incredible impact
on the things we're talking about, but then again, we have to
make sure that the FDA approves the use of these batteries and
everybody else approves the innovation all the way down.
So I'm very pleased that you alerted us to the bureaucratic
problems that have to be overcome in utilizing new technologies
for our veterans. Thank you very much.
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you, and I now recognize Ms.
Esty for five minutes.
Ms. Esty. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I want to thank the
Chairwoman and Ranking Member Lipinski and Chairman Weber and
Ranking Member Veasey for joining us here today.
As a member of both the Science, Space, and Technology
Committee and the Veterans Committee, I want to thank all of
you for your important work here today and give a real shoutout
to Mr. Meek and SoldierStrong based in Connecticut, and we're
really grateful for the work that you've done. All of us in
Connecticut know people who died in the Twin Towers, and that's
a searing memory and your commitment to that. My niece was one
of those who answered that call and served in Afghanistan, and
I know how important the work all of you are doing.
I think it was you, Mr. Meek, mentioned no DARPA for the
VA, and Dr. Major, you've also talked about the VA does not--
has aging facilities doing research. So I have a couple of
questions here so I'm going to ask all of you to say whether
you think there ought to be a DARPA for the VA or rather
whether we should be using DARPA as it exists but task them
with VA-specific goals because that's what's happened around
exoskeletons. I mean, that early work was around exoskeletons
through DARPA. They've kind of dropped it. It's now been left
for VA to pursue, so if people could opine on that, please?
Dr. Major. If you don't mind, I'll begin. Yeah, I mean,
essentially, in terms of funding mechanisms, we're obviously
for additional funding, the typical way that the mechanisms run
in the VA, there are certain priorities that research is
directed towards. I mean, for instance, the prosthetic needs of
women, for example, that's something that's come about mainly
because of the growing population of women veterans, but
essentially those type of priorities are fit into existing
mechanisms, right, and I actually would look forward to
something where there is maybe more targeted mechanisms,
targeted funding mechanisms, speaking specifically towards
certain priorities. DARPA may be a way to do that or some
different formation similar to that which could be implemented
in the VA, and I think that would actually be quite effective.
Again, maybe not DARPA in and of itself but something that
could work effectively in the VA that would allow individuals
to target certain priorities, and I think that would help with
the technology development, the advancement, and the
implementation in the VA specifically which I think essentially
is badly needed.
Ms. Esty. Mr. Wordin, I know that actually under Dr.
Shulkin, his only clinical priority was on suicide prevention.
You've talked about a lot of feedback information. A question I
have for you is, you're collecting a huge amount of important
information, and much of it tracks with what we know
anecdotally as well as, you know, the research beginning to be
done about feedback. Do we have an ability to share or how
would we go about sharing that important information that
basically you're developing with the privacy concerns and as
proprietary to you? And so here's part of the challenge. We
have innovative work being done in the private sector in order
to push it through all the VA. Then we have these questions
about access, who has access to the data, how do we safeguard
it and how do we share that information that you're developing
that would help us develop better programs for veterans?
Mr. Wordin. Okay. Well, that's a--I'll tackle that in
pieces.
First off, under Secretary Shulkin and under President
Trump, suicide prevention and mental health is the number one
priority and yet they don't--there's no visible funding for
technology that addresses those issues, not a single dime. So
that's one area of concern that we have.
With the testing that we're doing right now, we're not
collecting--we're collecting individual information but we're
not identifying the individuals. So it's a blind study so
there's no privacy concerns with that. With our program in
general, we partner with the VA and we track particularly
mental health status and suicide ideation of every participant
in our program, and we have done that on a longitudinal basis
for some time, and that information is contained or housed in
their VA medical records so we're able to deal with the privacy
in that regard. So as long as the VA medical records are
private and they have security, then the information that we're
gaining will have that same security.
Ms. Esty. I want to follow up with you afterwards because
we had some interesting testimony over in the Senate on gun
violence issues and work that L.A. is doing through texts to
deal with students who have suicidal ideation and other issues.
So I think there may be alternatives that we can look at that
have been developed elsewhere that could help marry the
technology that you're developing to connect to, say, the VA
hotline. You know, how can we have an ability to connect
because that's one of those issues we've had. How do people
even know about the VA hotline? Make sure you've got it
staffed, I don't know if you've looked at that at all?
Mr. Wordin. Well, actually, when we do have focus groups,
and as the device has been developed, it has four options when
you have a PTSD episode, whether it's self-resiliency or it's
contacting a family member or a peer or whether it's contacting
the VA hotline or 911, and what we find is that most veterans,
I would say over 80 percent of veterans, would rather connect
with a peer or a family member rather than a stranger on the VA
crisis hotline.
Ms. Esty. That tracks with all the other research we have
that they'd rather have peers, so again, I'm over time but I
really want to thank all of you for your important work on
these initiatives and urge you to continue to bring your ideas
forward so we can do a better job to serve those who have
served this country. Thanks very much.
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you, and I now recognize Mr.
Hultgren for five minutes.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Chairwoman.
Thank you all so much. This is really important. There's
nothing more important that we could be doing than caring for
our veterans, letting them have every opportunity for full
lives that are fulfilling and continuing to be amazingly
productive, so thank you for your work.
Dr. Kusnezov, if I could first address a couple questions
to you. A unique feature of the DOE-VA partnership is that the
Oak Ridge National Lab facility will be able to host protected
VA health data. It's the only institution outside the VA to be
able to do so. What steps is DOE taking to protect the personal
information of our veterans? And also a follow-up, should DOE
also be allowed to host secure data from other sources such as
private industry?
Dr. Kusnezov. So thank you very much for that question. The
data security piece is very important to us. Certainly,
compliance with HIPAA and HITECH are important. We have a
process we put in place to secure the data in the enclave. It
includes an annual external review from a third party that
reports back to the feds, and then we provide the authority to
operate the enclave. We engage our cybersecurity and privacy
experts and counterparts from the VA to oversee all of this so
we're very careful about data use and protection for this
enclave.
Mr. Hultgren. Do you think there is opportunity to host
other secure data from other sources?
Dr. Kusnezov. These are things we already do across DOE for
many different reasons from other agencies, for many different
reasons, so yes. The simple answer is yes.
Mr. Hultgren. DOE houses four of the top ten fastest
supercomputers in the world and is the principal federal agency
for leadership in computing facilities. How will providing DOE
with access to the VA dataset benefit healthcare research
specifically for veterans?
Dr. Kusnezov. I think what we've started to find in
applying the basic existing tools and artificial intelligence
is they break rather easily at the scales of the veterans' data
set. The complexities, the size, the amount of information
contained already exceed what standard toolsets are allowed
to--you know, can accommodate. DOE is very interested in
pushing the limits of technology and supercomputing and AI, and
these kinds of stresses are very interesting to us in terms of
where the next generation of more cognitive tools will come
from. So we're going to be pushing this data. The data itself
is the mechanism in which we set up this next frontier of AI-
inspired simulation.
Mr. Hultgren. Great.
Dr. Major, thank you for being here, grateful for your
work, so proud of Northwestern, and incredible accomplishments
that continue to come out of your work and others' work there
at Northwestern, so thanks for being with us. Getting older
brings with it many challenges including the danger of falls.
Does your research provide any quantitative data on how much
more of a danger this is to veterans in need of prosthesis or
orthosis as compared to veterans who don't require such
devices?
Dr. Major. Thank you for the question. Yeah, I'm not
particularly aware of any research that has targeted
specifically veterans of that nature and what that distinction
is between those again who do use prosthetic devices and those
who may not in terms of fall and fall risk. That type of
research I think is certainly needed. I think anything in terms
of looking at specifically different types of veterans, the era
which they come from, the combats in which they maybe perhaps
served, I think that particular research certainly would be
helpful in trying to target certain rehabilitation technology,
whether it's prosthetic and orthotic devices or other types of
rehabilitation technology in order to target that specifically
to individual cohorts. I think it's something that can be done,
and, you know, speaking again to some of the issues that were
brought up today, the veteran statistics, the type of data that
we have because it is such an integrative healthcare system,
it's ripe for that type of research essentially that cannot be
conducted necessarily on a wider scale.
I think the resources we have available to us through the
VHA is just a perfect opportunity to do that type of work. Some
of which is currently being done, but again, I think we could
take better opportunity of that.
Mr. Hultgren. Great. Quickly, Dr. Major, if I can follow
up. Clearly, our goal is to continue to improve the quality of
life of veterans but also for all people. I wonder with your
research and work in prosthetics, how is it making its way to
companies that develop such devices that could benefit from
your findings and in turn provide better technologies to
veterans and to all people?
Dr. Major. So one of the benefits that we have is
oftentimes the partnerships that we develop through a lot of
these research efforts so just to use an example, my research
in particular, even though it is directed through VA funding,
it also includes partnerships with academia, for instance, so
Northwestern University, and in addition to that, even industry
partners as well, so much of the technology that is developed
and the patents that are then developed through those efforts
are jointly owned, right, so it would be owned by the VA as
well as industry partners or academia as well. And so that is a
way, that's a method in which the technology that is developed
by funding supported by the VA that then can be brought out and
benefit civilians. So we do a lot of that, in fact, and I think
it's a great mechanism.
I will say that, you know, in terms of technology transfer,
I think if certain mechanisms could be developed within the VA
to help that, to help advance that process would certainly be
beneficial because there is a lot of great technology that is
developed in the VA, and these efforts and the funding through
the VA does support that but I think trying to get that out to
the civilian population would certainly be of great benefit.
Mr. Hultgren. I'd love to see that.
My time's expired. Thank you all so much for your work. I
yield back.
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you, and I now recognize Mr.
McNerney for five minutes.
Mr. McNerney. I thank the Chair. I thank the Committee for
having this hearing, and I have to say, I got excited listening
to your testimony.
Let me start with Dr. Kusnezov. A federal government
scientist who had worked for the VA since 1983 made more than
$400 million when he sold a company for $11 billion to this
pharmaceutical giant Gilead in 2012. The drug was then
discovered with federal resources and intended to treat
veterans with Hepatitis C but, unfortunately, once the drug was
sold to the private company, it was out of reach for veterans
and for the VA both. So as the VA and the DOE work together
with the private sector, how do we also ensure that the data
and technology resulting from taxpayer resources and labs is
not exploited by startups and private sector entities solely
for the commercial gain for a few individuals?
Dr. Kusnezov. Thank you. No, that's a great question. In
our partnerships, there are some fundamental tenets we have.
One is open source for the tools we create for the very reason
you mentioned. We do have some partnerships with pharma, for
example, with GlaxoSmithKline right now, an effort called ATOM,
also related to all of this activity. What we do in the space
with pharma and the technology companies is precompetitive so
it's by definition open to other entities to join and openly
available and accessible for that reason. So we're sensitive to
the question you're asking, and we have to manage the middle
ground in a suitable way so that it does draw in the right kind
of risk mitigation from the private sector, which adds value to
this, but does not do this at the expense of others. And so we
are keeping an eye on it, again, open source and precompetitive
are foundational here.
Mr. McNerney. Okay. Well, I mean, we've seen this happen in
other cases too so it's a very difficult situation when
veterans can't have access to medicines that were developed
with federal money. We need to work on strengthening those
protections.
Mr. Wordin, I was pretty excited about your PTSD alarm, and
you're using data, and the graphs you showed saw a spike in the
heart rate and then additional sort of physical indicators
after that. Were you able to identify in those cases the
physical event or the emotional event that triggered those
reactions?
Mr. Wordin. We aren't able to do that but we asked the
participants in our study right now to keep a journal, and they
were able to document what the environment was. We try to look
at both immediately before, a few minutes before, and maybe a
half-hour before, and it's great empowerment to an individual
veteran to understand what causes a PTSD episode for them
because it's different for each veteran.
Mr. McNerney. Absolutely, and if--I mean, if you could
understand what's triggering it, then that leads to all kinds
of opportunities for treatment and mitigation of those sorts of
triggers.
Mr. Wordin. Absolutely, and the great thing about the
device is, it will measure that and see if what you're doing to
mitigate is actually working or whether you see whether the
prescription drug or the therapy options that the VA or your
healthcare provider has given to you, you can objectively
understand how it's working, what is working, if it's working,
and so it's--I mean, that's the great thing about the device
is, it's completely objective. It is what it is.
Mr. McNerney. And do you see similar sort of
characteristics, you know, data characteristics, from different
individuals with regard to PTSD triggers?
Mr. Wordin. Well, yeah. I mean, when you look at the spike,
if that's what you're referring to, yes. I mean, that's a
common theme. If someone's having a PTSD episode, that's how
the device detects that PTSD episode is through that spike in
heart rate or the heart rate variation.
Mr. McNerney. Well, we saw a spike and then we saw a little
bit of quiet period and then we saw additional----
Mr. Wordin. That was--yeah, because we--the graph that
you're referring to, that showed physical activity, because I
wanted to differentiate, because one of the questions I always
get is, how does it know whether it's physical activity or
whether it's a PTSD episode, and the device is able to detect
because the steepness of the curve when you're having a PTSD
episode versus when you're, say, riding your bike, there's a
different in how your heart rate elevates and how fast it
elevates.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you, and I now recognize Mr.
Webster.
Mr. Webster. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you all for
appearing. This is great work you're doing and we really
appreciate it.
Mr. Meek, you talked about--I don't know your exact words
but you talked about the fact that technology was ahead of the
VA's practice in a sense and that you get these technological
advances that are not a part of the normal VA treatment. I
would assume--I don't know this is true but I make the
assumption that advances in technology usually cost more, and
that if it does more, probably costs more, but my question
would be, how do we balance that? How do we mold together
availability and advancement so that--I mean, you could have
the scenario where you make an advancement, and if you spend
all your money making advancements, then you could come up with
something that helps a veteran 10 times better than current
practice. However, you could only afford one out of 10 where
under the old technology, you could afford 10 out of 10. Is
there a balance there? Do you see what we might be able to do
to--we certainly want to make advancements but we also want to
be able to pay for it.
Mr. Meek. Sure. So I think to go back to your other
question about whether the DARPA should be a model to transform
to the VA, I think it should be. You know, we put the most
advanced technology we can in our warfighters, but once it's
done meeting DARPA specs for the battlefield, that's it, the
funding stops. There's nothing to commercialize that for the
private sector back at home, and so you look at a lot of these
devices. I mentioned how the average cost that we fund is
$100,000 with a couple of them almost $200,000. Think about the
original cell phone. It was the size of a small suitcase, you
know, and cost a thousand dollars. Well, today it's the size of
a calculator and it fits in your pocket, and it's a
supercomputer. So having that continued research and
development on a specific device, whatever it may be, for
advancement, you know, where the funding comes from, there are
separate pools that we could look at but you have to keep that
funding going because over time it will bring costs down. You
know, a lot of these devices are so advanced that yes, they
cost a lot right now but 10, 20 years from now, knowing some of
the work that Dr. Major's doing, you know, they're hardwiring
some of these devices in individuals' brains. You know, I've
seen virtual reality where somebody lost their arm in Vietnam,
and through virtual reality actually felt himself opening a
doorknob, and he cried because it was the first time he touched
something in 25 years.
So this funding has to be found somewhere, because in time,
not only will it reduce the cost of those devices, it's going
to reduce cost of medical and VA care for those patients.
Mr. Webster. Well, I saw a live presentation of the type of
technology you showed in your video, and I was just totally
astounded someone could actually go from a sitting position and
rise with no help at all, not even necessarily using their
arms. They could just get up. So I want everybody to have that.
It's just the idea of making it available. It's expensive, and
sometimes that would come at the expense of any more
technological advances.
I had another question. That was Mr. Wordin. You
mentioned--this doesn't have anything to do with that
particular issue, it has to do with self-directed mental health
care, which I have--you said something about that, I don't know
exactly what you said, but it struck a note that that's what
you were talking about in that the person would help in the
direction of what they would be choosing for their mental
health care. I have seen that work in the private sector. Do
you think that ought to be more uniformly applied in the VA?
Mr. Wordin. I don't know if I'd use the word ``uniformly''
but I think it needs to be available because every veteran that
suffers from PTSD is different. If you've seen one veteran with
PTSD, you've seen one veteran with PTSD, and I think what they
find as their support system individually is the most important
path, and the great thing about the HEROTrak device is, it
gives them feedback individually so then they can make
decisions for themselves based on how their quality of life is
that they want or that they have right now. And so if you go to
the VA and you see your mental health clinician and he goes
well, how are you sleeping; well, I'm not sleeping so good;
well, we're going to give you some Ambien. Well, how do you
know whether that actually does any good for you? Well, with
the device, you're able to monitor and look at sleep patterns,
look at PTSD episodes during sleep, and be able to decide
whether or not that's something--because every prescription
drug that you take has a side effect or it has some kind of
addictive quality, and that affects your quality of life as
well.
I mean, we have veterans in our program that literally have
suitcases full of prescription drugs that the VA sends them on
a regular basis, and then when they get into our program, they
get off of those prescription drugs and yet the VA continues to
send them the prescription drugs, and when you talk about costs
for technology, technology is way cheaper than prescription
drugs.
Mr. Webster. Yes. That's not shocking. That's awesome.
Thank you all for appearing, every one of you. It's been
very encouraging, each of you and your work. I yield back.
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you, and I just want to take a
little prerogative too on that particular point, that if you
can send us some of those examples with whatever way that
protects the patient's privacy, that would just be really
helpful in us making this case, because I think this is great
disruptive technology that is going to save money, and the more
we can highlight examples like that, I think as we move
forward.
So I now recognize Mr. Dunn for five minutes.
Mr. Dunn. Thank you, Madam Chair. I love these joint
Committee meetings where we're all gathered. It sort of
underscores our interconnectedness. You know, we're sitting
here with the Energy Subcommittee, the Research Subcommittee.
We're talking about quantum computing for our national labs and
it's being applied to translational genomics, and all this on
the subject of yet another committee, Veteran's Health, so
that's the interconnectedness that's great.
I'm a urologist--Dr. Kusnezov, I'm a urologist. Prostate
cancer is very near and dear to my heart. I know you're working
on ways to determine biomarkers that determine the lethality,
relative lethality of prostate cancer, what needs to be treated
and how aggressively. Can you briefly outline a couple of those
for us?
Dr. Kusnezov. I can talk more to the technology side than
the side that you might be more familiar with.
Mr. Dunn. Oh, yes. I want to know the biomarker, but I do
appreciate what you're doing, and I think that that's--you
know, I think that that's key.
Mr. Meek, you've partnered with VA hospitals, also I
suppose military hospitals like Walter Reed? No, they're
completely separate from you? Of course, they don't need your
help, so you've partnered with the VA hospitals. How do you
select which ones?
Mr. Meek. So we work with the device manufacturer, you
know, depending on what the device is. So if it's for an
individual, sometimes they fall through the VA cracks and the
device manufacturer will find somebody that maybe the VA won't
fund it or the VA will fund the device but not the fitting and
so they'll reach out to us to fill that void.
In terms of the exoskeleton devices, again, we work with
the manufacturer. There are 24 spinal cord injury medical
facilities within the VA center, and so we start with those
that have the largest population that they serve with the goal
of hitting all those with one device to begin with and then go
back and circle back again. So, for example, Richmond,
Virginia, serves the largest with 5,000 spinal-cord-injured
veterans. They have one device. They could use 25. Palo Alto
has 3,000 to 4,000 veterans that they serve. They could use a
few devices as well. So one doesn't cut it. It's a
rehabilitative device where somebody goes in like going to the
gym with a personal trainer and you set your 45-minute time and
you do laps around the VA.
Mr. Dunn. All right. And do you also--when you do provide
one of these exoskeleton whatever type suits to the veterans,
do you also provide continued support and maintenance upgrades?
Mr. Meek. We do. When we purchase it, it also comes with a
four-year warranty as well as training for the entire staff at
the VA.
Mr. Dunn. And you mentioned regulatory burdens. I just want
you to know that we have been tasked by no less than the
President to streamline the regulatory burdens so if you have
regulations that you think are bad regulations, duplicative,
get in the way, bring them to us. We love to get rid of
regulations, especially bad ones.
Ms. MacCallum, you're sort of a people specialist. You deal
with a lot of people in a lot of different strata. Have you--in
your opinion, have you seen the VAs and the veterans
themselves, are they receptive to some of these new
technologies?
Ms. MacCallum. Absolutely, you know, but I think about the
fact that just demonstrating with Sergeant Rose on the set--on
our set, we were able to raise enough money to buy an Ekso Suit
for a veterans hospital in one day. So I just think that the
awareness that people need to have, and also I think the
partnership between public and private entities is so
important, and I think about the new VA bill that is moving its
way through Congress and where the gaps exist, and the VA can't
provide that assistance. They are now allowed to turn to a
private entity in order to fill that gap, and I think we need
to look for more ways to do that so that private enterprise and
the VA can work most efficiently together, and then I think
you'll see a scaling up of this technology in private
facilities and in veterans facilities, and I think that the
will of the people in terms of what we've seen is certainly
behind it. And I also think that when you look at the cost-
benefit analysis in terms of taking care of veterans long term,
and you just heard what Mr. Wordin said about the incredible
expense of pharmaceuticals, this psychological benefit and life
benefit of these devices hopefully will make some of those
pharmaceuticals unnecessary.
Mr. Dunn. Well, I share your optimism, and I thank you for
the gratuitous plug for the Mission Act, the VA bill that we're
carrying across the finish line right now. It's near and dear
to my heart. I sit on that committee as well.
Looking at 20 seconds left on the clock, and it's not fair
to bring up the question, Mr. Wordin, that you brought up so
cogently in your report of the stigma that we attach to PTSD
and TBI in not just our veterans but in our active-duty troops,
and this is a major, major problem that we have just been
whistling past the graveyard on. If we could treat it
perfectly, we still aren't allowed to diagnose our active-duty
troops lest we ruin their careers, and we don't have time for
you to comment on that but I'm glad you brought it up, and----
Mr. Wordin. If I could, I'd like to say one thing about----
Mr. Dunn. With the Chairwoman's permission.
Mr. Wordin. One of the things that we found in testing, one
of the things that was brought up to us by the VA is that vets
wouldn't want to wear a HEROTrak because it would cause a
stigma just for them wearing a device, but because it's an
Apple Watch, it makes them cool, and so the stigma has been
removed, and therefore they're getting help that they wouldn't
ordinarily get. So we're very aware of stigma in our
organization and the vets that we service and, you know, you've
got to find creative ways to get around it.
Mr. Dunn. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you, and it's gathering general
information that's good for health and wellbeing along the way
too, right, so, excellent.
I now recognize Mr. Palmer for five minutes.
Mr. Palmer. I thank the Chairwoman. I'll be fairly brief. I
have to preside over the House in a few minutes. But Ms.
MacCallum, looking at your involvement in this, I really
appreciate how this started with SoldierStrong providing things
to the soldiers in the field. Some good friends of mine's son,
Lance Corporal Thomas Rivers' sister started that program and
sending everything from sporting magazines to staples to
essential things, and they got to the point where her brother
would get things and the other guys would say well, you know,
could you share that, and it turned into a program called
Support Our Soldiers. Unfortunately, Lance Corporal Rivers was
killed in the Helmand Province on April 28th, 2010, an IED, but
the program continues and has expanded, and we're having a
banquet next Thursday night, the annual banquet. These programs
are incredibly important for morale but also for the families.
A lot of these guys don't get letters from home, they don't get
things from home, so thank you for what you're doing.
Mr. Wordin, in your testimony you mentioned that Project
Hero has reduced participants' use of prescription drugs and
opioids and others and antidepressant use significantly, and
Mr. Dunn brought this up as well about--I think the process of
dealing with these soldiers begins before they get home. The
whole thing about PTSD, all of that begins before they get
home, and one of my concerns, we've got 22 veterans per day
that commit suicide, and I just have to wonder how much of
that's related to reactions to drug use and what you're trying
to do to reduce the dependence on drugs I think. Mr. Wordin,
could you comment on that, how you think that might help us
reduce what I think is an unbelievable tragedy that's occurring
every day with veterans?
Mr. Wordin. Sure. When you look at the report that's going
to come out, the risk factors that they looked at--worsening of
health status and decline in physical ability--those can be
directly related to prescription drug use, particularly when
you have overprescribing of prescription drugs, and it's not
working, and therefore you start losing hope, and then it
starts depression and then you're on the downhill spiral and
then eventually that's what leads to suicide. So that's where I
think the prescription drug use comes into play is because for
doctors, the easiest solution is here's a pill, this is going
to make you all better, whereas that's not necessarily what's
in the best interest of that individual, and I think that's one
of the great and exciting things about the HEROTrak is, you're
going to be able to figure out what's in the best interest of
the individual and be able to prescribe for that person a
healthcare path that is actually going to make a difference for
him.
Mr. Palmer. Well, I thank you. I told Mr. Norman if he
would yield to me, I would hold to three minutes. I think I
came pretty close to that, Mr. Norman, and with that, Madam
Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Comstock. Okay. We'll now recognize Mr. Dunn--
Mr. Norman. I'm sorry.
Mr. Norman. Thank you so much. Thanks to each of you for
taking the time to testify. It's valuable.
I'll emphasize what Dr. Dunn said. As you move forward, if
you see regulations that are impeding what you do, let us know
because we've got a body here that is strong and will take your
case to get needless regulations out of the way. It's a goal of
the President and it's a goal of this body, this House.
Ms. MacCallum, you've got an interesting role, as they
described, in the people business, as an anchor and on the
advisory board. What is your opinion on this and what's been
your experience on the specific technology for veterans that is
effective with raising money and raising the awareness? Is
there one or two that you could point to?
Ms. MacCallum. You know, I just think when people hear the
stories of these veterans the impact that it has on their
lives, you know, here's one veteran, Jason Geiger, who was a
SoldierStrong Ekso Suit beneficiary. He said you cannot put a
price on walking, you can't put a price on someone's ability to
be six feet tall again and stand up and kiss your wife or stand
up and hug your daughter or your son. You can't put a price on
that. And we talk a lot about money because we have to because
it's part of bringing this technology to our veterans but, you
know, I think there's a will in America--I know there's a will
in America to provide for this, and I do think that people are
very much aware--you talk about regulations--of the waste that
exists in the federal government in its, you know, good efforts
in many ways to solve some of these problems but I think
everyone sitting here is working towards efficiency and
improving the lives of our veterans, and I think that through
technology and through awareness, a lot of these ideas can help
us to cut some of the waste in these programs and to produce
more benefit.
Mr. Norman. And that's--you know, we don't know what we
don't know, and as--I'm glad you brought up waste because every
agency, particularly now, can give us a roadmap as to where
there is waste and specifics on how we can address it, and I
hope you all will do that as you move forward because every
dollar saved through waste goes back--would go back into
potential good use.
Mr. Meek, how did SoldierStrong decide which VA hospitals
will receive the SoldierSuits?
Mr. Meek. So again, we worked with the device manufacturer,
and within the VA medical system there are 24 facilities that
have a spinal cord injury unit. In addition, we also work with
those that have a traumatic unit as well, and so the spinal
cord injury unit will be focused more on spinal cord injury
versus traumatic could focus on stroke, and so we'll take the
recommendation from the device manufacturer with the goal of
getting those that serve the largest population a device first
and then going from there.
Mr. Norman. Okay. Perfect. Thank you all. I think we're at
about 12 o'clock. We really appreciate your testimony. I yield
back.
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you so much, and I thank the
witnesses for their testimony today and the Members for their
questions. Without objection, Chairman Weber and Ranking Member
Veasey's openings statement, which they were not available to
make when we started the hearing, are made a part of the
record.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Weber follows appears in
Appendix II]
[The prepared statement of Mr. Veasey appears in Appendix
II]
Chairwoman Comstock. And I really so appreciate the great
testimony here today. I think we're really seeing disruptive,
positive, innovative technology, and I think there's no
question that we need to reallocate resources, get new
resources, and make sure we're providing this choice because a
lot of the things we're talking about with our veterans and
what we're trying to improve are more veterans choice, and what
you're offering is more choice and more positive outcomes, and
I really do think it's a lot of win-win solutions that you have
here. So we look forward to working with you on how we can
redirect and reprioritize this so we actually end up with
better outcomes that will ultimately most importantly save
lives but also save money. So this is real exciting, and I
think this is the beginning of what I hope will be continued
discussion on this. We're already discussing maybe some
legislation and efforts that we can work on with our colleagues
here on this Committee who are also on the Veterans Committee.
So thank you for your inspirational work.
And the record will remain open for two weeks for
additional written comments and written questions from Members,
and this hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:05 p.m., the Subcommittees were
adjourned.]
Appendix I
----------
Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Appendix II
----------
Additional Material for the Record
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]