- IMPLEMENTING THE AGRICULTURE. IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2018
[Senate Hearing 116-126]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-126
IMPLEMENTING THE AGRICULTURE
IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2018
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,
NUTRITION, AND FORESTRY
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
FEBRUARY 28, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov/
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
37-222 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, NUTRITION, AND FORESTRY
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas, Chairman
MITCH McCONNELL, Kentucky
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
PATRICK J. LEAHY, Vermont
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
JONI ERNST, Iowa
AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota
CINDY HYDE-SMITH, Mississippi
MICHAEL F. BENNET, Colorado
MIKE BRAUN, Indiana
KIRSTEN E. GILLIBRAND, New York
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
ROBERT P. CASEY, Jr., Pennsylvania
CHARLES GRASSLEY, Iowa
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
JOHN THUNE, South Dakota
RICHARD J. DURBIN, Illinois
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
James A. Glueck, Jr., Majority Staff Director
DaNita M. Murray, Majority Chief Counsel
Jessica L. Williams, Chief Clerk
Joseph A. Shultz, Minority Staff Director
Mary Beth Schultz, Minority Chief Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
Thursday, February 28, 2019
Page
Hearing:
Implementing the Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018.............
1
----------
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY SENATORS
Roberts, Hon. Pat, U.S. Senator from the State of Kansas,
Chairman, Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry....
1
Stabenow, Hon. Debbie, U.S. Senator from the State of Michigan...
3
WITNESS
Perdue, Hon. Sonny, Secretary, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Washington, D.C................................................
5
----------
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Perdue, Hon. Sonny...........................................
42
Document(s) Submitted for the Record:
Roberts, Hon. Pat:
Prepared Statement Submitted for the Record from Hon. Richard
J. Durbin..................................................
48
Question and Answer:
Perdue, Sonny:
Written response to questions from Hon. Pat Roberts..........
52
Written response to questions from Hon. John Boozman.........
66
Written response to questions from Hon. John Thune...........
68
Written response to questions from Hon. Debbie Stabenow......
70
Written response to questions from Hon. Patrick J. Leahy.....
106
Written response to questions from Hon. Sherrod Brown........
128
Written response to questions from Hon. Michael Bennet.......
131
Written response to questions from Hon. Robert P. Casey, Jr..
134
Written response to questions from Hon. Tina Smith...........
138
Written response to questions from Hon. Richard J. Durbin....
142
IMPLEMENTING THE AGRICULTURE.
IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2018
----------
Thursday, February 28, 2019
United States Senate,
Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:40 a.m., in
room 328A, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. Pat Roberts,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present or submitting a statement: Senators Roberts,
Boozman, Hoeven, Ernst, Hyde-Smith, Braun, Grassley, Thune,
Fischer, Stabenow, Brown, Klobuchar, Bennet, Gillibrand, Casey,
Smith, and Durbin.
STATEMENT OF HON. PAT ROBERTS, U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF
KANSAS, CHAIRMAN, U.S. COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, NUTRITION, AND
FORESTRY
Chairman Roberts. I call this hearing of the Senate
Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry Committee to order. This
is our first hearing of the 116th Congress. Hopefully more will
be in attendance. We are taking names.
This morning I would like to welcome Senator Braun, who is
not here but we will welcome him anyway. We are glad to add his
first-hand experience managing timberland and working with the
turkey operation. I would like to offer a special welcome to
Senator Durbin to the Agriculture Committee this Congress. He
is the Minority Whip. He has been in leadership as long as I
can remember. We have had a long history going back to the
House of Representatives, when he used to rustle our mandatory
cows and use them for discretionary purposes.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Roberts. I will offer him a rebuttal any time that
he seeks that.
Senator Durbin and I have worked on the SIREN bill, in the
farm bill, and got that done, which passed, and it is a good
thing.
So we are very pleased today to welcome our distinguished
Secretary, Sonny Perdue, back to the Agriculture Committee.
Welcome back, Sonny. Secretary Perdue is no stranger to the
Committee. In fact, we successfully worked in a bipartisan,
bicameral manner to craft the farm bill, the Agriculture
Improvement Act of 2018.
I want to emphasize that the Department, led by Secretary
Perdue, was an important part of the process. Over the last 2
years, the Department offered--we asked, they offered--valuable
technical advice throughout the drafting and conference stages.
That was extremely helpful, Mr. Secretary, and I thank you and
all of your staff.
When the 2018 farm bill was signed by the President last
December it accomplished what we set out to do--provide
certainty and predictability for farmers, families, and rural
communities. I think those two words, certainty and
predictability, were probably used by Senator Stabenow and I at
least a 1,210 times.
Now we look forward to hearing about the Department's
efforts to implement the new farm bill. We will work together
to ensure that these programs are operating as Congress
intended and that changes are implemented as promptly as
possible.
I am going back two pages--first hearing of the 116th
Congress and I would like to welcome, since he is now in the
room and seated to my immediate left, Senator Braun, to the
Committee. We are glad to have his firsthand experience. He is
managing timberland and working with the turkey operation and
has great experience in that regard. Thank you for joining the
Committee.
Throughout the farm bill process we consistently heard
about the challenges producers have been facing in farm
country, and right now producers in Kansas and across the
country continue to face this rough patch. Over the past 5
years, prices for many of our major commodities have dropped
significantly. As a result, net farm income is expected to
decline by approximately 50 percent. I do not know of any other
part of the economy that is going through this kind of a
problem, and that has been going on now for four to 5 years.
The ongoing pressure of low commodity prices continues the
need for high-volume sales. Now, more than ever, our producers
need certainty and predictability on the trade front, on the
policy front, and on the regulatory front.
The 2018 farm bill provides much-needed certainty and
predictability to farmers and ranchers across all regions, all
crops, as promised. The bill provides additional resources and
risk management tools for producers. It makes improvements to
the Price Loss Coverage and Agriculture Risk Coverage program
while providing a new election, a new opportunity for farmers,
and future opportunities to change those decisions.
Importantly, producers maintain the ability to plant for the
marketplace, not the government.
This farm bill strengthens and improves the crop insurance
program, something we heard loud and clear from producers
throughout our listening process. Secretary Perdue, if you
could whisper that to the budget folks preparing the
President's budget it would be very much appreciated.
We maintain and strengthen the Environmental Quality
Incentives Program, EQIP, and other core voluntary conservation
programs that farmers and ranchers use to improve their
productivity and address natural resource concerns.
The bill also focuses on program integrity and common-sense
investments to strengthen our nutrition programs, to ensure the
long-term success of those in need of assistance. With trade
and market uncertainty it provides predictability and
additional funding for our trade promotion and export programs.
Additionally, the bill provides investment in research, new
technology, lines of credit, and proper risk management. It
empowers the government to provide tools, and then hopefully
get out of the producer's way. Finally, the farm bill provides
regulatory certainty and assists livestock producers facing the
threat of animal disease.
In summary, in this Committee, we were successful at
reaching a bipartisan, bicameral agreement on a strong farm
bill in a tough yet timely manner, and we look forward to
working with the Department to ensure that implementation
provides much-needed certainty and predictability in farm
country.
I now turn to my distinguished colleague and partner, the
Ranking Member, Senator Deborah Stabenow, for her opening
remarks.
STATEMENT OF HON. DEBBIE STABENOW, U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN
Senator Stabenow. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much,
and it is great to be back in the committee room for our first
hearing in the new Congress. I do want to recognize our two new
members and fellow Midwesterners, Senator Braun and Senator
Durbin. Mr. Chairman, I think having a senior member of the
Appropriations Committee may turn out to be a good thing on the
authorizing committee as well, and so we welcome both of them.
Of course, we want to thank Secretary Perdue for joining us
again today. Mr. Secretary, when you were here last time we
were deeply involved in working to draft the 2018 farm bill,
and by the end of the year, as you know, we passed a strong and
historic final bill with the support of 87 Senators and 369
House members. Mr. Chairman, I think that was a record! Of
course I want to thank you for being an outstanding leader and
a partner in this effort.
Now our farmers and families and rural communities are
counting on the USDA to implement the farm bill quickly and
effectively. This is especially true in my home State of
Michigan where agriculture supports one out of four jobs. My
State is the top producer of specialty crops, Mr. Secretary, as
you know, from tart cherries to asparagus. We are also a major
exporter of soybeans and dairy products. We have farmers who
sell fresh local food to their neighbors and farmers who market
their products around the world, and both are incredibly
important.
We have burgeoning urban farms in cities like Detroit and
thriving small towns, surrounded by multigenerational family
owned operations. In Michigan, we know the strength of our
agriculture economy is rooted in our diversity. The 2018 farm
bill celebrates that diversity and creates new opportunities
for farmers and families all across the country.
I am eager to see it implemented. Despite facing a
challenging budget, we secured permanent funding for several
important priorities, including historic investments in organic
research, local food systems and export promotion that will
help our farmers tap into emerging markets, which is so
critical right now, given the trade situation.
Permanent support for veterans, socially disadvantaged and
beginning farmers will ensure a bright future for agriculture
for many years to come. Our long-term investment in nutrition
incentives and new produce prescriptions will improve access to
healthy food for children and families for generations.
We established an Office of Urban Agriculture and provided
historic new tools for urban farmers that will bring jobs and
fresh food into local communities. We protected and enhanced
tools that will help farmers preserve our land, improve water
quality, and support climate-smart agriculture.
We made strong investments in rural America including
expanding high-speed internet and re-establishing the Under
Secretary for Rural Development. I look forward to the quick
nomination of a qualified candidate. We also expanded access to
risk management tools like crop insurance, which our Chairman
has been the champion of for so long. This will ensure that all
farmers, no matter what they grow and where they grow it, can
protect their livelihoods. We dramatically improved the dairy
safety net to help dairy farmers weather the instability they
have faced for too long.
I had a good conversation with Deputy Secretary Censky
recently about the new dairy program and other implementation
issues. Mr. Secretary, I heard your testimony yesterday in the
House. I appreciate the USDA's commitment to prioritize the new
dairy program's implementation.
While I had hoped for a quicker start to the sign-up, there
is still plenty of outreach work that needs to be done in the
interim. I encourage you to use every tool at your disposal to
reach all eligible dairy producers and get payments out as soon
as possible. Only about half of all dairy farms signed up in
2018, and the new program, which is much stronger, should far
exceed that mark.
While there is a lot of positive work happening to
implement the farm bill, I do need to raise some concerns. Mr.
Secretary, the farm bill that the President signed into law
Congress decided not to make harmful changes to nutrition
assistance. Unfortunately, this administration has proposed a
partisan rule that makes changes to SNAP that were rejected by
Congress and would take food assistance away from Americans
struggling to find steady work.
This proposal is an end run around the law that would leave
families hungry while doing nothing to connect people to long-
term employment that we focused on in the farm bill. It will
face fierce opposition from lawmakers and advocates, and I
would encourage you to withdraw it.
I also have questions about the USDA's capacity to
implement the farm bill. Year after year the President's budget
proposals have called for steep cuts to USDA staff, and rumor
has it this year's budget will not be any better for
agriculture. Congress has rejected these cuts in the past,
supported the USDA, and instead provided the Department enough
resources to fill vacant positions and support our farmers.
However, I want to know, at this point, why we have so many
important positions that have remained unfilled. In Michigan, I
have heard that farmers are worried about lack of staff and a
growing backlog of work in field offices. Without sufficient
staff in local offices, the farm bill improvements will not
reach the very people they are designed to support.
So, Mr. Secretary, I know you are committed to prioritizing
strong customer service at the Department and I applaud that
commitment. These vacancies raise questions about the ability
to implement the farm bill and provide our farmers and families
with the level of service they deserve. I look forward to
hearing more about your plans to quickly and properly implement
the farm bill, fill the vacancies, and allow us to support your
efforts to effectively implement the new farm bill that we
passed.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Roberts. I now turn to our witness for today's
hearing. Mr. Secretary, you have been no stranger to this
Committee, since being confirmed to your role as the 31st
Secretary of Agriculture. Hailing from the great State of
Georgia, Secretary Perdue brings valuable experience as a
farmer, an agribusinessman, a veterinarian, a State legislator,
and former Governor of the State of Georgia.
Mr. Secretary, welcome back and we look forward to our
discussion here today. You may proceed. Thank you for coming.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE SONNY PERDUE, SECRETARY, UNITED
STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, WASHINGTON, D.C.
Secretary Perdue. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
Ranking Member Stabenow. It is again an honor to be with you
all and your distinguished members of the Committee. Once again
I hope that we are no stranger to the Committee but not
necessarily here in this room, but we want to be no stranger at
all times. When your constituents have questions hopefully you
have noticed the accessibility that our team has struggled and
strived to provide for you all as serving your constituents and
our customers as well. So hopefully you noticed that.
So I thank you again for the opportunity to testify and
share USDA's early efforts in implementing the farm bill. We
reported to the House, as you know, yesterday, on the status of
the farm economy, and you so rightly described it, Mr.
Chairman, in your opening remarks, as well as describing the
farm bill. I want to take this opportunity to congratulate you,
the Ranking Member, and the members of your Committee for a
farm bill both introduced and passed in the same year, signed
on December 20th, there, and that did, I think, provide a big
boost to the producers, ranchers, farmers across this country
over what they could expect. I think it is also indicative that
the bill was evolutionary in improving, in many of the ways
that you and the Ranking Member have talked about, but
nonetheless easily assimilated in the path that you took in the
1914 farm bill, and we look forward to implementing it in an
expeditious way.
There is a lot to be done, as you know. There are many
sections and many parts of that bill. We will not go into the
data. I know that you all probably know that much better than I
do, having debated it and going line by line over the last
year. Nonetheless, it is a complex bill with rules to be
presented.
We have got partners in the administration that oversee
those rules, as you know, with OMB and others, over
interagencies that we have to coordinate with as well. I may
have the opportunity to share with you today the flow chart on
the Administrative Procedures Act that we have to conform with
in getting these rules and the granularity of the farm bill
introduced.
Nonetheless, you so rightly stated about the state of the
farm economy, working capital, farm income. Those kinds of
things we have talked about here. While there were, I think,
some missed opportunities, possibly in forest management and
improving other issues, I think you have given us the
opportunity to go forward and move out, and we are doing that
the best we can. Overall, the new farm bill provides--fulfills,
I think, the primary goal, as you have stated, of farm programs
to help farmers and ranchers manage risk and continue to
producing the food, fiber, fuel that not only our Nation but
other parts of the world need as well.
I also appreciate your recognizing that our team at USDA
provided over 2,000 items of technical assistance, to both
sides of the aisle in here in trying to provide the data and
facts upon which you made the policy decisions. So agencies
started gathering stakeholder input early on as the bill was
being concluded, on how best to implement the provisions. On
this past Tuesday, our farm production and conservation team
held a listening session. Formal and informal listening
sessions will continue going forward, as we hear the particular
items of interest and how we can bring clarity. We think
clarity brings compliance and that is what all of us want in
the farm bill.
So as an example of our early efforts on implementation we
have already allocated Fiscal Year 2019 funding to the
recipients of the Market Access Program. We know trade is a
huge issue, market access, foreign market development that you
all were very favorable to. You mentioned, Mr. Chairman, in
your comments about whispering about the budget. I would do
that but my whispering sometimes is not loud enough and you
have already given your--described your high regard for the
President's budget anyway and how highly it is viewed in
Congress sometimes. So, nonetheless, we will continue to do--be
advocates, as you all are, for our farmers and our advocates
and our farmers across the country that way.
We have, in NRCS, during the shutdown, utilized a mandatory
funding program to keep staff working throughout the shutdown,
providing significant time to begin rebuilding the framework
for the new and certainly, I think, improved conservation
programs that we see. So on our core conservation programs like
EQIP and CSP and ACEP and RCPP, those are wonderful additions
that we look forward to implementing.
Certainly we are interested in rural prosperity, and the
farm bill, I think, goes some way that way. We know the issues
we hear across the country repeatedly deal with trade, labor
regulations, and most recently in the hurricanes, in disaster.
So we hear that.
Before I conclude I want to ask respectfully for the
Committee to move quickly, if at all possible, on our committee
nominations before you. We are still--we have three nominees--
Dr. Mindy Brashears, for Under Secretary of Food Safety; Naomi
Erp, for the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights; and Dr.
Scott Hutchins, for Under Secretary of Research, Education, and
Economics. So confirming these three nominees in their
respective leadership roles will help us continue to make
strides that we want to in serving you and your constituents.
So thank you for the opportunity. I look forward to
answering your questions and having a candid discussion about
our efforts to again do right and feed everyone. Thank you,
sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Perdue can be found on page
42 in the appendix.]
Chairman Roberts. We thank you, Mr. Secretary. I have just
about two or three issues, and again, I am going to mention
those two words, certainty and predictability, that allowed us
to really pass the farm bill on time, which was, you know,
quite a push, but we did it in a bipartisan way, which is the
way to do it. That topped every other issue. Senator Stabenow
has strong issues, as do I, and so did the House conferees.
That was the top issue.
So apply that to trade and that continues to be concern for
our producers who are currently having conversations with their
lenders and facing tough decisions on which crops they are
going to plant this spring, hoping that Mother Nature will
cooperate.
The 2018 farm bill protected funding for the important
export programs while also increasing investment in trade
promotion and facilitation programs overall. I am pleased to
hear progress has been made with China. I hope that continues.
That is at least the information that I get. I am sure you are
getting the same thing, Mr. Secretary.
I look forward to receiving the International Trade
Commission report on the U.S.-Mexico-Canada agreement, USMCA,
which I fondly call the United States Marine Corps Always, but
it does stand for NAFTA too. However, while tariffs are in
place our producers will not be able to realize the full market
potential.
My question is what would you tell producers as they make
these choices in light of the current trade environment?
Secretary Perdue. I think while farmers are thought to be
farmers they are also very smart business people and they are
used to looking at these markets. Last year, the President
authorized a market facilitation program because their plans
were uprooted by the trade disruptions we saw in 2018. I think,
again, the best advice I could give these farmers is to do what
they have always done. Look at market signals and look at their
own production schemes about where they think they can become
most profitable, or maybe in this environment lose the least,
in order to be successful.
So I do not think--while we do, as well, hope that these
conclusions can come to the trade disruptions, I am cautiously
optimistic, but it is never over until it is over with our
negotiators and our opponents in this regard, and I think the
advice would be to look at the markets currently, work out your
input cost, and see if there is a way to make a profit for this
year and plant those crops.
Chairman Roberts. I appreciate that answer. I would only
comment. Every headline I can see with regards to trade and the
amount of trade that we are able to achieve, it is just not
good news. We hope for the best. I give a lot of credit to the
President for trying to reach a deal with China.
This use of tariffs results in tariff retaliation.
Agriculture is first--you know that. We have had to come up
with a $12 billion mitigation program, which was of some
assistance, but as we have said at the White House, and you
were there, we want trade, not aid. I am not going to go into a
speech on trade--I can do that very easy--but I would get wound
up and we do not want to do that this morning.
My next question is the 2018 farm bill suspends our
commodity program eligibility for base acres on farms that were
planted entirely to grass and pasture, from 2009 to 2017. My
good friend, Coop, over here, to my left, is very interested in
this issue. This provision will impact producers across the
country, including farmers and ranchers in Kansas, by
restricting access to the improved Agriculture Risk Coverage--
that is the ARC program--and the Price Loss Coverage program,
the PLC program.
Ahead of producer sign-ups and elections, the Farm Service
Agency needs to define grass and pasture and will need to
identify base acreage that will be subject to this new
restriction. These same acres will be eligible for the new
grassland conservation initiative established in Title 2.
Mr. Secretary, I know your answer is yes, but will you
continue to work and consult with us and this Committee ahead
of the Department making eligibility decisions regarding the
base acres as this development begins on the new grassland
conservation initiative?
Secretary Perdue. Mr. Chairman, your assumption is correct.
We would love to have the congressional intent behind this
change in the farm bill. We concur with it but we would like to
know more specifically, I think, what you and the stakeholders
feel of how these changes can impact them.
Chairman Roberts. The 2018 farm bill included Senate
provisions regulating hemp cultivation. I do not think I have
seen such interest in something in the farm bill ever since I
can remember Hadacol, for goodness sakes. It seems like hemp
has industrial use, health benefits. I see it advertised now.
My wife called a number to see about this hemp cream, or
something, but it was just too expensive for us to sort of
gamble on that. It is rather amazing. Senator McConnell has
started an absolute prairie fire with regards to hemp.
What timeframe do you envision for the rulemaking? What
agencies will the USDA coordinate with to provide this market
opportunity as quickly as possible?
Secretary Perdue. Mr. Chairman, we will probably proceed
very slowly and judiciously in this effort. It is a new crop,
obviously. We are advising our State partners, who will be
primarily responsible for administering and regulating this
crop, that they need to proceed under the 2014 rules currently.
We believe, as we work through these issues, we will
probably have more guidance out for the 2020 growing season for
those interested in hemp. We may be able to do some of the
things regarding some cross-State lines sooner than that.
Certainly, for the real details of the hemp provision, we are
asking States to--they can submit their applications. We
probably will not judge on those until we get the regulations
done. There may be an iterative conversations back and forth
with the State partners.
Obviously, Kentucky has had probably the most experience.
We are trying to learn from one another. We have advised our
State partners that right now they should plan on implementing
the 2014 bill for those interested in hemp.
You are absolutely right, it has had more interest than
probably anything I can remember. As you well know, as
productive as our farmers and ranchers can be, they could
easily overwhelm this market before it even gets started.
Chairman Roberts. I appreciate that. Senator Stabenow.
Senator Stabenow. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
again, on the point of hemp, I think I have never seen our
Majority Leader so excited about a provision in the farm bill,
so I am sure working closely with you.
First I want to talk about dairy again, and I want to thank
you for prioritizing the implementation of the dairy program,
and I appreciate the Department starting to make contact with
producers earlier this year. It is so important right now,
getting the word out and giving them tools and having adequate
staffing from the start, because even though we put a lot of
flexibility in to help all sizes of dairy farms, there is a
need for a major effort to reset the perceptions of the old
program. It is going to be very important to really cast a wide
net so we can educate all eligible producers on the risk
management tools, and particularly farmers who did not
participate before.
Farmers need the confidence that they can afford to stay in
business until the new program payments are issued later this
year. I know, in talking to farmers this week, they are very
concerned as they are going to their lenders, that the lenders
do not understand the new program and what is coming, so dairy
farmers may not be getting the support that they need to make
it through until the new program payments kick in.
So in the interim, will you work to quickly provide online
payment calculators and decision tools so our dairy farmers can
consider their options very specifically as they work with
their lenders?
Secretary Perdue. We will certainly commit to that, Senator
Stabenow. I think, again, farmers have a great social media
network that they do. It is called the coffee shop. As dairy
farmers look at this bill it is sort of a no-lose deal for
dairymen and hopefully they will hang on. We expect to have
that calculator out probably in the middle of April, as quickly
as possible, hopefully before then. We are going to allow those
farmers with the retroactive insurance and MPP to participate
beginning in the middle of March, March 18th, and we believe
that we can have the net refunds for the previous premiums,
prior premiums there, going out by April 30th. The sign-up for
all the rules for the new program hopefully by June 17th.
You can tell I am being very specific and I have asked for
specificity from our team. Then we believe that we can have the
payments going out retroactive to January 1st, probably in the
first week of July, maybe the second week of July. So that is a
pretty aggressive timeline for a new program, and we are going
to work certainly accomplish those commitments.
Senator Stabenow. Well I appreciate your being specific,
and you know how hard many of our dairy producers, most of
them, have been hit, so I appreciate that. You mentioned water
quality initiatives and the Regional Partnerships Program,
RCPP, and we are very pleased that we have been able to
strengthen and streamline the proposals as well as increase
funding for water initiatives. In Michigan we are surrounded by
water, as you know, and water quality is incredibly important
to us, from the Flint water crisis to contamination in Lake
Erie. Agriculture is a big part of the solution.
So as we are providing historical new tools to help
producers address water quality issues. I would very much
appreciate it if you would work with us on pulling together all
those new tools to create a comprehensive national water
quality initiative to coordinate all of the USDA's efforts on
water quality to help educate producers and pinpoint the areas
of highest need. Obviously, when we look at improvements made
to the Regional Conservation Partnerships Program and
prioritizing practices within the Environmental Quality
Incentives Program, or the new buffer initiatives in CRP and so
on, there are a lot of new tools available in the new farm
bill. This is something that is very important, I know, to our
producers and those across the country. So I am anxious to work
with you in making water quality one of the top priorities
moving forward, in terms of implementation of the farm bill,
and I would like you to comment on that.
Secretary Perdue. Certainly, and I think, again, you all
hit the sweet spot on the conservation title of the farm bill,
and I do not think I have ever seen a proposal in the farm bill
that was so widely accepted by farmers, producers, ranchers,
conservationists, wildlife people. I think everyone felt like
they got something in that.
You mentioned RCPP, obviously a large-scale landscape type
of effort that could really help. We look forward to using
these new tools for water quality, certainly for other things
as well, including wildlife recreation and others.
Senator Stabenow. Thank you. Finally, just one other thing,
Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary you have your work cut out for you
on implementing this bill. There is no question. Unfortunately,
with the government shutdown, while it was no one at USDA's
fault, as you know, you were delayed on implementation because
of everything that happened. We understand that and we know
that you and your team are working hard.
I have to raise this again, as I did in my opening
statement. Just as the President was signing the farm bill into
law, your department issued a proposed rule that would take
away food assistance from 755,000 people struggling to find
stable employment. This is something we debated in the process
of the farm bill and did not include. My concern is that last
week you indicated another rulemaking further addressing
eligibility changes to SNAP would be coming soon.
We have also been told there may be work underway on other
issues that were not congressionally authorized. My question
is, will you be prioritizing implementation of the bipartisan
farm bill policies first or rulemakings that have not been
congressionally directed or is not in the farm bill?
Secretary Perdue. The answer is we will be prioritizing
implementation of the farm bill, but we can also propose those
rules as well and will receive comments, I think 90 day on the
rule that you are referring to.
I would just submit to you, Senator, that while we
discussed the issue--you know, the House proposed this in their
initial bill. It was not accepted by the Senate. What was
accepted by the Senate and passed was the same bill that has
been there since the beginning of the welfare reform, recording
the work requirements of 20 hours per week. What you also
passed was not a prohibition. It was no change to the fact that
in one section it says that the Secretary may waive the
applicability, and we plan to do that for the able-bodied
adults without dependents. We think, again, the purpose of
these helps are to help people move to independency.
I know that we share different views on that. You feel very
strongly. I feel very strongly. I think many people in America
feel very strongly that we should help people when they are
down, but that should not be interminably help there. In fact,
when President Clinton signed this bill he said it was a--``I
made my principle for real welfare reform very clear from the
beginning. First and foremost it should be about moving people
from welfare to work. It should impose time limits on
welfare.'' President Clinton.
This legislation meets those principles. It gives us a
chance we have not had before to break the cycle of dependency
that has existed for millions and millions of our fellow
citizens, exiling them from the world of work. It gives
structure, meaning, and dignity to the most--to most of our
lives. This is the same language that was in this bill here
that you all passed in 2018.
Senator Stabenow. Mr. Secretary, let me just say, I do not
think there is anyone who would disagree with what you just
read from President Clinton. What we have here is a situation
where Congress increased program integrity, and added more
dollars on job training to create opportunities for people. The
only question is whether or not, in cases where States believe
there are not the opportunities for employment, that they would
have the flexibility. The language you are talking about is to
waive the time limit and give States the flexibility to act,
and I would argue you are going the opposite direction.
I know we can have this discussion further, but no one is
suggesting that people should be receiving assistance when they
could be working. We want everybody to work and we want
everybody to have the opportunity for that, and our farm bill
has been focused very much on increasing those job
opportunities. That is where I think we should be focused
aggressively moving forward on job training and job
opportunities for people.
Secretary Perdue. I agree and I think that is, and really,
one of the provisions of the rule that we proposed is in those
particular areas where unemployment, for whatever reason, is
higher than the national average by a certain point. Those are
areas that justify waivers and certainly will qualify, but not
statewide waivers where the statewide unemployment is 4
percent, Senator.
Senator Stabenow. Well, that is the difference and I am
sure there are a lot of Governors that are coming to you about
your proposals to change their capacity to be able to make
their State decision.
Secretary Perdue. They will, but----
Senator Stabenow. So thank you----
Secretary Perdue [continuing]. if I----
Senator Stabenow. Thank you.
Chairman Roberts. I thank the Ranking Member and I thank
the secretary----
Senator Stabenow. We agree on many, many things but this--
--
Chairman Roberts [continuing]. for this discussion.
Senator Stabenow [continuing]. is, this is one where we do
not. So, with all due respect.
Chairman Roberts. Pardon my interruption.
Senator Stabenow. Excuse me.
Chairman Roberts. I have a five-point response but I am
going to delay that, and Senator Boozman will be next, and I
know he has something very pertinent, and I will mention these
five points when we are talking on the floor.
Senator Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Mr. Secretary, for being here, and we really do appreciate all
of your hard work.
Like everyone else around the table, I certainly want to
echo that we would like to get these things in place as soon as
possible. I think the comment that you made about us providing
the resources that you need and getting your people in place is
really pertinent, and the Committee is pretty good about doing
those things so we are going to be working really hard to do
that for you.
As you know, right now, our growers are in the situation,
making lots of choices, loans, and all of those kind of things.
What I think would be really helpful is giving as much
information out as you can, perhaps through Deputy Secretary
Censky, letting the producers know as much as you can so they
can start to develop a plan of action.
One of the things that is a huge issue in my State, and I
think most of the people sitting around the table, is
broadband. It is not uncommon for me at all to go to a small
community and literally, in the evening, children are sitting
on the back of a pickup or in a car, using the broadband that
is inside.
So there is a lot of interest, lots of excitement about the
potential of the new Reconnect Program at USDA. Can you talk a
little bit about that and see how you feel like that might help
us solve some of those problems?
Secretary Perdue. I think regarding rural prosperity,
Senator, the topic you suggested has, in my opinion, one of the
best chances of transformative change from rural poverty
bridging the urban-rural divide that we see continuing to be
exacerbated across the country. We are on it. I think, again,
the proposal of the money you gave us last year for $600
million, those applications are going to be ready in April. We
are communicating very much to the stakeholders who have
expressed interest, public-private partnership over those
things and the website is up at ReConnect there, that people
can find that. There has been an immense interest in that.
My goal in doing that was to administer that and deploy
those resources in a way that you all trust us to do more,
because we need a moonshot of broadband connectivity across
this country in order to do the things that we think will bring
our Nation back together from a rural-urban perspective. I
appreciate you mentioning it. There is so much interest and
excitement among States out here that way. We want do you
proud.
Senator Boozman. Well, we appreciate that, and again, I
think your words would be echoed by everyone around this table
as to how important it is, so thank you for your leadership in
that area.
In regard to trade, and that is something else that I think
we are all concerned about, we appreciate the hard work on
China, all the efforts that are being made there. We seem to be
moving in the right direction. One of my concerns is that as we
work so hard in that area that we are forgetting about places
like Japan, which is so, so very important to the beef
industry, the pork industry, things like that.
Can you talk a little bit about that and how the tariffs
now are making it such that we are starting to lose market
shares that we have worked so hard to get? Can you talk a
little bit about how that is progressing?
Secretary Perdue. Certainly. The threat is real. Obviously
TPP will begin to be implemented this spring, and Ambassador
Lighthizer and I had several conversations about the
disadvantage that puts our American producers and experts
regarding Japan. I think the good news is he is very much aware
of that. His strategy is to really do an FTA with Japan,
dealing with agricultural issues, the goal being certainly to
be equivalent or plus TPP provisions in agriculture that would
put us in even stead with any other nation in the world.
Japan is a huge market, typically in the top five. I will
be going there late spring, I think in May, for the G20
Agricultural Ministerial. We plan to make that a sales trip as
well. So while most of the attention and press has been on
China, Japan is right underneath the surface as far as a
necessary sales destination.
Senator Boozman. We appreciate that so much. I know in
Arkansas probably over 40 percent of the crop grown is
exported, as you know better than anybody.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Roberts. Senator Klobuchar. I was watching
television some time back and I saw somebody that really
resembles you in the middle of a blizzard.
Senator Klobuchar. That would be me. I just left my snow
globe behind, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Roberts. I see. I see. Well, I think it would be a
little early for me to call you Madam President.
Senator Klobuchar. Yes, Okay. That sounds good, though.
Okay.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Roberts. You knew that was coming.
Senator Klobuchar. All right. Secretary Perdue, welcome.
Thank you for your good work, and I thank the Chairman and the
Ranking Member for their leadership on the farm bill.
I want to start with a non-farm bill issue. This is
something that Senator Smith and I have been working on, which
is the problems with the website with the reservation system
for the Boundary Waters Canoe Area, which is under your
jurisdiction. What is being done to ensure that the reservation
system will be operational and functioning in a more reliable
manner by the deadline of March 4th, which is the new deadline?
Secretary Perdue. We are--I am told, and we have to rely
on, obviously, our technological professionals to give us those
dates, but I am told that we will meet that deadline.
Unfortunately, we did not meet the deadline for Recreation.gov
that is so important in your part of the world, and many
others, from a reservation over our beautiful public lands and
all those things that people can enjoy. They are telling me
that they will be able to--it was literally an IT crash. There
was code that was not done well, in the initial, and so we hope
to have that done.
Senator Klobuchar. Okay. Another topic more related to ag,
the threat of foreign animal disease. Senator Cornyn and I
worked on a $300 million for permanent mandatory funding to
create a vaccine bank, and then we also have a new Animal
Disease Preparedness and Response Program. How is the USDA
coming along on these? Is there any kind of plans to deploy
them on a timeline?
Secretary Perdue. Well, there really are. Under Secretary
Ibach has been on top of this even before the appropriations
there in developing this strategy called the three-legged
stool. It deals with working our early discovery and detection
with network labs all across there, working with our partners
in the State and both Mexico and Canada and our borders there
for early detection, and then to create the vaccine bank.
I think, again, the industry is waiting on us to sort of
help them with the technology and which way we are going to go
in developing the bank. Probably when we make that decision
there may be more funds needed for the bank itself, but I think
the industry did a great job in raising awareness. I think you
all responded well in that regard.
Senator Klobuchar. Very good. Dairy farms, and more and
more of them facing closure, and the shutdown did not help
there. Can you commit to ensuring that the sign-up for the new
Dairy Margin Coverage program is prioritized?
Secretary Perdue. I absolutely can. I gave some specific
dates earlier and we are going to just break our necks to get
those done.
Senator Klobuchar. Very good. Well, do not do that
literally, but, okay.
So are refund or credit options for the premiums they paid
into the old program, is that also going to be a priority?
Secretary Perdue. It will. I think that is one of the
earlier things we will be able to get done. That is probably
the refunds, I think on April 30th. Part of the challenge
there, Senator, in the first, in trying to get the 1914 farm
bill dairy program done quickly, the first 2 years of those
sign-ups were done by paper results, and you know that does not
easily recover. We have to go through all those, the changes,
the reconstitution of farms, who has it now, and the things we
do there. So that slowed that, but I think we can have those
refunds out by the end of April.
Senator Klobuchar. Thank you. Senator Thune and I have a
bill that, a provision that got in the farm bill, the
Agricultural Data Act, and that is studying and ensuring that
we figure out conservation practices, because we think it will
be helpful for farm and ranch profitability as well as our
lands. Can you commit to proceeding with the study quickly and
to ensuring that it is delegated to the farm production and
conservation mission area?
Secretary Perdue. Certainly. We pride ourselves on being
data-driven, facts-based decisionmakers, and data is good and
we want to proceed to get as much as we can as quickly as we
can.
Senator Klobuchar. Thank you. Then, last, it has been
almost 5 months since the President instructed the EPA to begin
the rulemaking process to allow the sale of E15 year-round,
which would provide a much-needed boost to our rural economy.
As you know, there have been issues with prices for our
commodities and other things and this is something that will be
helpful.
It is my understanding that a proposed rule still has not
been published by EPA and that you told the House Ag Committee
yesterday that the rule will not be completed before the summer
driving season. Right now it looks like--some reports say it is
going to be done by June 1st. Do you think it will be finalized
by June 1st, and what can you do to help us?
Secretary Perdue. I was speaking on the latest information
I had. I was overruled by the Acting Administrator yesterday,
who, based on his confirmation hearings and his vote today I
think has committed once again to drive his troops in order to
get that done by June 1st----
Senator Klobuchar. Okay. Well that----
Secretary Perdue [continuing]. and we would encourage that.
Senator Klobuchar [continuing]. that is good news----
Secretary Perdue. That is the----
Senator Klobuchar [continuing]. and I bet your words were
helpful to get it done. So thank you very much.
Secretary Perdue. Thank you.
Senator Klobuchar. I appreciate it. I welcome Senator
Durbin in his new freshman capacity to the Committee, and I
like because it means my colleague, Senator Smith, is more
senior than someone on our Committee. So very good. Thank you.
Chairman Roberts. Thank you, Senator. I note the presence
of another candidate. We had four candidates on this Committee
for the highest office in this land. Maybe we could have a
hearing with just you four.
Senator Klobuchar. Like an ag debate of some kind? Okay.
You could moderate it.
Chairman Roberts. I am just saying.
Senator Klobuchar. That would be very good. All right.
Chairman Roberts. I would be very happy to do it. Senator
Braun.
Senator Braun. Thank you, Chairman Roberts, and welcome,
Secretary Perdue. It is a pleasure to be on this Committee. The
legacy of our State is shown up in the corner there in Senator
Lugar's portrait. There has been somebody from the Hoosier
State on this Committee for a long time.
For me, particularly, I have lived farming. I have lived
conservation. I got lucky that early on, back in the late
1980's, I got involved with managing my own ground. I started
with 100 acres and fell in love with forestry, later ag, and
have really lived it. So it is good to be on a committee where
I do not need to be briefed on a bunch of the issues that are
important.
I want to start with one. When I was back home about 3
weekends ago I had three different farmers in a very small
restaurant come up and ask me the same question, and it would
have been, we are now having trouble actually maintaining
ditches on farms that we have done for years. It would be the
impact of WOTUS, Waters of the U.S.
I am a conservationist and I appreciate every part of what
that was about. They are interested in knowing what we might be
doing, your position, and I know the jurisdiction is through
the EPA, if that looks like it is going to get easier for them
to do the simple things that they need to do keep their farm in
shape. Then after you answer that I have got a broader question
on about farm markets in general. So can you weigh in on that a
bit?
Secretary Perdue. Well, Senator, we are delighted that you
bring your experience to the Ag Committee and we look forward
to engaging you on many of the forestry issues. I would really
like to know more about the farmers and their concerns about
what they need to do with their ditches. Obviously, waterways
and ditches are very important for water quality, soil health,
and many other types of things. NRCS works with them on an
ongoing basis about that. So I am not sure what the impediments
they were facing, and maybe you can help us, and we will deal
directly with that.
Senator Braun. I think it is probably on the cusp of being
addressed, because there is a new ruling out there that is
going to have public airing, I think, in April. It basically
has gotten to where through that original ruling they are
uncertain as to what they can do on their own properties, and
it is involving basic farm maintenance that until the last year
or so they did not know they had an issue.
So I would just appreciate it if you would look more into
it. It would be the single biggest thing that I have heard in
terms of their day-to-day life and keeping their farm in shape.
The big issue, though, for most farmers would be that--I
have been involved in it for so long. I remember back in the
days of LDPs and corn prices struggling to get to three bucks,
you know, soybeans having their own problems. Inputs--I think
to put out an acre of corn it would have been 140 bucks an
acre, soybeans maybe 70, and now that has been 20 years or so
ago.
We have now got prices that are not a whole lot better than
what it was then, when you were using a lot of government help
to get you through. Is there the possibility that we can find
our way out of this by finding new markets, or does the
industry that has evolved in farming, which looks so different
to me from what it was 15 to 20 years ago, where it is more
concentrated. You have got a lot of large companies. I do not
see them ailing in the same way I do the farmers that make that
whole industry tick.
So should we look to government, like we did 15 to 20 years
ago, through direct payments, LDPs, and all the stuff that we
have weaned ourselves from, or should the industry itself,
especially larger corporations, weigh into this with inputs
being so much higher? They have gone up. They do not seem to
have come down. I would just be interested in hearing your
opinion.
Secretary Perdue. I am just glad to have someone here that
knows about LDPs from history.
Senator Braun. Yes.
Secretary Perdue. To answer your question, I think really
that is farming, and you know it, I know it. I think the farm
bill that we have now, in my opinion, is much more balanced to
market base, to allow farmers to make those decisions over
inputs versus revenue. I guess I go back to the mantra we used
to talk about in the grain business--the cure for low prices
are low prices and the cure for high prices are high prices.
The market will settle out. We are seeing this down revenue
because of relatively good growing seasons, worldwide, not just
in our area but worldwide, for the last four or 5 years since
they peaked in 1913. I think we are going to see an upturn.
The potential for trade and the potential for selling more
products is always necessary, and I think farmers--I think--my
opinion is we have seen the low. That does not mean we are
going to bounce back up, but I think we have seen the low in
the spread, the delta between the input cost and the revenue
and the commodity prices.
Senator Braun. Good to hear that and I would just make one
more note. I think the only thing I see that can give in that
equation, I would ask the industry itself to be attentive to
the farmers' concerns because I think there is a little bit of
room for help there from the people that benefit from what
farmers produce, as opposed to, you know, reflexing back to
where government does more.
Thank you so much.
Secretary Perdue. One of my most fun things is to jawbone
them all the time about that.
Senator Braun. Okay. Good.
Chairman Roberts. Senator Smith.
Senator Smith. Thank you, Chair Roberts, and, Secretary
Perdue, it is wonderful to have you here and I appreciate very
much the chance to talk with you about the farm bill. I want to
just start by echoing my colleague's, Senator Klobuchar's
comments about the reservation system up in the Boundary
Waters. As you know, this--we talked about this briefly--this
is an issue that is a core economic issue for Northern
Minnesota, and people are a little bent out of shape right now.
So I am hoping--and it sounds like you are confident that
we will be able to make that March 4th deadline?
Secretary Perdue. I am confident of what I was told and
therefore I have confidence in the people that told me that. So
we are going to do our best to make that effort. I am just
excited there is so much interest in that Recreation.gov.
Senator Smith. Yes. That is right. Technology has a way of
attracting attention when it does not work. March 4th is my
birthday, Secretary Perdue, so I would love to have it be live
on my birthday.
Secretary Perdue. We will do that----
Senator Smith. That would be great.
Secretary Perdue [continuing]. as a birthday present.
Senator Smith. Thank you. Thank you very much for that.
I also want to touch on something that Senator Stabenow was
talking about which is dairy. You know, farm bankruptcies are
on the rise in Minnesota and across the Upper Midwest, and it
is interesting. The Minneapolis Fed just released some data
that shows that between 1917 and 1918--2017 and 2018, farm
bankruptcies are about double what they were in 1913-'14. I
think that a lot of that--we think a lot of that is driven by
dairy, though it is a little early to say.
I was just talking with Minnesota Milk a little earlier
today, who are just so eager to see how the improvements to the
dairy program can get implemented as soon as possible, because,
of course, a lot of those dairy folks are heading to the banks
right now trying to figure out how to cobble together the
funding after a couple of rough years. So you feel good about
moving that forward, it sounds like, early on.
Secretary Perdue. I think this Committee and Congress have
done a wonderful job with a very supportive dairy program. It
is like when you have been down so long--and I think Senator
Stabenow mentioned about kind of the branding issue over the
Margin Protection Program--we have got to kind of rebrand and
sell it----
Senator Smith. Exactly.
Secretary Perdue [continuing]. because this is a great
program.
Senator Smith. Get people enrolled, and they need to----
Secretary Perdue. If they can just hold on it is going to
be really good for dairies, particularly the under five million
pounds.
Senator Smith. Yes. Well, I appreciate that and I am happy
to hear about the online payment, the calculator being up soon,
and we will look forward to spreading the word on that. That is
great.
One other thing I wanted to touch on, Secretary Perdue, is
the question of health care in rural communities. You know, it
is interesting. When I am out visiting with Minnesota farmers,
of course, there is a lot of talk about prices and a lot of
talk about the overall state of the ag economy. Often the
second thing that people talk to me about is rural health care
and mental health care, you know, that one thing together.
In the farm bill, which we passed last year, I worked with
Senator Jones and Senator Rounds on this Committee to get a
rural health liaison position in to help coordinate much better
rural health. So could you talk a little bit about that
position and where you are in terms of getting that position
filled and worked on?
Secretary Perdue. Certainly. Obviously this has been one of
the focuses of rural development. Health is one of the life
qualities that we judge how well we are doing by in rural
prosperity. Not only are farmers typically in the individual, I
think, health premiums have also increased the stress. You did
not used to see health premiums on their line sheet about cost
of living, but now, at $25,000 to $30,000 they have to account
for it, per couple.
Senator Smith. Yep.
Secretary Perdue. That hurts. Obviously we have got an
opioid epidemic that Rural Development's Anne Hazlett has been
extremely involved in nationally, and we hope to continue that.
Rural health is part of rural prosperity, it is a form of well-
being, and we will look forward to continuing that.
Senator Smith. Well, great. Well, I will look forward to
staying in touch with you and the agency on this rural health
liaison effort which I think could be a big help.
Secretary Perdue. Sure.
Senator Smith. It would be a big help.
Just in the few seconds that I have left, Senator Boozman
raised the question of rural broadband, which is, of course, so
important. I know how much you appreciate this. You and I have
talked about this before. One issue related to rural broadband,
which is a core economic issue, of course, all over the country
and in rural Minnesota, is the basic data about where we have
coverage and where we do not have coverage. I hear from a lot
of people in Minnesota that the maps--often they look at the
maps that show ``Oh, I am covered'' but I do not have coverage.
So can you tell me what the USDA is going to--can do to
help make sure that people are not overlooked because of
inaccuracies in these maps?
Secretary Perdue. Yes. I do not want to be political but we
believe that FCC coverage maps are fake news, and we are----
Senator Smith. Because there are a lot of people in
Minnesota that would agree with you.
Secretary Perdue. Everywhere, really. They were primarily
generated from carriers who do not want to see more
competition, and what we are doing right now is polling
individual States, and many States are engaged in this issue.
We are developing partnerships with the State departments of
rural broadband, many of them creating offices there of
actually finding out. That is the first thing. If you are going
to deploy these--and you all told us to deploy them in unserved
areas--we have got to know where those are, and you have got to
rely on data, which is not reliable currently under the FCC
maps now.
Senator Smith. All right, well, thank you. Mr. Chair, I
know my time is up but I would love to work with you on the
idea of some sort of a challenge process for consumers, so we
can get good information quickly.
Secretary Perdue. Okay.
Senator Smith. Thank you.
Chairman Roberts. Senator Hoeven.
Senator Hoeven. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for being
here, Mr. Secretary. Already you really are demonstrating that,
you know, you are an advocate for the farmer. The work on the
farm bill, which I think is a good farm bill, and I, of course,
commend our Chairman and Ranking Member, but your help and
support to get that good farm bill. Your work during the
shutdown to help our farmers and keep FSA offices going. Just a
whole variety of these issues when we have asked you to help
our producers during challenging times, which is what it is for
them right now. You have been a tremendous advocate, and so I
just want to say thank you for that.
I know you have a lot of things that you have to balance
and make work, but your advocacy for the farmers is always
first, and that is really important, and it shows, and we thank
you for that.
As you know, we need some help on those section line
issues, and I believe DOJ and some of your folks are meeting
this week or next week--next week on it. So I want to thank you
for that. That is important for us and your continued help
there is appreciated.
You know, as we talk to farmer groups, both when they come
in to see here in D.C. and when we go back home, really there
are not any commodities right now where they can price out and
make a profit. You know, for the established producers, you
know, they can get by, that are operating on pretty much all
equity. For the ones that we really have to keep in the
business of farming, the ones that have some leverage, that is
a huge problem.
The average age of our farmers right now is 60 years old,
and I know you and I do not think that is particularly old,
but, you know, when you think that is the average age in
farming and we have all the capital constraints and everything
else for young people to get into farming, and then stay in
farming, you know, continue to farm and ranch, this is a real
issue.
So I guess just touch on--and I know we tried--we worked
very hard in the farm bill to address that with improvements to
ARC and PLC, crop insurance and everything else--but your
thoughts as our farmers now are trying to, you know, get those
credit lines. We, of course, increased the FSA guarantee and
direct loan, but what are your thoughts right now as our
farmers are talking to their banker and they are putting those
operating lines in place and trying to--you know, last year
they could actually hedge maybe 40 percent of that crop and
lock in some revenue or some margin, but they cannot do that
this year.
Secretary Perdue. Well, you have correctly identified--I
think they probably ought to be included in the ESA laws. They
are the most endangered species out there right now regarding
young farmers and beginning farmers that have not had a career
of building up equity. Many of them are renting land, and from
a cash-flow perspective it is tough. I think what you all have
provided certainly in the FSA loan enhancements there will
help, but you cannot borrow yourself into profitability either,
and that is lenders, including us, and guarantee. You have to
look at cash-flow of being able to repay those loans.
It is challenging, Senator. I wish there were a magic wand
we could wave. It is pretty tough. I guess we used to laugh, in
the business, it is a pretty sorry farmer that cannot even make
a profit on paper these days, you know, and that is kind of
where we are these days.
Senator Hoeven. Well, the market facilitation payment was
very important. It is very important on crop insurance that you
do not reduce any of the current support on crop insurance.
That is critically important this year.
Then the other is on the trade piece, and I visited with
Larry Cudlow earlier this week. So the Market Facilitation
Payment helped, and you were a champion there, and again, I
thank you for that. Depending on how long the trade
negotiations go on, we really need to have some help for our
producers in the interim. So in those negotiations, to the
extent you can continue--and I know you are doing it and I am
doing it and others are trying to do it--convince the
administration that we have to have purchase, as well, that
goes on.
You know, we have got product, commodities stacking up all
over the place, and so it is not just from a pricing standpoint
but just physically selling product. We have got to try to get
some purchases while that negotiation is getting on. Obviously,
the sooner we can get a resolution, the better. So just some
thoughts in terms of trying to get some product moving for our
producers while those trade negotiations are ongoing.
Secretary Perdue. Well, certainly. Obviously, your part of
the world was most hard hit because it flows to the PNW, and
that market was essentially cutoff. In fact, even down in the
Gulf was--the liquidity issues that Senator Boozman knows was,
with no trade moving it is very difficult. The elevators get
stopped up very quickly because it is used to flow, and if you
do not have an outlet for it it is like the Dead Sea, and that
is sort of what happened this year.
Hopefully the Chinese, with their commitment, just last
Friday, almost a week ago, with 10 million more metric tons of
soybeans, hopefully we can see more of that. That implies that
we have to have an agreement, and while we are cautiously
optimistic, I think if we get an agreement in principle we can
see purchases on various commodities move fairly quickly and
recover markets. That still--I do not want to raise
expectations that that is going to be done in the near term.
Hopefully the President and President Xi of China can meet in
March, and I would love to see a resolution there. Right now it
is difficult to predict.
Senator Hoeven. Right. I mean, obviously that is the--I
think the No. 1 thing that would help right now is getting an
agreement. It the meantime, anything you can do on, you know,
keeping those purchases going.
Then the other thing is on as far as getting approval of
USMCA, addressing the steel and aluminum tariffs, because both
Canada and Mexico, as you know, are holding product on the
basis of that. That would be helpful.
Secretary Perdue. Great point. Obviously a very important
point that we have been advocating for, really, since the
signing of the USMCA agreement. The expectation was once the
agreement was signed the tariffs would come off. That has not
happened but I think it is in the best interest of all three
countries to do that. The President, we are working hard to
persuade him that the steel industry here, of which he is
concerned, can be protected through a TRQ program here rather
than tariffs, and release the retaliatory tariffs against our
farmers.
Senator Hoeven. I know you are doing all these things and I
really appreciate it. Thank you.
Chairman Roberts. Senator Durbin.
Senator Durbin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Roberts. I have been waiting 30 years to recognize
you, sir.
[Laughter.]
Senator Durbin. Mr. Chairman, I am honored to be on the
Senate Agricultural Committee and part of this cultural
exchange with the Senate Appropriations Committee. I recall,
when I was a member of the House Agricultural Committee and
went on Appropriations that the Chairman, Jamie Whitten, asked
me a little bit about my background, and I told him, and he
said, ``Congressman Durbin, understand that authorizing
committees deal in hallucinations and appropriations committees
deal in fact.''
Chairman Roberts. Senator if you would mind----
[Laughter.]
Chairman Roberts. I remember those days. Those
hallucinations were very real and they have stuck with me more
likely as nightmares, as I would point out.
Senator Durbin. Thank you very much. It is----
Chairman Roberts. I am amazed that you were able to
understand anything that Jamie Whitten----
Senator Durbin. That is right.
Chairman Roberts [continuing]. said. I made the mistake of
asking him a question on the floor of the House. Bill Emerson,
who you remember very well, was sitting next to me, and Jamie
explained, in his usual fashion, the response to my question. I
sat down and Bill said, ``Are you satisfied with that?'' I
said, ``I have no idea what the hell he said.''
[Laughter.]
Chairman Roberts. He was a great man and you replaced him
and did outstanding work, and thank you for that.
Senator Durbin. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
I have a statement I would like to place in the record but
I would like to take----
Chairman Roberts. Without objection.
[The prepared statement of Senator Durbin can be found on
page 48 in the appendix.]
Senator Durbin. I would like to take this opportunity to
ask the Secretary about the SNAP program. I heard your
explanation about the administration's position on changing and
reforming SNAP. So I would like to ask you about a specific
situation. This relates to a convent in Evanston, Illinois, for
Benedictine nuns. These nuns have worked their entire lives as
nurses in hospitals and as teachers in schools. The only
retirement they have is bare-bones Social Security, and they
live in community, approximately 20 of them. What they do is to
gather their food stamps, SNAP coupons, and make purchases for
food to be cooked in their community kitchen. They are clearly
needy, they are clearly eligible for SNAP payments, and there
is no evidence whatsoever of any abuse.
Despite that fact, there was an effort made in this last
farm bill to take away their ability, their legal ability to
pool their SNAP benefits to make purchases of food in bulk, to
save some money so that they can continue to live under these
modest circumstances. We were able to include in the farm bill
an 18-month delay before there would be a disqualification of
the waiver that allows them to make these community purchases.
They are not alone. In our State we have 150 senior support
living facilities and 8,000 seniors in the same boat. These are
not people who are welfare cheats. They are not people who are
ready to go to work if they are prodded a little bit. Their
working years are behind them. I would dare say in every State
represented here--Nebraska, Iowa, Arkansas, Kansas--they have
similar facilities.
Senator Duckworth and I are very concerned about this. Can
you give us an assurance that at the end of 18 months you will
not cutoff this community benefit for these elderly people?
Secretary Perdue. What I can assure you, Senator, is I
would like to learn more about that. Obviously, the anecdote
you recalled regarding the nuns certainly sounds reasonable.
They are eligible. What I have understood, and have been told
regarding this, is that there are for-profit areas--home in the
support living--of which they charge a fee for people to live
there, and then they collect those who are eligible on SNAP
benefits and then put that to their revenue in the home for the
benefit of everyone.
So I am certainly willing to look into considering those
types of things, as the example you gave, to make sure that we
can parse that out for those that we think are deserving in
that way, rather than a for-profit enterprise taking SNAP
benefits from the taxpayer and applying it to their overall
revenue.
Senator Durbin. In the year 2016, the Department of
Agriculture did a survey of all of these facilities, so they
certainly are not hiding anything. If there are people who
abuse it, put an end to it. When it comes to seniors in support
living facilities, many of whom are facing illness, disability,
mental illness, and the like, I hope that we will not be
treating them as if they are somehow cheating their government.
Secretary Perdue. Certainly, as we learn more about that,
as I indicated, my information was that these were the
providers of which--I think the State law in Illinois requires
that food be provided in that fee that they are being charged
to live there. So unless they are giving them credit for the
SNAP benefits, we think, again, the issue is on the purveyors
of that service, if the fee, by Illinois law has to do with
food being included in that fee, then I am happy to talk with
you further about that and make sure that those who are worthy
achieve that.
Senator Durbin. Let us do that. Illinois is proud to be the
largest agricultural producer of soybeans in the United States.
Since President Trump took office the price of a bushel of
soybeans has gone down $1. We believe that the trade policy of
the administration could threaten the progress we have made in
establishing customers around the world. I hear that from my
soybean growers all the time. What would you tell them?
Secretary Perdue. Tell them that they are in the long-term
game. They obviously understand the volatility of prices. Many
people like to attribute a cause and effect over trade.
Certainly the Market Facilitation Program supported what we
were able to determine and calculate to be the trade disruption
damage for those soybean producers. We hope that the purchases
that China just announced can be more and hopefully we can have
a resolution of the trade where we think their prices will be
better.
Senator Durbin. My last question--and I see my time is up
here and I want to be careful since I am a newcomer here. We
talked about immigration. Workers, migrant workers and
undocumented workers are critical to the survival of American
agriculture. If we are declaring war on immigrants, war on
undocumented immigrants, we have got some questions that need
to be answered when it comes to dairy operations and fruits and
vegetables.
We produced a bill 6 years ago that was approved by both
the Farm Bureau and the farm workers' union, the United Farm
Workers, to deal with this issue. Are you willing to suggest to
our President that we need an immigration reform bill to deal
with this issue?
Secretary Perdue. Absolutely, and the President understands
we need a legal agricultural work force. It is probably the No.
2 issue I hear behind trade everywhere I go and I look forward
to working with both sides and the administration to achieve a
comprehensive immigration bill that satisfies the need for
agricultural workers. We know that the majority of our
agricultural workers are foreign-born now, and some legal, some
illegal, from an immigration perspective, and we need to help.
Senator Durbin. Thank you.
Chairman Roberts. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Ernst, Senator Fisher, prior to the opening of this
session I was asked by the distinguished pro tempore of the
Senate that when he arrived I would recognize him. He is in
earnest conversation with Senator Durbin now so he is not aware
of my remarks, but I am now going to recognize the President
Pro Tempore, knowing that his schedule is tremendously
important and that he is probably gassing up the three cars
that he uses to now to get over to the Capitol.
Senator Grassley. You have a way of quietly irritating
people.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Roberts. I just want to let you know I practice
that each and every day.
Senator Stabenow. I think we put that on his tombstone, the
ability to quietly irritate people.
Senator Grassley. First of all, thank you--whoever I am
offending by going ahead of other people, thank you for letting
me offend you. This is a very important hearing. With the new
farm bill and one that is going to be around for 5 years, we
have got to make sure that it gets started right away. Thank
you, Secretary Perdue, for coming.
I want to bring up an issue I often talk about that I once
again, after three farm bills, failed to get in the farm bill
conference report, even though every year I get it through the
U.S. Senate, and 1 year I was able to get it through the House
of Representatives, and it was taken out in conference, even
though it was the same in both houses, as an example. This is
the payment limitation issue that I am talking about, because
the 2018 farm bill we passed last year created these goofy new
loopholes for large farmers to extort taxpayers for more
subsidies.
Everyone who really farms has no problem with his or her
eligibility for farm subsidies, so no farmer would--if you are
actually farming, you are not going to have any problems. I
have never tried to eliminate legitimate farmers from being
eligible for the farm safety net. However, I have tried to
crack down on abuses in the system that allows large farmers to
extort taxpayers for every additional actively engaged person
they qualify. Just so everyone here is clear on how much money
one non-farmer, who still qualifies, can receive each year from
the taxpayers--an individual, $125,000; married couple,
$250,000.
Now this is what is worse in this farm bill. The new farm
bill, even enlarged that existing loophole to expand the
definition of family to include first cousins, nieces, nephews.
Imagine the outcry, probably by some of the members who support
loopholes for farmers, if a food stamp recipient could claim an
extra $1,000 a year for extended family members who do not,
themselves, need food stamps. Plain and simple, this new
loophole will allow large farmers to milk taxpayers for even
more by claiming their niece or nephew, who may live on the
opposite side of the country and have nothing to do with the
farm, is a farmer who deserves $125,000 a year of free money.
That is a slap in the face to the real farmers who sweat and
manage their farms honestly, and to taxpayers who are on the
hook for these payments.
A young person fresh out of college or military has no
chance of competing on cash rent for land with a larger farmer
who has 5,000 to 10,000 acres of land in operation and access
to unlimited subsidies. Just in case the Chairman is not paying
any attention, please pay attention to this.
Earlier this week this Chairman of this Committee called me
a liberal at the Finance Committee hearing, and this is a
hearing I held on prescription drugs. Well, I have to say to
you, Mr. Chairman, I wish you would not be so very liberal with
farm subsidies to non-farmers. It is all right with me if
Kansas State beats Kansas, because they have never been there
before, you know.
Now can I ask a question? Can I ask a question?
Chairman Roberts. We just had an athletic contest in
Lawrence. My visa into that county has expired so I could not
see the game. We were not successful against the Jayhawks. We
were at home, but we still lead the conference. As to this----
Senator Grassley. And you----
Chairman Roberts [continuing]. any member of the Senate, I
would deign to say anything----
Senator Grassley [continuing]. and you beat Iowa State.
Chairman Roberts [continuing]. to try and arouse the
interest and ire of the distinguished gentleman from Kansas--
pardon me--Iowa.
Senator Grassley. Can I ask----
Chairman Roberts. I would just say that--I am not going to
go there. Duly noted.
Senator Grassley. Can I ask a question?
Chairman Roberts. Certainly.
Senator Grassley. Okay. Mr. Secretary----
Chairman Roberts. You have 55 seconds. Go ahead.
Senator Grassley [continuing]. a common concern I hear at
my town hall meetings from farmers is the disparity of payments
in ARC program from adjacent counties. The farm bill instructs
USDA to start using RMA data instead of NASS data for
determining county yields, the belief being that RMA data is
more accurate than survey based on NASS data. Will that change
be in effect for the upcoming crop year and its potential ARC
payments?
Secretary Perdue. By the way, Senator, I appreciate your
comments were directed to the Chairman and not at me initially
on that.
Senator Grassley. Well, you and I had that conversation in
my office before you were confirmed and you told me you agreed
with me.
Secretary Perdue. Let me go to your question here. I think
that, yes, the RMA data should be used in this calculation
here, going forward.
Senator Grassley. Would you repeat that please?
Secretary Perdue. Yes. I think that the RMA data will be
used as you asked.
Senator Grassley. For this year's----
Secretary Perdue. Yes, for crops--for the 2019 crop season.
Senator Grassley. Yes. Then I want your view on China's
slow-walking biotechnology approvals having caused many
problems for our farmers and biotech companies. Can you tell us
if the U.S. is prioritizing improving China's approval times
for biotech products in the ongoing negotiations between our
two countries?
Secretary Perdue. Not just prioritizing but pounding it in
every conversation. This one of the non-tariff barrier issues
we have been laser-focused on regarding that. China, as you
know, has used this slow-walking of biotech traits as a
protectionist measure and it is one of the issues that we are
working on, from a resolution.
Senator Grassley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You were more
cooperative than I thought you would be. Thank you.
Chairman Roberts. Well, thank you, Senator, and given your
immense and important duties you are now free to leave any time
that you would like to absence yourself from the Committee.
Let us hear from Senator Casey, please.
Senator Casey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This has been an
interesting hearing so far.
[Laughter.]
Senator Casey. I speak from this side, the Sea of
Tranquility.
[Laughter.]
Senator Casey. Mr. Chairman----
Chairman Roberts. Senator, are you considering running for
President?
Senator Casey. No.
[Laughter.]
Senator Casey. Like I said, it is a Sea of Tranquility.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here. I want to thank
you for doing the job that you do. It is a tough job under any
circumstances but maybe particularly so in these times.
I wanted to try to cover three issues. One I will just do
by way of a statement. The three would be conservation, dairy,
and organic agriculture. I wanted to reiterate something that
the Ranking Member, Senator Stabenow, referred to earlier in
the conservation discussion.
As you might know, in our State of Pennsylvania we are in
the process of developing the Phase 3 Watershed Implementation
Plan that will outlines how our State intends to meet the
requirements of the Chesapeake Bay cleanup. The cost for
agriculture will be significant, as you know. The strong
conservation title in the farm bill should lessen the burden
for farmers.
I do want to echo what the Ranking Member said, her call
for a coordinated, targeted, national initiative aimed at
addressing water quality concerns throughout the numerous
conservation programs administered by USDA. So I appreciate
your continued attention to that.
Let me start, though, with my question on organic. The
national--included in the enforcement provisions that will
expand USDA's organic program authority and also the capacity
to provide oversight for both domestic and imported organic
products. The question I had was, the farm bill requires your
department to issue a final rule to strengthen organic
enforcement by December of this year. Can you provide an update
on how the Department plans to met the deadline and provide a
timeframe with regard to your plans to publish the proposed
rule?
Secretary Perdue. Well, we are striving to meet the
deadlines. As you know, there were some statutory deadlines in
the bill that assumed passage by September. So we signed in on
December 20th. We had the shutdown that have delayed some. We
are working to implement those as hard as possible, as
certainly the enforcement of some of the issues we have heard
over imported organic violating some of the standards and the
competition with our growers here who are abiding by those
rules is a very serious issue and we will continue to work to
meet those deadlines. I cannot tell you right now if we will be
successful.
Senator Casey. Well, I appreciate that. I appreciate your
attention to that.
My second question also pertaining to organic, again, is
the farm bill's legislative principles states that it was your
department's priority to, quote, ``Protect the integrity of the
USDA organic certified seal and to deliver efficient, effective
oversight of organic production practices to ensure that
organic products meet consistent standards for all producers,''
unquote. That is the statement. We know that inconsistent
enforcement in the organic dairy standards is further
exacerbating the economic challenges these, in this case, dairy
farmers are facing.
The question I have is, can you provide clarity with regard
to whether the department will be taking regulatory action on
this issue, and if not, why not?
Secretary Perdue. I expect that we will. Certainly,
enforcement means consequences, and it does not do much good to
enforce if you do not have consequences to do that. Certainly I
expect that we would.
Senator Casey. Well I hope that is the case and maybe we
can followup and talk more about that.
The last question I have is on dairy itself. We know that
prior to the farm bill the Bipartisan Budget Act added
significant improvements to the dairy safety net. We are told
that some 20,000 farms, about half of those eligible, have
signed up for the program. The farm bill made additional
changes, and I guess the basic question I have for you, because
this is so important to risk management, is what steps will the
Department take to inform the eligible farmer of the
improvements made to the dairy program and thereby increase
enrollment significantly?
Secretary Perdue. As we prepare to get the rules in place
then I think, again, we communicate certainly by any medium we
have, including postcards to our producers, if we have email
addresses we do that. We actually have joint meetings and
calling within the regions of dairy producers and they are
usually well attended. Frankly, we rely on the members and the
producers themselves to spread the word. As I said, the great
social media, the coffee shop, is still alive and well.
Senator Casey. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Chairman Roberts. Senator Ernst.
Senator Ernst. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for being here today.
Secretary Perdue. Another Iowan.
Senator Ernst. That is right. I was greatly offended that
the senior Senator from Iowa was allowed to go first, even
though I outrank him on the Ag Committee. I will speak to you
later, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Roberts. I would recommend you take that up with
Senator Grassley.
Senator Ernst. Well, and certainly, Secretary Perdue, thank
you so much for being here. I want to start out by touching on
the importance of the EPA's work, of course, to get the
President's promise fulfilled on completing the rule to allow
for the sales of E15 year-round. After speaking with you and
Acting Administrator Wheeler yesterday I do feel confident that
the EPA is on target. They are doing everything in their power
to write and finalize the rule as fast as possible. So thank
you for having that conversation with me.
Secretary Perdue. Well, thank you for your encouragement
for Administrator Wheeler.
Senator Ernst. Yes. Thank you. We will keep pushing.
Believe me, we will keep pushing.
I want to talk a little bit about some of the epidemics
that we are seeing worldwide, and near and dear to Iowans'
hearts, of course, is hog production, No. 1 in the United
States. North Carolina, very distant--distant second. Our Iowa
hog producers are really staring down the threat of African
swine fever. This has been sweeping through Eastern Europe. It
is affecting herds in China. If it were to come to Iowa or
anywhere in the United States this could be absolutely
devastating to the hog industry.
So what additional steps or precautions is the USDA--what
are they taking to ensure that this horrible disease does not
hit the United States and hurt our industries?
Secretary Perdue. Obviously, Under Secretary Ibach can tell
you more specifically but I can tell you that it has been on
our radar since it first showed up in China. We track it on a
daily basis. We communicate with our industry over biosecurity
measures. We are communicating with our partners to the north
and south on the North American continent about trying to have
protocols that make sense that way, since those are the most
porous borders that we have, and then, certainly, from Customs
and Border Patrol over incoming travel from the affected areas.
We are in daily contact with them regarding the threats that I
have to do. You may have read the little anecdote story about
our little USDA beagle that detected the hog head coming from
elsewhere.
Those are the things. Obviously, transmissible diseases
have the potential to be extremely threatening, and I do not
know that there is anything else we can do in that way but we
are always looking and seeking, because in emergency
preparedness or in trying to prevent these kind of things, we
are not leaving a stone unturned, but if someone sees that from
the industry, we want to know about it.
Senator Ernst. Mm-hmm. I appreciate that, Mr. Secretary.
Then in the farm bill there were a number of provisions
included, focusing on conservation that I focused on, and
including those in CRP that benefit our beginning farmers while
also protecting land and ag production with practices that
benefit our water quality. That is very important in Iowa. That
is done especially through the new Clean Lakes, Estuaries, and
Rivers Initiative. I also want to stress the importance of
working lands conservation programs, like EQIP and CSP--those
have been really important to us as well--and protecting
natural resources through voluntary conservation.
So the farm bill did make changes to support those goals,
and what I would like to know from you, can you speak to how
USDA is moving forward to implement the changes that were in
this recent farm bill and your commitment to ensuring farmers
have access to the support they need, especially for those that
are just getting started.
Secretary Perdue. Surely. As we said, it was fortunate the
NRCS continued to work through the shutdown, because they are
working on mandatory money, and implementing these new
provisions and educating both first and training our both
employees and staff around the country on the new provisions.
We think they are going to be very beneficial and helpful, and
we will do all that we can to educate our producers and farmers
about the new provisions, how they can help them on their
working lands of agriculture but also working lands for
wildlife and conservation.
Senator Ernst. Thank you. Thanks to those employees too,
that man those offices. That was really helpful in Iowa. So
thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Chairman Roberts. Senator Brown.
Senator Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, nice
to see you. Thank you. I do not think I have ever talked to you
without talking about Lake Erie and algae blooms and the
conservation title. During the farm bill I worked with Senator
Ernst and Senator Grassley and Senator Casey--to write the
CLEAR Act. That was included in the farm bill, standing for the
Clean Lakes, Estuaries and Rivers Program. The farm bill made
certain that CLEAR enrollment should receive priority among the
categories of CRP. As you will remember, 40 percent of the
acres enrolled through continuous CRP will go to CLEAR.
My first question is will you commit to fully enrolling the
acres that Congress set for CLEAR in the farm bill?
Secretary Perdue. Yes, sir.
Senator Brown. Okay. Thank you.
The Western Lake Erie Basin, Lake Erie near Toledo, is only
30 feet deep. Lake Superior is 600 feet deep. Lake Erie, in the
Western Basin, is the most vulnerable part of the Great Lakes.
It also has the largest drainage area, 4 million acres, called
the Maumee River Basin. So it will always be at risk. It will
always be vulnerable, for a whole lot of reasons--humans,
industrial, commercial, agricultural, all that. So it is
particularly important that we support all of these programs,
and we will continue to talk about that.
I want to followup on Ranking Member Stabenow's back-and-
forth with you on food stamps. As she says to me privately and
as she has said publicly, we debated and rejected some of the
things that you are planning to do, it sounds like. The same
day the President signed the most bipartisan farm bill in
history you announced your intent to make changes to SNAP. We
went back and forth on these issues during the farm bill. You
know, Democrats gave, Republicans gave. Senator Roberts and
Senator Stabenow showed about as good a bipartisan leadership
that I have ever seen here to get 87 votes and to insist on
that bipartisanship. The same day that bill was signed, you all
announced, that USDA would propose a rule that would result in
potentially hundreds of thousands of SNAP recipients losing
access.
I understand you want to put people to work. So do I. I
want to move people from food stamps to work. I know that is
good politics in Washington and good politics at home, and I
want to do that because that is the right thing. I also know
that so often these are individuals in our States, in Colorado,
in Nebraska and South Dakota and Kansas and Michigan and Ohio,
who fall through the cracks. They are sometimes people
undiagnosed with mental illness. They are disabled people that
have not gotten on the disability rolls, if you were.
So my question is, are there enough--what exactly you are
going to do to make sure these people who were receiving SNAP
benefits, and we just--I am not sure you have the available
data, county and State data, to make this decision. What are
you doing to get that data and how can you ensure, to us, that
people who are disabled, people who are mentally ill but not
yet diagnosed can eat and can have at least some sort of life
that we all think is part of human dignity?
Secretary Perdue. With all due respect, Senator, one of the
conversations that occurred during the farm bill, when the
House came out with their version of much further than we have
gone with our rule, was that, well, we do not need to do that,
that Sonny can take care of that through a rule in the program.
Based on the law that you passed, just in this past year, that
is exactly what it gives the Secretary the discretion to do and
that is the discretion I am exercising in that regard.
Senator Brown. Well, one moment. I apologize, Mr.
Secretary. With all due respect--back at you, all due respect--
because some House members said that does not mean that that is
what the Senate was voting on. The Senate was 87 votes with
language that we wrote without that intent that Senator Roberts
and Senator Stabenow and the rest of us came to agreement on.
Secretary Perdue. Senator, those were not House members,
but I do not think it is appropriate to identify those members
right now.
Senator Brown. They were wayward Senate members. They were
among the 13.
Secretary Perdue. Well, they are sitting close to me.
Senator Brown. Even our Lord, in choosing 12, chose one who
erred. If I can explain that to all of you, okay, go ahead.
Secretary Perdue. I think to answer your question, though,
for those who are undiagnosed--and that is the challenge we
have in mental health in this country. We want those people to
be diagnosed, and then obviously ABAWD stands for able-bodied
working adults without dependents. That is what this is. There
are provisions in local regions of high unemployment where
these waivers are appropriate and they will be utilized.
You all also gave a 12 percent exemption Statewide that
States can use in populations they feel like are being directly
affected.
Senator Brown. Well, I thank you for that. I am not
convinced, from talking to people at food banks and talking to
people in communities and local governments that they have the
wherewithal to do the job training programs that you need, that
we need, and would like to do for those we can do it for, to
move them into work. I just ask that you be sensitive to
understanding that in many communities they just, for whatever
reason, they do not have the dollars to pull off to accomplish
those programs to do that.
Secretary Perdue. We will be sensitive to that. I also
believe that the Senate rejected the education and training
that might have been proposed from the other side as well.
Chairman Roberts. Well, Coop, you are back. It is almost
high noon. I think that, you know, Grace is going to show up
with her wagon and ask you to go with her, and you are just
going to tell her a man has got to do what he has got to do.
Senator Thune. Does anybody under 70 in this room know what
he is talking about?
[Laughter.]
Chairman Roberts. We just went through that with Hadacol.
Senator Thune. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
you and the Ranking Member and your staff for such a great job
getting this farm bill across the finish line. It is hard to
believe it is almost 2 years ago now that we started hearings
on this. It seems like yesterday. It is a great accomplishment.
Secretary Perdue, thank you to you and your staff for your
expert technical assistance and guidance that USDA provided to
me, to my staff, and to the members of this Committee as we
were writing that bill.
Mr. Secretary, I would say that the producers in South
Dakota are primarily concerned about two things. One is
implementation of ARC and PLC and the other is CRP sign-up.
Most producers were enrolled in ARC under the 2014 farm bill.
That is likely to change. Most are probably going to be likely
to be in PLC for most crops. You testified yesterday that you
expect to have the regulations, procedures, and software ready
for farmers to enroll in ARC and PLC by September the 1st.
Really important for producers is this question, and that
is do you expect to have worksheets and calculation models in
place before September 1st, so they, and their lenders, can
have some certainty going into the 2019 crop year?
Secretary Perdue. I would hope so, Senator. I am looking
for my notes here about the timeline on that. If we are
expecting that sign-up period, I am hoping that we can get them
information upon which to make a decision. Obviously, that is
iterative and it is, you know, like building the airplane while
you are flying it, to get that out there. So I know, in the
previous 1914 farm bill there was a lot of discussion over ARC
and PLC and how to make choices. I think you are absolutely
right that we will see probably more PLC this time, based on
where prices are. I think the flexibility you all gave them on
the annual choices will also be helpful.
Senator Thune. Good. I would just say, particularly as they
are trying to get their lenders to work with them, if, you
know, the worksheets and the calculation models that are used,
they take them to the banks, the borrowers, to get those
operating loans, it is really critical. So I would just
encourage you and really emphasize the importance of getting
that part of the--you know, the regulation procedure process
out there as early as possible.
Yesterday, during the House Ag Committee hearing, Chairman
Peterson asked you questions about the CRP sign-up and you
mentioned later this summer and December 1 as possible dates
for CRP sign-ups. My concern is that as of last October--and
CRP enrollment was at about 22.5 million acres, about 1.5
million below the acreage cap, with another 1.6 million
additional acres expiring September 30 of this year.
Because acres accepted into CRP usually are not actually
enrolled until the following October 1, I am very concerned
that unless general CRP and continuous CRP sign-ups are held no
later than summer of this year, we are going to lose potential
to have more than 2 million acres that if not enrolled in CRP
and taken out of production cropped in 2020, and adding to the
surplus burdensome--or I should say the existing burdensome
grain surplus.
So the question is, could you expedite CRP sign-ups to
ensure that acres are enrolled and dedicated to CRPs so that
they are not cropped in 2020? In other words, if CRP sign-ups
cannot be held prior to December 1, what can USDA do to ensure
that acres enrolled in CRP after December 1 can actually be
placed under contract and the vegetative cover established in
2020?
Secretary Perdue. Senator, we are going to do the very best
we can in that. There are several changes in CRP. I am a
sooner-rather-than-later guy and I pushed our people as hard as
I can. I would rather give what we expect not from a sandbag
kind of perspective but what we think is realistic. That is
what I have tried to do with all of these dates. I understand
your concern.
The answer to the second part of your question is yes, I
think we can do that, after the December 1st sign-up. These are
pretty complex kind of changes and issues there, and we are
going to expedite as much as possible.
Senator Thune. Thank you, and this is personally relevant
to you because we want to make sure you have plenty of CRP
acres to hunt pheasants on in South Dakota. So that is another
reason to get it done.
Secretary Perdue. That is why we are going to expedite it.
Senator Thune. Could you share with us your plans for
ensuring that there are adequate staffing levels in USDA
headquarters, IT operations in State and county offices, to
ensure timely delivery of farm bill and all other programs this
year?
Secretary Perdue. Several months ago we authorized staffing
and hiring plans throughout USDA. You probably know the Federal
Government is not the best, easiest place to onboard people
regarding all the checks that we have to do. I asked the other
day how we were coming and I did not get a favorable answer. It
was a C-grade, and I reminded them that that was not acceptable
in our household and it really was not going to be acceptable
in USDA. So we will continue to make a specific effort to get
the appropriate staffing, and if you or any of your members
here, or throughout Congress, hear of specific gaps in your
offices around there I hope you will let me know specifically
where we can address those.
Senator Thune. All right. Thank you. My time has expired.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Roberts. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Bennet.
Senator Bennet. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thanks for holding this hearing and for your leadership, and
the Ranking Member's as well, and this excellent farm bill.
Mr. Secretary, thank you also for--I have said this to you
before but I want to say it again--for ending fire borrowing at
the Forest Service. Many secretaries have tried to do it before
and you did it, and it was excellent, and I want to thank you
for that.
Secretary Perdue. You all did it, but thank you.
Senator Bennet. Well, we have got more to do, but I am
grateful for it and I look forward to working with you on
implementation of the hemp provisions in the farm bill as well
as the drought provisions that are in that bill.
I wanted to ask you a couple of questions about trade, if I
could, today. Mr. Secretary, last week the USDA projected
agricultural imports will increase while exports will decline
in 2019. The USDA's chief economist noted that China reduced
American soybean imports by 90 percent. Now Brazil is rushing
to fill that void, as you know, and I have heard from Colorado
wheat growers who stand to lose precious market share in Japan.
I am worried that once lost these markets will be hard to
recover. I wonder whether you could summarize the USDA data
that quantifies the cost of lost market opportunities overseas
for American farmers and whether you have communicated that
data to the President. I would like to know what your
conversations have been about that.
Secretary Perdue. Certainly. I want to thank you again for
your mentioning of the forest issues and I want to remind
certainly members here, as I did yesterday, that one of the
things not only in the disaster that fell out of the recent
appropriations bill but also the backfill from our fire
suppression efforts of where we borrowed $720 million from
operating there. That did not get filled back either. That has
been typically done. You know the fire borrowing does not kick
in until Fiscal Year 2020, so we really need that, as well, to
do what we need to do, in your State and others.
Regarding trade, obviously we are continuing to describe to
the administration the impact of trade. I think--I do not know
when those economist numbers came out, but I think it has
improved since that time, based on the 20 million metric tons
of soybeans that had been committed since these latest
discussions happened with China. Nonetheless, they have been
impactful, and not only there but certainly the trade
disruptions last year from Canada, Mexico, and other places.
So we hope to get those restored. We are all cautiously
optimistic we can get a resolution. I believe, honestly, the
President, if we can get the structural reforms on intellectual
property that kind of began this issue, I believe the President
wants to. The concern about getting the markets back, based on
some of the numbers that China has proposed, I think they can
come back quickly and more abundantly than we have seen before.
Senator Bennet. I know, Mr. Secretary, you know this as
well as anybody around this table, that our producers are well
aware of what the cost to them has been. In other words, they
are not going to accept as a success some modest purchase by
China of soybeans that they already would have sold to China
had we not been in the middle of this trade war. You know, you
mentioned 20 million metric tons. I had heard 10 million metric
tons.
Secretary Perdue. Well, it was 10 recently, plus the 5,
plus the 5, so it is 20 most recently. That only gets us back
to two-thirds of the 75.
Senator Bennet. Yes, that is right. I mean, it is 32 metric
tons or something that they would have bought anyway. So to
have people suggest that somehow that is a win for our farmers
or our ranchers--I am not saying you are. I am not saying at
all that you are--it just--between that and the payments that
have not covered the damage that has been done, you layer on
commodity prices, drought, and trade, there is just so much
uncertainty and it is why bankruptcies are up all over farm
country as a result of all this.
So I just hope you are communicating this with the
President. This has not been a costless exercise that he has
been engaged in, and in the end maybe he will succeed. In the
meantime there are a lot of farmers that are going out of
business as a result.
Secretary Perdue. If we see anywhere near the numbers that
we are looking at with the potential success, I think the
farmers will be rewarded handsomely.
Senator Bennet. The trade representative said to me once
that our farmers and ranchers have his sympathy because he
knows they are the first ones that are going to be attacked in
the trade war. I said, ``Well, I do not think we need your
sympathy. I think what we need is for you to act rationally and
reasonably.'' I think you are a rational and reasonable person
so I hope that you have got a seat at the table here.
Secretary Perdue. Oh, I have had that conversation with
Ambassador Lighthizer as well and, honestly, I do believe
initially he might have thought that farmers were complainers.
I will tell you, at the end of the USMCA and in East China
negotiations, he has been a legitimate advocate for American
agriculture, at EU, Japan, and China, and the USMCA. So I have
been proud of the conversion there that I witnessed and I think
we are on the right track.
Senator Bennet. Well, keep working on it. Our farmers are
not complainers ever.
Chairman Roberts. Thank you, Senator. You made your mind
up?
Senator Bennet. I will keep you posted.
Chairman Roberts. All right. Thank you.
Senator Bennet. I do not know where these other people
left.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Roberts. I think when you came in they left. I am
not quite sure what happened.
Senator Bennet. That very well could be.
Chairman Roberts. But it is the Fab Four, and we welcome
you any time. Thank you.
Senator Fischer.
Senator Fischer. No comments? Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[Laughter.]
Senator Fischer. That is a good thing. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Mr. Secretary, nice to see you. It was great to have
you out at Sunny Slope Ranch, our family ranch, where a couple
of years ago I woke up to snow on a late May morning and had a
great discussion in our barn with 70 neighbors. The first thing
I asked the Secretary to do was pull out his cell phone and see
how his reception was. There was not any. So I appreciate your
comments on the broadband and the importance of rural
broadband.
I wanted to followup on some of my colleagues' comments on
that, specifically looking at precision agriculture and the
importance of precision agriculture and the technology, all the
cool things that our producers will be able to do, how that
affects many States including mine, where ag is the economic
engine, and how that affects the economy of this country. It is
extremely important.
We had a report that was required with regards to that. Is
your agency on track to get that published?
Secretary Perdue. I think it is. In fact, I am not sure--I
am surprised it has not already out there, but I have seen it
probably in a couple of weeks and it should be there. I
appreciate your interest in that. Obviously, those of us who
thought we lived in rural America have not been to the
Sandhills, where your nearest neighbor sometimes are----
Senator Fischer. A long ways away.
Secretary Perdue [continuing]. 50 or 60 miles away. So,
nonetheless, it is important. You mentioned certainly one of
the key components. Precision agriculture sounds neat, but what
it does is less inputs and more productivity, more outputs, and
that is really what it matters. It lowers the footprint. It is
better for all of our environment and other things. So that is
why it is so important, along with the e-commerce and health
and education, all those kind of things. That is why we need
that moonshot in the Sandhills as well as all across the
country.
Senator Fischer. Definitely. You know, when we look at
trade policies, a lot of discussion on that as well today. Part
of what we had in the farm bill was a consolidation of trade
programs that are out there, and hopefully to have a more
efficient trade program going forward with some flexibility.
Where are we on that, on the development of looking at a more
efficient trade program so that we can really target some
areas?
Secretary Perdue. Maybe I am not quite sure what you mean
by more efficient trade programs. We are obviously putting
money in our market access programs to develop more markets,
efficiency in trade programs, working with collaborators and
exporters all across the sectors of specialty crops and our
primary crops, and working on China on their traceability and
age of that Nebraska beef, and MRLs regarding residue limits
and those kind of things we continue to work on. I am not
exactly certain of what you are talking about with efficiency
of trade.
Senator Fischer. Well, I viewed it as, I guess, a better
use of taxpayer money when we consolidated some of those trade
programs in the farm bill, so that we can, I think, target
areas so that we do not have the duplication.
Secretary Perdue. Well, I think in the Market Facilitation
Program, or, really, the Market Access Program, and the $200
million of that Market Facilitation Program we are doing,
working with 57 collaborators, these are the industry sectors
that know where they can go to find other markets. I think that
is increasing the efficiency of it.
We are holding our partners accountable, not just for
outputs but outcomes. I had a pretty stern discussion with one
of our regional organizations from our part of the world. It
did not look like they were meeting the criteria for
productivity.
Senator Fischer. Good. Then I wanted to ask you about the
vaccine bank. As you know, from your training and profession,
what an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease would do to States
around this country, but the country as a whole. What measures
are being taken by the agency to stand up the program of that
vaccine bank, and are you in any kind of coordination with
individual States on being able to involve industry
stakeholders?
Secretary Perdue. Both the industry and our State ag
partners, those are the networks when we talk about the three
legs of the labs and then the network, the early detectors and
biosecurity measures. This is the way it works. It works from
the industry to our State regulators to USDA, in that way. Your
own former Secretary of Agriculture, Greg Ibach, is very
familiar with these issues and has done a marvelous job in
working with, ahead of time, as we saw these things coming. I
think the industry did a good job in identifying the threats
and you all responded with resources in order to get that done.
Senator Fischer. Would you say that is a top priority that
we need to get that funded?
Secretary Perdue. I think, again, the funding is sufficient
currently until we identify probably what the level of the
vaccine bank should be, and that may require more funds.
Senator Fischer. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Chairman Roberts. Thank you, Senator Fischer. Senator
Gillibrand. You are up.
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like
to ask a little bit about the women and infants nutrition
program, WIC. It has been widely reported that the President's
budget will contain a 5 percent cut to discretionary programs,
and you have said that the cuts to USDA programs will likely be
even higher.
The administration has made a lot of noise about how much
they care about the health and well-being of babies, so I want
to know if this includes the WIC program. Do you except
proposed budget cuts to affect the amount of money available to
provide healthy food for our low-income pregnant women and new
mothers caring for their babies and young children?
Secretary Perdue. The WIC program, as you know, Senator, is
a utilization program. There will be ample funding for all of
those. The economy has increased and helped and we see a lower
utilization of the WIC program. Many have alleged that is
because of some of the immigration discussions. We have not
been able to validate those anecdotes about that. Every
pregnant woman and child will be able to use the WIC program as
you desire.
Senator Gillibrand. Yes. Will this proposed cut make it
harder for women to get prenatal care, increase the likelihood
of premature births, or reduce the number of babies born
healthy?
Secretary Perdue. The WIC program will be completely funded
for all those who use it. The money will be going down based on
the expectation of lower utilization.
Senator Gillibrand. The amount that the President puts in
the budget, will it be based on what you recommend to him? Do
you recommend a lower amount?
Secretary Perdue. We recommend an amount that we estimate
will be utilized.
Senator Gillibrand. Mm-hmm.
Secretary Perdue. The usage, if there is a cushion and a
reserve there--if, for instance, we have a higher utilization
than is estimated, that reserve money in WIC will be utilized
to serve the people who come and apply for WIC.
Senator Gillibrand. Okay. I want to build on what Senator
Brown covered on the SNAP proposed rule on waivers. From the
questions you have received over the past 2 days it should be
obvious that the recent proposed rule to limit the State's
ability to apply for ABAWD waivers is a non-starter, having
been rejected in both the House and the Senate. I want to know
why you chose to pursue the rulemaking process anyway.
I know that when Senator Sanders asked you on what did you
base your decision to propose this rule you said you were
acting on the work of the House. Obviously that is not what the
law says. So I am very disturbed about that answer.
Second, did anyone with the USDA conduct an analysis of how
this would actually affect the food security for low-income
people?
Secretary Perdue. What the law says, that you voted for and
passed--I assume you voted for it; it passed fairly
overwhelmingly there--it says that requires 20 hours of work
there. Then it says the Secretary may waive those requirements
there, and we are waiving some of those, those not those for
able-bodied adults without dependents. We are complying with
the law with the proposed rule as passed.
Senator Gillibrand. Have you done any analysis about how
this affects people who are disabled or mentally ill or are
veterans, people who are in foster care, our foster youth,
anyone who has mental health issues?
Secretary Perdue. Senator, the rule we have proposed, that
you are commonly to as the ABAWD----
Senator Gillibrand. Mm-hmm.
Secretary Perdue [continuing]. ABAWD is an acronym for
able-bodied working adults without dependents, adults able to
work, not disabled, not in any way with children or dependents.
These are people who are able to work and have no dependents,
and that is who we are addressing the rule, giving States a
certain----
Senator Gillibrand. Mm-hmm. Well, one of the problems is
that----
Secretary Perdue. I was waiting for you----
Senator Gillibrand. Oh, keep going. Yes.
Secretary Perdue [continuing]. to hear from your staff
before finishing my answer.
Senator Gillibrand. Go ahead. Finish.
Secretary Perdue. The provisions we are proposing in the
rule give States some waivers for areas where high unemployment
may occur for loss of a company or different things like that.
Senator Gillibrand. Right.
Secretary Perdue. You all also provided for a 12 percent
cushion for States they could use for any purposes. We do not
believe that in States where unemployment is 4 percent that
people should--able-bodied adults should be able to stay on
work, on food assistance interminably. That was the--when you
talk about the integrity of the law, that was the proposal that
was signed, the law that you still have passed, by amendment,
this past year.
Senator Gillibrand. Yes, and I think the purpose of the law
was for you to use your discretion. So what I am asking you is
what discretion did you use and whether you had an analysis
done to inform your discretion. For example, we have places all
across rural upstate New York where there is so little work
available, they do not have the jobs. You also have young
adults who are in much more precarious situations. So, for
example, a foster youth who might be 19 or 20 years old, he or
she may not have the full capacity or the training he needs to
get a job in the area.
So I am just asking, you know, what kind of pushback have
you done, from an analytical perspective, about where you
should use your discretion, because we do not want hungry
people in America. We do not want people who are starving. We
want to use the wealth and resources we have in this country. I
just am asking, how did you use your discretion and what facts
did you look at, and did you actually have the opportunity to
understand perhaps why someone who might be considered able-
bodied is not actually working, what the actual impediment for
them is?
Secretary Perdue. The law that you passed still allows for
120 days for those people that you are talking about to be on
food assistance. For the people you talk about where jobs are
not available, that is the unemployment delta that would allow
for a waiver in those areas where they exist.
Senator Gillibrand. So let us just say it is a persistent
problem and there is underemployment and unemployment, and you
are only allowed 30 days of assistance for--or 3 months of
assistance, excuse me--in a 3-year period. So if that person
cannot get a job, giving them access to 3 months of food
assistance is not necessarily enough if they cannot get a job.
People want to be working.
Secretary Perdue. Senator, as I understand the labor
statistics right now, I believe we have about 7.5 million jobs
available and 6.5 million people unemployed, almost a delta of
1 million jobs going lacking. So that would be one of the
basis.
Senator Gillibrand. Okay. Well, thank you, Mr. Secretary. I
did not realize I was over time. I was very excited about my
questions. Sorry, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Roberts. That is fine. Thank you.
This is going to conclude our hearing today. Secretary
Perdue, thank you for your efforts to ensure this farm bill is
implemented promptly in the way the Congress intended. Farmers
and ranchers across the country are depending on you. You know
that. I know that. They are also depending on Senator Stabenow
and myself and every member on this Committee.
To my fellow members, we would ask that any additional
questions you may have for the record be submitted to the
Committee clerk five business days from today, or by 5 p.m.
next Thursday, March 7th.
The committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:46 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================
A P P E N D I X
FEBRUARY 28, 2019
=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
FEBRUARY 28, 2019
=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
FEBRUARY 28, 2019
=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]