- THE INVASIVE SPECIES THREAT: PROTECTING WILDLIFE, PUBLIC HEALTH, AND INFRASTRUCTURE
[Senate Hearing 116-4]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-4
THE INVASIVE SPECIES THREAT: PROTECTING
WILDLIFE, PUBLIC HEALTH, AND INFRASTRUCTURE
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
FEBRUARY 13, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-945PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).E-mail,
[email protected]
COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming, Chairman
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware,
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
Ranking Member
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE BRAUN, Indiana
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
RICHARD SHELBY, Alabama
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JONI ERNST, Iowa
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
Richard M. Russell, Majority Staff Director
Mary Frances Repko, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
FEBRUARY 13, 2019
OPENING STATEMENTS
Barrasso, Hon. John, U.S. Senator from the State of Wyoming......
1
Carper, Hon. Thomas R., U.S. Senator from the State of Delaware..
2
WITNESSES
Franklin, Slade, Weed and Pest State Coordinator, Wyoming
Department of Agriculture......................................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
9
Responses to additional questions from:
Senator Barrasso.........................................
13
Response to an additional question from Senator Carper.......
15
Responses to additional questions from:
Senator Whitehouse.......................................
16
Steinwand, Terry, Director, North Dakota Game and Fish Department
19
Prepared statement...........................................
22
Responses to additional questions from:
Senator Barrasso.........................................
33
Response to an additional question from Senator Carper.......
33
Response to an additional question from Senator Whitehouse...
34
Responses to additional questions from:
Senator Wicker...........................................
34
Rogerson, Joe, Program Manager for Species Conservation and
Research, Delaware Division of Fish and Wildlife...............
36
Prepared statement...........................................
40
Response to an additional question from Senator Barrasso.....
48
Responses to additional questions from:
Senator Duckworth........................................
49
Senator Whitehouse.......................................
51
THE INVASIVE SPECIES THREAT: PROTECTING WILDLIFE, PUBLIC HEALTH, AND
INFRASTRUCTURE
----------
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Environment and Public Works,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:06 a.m. in
room 406, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. John Barrasso
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Senators Barrasso, Carper, Cramer, Braun,
Sullivan, Boozman, Ernst, Cardin, Gillibrand, and Van Hollen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN BARRASSO,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING
Senator Barrasso. Good morning. I call this hearing to
order.
Today we will consider the scourge of invasive species, the
species that threaten our communities and how we can most
effectively combat them. This hearing will also continue the
Committee's work to support successful efforts to conserve
wildlife, build infrastructure, and protect the public health.
Invasive species have significant impacts on all three of these
areas.
Few issues are more bipartisan than the need to protect our
communities from invasive species. Invasives are non-native
species whose introduction causes harm to the local economy and
the environment, and to human health. More than 5,000 invasive
species exist in the United States. They cause more than $120
billion of economic damage each year.
According to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, ``every
region of the United States has invasive species problems.''
``Invasive species can be found,'' they say, ``from Alaska to
Louisiana and from Maine to Texas.'' They go on, ``They can be
found in our forests, fields, and wetlands, and in our streams,
rivers, and bays, and even off of our coastlines.''
Each year, hundreds of millions of dollars are spent in an
attempt to eradicate invasive species, and each year new
threats for invasives immerge.
Like the rest of the Country, Wyoming finds itself coping
with an extensive and expensive invasive species problem.
Cheatgrass consumes vast amounts of water, degrades valuable
soil and habitat, fuels catastrophic wildfires, and displaces
vegetation, turning vibrant prairie communities into
monocultures, leaving only cheatgrass as far as the eye can
see.
Russian olive trees take over riparian areas across the
State, absorbing massive amounts of water that would otherwise
be used for wildlife and native species. The West Nile virus is
transmitted by mosquitoes that infect birds and mammals,
including humans. It is an invasive species according to the
U.S. Department of Agriculture.
West Nile virus is the leading cause of mosquito-borne
illness in humans in the United States. In 2018, 2,544 cases of
West Nile virus were recorded and reported in 49 States,
including Wyoming. West Nile virus affects horses, dogs, and
other animals, and causes millions of dollars in losses
associated with the treatment of the infection and even death.
The environmental costs of invasive species are real as
well. According to the National Wildlife Federation, 42 percent
of threatened or endangered species are at risk because of
invasives. West Nile virus threatens species like the sage
grouse, which Wyoming and many other States are working hard to
protect. The problem of invasive species is rampant and
requires action.
Last Congress, this Committee examined innovative solutions
to control invasive species, with the goal of improving
wildlife conservation efforts. We heard about cutting-edge
technologies to more effectively control invasive species, from
smart fish passage systems to keep invasive species out, to DNA
technologies that detect invasives earlier.
Together with Ranking Member Carper and several other
Committee members, I introduced the Wildlife Innovation and
Longevity Driver Act, called the WILD Act, to support efforts
to combat invasive species in several ways, including by
reauthorizing the Partners for Fish and Wildlife Program and by
requiring Federal agencies to coordinate when planning and
implementing invasive species-related activities. The WILD Act
also incentivizes the development of cutting-edge technologies
by establishing cash prizes for technological innovation in
invasive species management.
In 2017, the WILD Act passed the Senate by unanimous
consent. Last month, we reintroduced the WILD Act and last week
we again reported this important bill unanimously from the
Committee. Yesterday this bill passed the Senate as part of the
Omnibus Public Lands package. I look forward to seeing it
passing in the House and being signed into law.
I look forward to hearing from our three witnesses today on
what tools will be most helpful in protecting our wildlife, our
infrastructure, and public health from the scourge of invasive
species.
I would now like to turn to my friend and Ranking Member,
Senator Carper, for his opening statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. THOMAS R. CARPER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF DELAWARE
Senator Carper. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Before I introduce Joe Rogerson, my staff actually was kind
enough to Google the Troggs, who came up with a great record
called Wild Thing.
Senator Barrasso. Wild Thing. You owe me $10. I told you he
was going to talk about Wild Thing today.
[Laughter.]
Senator Carper. And the Troggs' original name was----
Senator Barrasso. I get $100 if you sing.
Senator Carper [continuing]. the Beatles.
[Laughter.]
Senator Carper. Wouldn't that be great? The Beatles. They
changed their name to the Troggs. They would never get anywhere
with that name.
Senator Barrasso. We could sing together.
Senator Carper. We could?
Senator Barrasso. Let's not.
[Laughter.]
Senator Carper. Never let the Nation's business get in the
way of some fun.
Joe, thanks for joining us. Terry and Slade, thank you all
for coming today.
I want to thank our staffs for the work that they have done
in preparing for this hearing.
Mr. Chairman, since our last hearing on invasive species in
March 2017, our Committee has worked across the aisle--most
people think we don't work across the aisle, but we actually do
it pretty well in this Committee--to try to address these
challenges that these species create for our health, create for
our infrastructure, create for native wildlife.
The WILD Act, which we reported out from our Committee last
week, directs Federal agencies to manage proactively for
invasive species and it creates a new Genius Prize, a Genius
Prize to spur innovation in managing invasive species.
I am proud of our Committee's ongoing work on the WILD Act,
and a lot of other things, too, and I urge its swift passage
and enactment into law by this Congress.
Our 2018 Water Resources Development Act, which we enacted,
the authorship of the Chairman and myself, and input from a lot
of people on this panel and other places, too, affectionately
known as WRDA, also included provisions to target invasive
species in specific States, including the Asian carp in the
Great Lakes.
Unfortunately, invasive species are still prevailing and
wreaking havoc across our Nation. Delaware hosts both aquatic
and terrestrial invasive species, such as catfish, crayfish,
and insects. Specifically, the Delaware Department of
Agriculture has recently reported Spotted lantern flies
sightings. These destructive insects could harm agriculture
industries throughout our region.
The emerald ash borer also made its way to Delaware in
2016, and this kind of jewel beetle--that is what it is called,
a jewel beetle--is not a welcomed jewel by those of us in the
Diamond State. This beetle's path of destruction is broad,
already causing the rapid decline of five species of North
American ash trees across 35 States.
Ash wood is a valuable commodity for many reasons. It is
used in baseball bats, among other items. This week, as
pitchers and catchers of major league baseball teams across
America are reporting for spring training, given that many of
the bats those teams will be swinging come from ash trees in
the United States, if we want to strike a blow for America's
national pastime, we could start by making sure that this pesky
beetle is called out on strikes and tossed out of the game for
good.
Ash trees are also important in their ecosystems. Those
trees filter air, mitigate stormwater runoff, sequester carbon,
and they provide habitat for native moth, butterfly, and insect
species.
Sadly, ash trees are not the only species that have
declined significantly due to invasive species. According to
the National Wildlife Federation, invasive species have
contributed to the decline of over 40 percent of threatened and
endangered species, over 40 percent.
We have to do more to quell the growing threat of invasive
species, and that includes addressing root causes. To that end,
I would be remiss if I did not mention the role of climate
change in the spread of invasive species. The Fourth National
Climate Assessment, issued by 13 Federal agencies just last
November, recognizes that climate change is causing conditions
that may favor invasive species over native species.
As warming temperatures cause native species' ranges to
shift, experts believe invasive species may come to occupy many
new areas. For example, the Asian tiger mosquito, which carries
West Nile and Zika viruses, may well expand into the Northeast
in coming years. Climate change is an existential threat to our
Nation and to our World, and the spread of invasive species is
just one symptom of that problem and challenge.
In addition to considering root causes, there are creative
ways we can adapt to deal with invasive species. A few months
ago, I visited an Agricultural Research Service unit on the
campus of the University of Delaware in Newark, Delaware, where
I think Joe was a student and I was a graduate. We were both
graduate students there at different times. He was there before
me.
Researchers at this facility study beneficial insects and
are exploring options for releasing these natural predators
where invasive species are present. The research takes many
years to ensure that releasing new species will not have
unintended consequences. When this method is successful, we can
alleviate the need to eradicate invasive species in less
environmentally friendly ways.
In conclusion, let me just say that each State is
different. We face different challenges and hold different
ideas regarding how to address invasive species, so I want to
thank each of our witnesses for sharing your perspectives with
us today. With your help and the help of other stakeholders and
colleagues, I hope we can identify some new opportunities for
bipartisan collaboration to combat invasive species.
We appreciate your leadership and interest, and I
appreciate very much your leadership and interest here, Mr.
Chairman.
Senator Carper. I want to, if I could, at this time, just
give a brief introduction of Joe Rogerson. Can I do that?
Senator Barrasso. Please do.
Senator Carper. Thank you.
This is the PG version.
Mr. Rogerson. Oh, boy.
Senator Carper. Joe was born in Maryland. What is it,
Boonsboro?
Mr. Rogerson. Yes, sir.
Senator Carper. In the western end of the State?
Mr. Rogerson. Yes.
Senator Carper. He couldn't get into any schools in
Maryland; he got wait-listed to all those schools, so he had to
go to West Virginia University, where the president was Gordon
Gee, who is the president again.
Gordon Gee was honored this week. He has been president of
West Virginia University twice, Ohio State twice, Brown,
Vanderbilt, and Colorado, and I think two nights ago, in
Washington, DC, he was honored as the outstanding college
president in America. He is so good at raising money, he would
walk into a room full of alum and they would pull out their
wallets. For that and other reasons he has received this honor,
and you have been honored to go to a school where he was your
president and he is again.
But I am pleased to introduce Joseph to work for the
Delaware Division of Fish and Wildlife since 2005. Came to
Delaware to get his master's degree and found his master, a
woman named Alison, who is the mother of their two children.
They are almost five and 7 years old. The 7-year-old goes to a
charter school that I actually, as Governor, helped to create,
so it is a small world in Delaware.
Joseph oversees the implementation of Delaware's Wildlife
Action Plan. He is also active in the Northeast Association of
Wildlife Agencies in the Atlantic Coast joint venture. He
received his bachelor's at WVU, master's degree at the
University of Delaware in wildlife ecology, and we are just
grateful that you are all here, and thank you, Joseph, for
joining us.
Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Carper.
We also have joining us Terry Steinwand, who is the
Director of the North Dakota Game and Fish Department.
Senator Cramer, I invite you to introduce him, if you would
like.
Senator Cramer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Terry, for being with us today.
It is a great honor to be able to introduce Terry. I have
known Terry a long time. We worked together in State
government, prior to my coming here.
Terry is the truest of North Dakotans. He grew up on a
grain farm near Garrison, North Dakota, in McLean County.
Garrison is important for lots of reasons, not the least of
which is it is the namesake of the Garrison Dam, which creates
what we call Lake Sakakawea; people around here call her
Sacagawea. Born in the outdoors and a fan of the outdoors, and
now a protector of the outdoors.
Terry started his work at the Department of Game and Fish
in North Dakota well over 30 years ago as a fisheries biologist
and then eventually becoming the head of fisheries. Then, in
2006, our colleague, former Governor John Hoeven, appointed him
to be the director of the agency. Since then, two more
Governors thought it was such a good idea, they have appointed
him. I don't know if he is going to retire or die there, but we
are glad you are there, Terry.
Terry brings an important perspective as an outdoorsman, a
biologist, well educated at the University of North Dakota in
fish and wildlife management and biology, with a master's
degree in biology. He also brings an important perspective of
how important collaboration and cooperation is among agencies
and outdoorsmen and stakeholder groups.
We are grateful you are here, Terry. As you can probably
tell from the earlier banter, we are a friendlier legislature
than the one you have to go back in Bismarck tomorrow, shall we
say. With that, I am grateful you are here. Thank you. We
welcome you.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much, Senator Cramer.
To the witnesses, your full written testimony will be made
part of the official hearing record today, but I ask you to try
to keep your statements to 5 minutes so that we have time for
questions. We all do look forward to the testimony.
I would like, at this time, to introduce the witness from
Wyoming who is here, Mr. Slade Franklin. He has served as the
Weed and Pest State Coordinator at the Wyoming Department of
Agriculture since 2004. In this role, Mr. Franklin has
developed statewide invasive species management programs that
have been integral to protecting the health of Wyoming's
ecosystem.
He organizes, chairs, and facilitates groups concerned
about invasive species, like the Wyoming Annual Grasses Task
Force and the Wyoming Interagency Weed and Pest Working Group.
He has chaired the Western Weed Coordinating Committee and the
State Weed Coordinators Alliance.
In 2015, I was pleased that the Secretary of Interior
agreed to my recommendation to appoint Mr. Franklin to serve as
a member of the Invasive Species Advisory Committee. As a
member of that Committee, Mr. Franklin provides information and
advice on invasive species-related issues to the National
Invasive Species Council, which coordinates efforts to address
invasive species issues at the national level.
Mr. Franklin has represented Wyoming well as a member of
the Invasive Species Advisory Committee. I know we will all
benefit from hearing about his extensive experience in fighting
invasive species in Wyoming and the challenges that they pose
to our State's wildlife, our infrastructure, and our public
health.
Mr. Franklin, it is a privilege to welcome you here today
as a witness before the Environment and Public Works Committee.
Thank you for traveling to Washington, as well, when the
legislature is in session at home. We are delighted to have you
here with us today.
Mr. Franklin, please proceed with your testimony.
STATEMENT OF SLADE FRANKLIN, WEED AND PEST STATE COORDINATOR,
WYOMING DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Mr. Franklin. Chairman Barrasso, thank you for the welcome.
Ranking Member Carper, as well as other members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to speak with you
today. As mentioned, my name is Slade Franklin. I serve as the
Weed and Pest Coordinator at the Wyoming Department of Ag. For
the past 15 years I have been working on the issue of invasive
species in the State of Wyoming, the western region, and the
United States.
Through my experiences, I have gained insight to the
difficult task of managing invasive species. The extent of the
problem is not just limited by industry, by location, or by
economic impacts. Urban communities deal with the issue as much
as the rural communities. Species like zebra and quagga mussels
can impact water supplies for livestock and municipalities
both. The impacts to the Country from invasive species are
economically staggering.
Additionally, we are becoming more aware of the impact to
our native wildlife. In the State of Wyoming and the Great
Basin, invasive grasses such as cheatgrass and medusahead rye
are altering critical habitat for sage grouse and mule deer by
transitioning sage brush communities from a 50-year fire cycle
to a 3-year fire cycle. The Bureau of Land Management reported
that in the last 20 years 74 percent of Department of Interior
acres burned were on range lands, and 80 percent of those 12
million acres were on cheatgrass-invaded range lands.
In 2016, the Invasive Species Advisory Committee published
a paper outlining the problem invasive species presents for the
Country's infrastructure. The Committee reviewed four main
categories: power systems, water systems, transportation
systems, and housing. The Committee identified existing
potential threats to each of the categories due to invasive
species that range from mussels to insects, to animals such as
burrowing iguanas and nutria. ISAC concluded that Federal
agencies currently lack the authority necessary to effectively
prevent, eradicate, and control invasive species that impact
the human-built environment.
Invasive species not only impact infrastructure, they
utilize it. In 1896, U.S. Department of Agricultural botanist
Lester Dewey was requested by Congress to research how western
States could eradicate the invasive weed Russian thistle.
Russian thistle had been introduced in South Dakota through
contaminated flax seed, and it quickly established itself
throughout the West and Midwest. Some of you may recognize
Russian thistle as the tumbling tumbleweed costarring in every
western movie ever made.
In his report back to Congress, Dr. Dewey noted, ``Next to
the railroad yards and the waste land in cities and villages,
the roadsides are the most important avenues for the
introduction of new weeds and for the propagation of old ones.
They should, therefore, be watched with special care.''
Roads and rail lines are still one of the primary avenues
by which invasive species move. We have watched invasive weeds
such as yellow star thistle, an invasive plant that has
infested over 14 million acres in California, creep its way
east to Wyoming by following the interstates and highways.
Introduced terrestrial pathogens and diseases, such as West
Nile virus, can have a direct impact on human health. In
Wyoming, the first confirmed case of West Nile virus was
reported in 2002. Since then, Wyoming, Montana, North Dakota,
and South Dakota have some of the highest average annual
incidents of West Nile virus or neuroinvasive disease reported
to the CDC. The neuroinvasive disease can lead to encephalitis
and meningitis, and, in extreme cases, death. Between 1999 and
2017, over 2,000 deaths had been reported to the CDC due to the
West Nile neuroinvasive disease, with an additional 137 deaths
reported in 2018.
As daunting as the task of managing invasive species can
be, successful management is realistic and achievable through
partnerships involving Federal, State, and county agencies,
nongovernment organizations, land grant universities, and,
critically important, the private landowner. In the same 1896
USDA bulletin, Dr. Dewey states, ``In nearly all cases, the
landowner can do the work at much less cost than it can be done
by public authorities.'' Federal and State government partners
contribute greatly through their jobs and are deeply
appreciated, but agricultural producers are passionate and
financially motivated. Their livelihoods depend on healthy
ecosystems.
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's Partners for Wildlife
and the U.S. Forest Service's State and Private Forestry
Programs are essential tools in rewarding landowners in their
habitat and weed management efforts that protect critical
wildlife.
We need to continue moving the dialog on invasive species
forward as to what role we can play in improving success by
identifying what resources are already in place and what
additional resources are needed. Just less than 50 percent of
Wyoming is managed by Federal agencies, and some of the most
concerning infestations of terrestrial weeds occur on these
public lands. When cross-jurisdictional programs are developed,
local experts should be empowered by the respective Federal
agencies to make critical time-sensitive decisions.
Capacity can be improved through policy and legislative
changes, but it also needs to be improved through funding.
Invasive species programs have often relied on grants and
short-term funding sources, which are helpful for immediate or
initial treatments, but do little to assist with long-term
program stability. Additionally, we need to improve funding for
research and development in programs such as USDA-ARS and land
grant universities such as the University of Wyoming.
New funding is not the only solution. In 2017, the National
Interagency Fire Center reported firefighting costs were $2.9
billion to fight fires across 10 million acres. This works out
to a cost of $290 per acre. The landscape scale herbicide
treatment of cheatgrass costs, at most, $60 an acre. Yet,
agencies are only treating a fraction of the known infested
acres. If the medical adage ``prevention is better than the
cure'' is true, it may be time Federal agencies review how
current firefighting funds are utilized and change the
paradigm.
Chairman Barrasso, thank you again for the invitation to
speak with your Committee. I would like to close by
congratulating you on receiving the 2018 Wyoming Weed and Pest
Council's Guy Haggard Award. We appreciate all the work you
have done in helping bring national attention to this issue.
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Franklin follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Steinwand.
STATEMENT OF TERRY STEINWAND, DIRECTOR, NORTH DAKOTA GAME AND
FISH DEPARTMENT
Mr. Steinwand. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Carper, and members of the Committee. I didn't write anything
down; I like to adlib stuff. I will add right upfront that I am
more of an expert on the aquatic side of invasives. We do deal
with the terrestrial side also, but I will let the colleagues
on either side of me deal with it.
I wish Ranking Member Carper were here, because he
mentioned the emerald ash borer as being a devastating insect,
and it absolutely is. But I just read an article last week, and
I don't know if this is verifiable, if there is research, but
out of Minnesota there was an article that stated once it hits
20 below, it starts affecting the larvae of emerald ash borer,
which are right under the bark of the tree. Once it hits 30
below, 90 percent of the larvae are killed.
Well, being from North Dakota, we don't have emerald ash
borer, and I would like to say that it is probably because we
have 40 to 50 below temperatures up in North Dakota. That is
not necessarily true; we have been relatively lucky.
Also, Mr. Chairman, you also mentioned about the monotypic
stands, and I think you were probably referring to cheatgrass.
That is also true in the aquatic world. Eurasian watermilfoil,
curly leaf pond weed, we do have those in North Dakota, and
they form these monotypic stands and it hurts the aquatic side
of it, too. My colleague, Mr. Franklin here, mentioned about
the wildfires with cheatgrass. We don't have wildfires in the
aquatic ecosystem, but what happens is they take over, they
become a monotypic stand; it reduces the diversity of the
vegetation and therefore reduces the forage species, insects
for other sports species and other potentially endangered
species.
Senator Cramer mentioned I am a farm boy. I am not a boy
anymore, I am a lot older than that; I qualify by Social
Security, but I love what I do, so I don't plan on taking
Social Security for a while. But being a farm boy analogy, my
dad never planted the same crop on the same land year after
year, and it was for disease issues. I think we can say the
same thing. You have that monotypic stand, you lose that
diversity.
On any invasive species, if it can be found early, that is
when your chances of eradicating it or controlling it are
absolutely the best, or certainly enhanced in most cases. This
really takes aggressive and sometimes constant monitoring of
the landscape, again, whether it is the aquatic or the
terrestrial ecosystem. Of course, that requires people and
funding.
I just want to give you some examples of what do in North
Dakota. We monitor high-value, high-risk areas. Again, Senator
Cramer mentioned the Lake Sakakawea and Garrison Reservoir. We
monitor that frequently with our colleagues from the Corps of
Engineers, local sportsmen's groups, so on and so forth.
We also contract with local college students in the eastern
part of the State to have students go out and check boaters in
some of these high-risk areas. It is not mandatory check in
North Dakota, but check them, tell them how to check for
vegetation and drain their live wells and their bilge water;
and, at the same time, educate and inform them, because that
has been our attitude. Education and information is maybe the
best tool we have.
I will also give you some examples of what we don't catch
early. Everybody has heard of the common carp. It has been in
the United States since the 1800's, and my German ancestors
brought it over because they were homesick for what they had
back in Europe. We have problems with that in many places. In
waterfall areas it can cause problems by rooting up the
vegetation in their spawning activities. It does the same for
the fishery side; they tend to take up that biomass, so it is
almost impossible to control. We have controlled it with
rotenone applications to kill it, but it is not specific to
carp, so it kills the rest of the fish species.
One we did catch in time is the Eurasian watermilfoil. It
was first found in a little sidewater of the Cheyenne River,
which is in east central North Dakota, and we were a little
concerned, but what we did is we have done surveys on where the
highest risk areas they come from, and it undoubtedly came from
Minnesota at that point in time. We had found a small lake in
southeastern North Dakota that was a real hotspot for Minnesota
anglers to go to. Within 2 years, we had Eurasian watermilfoil
there. What we did, we worked with the local water board, we
drew down what was called Dead Colt Creek, trying to freeze it
out because the literature said that will work. Then, the
following spring we applied it with an herbicide. We did that
for 2 years; it was eradicated and we have not found it there
ever since.
Another issue we think we have caught in time is silver
carp, a form of Asian carp. In 2011, there was a tremendous
flood all across North Dakota. It actually moved up the James
River from South Dakota into North Dakota and hit a dam,
Jamestown Reservoir or Jamestown Dam, and we have been
monitoring it very closely. We have not found any reproduction.
We put some regulations in place that does not allow the public
to take small fish out of there for bait to use in other
waters, and, so far, we have not found it in any further
places. There are big adults, but they are just getting larger.
Another one we think we have caught in time, and it is not
just us, we worked with the North Dakota Department of
Agriculture, is palmer amaranth. The first occurrence in North
Dakota was found this last August. And if you don't know
anything about palmer amaranth, it is a species of pigweed that
grows very aggressively, about 2 to 3 inches a day, can have a
stem about that big, and produce up to a million seeds in the
seed head. We coordinated with the Department of Agriculture
right around the start of hunting season in North Dakota, and
we figured if we could have thousands of boots on the ground in
the form of hunters looking for those areas, then they could
pull them in time, figure out exactly what it was; and, to our
knowledge, there have been no further occurrences of that in
North Dakota.
Zebra mussel, we do have it in North Dakota. That is one
that we anticipated it coming because it was coming to a
tributary of the Red River, which forms the border between
North Dakota and Minnesota. We had found larvae for about 4
years, just not very many of them, the veligers, but in 2016,
all of a sudden, we found adult zebra mussels. Not much you can
do without very, very extensive means to take care of that, but
we do know it is there, and we put some special regulations in
place to ensure that water from the Red River does not move
anyplace westward further into North Dakota.
I have gone over my time here, but I guess my advice is the
sooner we can catch something like that, the better off you
are. And if you can contain it to a general area, the better
off you are. Once it gets out of control, spreads and spreads
and spreads, it becomes more expensive and there is more
damage.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Steinwand follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Appreciate your testimony. Thank you, Mr.
Steinwand.
Mr. Rogerson.
STATEMENT OF JOE ROGERSON, PROGRAM MANAGER FOR SPECIES
CONSERVATION AND RESEARCH, DELAWARE DIVISION OF FISH AND
WILDLIFE
Mr. Rogerson. Good morning. I would like to thank each of
you for the opportunity to visit and meet with you to discuss a
very real and significant problem that affects our entire
Country and not just my home State of Delaware: invasive
species. My name is Joe Rogerson, and I oversee Delaware's
Species Conservation and Research Program within the Delaware
Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Controls
Division of Fish and Wildlife.
My comments today will focus primarily on the impacts of
invasive species on native wildlife and their habitats, but I
would remiss if I didn't point out that the impacts of invasive
species often equal, and in some instances have more
significant impacts to, public health and safety, our economy,
commercial industries, agricultural producers, hunters,
anglers, wildlife watchers, and many other groups. I have seen
reports estimating the total impact of invasive species across
our Country to exceed more than $100 billion annually, so this
is a very real and significant problem, as invasive species
affect many facets of our lives.
Invasive species are a leading driver of biodiversity loss
and, in many instances, are one of the primary factors that
result in a listing of many of the Country's threatened and
endangered species. State wildlife action plans serve as the
blueprints for conserving our Nation's fish and wildlife and
preventing species from becoming endangered.
In 2005, each State, territory, and the District of
Columbia submitted their plan for approval to the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service as a condition for receiving funding through
the State and Tribal Wildlife Grant Program. The plans were
recently updated with the latest science and information to
guide conservation of over 12,000 species in greatest
conservation need across the Country. Along with identifying
the species in greatest conservation need, each State
identified threats and associated actions that could be
implemented to reverse each threat.
Recently, the content of each State's wildlife action plan
in the northeast region was summarized. Of the 2,918 species of
greatest conservation need within the region, pollution and
development were the most frequently cited threats, with
invasive species closely following as one of several additional
regional threats. States currently don't have sufficient
resources to tackle all of the threats outlined within their
wildlife action plans, so we are unable to fully address
threats facing fish and wildlife populations from invasive
species.
Following an Executive Order signed by then President
Clinton in 1999 to establish the National Invasive Species
Council, the nongovernmental Delaware Invasive Species Council
was also formed that same year. The mission of the 120-member
DISC is to protect Delaware's ecosystems by preventing the
introduction and reducing the impact of invasive species.
DISC works closely with natural resource managers,
biologists, and stakeholders to reduce invasive plants and
animals, and to promote native habitats. In 2017, I was part of
Delaware's Ecological Task Force, which identified many threats
that contribute to the decline and, in some cases, extirpation
of native fish, wildlife, and plants in Delaware. Invasive
species are one of the leading threats identified by the Task
Force, in addition to pollution and habitat loss.
Based on the recommendations of the Task Force, Delaware's
General Assembly established the Delaware Native Species
Commission in 2018 to bolster State efforts to reverse the
trend of native plant and animal decline within our State. Of
the more than 6,500 invasive species known to occur in the
U.S., I would like to list a few invasive species that are or
may become significant challenges in my home State of Delaware.
Control of invasive species in Delaware and the surrounding
region has been initiated in the response to the invasion of
Phragmites and nutria within our wetlands, northern snakehead
fish and hydrilla plants within our waters, and Asian tiger
mosquitoes that are a threat to transmit Zika and West Nile
virus in our communities. More recently, efforts have been or
soon will be taken in Delaware to monitor for lionfish, Spotted
lanternflies, and the Asian longhorned tick, as well as bats
that have been identified with a non-native fungus that causes
the debilitating White-nose Syndrome which has decimated
populations of some species of bats across the Country,
particularly in the northeast.
Along with a written copy of my oral statement today, I
have included an appendix within the written statement that
includes more in-depth information on the species I just
described, but I would like to talk about some of the work
being done back in Delaware and a very good example of an
invasive species control project that is occurring currently on
the Delmarva Peninsula.
The control of Phragmites is a major priority in Delaware
to reduce the impact of this highly invasive plant that
outcompetes and replaces our native wetland plants, severely
degrading these wetland habitats. An aggressive control program
has been initiated in Delaware since 1976 and, to date, more
than $6 million has been spent by my agency to control this
species. While far from being eradicated, we have been
successful at reducing the amount of Phragmites in Delaware,
which has helped to restore the biodiversity and functions of
our wetlands. Control of other invasive plant and animal
species has required countless hours of agency staff time and
funding, and the help of volunteers to combat invasive species
across Delaware, including within our State-owned wildlife
areas, forests, and parks.
From where we sit today, we don't have to travel far to see
an example of a highly successful program to combat an
extremely detrimental introduced invasive species. Nutria, a
semi-aquatic rodent native to South America, were introduced to
the Chesapeake Bay region in the mid-1900's. Prolific breeding
habits and a voracious and destructive feeding behavior caused
extensive destruction of wetlands which, if left unchecked,
would have compromised the Chesapeake Bay. A federally
supported Chesapeake Bay Nutria Eradication Project initiated
in the early 2000's helped turn the tide of this invasive and
destructive rodent, effectively eliminating all known nutria
populations from over a quarter million acres of wetlands on
the Delmarva Peninsula, with current efforts focused on removal
of residual animals.
A study completed by the Maryland Department of Natural
Resources reported that, without decisive action, more than
35,000 acres of Chesapeake Bay wetlands could be destroyed by
nutria in 50 years. The predicted impact of nutria destruction
to Maryland's economy was dire, with losses exceeding $35
million annually. Maryland watermen would have been hit hardest
from the loss of tidal wetland fish and shellfish nursery areas
that help replenish important and productive Chesapeake Bay
fisheries.
The study illustrated the economic costs to the citizens of
Maryland and the entire Chesapeake Bay in terms of dollars lost
to commercial fisheries, recreational fisheries, hunting,
wildlife viewing, and related industries. Damage to the
ecological services provided by healthy wetlands, such as storm
protection, flood control, and water purification would have
made the overall destruction even greater than the economic
findings indicated.
As of 2016, all of the known nutria populations have been
removed form over a quarter million acres on the Delmarva
Peninsula. The project is currently implementing efforts to
verify eradication and remove any residual animals. The
Chesapeake Bay Nutria Eradication Project is a classic example
of how an invasive species can be controlled and, in this case,
potentially eradicated with adequate funding and staff
resources.
Hopefully, all of us recognize that invasive species are a
significant problem facing our Country. There are steps that
individual States can do and have done to prevent invasive
species from becoming established or spreading into new areas,
but many of these species cause problems across State lines and
over large geographic areas, which is where the Federal
Government could further help tackle this problem.
While not referring to invasive species, Benjamin
Franklin's quote ``an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of
cure'' couldn't ring more true in terms of how we handle
invasive species, since it is more costly to deal with invasive
species once they become established than it is to prevent them
from entering in the first place.
A couple examples of proactive species prevention include
increased invasive species surveillance on the goods and
imports arriving in our Country to prevent their introduction
to the wild and some States restricting the possession of
certain invasive fish and wildlife species to minimize the
chance of their introduction into the wild. Furthermore, some
States have restricted and planting of certain species of
invasive ornamental trees and shrubs that have the propensity
to rapidly spread in the new areas and outcompete native
plants.
Another example of some prevention includes regulations in
some jurisdictions that establish weed-free forage programs for
agricultural producers to minimize the spread of invasive and
noxious weeds.
There are many other similar programs to prevent or
minimize the chance of new invasive species from entering the
Country and preventing those that are already here from
spreading into new areas. Unfortunately, the invasive species
genie is out of the bottle. In addition to needing an ounce of
prevention to prevent further introductions, we also need a
pound of cure to control these species that are already here.
Dedicated funding and personnel are needed to control and, in
some cases, eradicate invasive species.
I again would like to thank each of you for giving me the
opportunity to meet with you today to talk about the important
issue of invasive species, and I look forward to additional
opportunities and actions to combat them.
With that, I would gladly take any questions you may have.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rogerson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Well, thank you.
I appreciate the testimony from all of you.
Since you quoted Ben Franklin, we will head to Mr. Franklin
for some thoughts.
Mr. Franklin. No relation.
Senator Carper. Mr. Chairman, can I just say something?
Senator Barrasso. Please.
Senator Carper. I apologize to our witnesses. We all serve
on a bunch of different committees, and the Homeland Security
Committee has just been meeting and marking up a bunch of bills
and nominated, and they needed somebody for a quorum, so I
apologize for slipping out, but I read your testimony and just
look forward to asking some questions.
Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Carper.
Mr. Franklin, like most of the west, Wyoming has serious
problems with cheatgrass. You mentioned it can cause
catastrophic fires. It has been aggressive in crowding out,
sometimes eliminating, native grasses that are important to so
many species, including the sage grouse. I think you said in
your testimony it has taken the fire cycle from 50 years down
to 3. It is the first to move in after a fire or other
disturbance, and it is incredibly hard and difficult to get rid
of. Conservative estimates indicate that it has taken over 100
million acres across the west.
Can you talk about the environmental ripple effects of when
a species like this takes over an area?
Mr. Franklin. The unique thing about cheatgrass and how it
has been able to really take over those rangelands, is it is a
winter annual, so what people don't understand sometimes in
that, in the winter in Wyoming, November and December, that is
when it is greening up. Then it becomes dry and dies out in
June, when a lot of the other native species are just starting
to green up, so it is in that process, that timeline variation
with our perennial plants that causes the fire cycle.
What we find with cheatgrass, and I think you mentioned in
your question, is it likes fire and it creates fire, so it
takes out all those native species that sage grouse
specifically deals with and creates this monoculture, and then
that fire cycle is a continuing process; and with that
continuous process we see the acres increase simply because
that seed production in that fire is making it go farther out.
We have seen some mass effects on our sage grouse habitat,
which is critical to Wyoming and to the Country, and also on
our mule deer habitat, so what we really try to do is get out
there after the fires as much as anything and do treatments so
we can help give those perennials the opportunity to come back
that those species are depending on.
Senator Barrasso. I would also like to ask about specific
economic impacts in terms of ranching in Wyoming. Canada
thistle affects almost every county in our State, it degrades
the quality of forage for livestock by crowding out native
vegetation. Ranching is so very important to us at home. Can
you talk about the economic impacts that invasive species are
causing to rangelands in Wyoming?
Mr. Franklin. One of the species the Director from North
Dakota and I were talking about before we started this is leafy
spurge. It is a species that does impact North Dakota and does
impact Wyoming; impacts a lot of those Rocky Mountain States.
Back, I believe, in about 1999 there was a leafy spurge task
force that looked into the economic impacts of just that single
weed, and what they came up with is, annually, the States of
South Dakota, North Dakota, Wyoming, and Montana lose $144
million in production and for control costs just from that
species alone.
The unique thing about leafy spurge, or one of the more
concerning things, is it is poisonous to livestock, so there
are incidents where people have been put out of business in the
ag industry simply because of this weed being present on their
lands.
Senator Barrasso. I wanted to turn to West Nile virus. You
mentioned it was discovered in 1937 and first detected in the
United States in 1999. It is found today in every county in
Wyoming. Per capita, Wyoming is among the highest number of
cases of West Nile virus in the United States.
I was just visiting with Senator Cramer about a friend that
I served in the Wyoming State Senate with and you were working
for the Department at the time, State Senator Bob Peck. Bob
Peck, multi-award-winning American politician, journalist,
editor, publisher, and Wyoming State Senator; published
newspapers around the State. The Riverton Rangers and The
Family talks about his death. The cause of death on March 6,
2007, while I was still in the State Senate: West Nile virus.
So, one of our State senators felled by West Nile virus.
Can you talk a bit about the invasive species, how they
become not just an environmental or an economic threat, but
also a public health threat?
Mr. Franklin. Wyoming is a small State, and I think if you
talk to anyone in our State, they know someone who has been
impacted by West Nile virus. I know a couple people myself who
had the virus back, I think, somewhere around maybe 2005, 2006,
and they still have neurological effects from that virus, so it
is not something that just goes away overnight, and certainly
there are deaths that lead to it.
We are a little more unique in Wyoming because we don't
have Aedes aegypti mosquitoes, which carry the Zika virus, we
just deal with the Culex tarsalis mosquito. The program we run
in our State, the Culex tarsalis is a later summer species, so
we are able to, through monitoring on the local level,
determine when Culex tarsalis is mostly prevalent and when the
potential for West Nile virus is there, so we really try to
target that species based on when it is going to be most
active.
But it is always a difficult battle because public
perception on mosquito control programs is, there is variation.
When you see an airplane, for instance, flying over a
municipality, some people just don't like that. In Wyoming, we
do a lot of that with larva sighting, though, so it is a matter
of, I think, with the West Nile virus program and mosquito
programs, a lot of education still needs to be done in the
public.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Mr. Franklin.
Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. Again, thanks so much for joining us and
for your testimony. A lot of times, here in Washington, the
press tends to focus on our differences. You would think we
never agree on anything and never get anything done, but
actually I hope this week that we will prove them that is not
always the case.
Let me just ask a question with that in mind. In listening
to your testimoneys and talking to each other a little bit
earlier today, what are some areas that you see agreement,
common ground on these issues?
Slade Franklin, relative, descendant of Ben?
Mr. Franklin. I think you heard in all three of our
testimoneys the importance of early detection, rapid response,
and the importance of getting on some of these new species as
quickly as possible; the economics of saving the money by
getting it early, compared to doing what we are doing now with
cheatgrass.
At least in Wyoming, one thing that we are looking at very
closely is medusahead rye, which is a big problem in Nevada. A
lot of people consider it worse than cheatgrass. We found it in
our State and we are trying to an early detection and rapid
response program because we know the economics of doing that
now makes more sense than waiting until it gets to the point
with cheatgrass.
Senator Carper. Thanks. That is a good point.
Terry?
Mr. Steinwand. I don't think I can add anything to what Mr.
Franklin said.
Senator Carper. Oh, come on, I bet you can. We have never
had a witness say that.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Steinwand. I am never at a loss for words, I guarantee
you.
Senator Carper. Again, areas of common ground.
Mr. Steinwand. Oh, absolutely. Absolutely.
Senator Carper. Just go ahead and mention one or two.
Mr. Steinwand. West Nile virus. I guess I bring that up
because it is a human health issue, but it is also a wildlife
issue. Our sage grouse population was doing very good until
2008, when there was a West Nile outbreak in our sage grouse
population and it just crashed. We are actually trying to
reestablish that population.
Senator Carper. Are you really? Was it wiped out?
Mr. Steinwand. Pardon me?
Senator Carper. Was it largely wiped out?
Mr. Steinwand. No, just drastically reduced. We went to 350
males to less than 100 within a year. Actually, through the
graces of Wyoming Game and Fish Department right now, we are
actually translocating some hens and some chicks and some males
into North Dakota; have for 2 years and are going to for three
more years, so there is more to it than that.
I think it is collaboration amongst everyone, different
agencies. Wildlife and invasive species don't know political
parties, they don't know sociopolitical boundaries, so I think
collaboration is really the key.
Senator Carper. All right. Thank you, sir.
Joseph?
Mr. Rogerson. I was going to reiterate those two points.
Senator Carper. Go ahead, reiterate them.
Mr. Rogerson. As I concluded with, early detection is key,
and a rapid response both from an effectiveness and efficiency
from a funding standpoint are critical; and I think improved
communication not just within individual States, but between
States. Invasive species can come at us from any different
direction in a whole multitude of manners; they can swim
upstream, downstream, come from the air, they can come from a
car, they can come from the bottom of someone's shoes as they
walk in from the last time they wore them in another State.
So oftentimes these species can make great jumps
geographically, and if it is a species that, in Delaware, we
are not familiar with dealing with, having those improved
communication lines that if that was a Nebraska kind of thing,
for us to know how we should respond and that kind of thing I
think is important, and I think we could all agree that we
could get this pretty much anyway.
Senator Carper. Thank you.
I think each of you, in your testimony, mentioned funding
at some point. We are, as you know, wrestling with funding
legislation to fund the Federal Government for the balance of
the fiscal year. I hope we will make some progress on that
today and tomorrow.
Do your States have the financial resources that they need
to fully address invasive species? Do you believe the Federal
Government has a role to play in better meeting your funding
needs?
Joe, I will just go to you first.
Mr. Rogerson. I would say, no, we do not have adequate
funding needs to address all of our invasive species. It seems
to be we receive more of them rather than getting rid of them
faster than we are able to bring new ones in, so constant
challenges even from just educational capacity and what we
should be doing and looking for, so, no, we are certainly
challenged from a funding standpoint.
I think the Federal Government does have a role to help
with that. Many of these species cross State borders. Delaware,
as you know, is a very small State, and some of these species
could come from the north down the Delaware River or any way
from a port from overseas or anything, so I do think the
Federal Government does have a role to help States,
particularly those that cross State borders and have large
geographic problems.
Senator Carper. Thank you.
Terry?
Mr. Steinwand. Thank you. Like Mr. Rogerson said, there
never seems to be adequate funding. We are actually asking for
more funding through the State legislature, actually through
fishing license fees in North Dakota as we speak.
In terms of does the Federal Government have a role, I
would say yes, but it is primarily a State role also. The
Federal nexus that I can think of right now would probably be
primarily Corps of Engineers. Again, Senator Cramer mentioned
Lake Sakakawea. A typical reservoir doesn't stay at a stable
level, it goes up and down, and as it goes down you have
noxious weeds such as Canada thistle primarily showing up on
shorelines, and there never seems to be enough funding for the
Corps of Engineers to handle that because it may provide some
wildlife habitat, but it certainly provides more of a problem
for surrounding landowners.
Senator Carper. OK, thanks.
Mr. Franklin, I may come back to you later on the same
question.
Thanks so much.
Senator Barrasso. Senator Cramer.
Senator Cramer. Thank you.
Thank all three of you for your testimony and being here.
This is really quite fascinating. I think what I will do is I
will just maybe expand a little bit on what you are talking
about right now on Senator Carper's questions.
I will come to you first, Terry. With regard to the Federal
Government's role, if not monetary, and clearly there is some
in terms of just cleaning up our own house, although I will
resist the temptation to talk about the Corps having too much
land and perhaps they should give you some more of it to do the
right thing with, but that aside, you talked a lot about
collaboration early on, particularly in the context of the
amaranth and the collaboration with the Agriculture Department
obviously using the outdoorsmen as the boots on the ground, as
you called them, during the hunting season and how important
that was.
From a Federal perspective, obviously, you have Federal
partners that do the very same things you do, or similar, are
there things we could either do from a policy standpoint, in
terms of guidance or rules or just behavior that the Federal
Government or the Federal agencies you work with could be doing
differently to be more cooperative; and, as policymakers,
especially things that we should be changing to help them in
that?
Mr. Steinwand. Thank you, Senator Cramer, that is an
excellent segue or excellent question. We do routinely
collaborate quite extensively with State partners, Federal
partners, private partners, one I will say is the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, for more disease issues, more than anything,
at the national fish hatcheries, but also we coordinate with
the Ecological Services Branch in terms of terrestrial
vegetation as much as anything.
I don't think, at least in North Dakota, we need any policy
changes because the collaboration is there.
In terms of the Corps of Engineers, again, on aquatic
species, particularly zebra mussel monitoring, they help us
tremendously. We just don't have enough people to get around
and monitor all those areas, and the local Corps of Engineers
office in Riverdale, North Dakota helps out. Whenever they pull
out a dock or a fishing pier, which you can't leave in North
Dakota because of the ice issues, they are checking those; they
are going around to municipalities, areas they deal with. The
same with the Bureau of Reclamation, which I know this
Committee doesn't deal with, but the Bureau of Reclamation
equally helps us out.
So, in terms of Federal agencies, I wouldn't say more
funding helps, and I wouldn't even say policy, because the
people that we work with in North Dakota are very, very good to
work with.
Senator Cramer. Thanks for that.
Mr. Franklin, anything different to add?
Mr. Franklin. Collaboration is really important in Wyoming
when you talk about that many acres of Federal land. We have
BLM, Forest Service, Department of Defense, Bureau of Indian
Affairs, so the collaboration is important. What we find is we
have good people on the ground, but sometimes they don't have
the resources actually to act upon that.
There are things with NEPA that could be improved. The
ability to do categorical exclusions for new insipient
populations and treatments would be helpful. We also see, for
instance, between the Federal agencies on their approval
process or risk assessments for new herbicides or new
management tools, some can do that fairly quickly, some take
several years and millions of dollars to do the risk
assessment.
These are some of the issues I know we are working on with
Federal agencies and trying to mitigate those, but there are
some places with that policy that we really could use some help
to give those land managers for those agencies better ability
to react.
Senator Cramer. And is that more profound in Wyoming
because I think you stated in your testimony that roughly 50
percent is Federal ownership?
I know, Terry, in North Dakota it is like less than 4
percent, I think. That is probably one of the significant
differences.
Mr. Franklin. Right. I would think so.
Senator Cramer. Sir, do you have anything to add to that?
Mr. Rogerson. I do not. I would say that, in Delaware, we
are very much a private land driven State; we have not that
much Federal land compared to my counterparts to the right. We
do have a good relationship with our Federal and State
partners. Our Delaware Invasive Species Council is a very
active group.
I would say some areas where we are lacking is education
and understanding from the general public, particularly of the
invasive plants. It is nice to see a nice grove of Bradford
pears that was an early successional field, and to think that
is a native species in the spring, when it is just a
monoculture of beautiful white flowers, when, in reality, you
have outcompeted those species, outcompeted the native plants
and shrubs that should be there.
The Spotted lanternfly is an example of a new species that
came here, so efforts to improve detections of these critters
that are coming in from reports and other places I think is
still necessary. That has the potential to tremendously impact
our orchards and peach production and grapes around the States.
So, I think there are areas that we can improve, but we are
doing the best we can with the resources that we have.
Senator Cramer. Excellent.
Thank you all.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you.
Senator Cardin.
Senator Cardin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rogerson, it is always nice to have a Marylander on the
panel, so thank you for being here. I know that Senator Carper
is claiming you as a person from Delaware, but we will let him
do that for today.
I also appreciate the fact that you brought the nutria
issue and the fact that the investments we made in eradicating
the nutria, there are still some signs, but basically under
control, has returned greater dividends for our economy.
Nutrias are interesting animals; they were originally brought
into our region because of their fur used for coats, until they
recognized they were just big rats and women didn't want to
wear rat coats. So, the nutrias were then released into the
wild, and they multiplied and destroyed a lot of wetlands.
Blackwater National Wildlife Refuge is an example of an area
that was very badly damaged as a result of the nutria
population.
We acted here in Congress, we passed the Nutria Eradication
Act. It was also well balanced geographically, because they had
the problems in some of our southern States, Louisiana, so we
were able to get the right political mix to get that passed and
it is a success story, so I want to take what we learned from
the nutria, that if we invest in dealing with invasive species
control, it cannot only help our environment, but help our
economy as well.
We are having challenges in the Chesapeake Bay because of
the salinity of water changing with the amount of rainfall that
we have had. We find that there are catfish invasive species
that are thriving much stronger than they would otherwise be
able to do because we have warmer seasons. The invasive plants
are much stronger that we need to deal with.
The question I have for you is what type of public
investment should we be making in the Chesapeake Bay region in
order to be able to duplicate the success that we had on nutria
for the other invasive species. I understand there are
somewhere around 200 invasive species in the Chesapeake Bay
region. Clearly, we have challenges in the region on invasive
species.
Mr. Rogerson. Thank you. And if it earns me any brownie
points, not only am I from Maryland, I worked on the Nutria
Eradication Program before I came to Delaware Fish and
Wildlife, so I was there for about a year.
I think one of the reasons the nutria project was so
successful was the original folks involved didn't set out to
just try and control nutria, which would then have this long-
term, we are going to lower populations down, but now we are
going to have to fund and address this for decades and decades
in the future, because if we stop there is going to be more of
them.
So, they hit it aggressively and said we are going to get
rid of nutria from the Delmarva Peninsula. It is going to cost
a little more money upfront initially to hit it hard with that
full-frontal force, but, in the end, it is going to pay
dividends because they will be gone and we don't have to have
long-term monitoring teams and stuff out there in the future.
It has been a couple years since they found an animal,
which is amazing. Many folks didn't think it was going to be
possible. But there are still areas, leaving no stone unturned
because of how prolific breeders they are.
So, I think with the number of species you talked about in
terms of in the Chesapeake Bay would be prioritizing which ones
do we think we can get a handle on now, which ones are most
detrimental to our resources. You know, nutria impacted the
environment not only from our wetland integrity to handle sea
level rise and storm surges and things like that, but also our
economy. If you like crab cake sandwiches, you didn't like
nutria, because they were going to impact the nursery habitats
for our blue crabs and stuff like that.
So, I would say reviewing what species you have and then
prioritizing where you should focus those efforts, because you
are probably not going to be able to hit all 200 of them with
the same force.
Senator Cardin. Is there a mechanism in the Chesapeake Bay
program for doing that with invasive species? I am not aware of
a ranking as to where we should put our priorities, nor am I
aware of a real effort being made collectively within the
Chesapeake Bay region on invasive species. I know we do have
programs to eradicate invasive species, but I am not aware of
such a coordinated effort.
Mr. Rogerson. I am familiar with our Delaware Invasive
Species Council, from my State. I would presumably venture to
guess that there is one in Maryland. It is an unfunded, at
least regulated by the State standpoint in Delaware, so we have
identified our most important things. Our challenge in Delaware
comes from acquiring all the resources we need to put boots on
the ground. What we try and do is educate folks to the problem
so that then, perhaps, they can implement the actions and find
the resources that they need to be able to handle it.
Senator Cardin. I would just point out invasive species do
not know geographic borders.
Mr. Rogerson. Absolutely. Yes.
Senator Cardin. Thank you. We will look at whether we can
provide some guidance within the watershed on this area.
Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Rogerson. Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Cardin.
Senator Braun.
Senator Braun. A subject dear to my heart, back in the late
1980's I started investing in timber ground, and invasive
species was not even mentioned up until probably 15 years ago,
and then I have stuff like bush honeysuckle start showing up,
stealth grass, of course, the emerald ash borer for midwestern
timber, and I think that is 8 percent of all the trees in
Indiana, pretty well taken them all out.
I am interested because this seems to be a problem that is
so massive. Does it make sense and can you bring in natural
enemies and counterpunches that come from the places where this
stuff originates, or is that opening up a Pandora's box of
further complications? Because, to me, unless you are kind of
have an involvement in it, like I do, most people don't know
the difference between a bush honeysuckle and a native plant,
or stealth grass and grasses that grow here natively.
What about that idea? Then I want to get one other
question. Anybody that feels comfortable, weigh in on it.
Mr. Franklin. We are big supporters of biocontrol in the
State of Wyoming; we think it is a great opportunity to help
balance, maybe, in some cases some of these invasive species
with the native vegetation. The Wyoming Weed and Pest Council
actually puts money into research for new biocontrol agents in
our State, so we are putting county and State funds into that
kind of research because we feel it is a great opportunity.
We were talking, just before this testimony, about leaf
beetles on leafy spurge, because the herbicides available for
leafy spurge are minimal and have very little effect in some
cases, so the leaf beetle actually can go in and do a great job
of balancing the leafy spurge within those ecosystems.
So, I would say, from Wyoming's perspective, that is one
place we really could support and expand, is the biocontrol
agents.
Senator Braun. And is that finding a native biocontrol? Is
all this stuff unchecked, where it comes from? Like cheatgrass,
does that dominate the landscape from wherever it originates?
Mr. Franklin. It does not. So, what we do is our research,
what Wyoming funds for research is actually in Switzerland, and
they go out and actually look in the native landscapes where
these plants are and look for native bugs that impact them or
eat them. And then it is a pretty lengthy process in terms of
researching whether it will work or not, and also to get those
biocontrol agents approved. So, it is not simply a matter of
going over, finding it, and bringing it back, you know, on a
boat; there is an approval process. Speaking of the genie
getting out of the bottle, there is a pretty lengthy approval
process to help monitor that.
Mr Steinwand. Mr. Franklin did a tremendous job, but I
would add to that that biocontrol is a preferred method over
herbicides, but you have to be careful of the unintended
consequences. And, again, Mr. Franklin kind of alluded to the
fact that there needs to be research. Using the flea beetle and
leafy spurge as an example, there was a tremendous amount of
research done on that, because what happens when they control
or eradicate the intended plant? What are they going to go to
next, an unintended plant and get something you really don't
expect? So there has to be some background and some research
before we go that route totally.
Mr. Rogerson. I agree that biocontrols do have their
merits. I know the University of Delaware Ag Department does
quite a bit of research on biocontrols. And to your point
earlier about these species, where they come from, are they
pervasive and out of control over there, if you think about the
natural world that is here, and the plants and animals and
insects that are all connected together, every plant has a
group of insects that it supports; it also has some insects
that feed on it, and everything works together.
When you take these species that aren't native to those
areas and drop them in, they lack, oftentimes, those controls
that keep them in check here, so then they are able to dominate
our landscapes that are here, and that is why, when you see
these animals moved around these great distances, you see them
kind of potentially explode, given the right species and the
right condition.
Senator Braun. Thank you.
Have you found that these species naturally climax or start
to feather out, or do they just keep exploding into the local
environment? And have we had many instances of where something
here actually that is native starts to knock it back, or would
that be the exception rather than the rule? For anybody.
Mr. Franklin. I think you are specifically asking about
invasive species, right?
Senator Braun. Yes.
Mr. Franklin. So, there are invasive species that come in
that have value to some degree. I think some of the non-native
grasses that do have a grazing value to them, so maybe we are
less likely to focus on them as we are the ones that have no
value. So, there are a lot of invasive species out there and
there are some that are lower priorities and should be
prioritized lower than the ones that have that economic or
agricultural impact.
Mr. Steinwand. I would add that the hallmark of an invasive
species is typically tremendous, tremendous growth of that
population if left unchecked to begin with, and then stabilizes
to some level below that somewhere in the future. I would
hopefully not contradict what you are saying, but, to some
extent, Kentucky bluegrass, which is a great ornamental grass
for lawns across the Nation, has created a little bit of a
problem in North Dakota when it invades our native prairies. We
have found that if we get heavy grazing pressure when it is
still less than 30 percent of that landscape, we can control
it, but, if not, once it gets above 30 percent, it tends to
take over that native prairie, thus reducing pollinator
diversity, so on and so forth, and very little wildlife value.
Mr. Rogerson. And I will mention that not every non-native
species that comes here is invasive and causes problems. For
example, where nutria were introduced in Blackwater and
Cambridge area, during that same time period sika deer were
brought over from Thailand I believe is where they are from,
and certainly they do impact the agricultural producers and
farmers over there from a crop damage standpoint. They did not
have the same ecological impacts that nutria did.
So, it depends on the life history traits of that species
that is brought over here and things like that that is going to
determine whether it becomes an invasive species and becomes a
problem for us.
Senator Braun. Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Braun.
I have one last question to Mr. Steinwand. We talked about
invasive mussels and things that are happening underwater. The
quagga and the zebra mussels have had enormous destructive
powers, from clogging pipes and reservoirs to destroying the
motors of private recreational boats. We have here a poster
board of zebra mussels on a motor.
Can you share some advice that you might have to inform
Wyoming in terms of our future efforts to prevent the spread of
quagga and zebra mussels based on your experience in dealing
with this in North Dakota?
Mr. Steinwand. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I believe I
mentioned it in my written testimony and my oral testimony. As
good as Wyoming Game and Fish Department is, I am guessing they
already do this, but I don't know, again, given limited
resources, first of all, try to find out where the pathways,
what are the most likely high-risk pathways for that to come
into Wyoming and then concentrate your forces on them. If you
can prevent it from coming in, again, I think we have all said
that that is the best route to go.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you.
Senator Carper. I have one question for Joe and then a
question for our panel to close it out.
I mentioned in my opening statement, I talked a little bit
about climate change. I think most people, when they think
about climate change, in Delaware we think about sea level
rise. We are a small State. We are sinking and the oceans
around us, as Joe knows, are rising. Not too far from where I
live, my neighbor here, Ben Cardin, to my left, from Maryland,
one of the places he represents is Ellicott City. We saw a lot
of rain in Delaware last year, probably twice as much as we
normally get, and damaged our crops quite a bit. A lot of the
farmers ended up just plowing their crops under because we had
so much rain. They just kept planting and replanting, and
finally kind of gave up and turned to crop insurance. So, we
think about that.
We think about wildfires, all these wildfires out west,
where one of my sons lives, wildfires bigger than Delaware. But
we don't often think of invasive species and what effect, if
any, climate change has on invasive species, and I would just
ask Mr. Rogerson whether or not climate change is a
consideration in the Department of Natural Resources and
Environmental Control's management of invasive species. And, if
so, would you share some thoughts with us on how Delaware might
be adapting and some examples of possible implications in our
State and maybe even implications for other States?
Mr. Rogerson. Yes. At DNREC, we take climate change into a
whole host of considerations that we are working on, not just
invasive species, due to many of the reasons you just pointed
out. Just a quick example, as I said earlier, invasive species
can come at us from any different direction, not just
necessarily as we think of things getting warmer and stuff. As
an example, lionfish, lionfish are a tremendous problem in
offshore reefs and places particularly more in the southern
part of the Country. Currently, our water temperatures in the
wintertime seem to be too cold for that species to persist
here, but they have been found as far north as Rhode Island and
north of us, so just proactive monitoring efforts, knowing that
things are going to move and increased coordination with our
southern counterparts.
Asian tiger mosquito, as pointed out, having the potential
to carry Zika and West Nile. I can attest that I have had
invasions over the years of tiger mosquitos in my neighborhood,
and they are voracious predators and feeders out in the yard,
and you can't play outside with the kids, so we do have a very
modern and----
Senator Carper. Do repellants work with those?
Mr. Rogerson. Say that again?
Senator Carper. Repellants, the kind of repellants we use
for most mosquitos?
Mr. Rogerson. They seem to, at least in my yard, when they
are out and around, I am inside kind of thing, or certainly
wearing long-sleeved barriers kind of thing to get through. I
mean, they are much larger than our normal mosquitos, and their
feeding habits and such, they are not a fun one to have around;
not that any of them are.
Furthermore, with climate change, sea level rise, the host
of factors that come with it, those all put stresses on our
native plant and animal communities; and you throw in invasive
species on top of them, which typically the ones that we see
aggressively get out of hand or be strong competitors are the
ones that dominate those sites and areas that have been
disturbed where our native plants don't do as well, so I think
that can lend itself to being a further problem in the future.
Senator Carper. All right, thank you.
Last question, if I could, on regional collaboration. In
Delaware, we are big on the four Cs, communicate, collaborate,
cooperate, and civility, in order to get us to consensus. That
is what we try to do.
I was encouraged, with that in mind, by some of the
regional collaboration that you all have mentioned here today
to us, including the Chesapeake Bay Nutria Eradication Project
and the Western Governors Association Invasive Mussel Forum.
How do you think Congress and the Federal Government could
better support these regional efforts and others? Go ahead.
Mr. Steinwand. If I might, you did mention the Western
Governors Association. Of course, that is North Dakota and to
the west. I think supporting the policies that that group has
come up with, which is truly a bipartisan effort, supporting
those policies and working together. We serve, not myself, but
staff serves on a minimum of three regional invasives council
to more share information such as we are doing here, to
innovate to the extent possible. I don't mean this as a
denigrating remark, but if we can get by with not having to
spend any Federal money on this and just cooperation and
policy, to me, that would be the greatest win.
Senator Carper. OK. Thanks.
Others, please, Franklin and Joe? We will close it up.
Slade?
Mr. Franklin. I would reiterate the Western Governors
Association just did a bunch of workshops on invasive species,
and they are working on some ideas on policies, and I think
there is a place maybe for Congress to look at what those ideas
coming out of that are.
Certainly, ISAC, the committee I am on, works on some
policy ideas that would be well work Congress looking at. ISAC
has been around for, I think, 10, 15 years, and there are some
great whitepapers discussing not just the funding issue, but a
lot of the policy issues that may be worthwhile looking at.
Senator Carper. OK, thank you.
Joseph, you get the last word.
Mr. Rogerson. I agree, I think any kind of improved
coordination between the States, particularly Delaware, where
we are, as I said before, being small. The Spotted lanternfly
is yet another example of nobody expected it to come here and
it showed up, so I think the Government can help us with
keeping species out through better inventory of goods and
things coming into the Country, as well as the fact that these
species, many of them do cross State borders and State lines
and stuff, being facilitators, perhaps, between the States to
work together.
Senator Carper. All right.
Mr. Chairman, one of the issues that is dividing my staff
sitting behind me is the Spotted lanternfly. The S in Spotted
lanternfly is, of course, capitalized, but the question is how
about that L in lanternfly. Some say capitalize; others say
not. What do you say?
Mr. Rogerson. I would have to look at my testimony to see
what my Department of Agriculture folks said to me.
[Laughter.]
Senator Carper. Well, to be continued. Those will be
questions for the record.
Thank you all.
Senator Barrasso. Well, thank you, Senator Carper.
Thank you to the witnesses.
As you had mentioned, Senator Carper, there are so many
different conflicting committees going on today that some of
the members weren't able to get here, so they may submit
written questions, so I would ask that you please respond to
those. The hearing record is going to be open for 2 weeks, but
I think all of us want to just thank all of you for your time
and your testimony today. It has been a tremendous hearing.
Senator Carper. Mr. Chairman, could I ask for a unanimous
consent request to ask unanimous consent to enter into the
record written testimony and letters from stakeholders, as well
as other supplemental materials?
Senator Barrasso. Without objection.
Senator Carper. Thank you.
[The referenced information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:25 a.m. the committee was adjourned.]
[all]