- EGYPT: SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS, AND REFORM
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
EGYPT: SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS, AND REFORM
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JULY 24, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-161
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
or http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-888PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
______
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas
KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama
AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
TED S. YOHO, Florida
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
NORMA J. TORRES, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
Wisconsin
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
Amy Porter, Chief of Staff
Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director
Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------
Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida, Chairman
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
TED LIEU, California
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
WITNESSES
Mr. Jared Genser, adjunct professor of law, Georgetown University
Law Center.....................................................
8
Mr. Samuel Tadros, senior fellow, Center for Religious Freedom,
The Hudson Institute...........................................
17
Michele Dunne, Ph.D., director and senior fellow, Middle East
Program, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace............
32
Mr. Andrew Miller, deputy director for policy, Project on Middle
East Democracy.................................................
38
LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING
Mr. Jared Genser: Prepared statement.............................
12
Mr. Samuel Tadros: Prepared statement............................
19
Michele Dunne, Ph.D.: Prepared statement.........................
34
Mr. Andrew Miller: Prepared statement............................
40
APPENDIX
Hearing notice...................................................
60
Hearing minutes..................................................
61
The Honorable Ann Wagner, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Missouri: Questions submitted for the record..........
62
EGYPT: SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS, AND REFORM
----------
TUESDAY, JULY 24, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:45 p.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ileana Ros-
Lehtinen (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. The subcommittee will come to order. So
sorry about our delay due to votes.
After recognizing myself and Ranking Member Deutch for our
opening statements, I will recognize other members seeking
recognition for 1 minute. We will then hear from our witnesses.
Without objection, the witnesses' prepared statements will
be made a part of the record and members may have 5 days to
insert statements and questions for the record, subject to the
length limitation in the rules.
I am going to recognize Mr. Cicilline in a minute and I
also would like to note that Mr. Genser will only be able to
stay with us until 3:30 or so. He needs to catch a plane to
West Africa to see--for a meeting and because of the beautiful
weather that we are having--where are you--there you are--he
had to rearrange his flight.
So we will do our best to get him out of here on time and
on that--on the plane.
And thank you--who do we have as our special guest? Mr.
French--Mr. Hill, welcome to the committee. Who do you have
with you there?
Just you, because your interest that you've spoken to me
about on your bill on the Christians--Coptic Christians. So
thank you, Mr. French Hill.
Welcome to our committee and thank you for your efforts in
support of Egypt's Coptic population, and as I will say in my
opening remarks, I am proud to be a co-sponsor of your
resolution supporting better treatment and increased protection
for the Coptics and I thank you for being with us today, and we
will recognize you.
So let me first turn, if I could, Mr. Deutch, to Mr.
Cicilline, who has to get to another place and but has an
adopted journalist.
Mr. Cicilline. Yes.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you,
Ranking Member Deutch, for affording me this courtesy.
Thank you for convening this hearing on security, human
rights, and reforming Egypt. Egypt consistently ranks as one of
the worst countries for freedom of the press.
Under--ushering counterterrorism laws, President Sisi has
censored the press and journalists are routinely harassed,
arrested, and imprisoned without trial.
This hearing is timely, as this Saturday, a court in Egypt
will be deciding whether to execute over 700 individuals who
were arrested during the violent dispersal of a protest in
2013.
One of these individuals is photojournalist Mohammed Abu
Zeid, who is professionally known as Shawkan. I was made aware
of Shawkan's case through the Lantos Commission's Defending
Freedoms Project and I am so outraged by the conditions
surrounding his arrest and detention that I decided to advocate
on his behalf. Shawkan is an Egyptian freelance photojournalist
whose work has been published in international publications
including the New York Times.
On August 14th, 2013, while photographing the events
occurring in Rabaa Square, he was taken into custody along with
two other journalists.
The other journalists, however, were foreign nationals and
were released within 2 hours, while Shawkan, only 25 at the
time, has been abused, beaten, and denied his freedom, due
process, and adequate medical treatment ever since simply
because he was doing his job.
In 2016, the U.N. Human Rights Council Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention issued a report on his case. It regarded
his detention as arbitrary and recommended that he be released
immediately.
I sent a letter to President Sisi of Egypt today, urging
him to support the immediate release of Shawkan or, at the very
least, to support an individual trial so that evidence specific
to his case can be heard and contested.
To paraphrase Shawkan, photography is his passion, but he
should not have to pay for his passion with his life.
Thank you for convening this hearing and to our witnesses
for taking the time to share their knowledge on these very
consequential issues and I really thank the chairman for giving
me an opportunity to make those comments, and I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Of course. Thank you very much, Mr.
Cicilline.
The Chair now recognizes herself for 5 minutes
U.S. policy toward Egypt is an issue many of us on this
subcommittee and, indeed, many of us generally in Congress have
debated over the past few years but especially since the
revolution of 2011.
I think many of us recognize the strategic importance of
Egypt and the role that it plays in the greater Middle East,
and we can all understand the challenges that Egypt has faced
since 2011, particularly in respect to security--both national
security and economic security.
President Sisi has had a very difficult task in
implementing some IMF-mandated reforms. We have seen some
positive signs as he makes progress, particularly with
reductions in food and fuel subsidies.
There are signs that economic growth is on pace for its
highest since 2008 and Egypt may even have a budget surplus
this year. Egypt has begun to commercialize its natural gas
resources.
Yet, as positive as all those signs are, there is still
many questions as to whether the reforms or the level of growth
are enough. Egypt is the Middle East's largest country with a
rapidly expanding population.
The struggles to keep the economy driving while also facing
a growing terror threat from ISIS in the Sinai and the Muslim
Brotherhood are daunting.
But for many of us, while we appreciate the difficult
position this puts President Sisi in, we worry that the human
rights of Egyptians are being curtailed and that the
government's repressive behavior will undermine Egypt's long-
term stability.
As such good friends, it is important for the United States
to let our partners in Egypt know that we are there to support
its counterterrorism efforts, but our ideals, our values, our
interests will not countenance the erosion of human rights in
the name of the fight against terror.
After all, the United States has been one of Egypt's
largest supporters over the years in terms of economic
assistance--in terms of military assistance.
In just the past 5 years, the U.S. has provided over $7
billion in bilateral aid to Egypt, and Egypt has been key to
holding the line against the Islamic State's Sinai province
affiliate, a U.S.-designated foreign terrorist organization.
But at what cost? President Sisi launched an offensive
earlier this year named Operation Sinai 2018. I am supportive
of the objective but I am concerned about the effectiveness of
the military's tactics and the lack of transparency in its
efforts against ISIS.
I am concerned over allegations that Egypt has used counter
terror operations as a means to crack down on its opposition.
The state of emergency laws have been extended and we have
heard reports of the rights of journalists, as Mr. Cicilline
just pointed out, activists, and critics of the Sisi
government--their rights have been curtailed.
One of the most important roles that Congress has is that
of oversight--oversight over the administration's policies but
also oversight over how the American taxpayer dollars are being
spent.
So, naturally, we want to be cautious. We want to ensure
that our assistance is promoting our values and our ideals and
long-term stability.
We should continue to support Egypt's legitimate operations
against the terror groups. But this is by no means a green
light to take whatever action the government wants.
There must be protections for the citizens of Egypt and
their human rights must be respected. I hope that Egypt, while
implementing its economic reforms, will also assess making
additional reforms to guarantee the human rights of all of its
citizens. That includes revoking the controversial NGO law that
President Sisi enacted last year, which is making it difficult
for civil society to operate and to promote democratic ideals
and democracy programs.
It also means ensuring that the rights of ethnic and
religious minorities like the Coptic Christians, which Mr.
French Hill is very concerned about, are protected and
guaranteed.
I have joined Mr. Hill in introducing House Resolution 673
expressing concern about the attacks against Coptic Christians
in Egypt and it's my sincere hope that Egypt protects all of
its citizens.
I also want to raise the issue of the 20 or so U.S.
citizens and legal permanent residents who are currently being
detained in Egypt, possibly under dubious causes.
I urge Egyptian officials to ensure their rights, their
safety, and their wellbeing are being taken care of and that
their rights are not being violated.
In addition to finding a fair and immediate resolution to
those cases, I am hopeful for a resolution in the ongoing case
against the 43 NGO workers, an issue I've personally been
engaged in from day one, and I know it's an issue that many of
our colleagues are eager to see resolved.
I thank the Egyptian government for working with our State
Department officials to try to find a way forward. It is my
understanding that we continue to work toward that and to
resolve it.
But I encourage the Egyptians to resolve this as soon as
possible. I encourage the Egyptian government to continue to
work with Congress. We can find a way to build this
relationship for the betterment of both of our countries. But
we have to find a way to do it in a manner that both secures
the country and secures the human rights of all of Egypt's
citizens.
And with that, I am pleased to turn to Mr. Deutch, our
ranking member.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Madam Chair, for calling this
hearing. I also want to extend my gratitude to this really
terrific panel of experts.
Egypt is an important ally for the United States and has
been for decades. It is a leader in the Arab world and has been
a strong counter terrorism partner to both the United States
and Israel.
I value the relationship that we share with Egyptians. But
I must express my sincere concern about some of the activities
and trajectory of the Egyptian government.
The state of democratic governance and human rights in
Egypt has continued to challenge me. We have watched as civil
society and NGOs, including Americans and dissenting voices,
are prosecuted and even unlawfully imprisoned.
There continue to be reports of torture and other
concerning human rights offenses in the country and the
crackdown on journalists and the free press is shocking.
Arrests of journalists and increased efforts to control the
media and Egyptians' access to social media are an affront to
democracy and stand in stark contrast to the democratic change
the Tahrir Square revolution called for.
Many of Sisi's actions appear to me as steps toward an
authoritative strongman-led government. The Egyptians have
striven and fought for democracy and a return--and deserve a
move toward freedom and democracy, not a return to
totalitarianism.
Sisi's recent reelection is further fodder for worry about
Egypt's prospects for a thriving democracy. The election was,
by all accounts, theatrics, as potential challengers were
intimidated and oppressed.
There were mass arrests and dissenting voices in the media
limited to only those at issue with the state's official
message.
Women continue to face daily obstacles. Cairo has been
listed among the most dangerous large cities for women.
Assaults, harassment, verbal abuse, and fear are commonplace
for Egyptian women.
And while we have observed some progress, like Egypt
banning the practice of female genital mutilation, girls
continue to be cut in secret.
Furthermore, Egypt's discrimination against the LGBTQ
community, often arrested under claims of membership in groups
aiming to overthrow the government is, again, a key concern for
Egypt's overall trajectory.
We have seen some indication Egypt's economy is making
gradual improvements but the country continues to lag behind in
extending economic growth to rural and impoverished regions.
Economic reform and improved economic opportunity will be
key to Egypt's future. In the realm of terrorism, Egypt has
been a dedicated fighting force against ISIS cells throughout
the country, particularly in the Sinai.
ISIS is still a global terror group and its loss of
territory in Iraq and Syria does not mean that the group has
been defeated. Egypt's dedication to fighting this dangerous
terrorist group reflects common ground with the United States
and we are most grateful for that.
With that in mind, we, as Congress, must still emphasize
the need for human rights while embarking upon a comprehensive
coordinated counterterrorism counter insurgency strategy.
The press needs to be free to report factual news and Egypt
cannot implement domestic political policies under the guise of
security.
I've said this at every hearing that we have had on Egypt
since the revolutions that took down Mubarak. It doesn't matter
who sits in the government--our message and respect for human
rights must remain the same.
While the United States desperately wants to see Egypt's
security and economy sectors be strengthened and bolstered, we
cannot ignore the suffering of people and the challenge to
democracy just to focus on economic and security assistance.
I want to see a stable Egypt--one that continues decades of
partnership with the United States. But there must be security
and human rights improvements as well.
Human rights are vital to the growth of a healthy democracy
and these issues cannot be put on the back burner under the
guise of focusing first on the economy or other factors.
I look forward to the conversation today and I again want
to thank all of our witnesses for being here and I yield back
the balance of my time. Thanks.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Deutch.
Now we will turn to members for their statements. Mr.
Donovan, Ambassador Wagner, and Mr. Hill.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and thank you,
Ranking Member Deutch, for conducting this important hearing
today on Egypt security, human rights, and reform.
In the past, the United States and Egypt have enjoyed a
friendship and partnership. But Egypt's drift toward China,
Russia, and, most especially, North Korea raises grave
concerns.
As we all know, 2 years ago, U.S. intelligence tracked a
North Korean ship that was headed toward Egypt. U.S. officials
warned Egyptian officials and an Egyptian naval vessel ordered
the crew to halt for an inspection.
In addition to the cargo listed on the ship's manifest,
there were also over 2,400 North Korean rocket-propelled
grenades and completed components for 6,000 more.
As the United Nations report concluded, this was the
``largest seizure of ammunition in the history of sanctions
against the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.''
The evidence against Egypt was clear. For example, each
crate had been stenciled with the name of an Egyptian company.
Many of the rounds were practice rounds, demonstrating that
they were intended for training for a sizeable army.
There is no doubt the shipment of North Korean weapons was
intended for the Egyptian military. While the United States has
cited this incident as a reason for delaying $300 million in
aid, I am looking forward to hearing what more we could do to
dissuade the Egyptians from violating international law and
partnering with North Korea.
We are happy to work with Egypt and honor our historic
relationship. But Egypt must do its part as well.
And with that, Madam Chairwoman, I waive the remainder of
my time.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. Donovan.
Ambassador Wagner.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Madam Chair, for hosting this
hearing, and thanks to our witnesses for your expertise.
Egypt has been a valuable partner in managing Israeli-
Palestinian tensions, countering terrorism, and supporting U.S.
military operations in the region. But, despite receiving
significant support from the United States, Egypt remains a
problematic partner due to its serious human rights abuses,
especially persecution faced by Coptic Christians.
Egypt's historical importance to our regional policy goals
shouldn't give it a free pass. Our close relationship means we
have an opportunity to help Egypt achieve real progress in
safeguarding human rights and advancing democratic reforms.
United States must continue to hold Egypt to a high standard.
I thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Madam Ambassador.
Mr. Issa of California.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Madam Chair. And on a slightly
different note, unequivocally, we need Egypt as much or more
than Egypt needs us.
Our relationship with Egypt has been strained, but it was
strained in no small part because the Obama administration
allowed the Muslim Brotherhood to take over, run the country,
persecute Christians in a way that no Coptic Christian I know
had ever seen.
Since the takeover of the new regime, we have shown
indifference to them. We have gone out of our way to withhold
funds, so much so that they have in fact--and I regret that
they have made this decision--I think it's a bad decision--
looked elsewhere at times for military weapons.
The bottom line is the only safe border that Egypt has is
the one with Israel, and even that border takes divisions to
guard against operatives ISIS in the Sinai.
So I will say to my colleagues, yes, I would like to see
better human rights. But ask a Coptic Christian which they'd
rather have--the last regime that my previous President
endorsed, or the regime today that's fighting ISIS and other
enemies on all its borders while defending Israel's border so
that it need not worry nearly the way it had in the past.
And I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Issa, and to talk about
the Coptic Christians, Mr. Hill is recognized. Welcome to our
subcommittee.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, my friend from Florida, the
chairwoman, and the ranking member for the opportunity to speak
today.
I am proud to be a sponsor of House Resolution 673, which
expresses concerns over a tax on Coptic Christians in Egypt.
While I give full credit to President el-Sisi for his work
to promote religious tolerance and support for Egyptian Copts,
I believe there is much more than can be done to ensure that
the President's message trickles down and is implemented by his
government's educational, cultural, and provincial officials.
On the heels of the recent Department of State report, I'll
look forward to hearing today from witnesses on the ways that
Egypt can improve in this area.
I thank the chairwoman and Mr. Cicilline for their
friendship and their work and original co-sponsor on this
resolution and I thank the five other members of this
subcommittee and 14 members of the full committee to co-sponsor
this message of appreciation for efforts made and call for
continued progress.
And with that, Madam Chair, I thank you and I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Hill.
And now I would like to introduce and recognize to speak
first Mr. Jared Genser--I hope that you make your flight--
managing director of the Perseus Strategies and adjunct
professor of law at Georgetown University Law Center.
Mr. Genser is known for his work freeing political
prisoners and is a recipient of the American Bar Association's
international human rights award. Thank you for being here
today and we will recognize you, first off.
STATEMENT OF MR. JARED GENSER, ADJUNCT PROFESSOR OF LAW,
GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY LAW CENTER
Mr. Genser. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, Ranking Member
Deutch, and distinguished members of the committee.
It's great to be with you all this afternoon. First, I'll
discuss my prospective on the situation of human rights in
Egypt.
Second, I'll talk about some of the important issues
between Egypt and the United States and the bilateral
relationship and then, lastly, I'll provide my recommendations
about how I believe the U.S. should use its leverage from our
annual appropriations to Egypt to secure important reforms.
For the sake of time, let me just summarize first that the
situation of human rights in Egypt, which I have expounded more
upon in my written testimony, because the situation I think is
well known to all of you, under President Sisi crackdowns on
freedom of speech, expression, assembly, and religion are
commonplace, today there are tens of thousands of political
prisoners.
Police forces employ arbitrary arrests, extrajudicial
execution, and enforced disappearances to punish dissent, not
only political opponents--lawyers, NGO workers--but also
journalists and bloggers as well.
Travel bans and asset freezes are deployed against human
rights defenders and national security officers routinely
torture political detainees with techniques that include
beatings, electric shocks, stress positions, and sometimes even
rape.
And, of course, we have already heard mentioned from all of
you this afternoon the situation of the Coptic Christian
community, which continues to face serious repression and
persecution as well as the GLBT community in Egypt as well.
While the Egyptian people have faced the brunt of the
abuses under Sisi's authoritarian rule, there are three
especially important human rights concerns directly connected
to the United States Sisi has inexplicably allowed to fester,
despite the U.S. having provided more than $76 billion of
foreign assistance since 1948 and $1.3 billion annually in
military assistance alone in recent years.
First, some 5 years after the felony convictions of the 43
Egyptian and foreign NGO workers, 17 of whom are Americans, the
affair has remained an unfortunate irritant in U.S.-Egypt
relations.
It appears Cairo and Washington are close to a resolution
of the case and I can only hope for all those impacted that we
see a fair and expedient resolution.
I know both the U.S. and Egypt have remained actively
engaged in discussion this issue and I believe if it were to
get a fair resolution, it could be an important measure that
shows Egypt's willingness to improve our bilateral relations
and in a small part its human rights record, although I would
note, of course, that the NGO law that President Sisi promised
not to sign after visiting the Congress and with the President
here in Washington, he did in fact sign and despite promises
now that it's not going to be enforced, in fact, we have
already seen enforcement well underway, as I know some of the
other panelists will discuss.
Second, the government of Egypt continues to wrongly
imprison close to 20 American citizens and legal permanent
residents.
This includes Mustafa Kassem, an American auto parts dealer
caught up in the crackdown in Rabaa Square, and it includes two
clients of mine, Ola al-Qaradawi and Hossam Khalif, a married
couple who were approved for green cards during the Trump
administration and have eight American citizen family members.
In the last month, the U.N. High Commissioner for Human
Rights called for Ola and Hossam's immediate release and the
U.N. Working Group on Arbitrary Detention found that they were
being held arbitrarily and in violation of international law.
Both have been held incommunicado in terrible conditions
and without regular access to counsel or any access to family
for more than a year.
Ola is the longest held female political prisoner in
solitary confinement by the Egyptian regime and she's been on a
hunger strike, demanding her most basic human rights and her
immediate release.
And while the Trump administration did secure the release
of two Americans--Aya Hijazi and Ahmed Etiwy--more hostages
have been taken by this purported ally of the United States.
Finally, there is the case of April Corley, a U.S. citizen
who's also a client of mine and who was seriously injured in
Egypt's Western Desert in an attack by the Egyptian military
using a U.S.-funded and supplied Boeing AH-64 Apache helicopter
in September 2015.
April is now permanently disabled, unable to work, and in
constant pain. Yet, while the government of Egypt has expressed
its remorse, it has offered less money as a settlement in the
cost of the medivac out of Egypt, which she had to pay for
herself.
Sisi has so far rightly concluded that U.S. military
assistance comes with a license to kill or injure Americans
with total impunity.
Because he actually has the full protection of our legal
system to do so, April in fact cannot even sue Egypt for her
injuries because of the Foreign Sovereignty Immunities Act,
and, inexplicably, neither President Trump nor President Obama
nor the U.S. Congress has imposed any consequence on Egypt for
refusing to fairly resolve April's case or secure a final
resolution of the case, despite the fact that it was U.S.-
funded equipment that she, as a taxpayer, paid for that led to
her plight.
Lastly, let me talk about my recommendations about how to
improve Egypt's human rights record. As a human rights lawyer,
I am often asked to comment on the most effective ways to
improve the compliance of governments with their binding
obligations under human rights treaties to which they are a
party.
That is, indeed, generally, an enormous challenge. But in
the case of the bilateral relationship between the United
States and Egypt, our government has enormous leverage.
Contrary to the view of the government of Egypt, which sees
our foreign assistance as an entitlement and not as a
privilege, the United States has no legal obligation to provide
assistance to Egypt.
While it is in our regional strategic interest to support
Egypt in its fight against Islamic extremism and terrorism,
today it is a less important and less effective ally as it is
both at times aligned itself with Russia and North Korea and
its own capabilities to support our objectives have been
degraded from within.
It is equally a major error in judgement for the United
states to ignore the way that Sisi is governing, which works
directly in contravention of that goal.
Indeed, our country knows from experience that
radicalization occurs in environments in which an authoritarian
ruler suppresses the population's democratic aspirations for
self-governance, seriously represses its rights, and poorly
manages an economy that has a lack of good-paying jobs,
especially for young people.
All of these elements exist in Sisi's Egypt today. Surely,
Egypt can find a way to address this legitimate security
concerns while ensuring both the rule of law and human rights
are respected.
Indeed, this is in the interests of both the U.S. and
Egypt, as its stability and leadership is important for a
secure and stable Middle East.
Yet, right now, unfortunately, it's business as usual here
in Washington, with Egypt's aid flowing, basically unimpeded.
This not only sends the wrong message to Cairo but it puts
our regional strategic interests at greater risk in both the
medium and longer term.
The smartest way forward for the United States is for
President Trump and Secretary Pompeo as well as the U.S.
Congress to send a clear and consistent message to Sisi that
while the United States views Egypt as an important ally, the
American people expect our allies to act in certain ways.
First, the United States must say that Egypt's actions
targeting American citizens and legal permanent residents must
stop.
For President Trump, who has spoken of America first, this
motto is empty rhetoric if he tolerates any of this behavior by
the Sisi government.
The President should tell Sisi privately, as a start, that
if he doesn't permanently resolve the NGO cases, pardon the
wrongly imprisoned Americans in LPRs and pay appropriate
compensation to April Corley, all three of which Sisi can do
today within his powers as President.
Then President Trump will have no choice but to make
serious cuts in Egypt's aid. It is particularly worrying that
the administration way waive the human rights conditions on and
release the $195 million in fiscal year 2017 funds that have
been held back, which will undoubtedly be taken by Sisi as a
clean bill of health on human rights.
Second, the U.S. Congress needs to speak in one voice about
the path that's easiest taken as being unacceptable. While the
fiscal year 2019 foreign operations appropriations bill in the
Senate imposes human rights conditions on 30 percent of Egypt's
proposed $1 billion in reduced military assistance, the House
bill maintains $1.3 billion in military assistance and imposes
no conditions of any kind.
As authorizers, you have the ability to advocate with your
colleagues and, ultimately, help ensure that the final bill
that will come out from the conference committee and will go to
the floor of the House and the Senate imposes the human rights
conditions from the Senate version of the bill.
If those human rights conditions are dropped, the message
sent to Sisi would be unmistakable--that the United States will
ignore his abuse of numerous Americans, his evisceration of
Egypt's democracy, and the egregious abuses that he's imposed
on his own population, all in the name of a so-called greater
good.
Finally, we need transparency and visibility here in
Washington, not only about the U.S.-Egypt relationship but the
way in which the Sisi government treats its own people.
This hearing is an important start. Nonetheless, I can't
remember the last time I saw any administration official from
the Trump administration or Obama administration before it
actually testify before the U.S. Congress about the realities
of the U.S.-Egypt relationship, and it is important for the
Congress to hear directly from victims of the Sisi government,
both American and Egyptian.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today
and I am happy to also answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Genser follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Genser. We
appreciate you being here and thank you to our panelists for
extending that courtesy to him.
We are delighted to welcome back Mr. Samuel Tadros, senior
fellow at the Hudson Institute Center for Religious Freedom.
Mr. Tadros is also a professional lecturer at Johns Hopkins
University School of Advanced International Studies and a
distinguished visiting fellow of Middle Eastern Studies at
Hoover Institution.
Thank you for being here again. I still can't say your name
right. We look forward to your testimony.
And next, we are delighted to welcome Dr. Michelle Dunne,
director and senior fellow of the Middle East Program at the
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
Prior to this post, Dr. Dunne served in the U.S. missions
in Cairo and Jerusalem as well as at the National Security
Council. Thank you for your service. We look forward to your
testimony, Doctor.
And, finally, we are delighted to welcome Mr. Andrew
Miller, deputy director for policy at the Project on the Middle
East and Democracy and a nonresident scholar at the Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace.
Previously, Mr. Miller served at the U.S. Department of
State and the National Security Council. Thank you for your
service.
We welcome your testimony as well, and we will begin with
you, Sam.
STATEMENT OF MR. SAMUEL TADROS, SENIOR FELLOW, CENTER FOR
RELIGIOUS FREEDOM, THE HUDSON INSTITUTE
Mr. Tadros. Thank you, Madam Chair, Ranking Member Dutch,
distinguished members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
holding this hearing and for inviting me to testify today.
I have submitted the written testament with the detailed
description of the challenges facing Egypt and recommendations
for U.S. policy.
But let me devote those few minutes to discussing the
Egypt-American relationship in general.
For the previous four decades, the U.S.-Egypt alliance has
been a cornerstone of the American order in the Middle East.
After two decades of tensions and conflict between both
countries, Secretary Kissinger and President Sadat forged a new
basis for the American-Egyptian relationship, helping attain
key U.S. objectives during the Cold War.
In return for U.S. aid to Egypt, successive administrations
hoped that the country that led the region to war and
destruction would now lead it to peace and cooperation.
Despite this, the relationship between the two countries
has never been a smooth one. Egypt was always a problematic
ally. From Egypt's conduct during the Achille Lauro affair and
attempt to smuggle missile components under President Reagan,
from its attempt to stop economic cooperation between Arab
countries and Israel and its pressure on Nasser Arafat not to
give any concessions during the Camp David Summit under
President Clinton to the Mubarak Regime's refusal to reform
under President Bush's tenure, throughout those three decades
there were deep U.S.-Egyptian disagreements over a variety of
issues ranging from the peace process, U.S. policies in the
region, democracy, and human rights.
Moreover, despite continued U.S. economic and military
assistance to Egypt, the Egyptian press allowed to buy the
government control by the government, continued to traffic in
anti-American and anti-Semitic arguments.
And yet, these previous disagreements and frustrations pale
in comparison with attention, disappointment, and mistrust that
has shaped the previous decade in U.S.-Egyptian relations.
Policies followed by the Obama administration perceived in
Egypt as one that's in support of the Muslim Brotherhood, the
condemnation of the military coup, and threats to cut U.S.
military aid to the country have led to growing antagonism in
Cairo.
In turn, Egypt has shown an unwillingness to cooperate on
regional security challenges such as joining the fight against
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, pursue them in dependent
policy in Libya, deepen its military and economic ties to the
Russian Federation, or pursue a scorched earth strategy to wipe
out the Islamic State's affiliate in Sinai, crack down on all
forms of dissent in the country, stifling civil society and any
independent media, engaged in appalling human rights abuses,
continued to attempt to undercut U.S. resolutions in the United
Nations, and most importantly, engaged in an unprecedented wave
of anti-American propaganda and conspiracy theories at home.
The American-Egyptian alliance is crumbling. For some in
Washington, while unfortunate, and end to the alliance is
inevitable.
Cold War rationale should no longer be the basis of a
continued alliance with a problematic partner and the two
countries do not see eye to eye on many important issues.
Moreover, Egypt's regional importance has vastly
diminished. Egypt has continued to decline on all levels--
economically, culturally, and politically.
It is no longer today the key player in the Middle East
that it was in the past. As an external power, Egypt is a
shadow of its former self and there are well-founded doubts
about its capacity to play a leading and constructive role,
even if it wanted to.
Instead, Egypt itself has increasingly become a locus of
the region's unfolding strategic competition, an unprecedented
political and ideological crisis of the state-based order.
The regional decline is a reflection of deeper ills within
Egypt itself. The inability of the country's leadership to
reform the economy through market-oriented policies, combatting
corruption, and addressing the dysfunctional bureaucracy has
worsened the lives of millions of Egyptians.
But continue with all the failures of the government, I
hope that the U.S. is able to develop a coherent strategy to
deal with these challenges.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tadros follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Tadros. Did I get
it? All right.
Dr. Dunne. Nate corrected me.
STATEMENT OF MICHELE DUNNE, PH.D., DIRECTOR AND SENIOR FELLOW,
MIDDLE EAST PROGRAM, CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE
Ms. Dunne. Chairman Ros Lehtinen, Ranking Member Deutch,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify.
I am going to focus in my brief remarks here on
developments in Egypt's political scene that have implications
for the country's stability as well as for U.S. interests.
With your permission, I've submitted a slightly longer
written statement.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Without objection.
Ms. Dunne. During the first half of 2018, President Abdel
Fattah el-Sisi eliminated five Presidential challengers, four
of them senior and well-known figures, through arrest or
intimidation.
Sisi was then reelected after running against a virtual
unknown. One of the would-be candidates, former army chief of
staff Sami Anan, suffered a stroke in prison and is now in
critical condition.
There has been also a recent wave of arrests of those who
have criticized Sisi publicly. Again, some of these are quite
well-known people.
Abdel Moneim Aboul Fotouh, the founder of the Strong Egypt
Party, himself a previous Presidential candidate, blogger Wael
Abbas, youth activist Shady al-Ghazaly Harb, human rights
defender Amal Fathy, as well as others.
They've joined tens of thousands of other political
prisoners who have been detained for months, in some cases
years, and often in harsh conditions, including prolonged
solitary confinement and denial of adequate medical care in
addition to the even harsher measures that Mr. Genser
discussed--torture and so forth.
So why all these arrests now? Well, they come amid signs
that President Sisi might try to stay in office beyond the end
of his second term. The 2014 Egyptian constitution, which was
written after the 2013 military coup but before Sisi became
President, stipulated that the President is limited to two 4-
year terms and, of course, the writers of the constitution
wrote that because President Mubarak stayed in office for 30
years.
During his first term, Sisi promised that he would leave
office after 8 years. But he has not repeated that pledge
either during his reelection campaign or since, beginning his
second term.
His supporters are now saying that 8 years are not enough
and it's widely reported that amendments to the constitution
will be introduced into the Parliament to remove term limits
and perhaps extend the Presidential term from four to 6 years
as well as make other changes to strengthen Presidential
powers.
President Sisi has also taken steps that appear designed to
ensure the loyalty of senior military officers to him
personally. He has recently replaced the ministers of defense
and interior, the head of general intelligence, the army chief
of staff, and the Parliament recently passed a law that would
grant designated security officers lifelong immunity for crimes
committed following the 2013 coup--for example, the mass
killings at Rabaa and other acts of violence.
This law gives the President the right to designate which
senior officers would enjoy such immunity and thus will be a
highly effective tool in the hands of President Sisi to ensure
loyalty to him.
Now, why should the United States care if Sisi paves the
way to remain President for life? First of all, if he succeeds,
at best the lack of new blood in political leadership would
bring back the stagnation, corruption, and lack of
responsiveness to citizens, lack of accountability that led to
the revolt against Mubarak but with much more brutal repression
in the case of the Sisi regime.
That's a recipe for trouble in this nation of 100 million
people and neighbor to Israel. And if Sisi tries to secure a
lock on the presidency and he fails but there are no credible
political processes to sort things out, then the country might
well be headed for violent unrest before too long.
While the United States cannot and should not try to micro
manage Egypt's politics, the U.S. Government and particularly
the Congress can scrutinize engagement with Egypt and aid to
Egypt to be sure that the United States is promoting stability
for the entire nation rather than repression and one-man rule.
My specific recommendations include keep conditions on
security assistance. They're working. The U.S. administration
has become bolder in using the human rights conditions that
Congress has written into legislation and has withheld
assistance.
Based on some of the concerns that Mr. Genser articulated--
the conviction of NGO workers in 2013, the draconian new NGO
law that would crush civil society, and Egypt's dealing with
North Korea.
These problems have not yet been resolved. There are signs,
though, of greater responsiveness on the part of the Egyptian
government since the suspension of aid.
So keep writing those conditions into legislation and
encourage the administration to use them, which, of course,
means not releasing aid until the benchmarks are met.
I would recommend a bottom-up review of security assistance
to be right sized to make sure that it meets Egypt's actual
defense needs rather than the military's desire for impressive
weapons systems.
Insist on vigorous implementation of end use monitoring to
ensure that equipment provided is not used for human rights
abuses because, as we've already heard, it has been.
Consider shifting some assistance from security to address
some of the urgent needs of the population such as
modernization of the country's water infrastructure. It is
headed for a water crisis.
Ultimately, it's for Egyptian citizens to decide the future
they want for their country. But it's for American citizens and
their representatives to decide how much faith we have in that
vision and to what extent we are willing to support it.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Dunne follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Dr. Dunne, very much.
Mr. Miller.
STATEMENT OF MR. ANDREW MILLER, DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR POLICY,
PROJECT ON MIDDLE EAST DEMOCRACY
Mr. Miller. Chairman Ros-Lehtinen, Ranking Member Deutch,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me to testify.
With your permission, I will summarize my written
testimony, which I've submitted for the record. I will describe
three defining and concerning characteristics of Egypt under
President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi.
Then I will offer two recommendations regarding security
assistance that can help advance U.S. interests while right
sizing the bilateral relationship.
The first key characteristic of Egypt today is that the
country is no longer as important to U.S. interests as it once
was. Due both to its own internal decline and the growing
influence of wealthy Gulf states, Egypt has ceased to be a
regional power.
Egypt still matters to the U.S. but more because we cannot
afford the Arab world's most populous country becoming a basket
case that generates refugee flows or terrorist threats abroad.
A second characteristic is how poorly Sisi's military-
backed government is managing these problems. Dr. Dunne already
addressed the dangers of Sisi's attempt to create a total
autocracy in Egypt.
In the security arena too, Sisi has been unable to defeat
ISIS Sinai and other terrorist groups. In fact, 2017 saw the
most fatalities from terrorist attacks in modern Egyptian
history--756--while the mass incarceration of peaceful citizens
is worsening the radicalization problem.
On the economic front, Sisi has made some important fiscal
reforms, but his policies have led to deteriorating living
standards threatening the country's stability.
Third, Egypt is a very difficult partner for the United
States. Despite the $1.3 billion in FMF funds we provide each
year, Sisi has continued to cooperate with North Korea and
imprisoned U.S. citizens on trumped up charges.
Even where we share common interests, Egypt has often
rejected cooperation. For example, Egypt has spurned U.S.
offers to train its military in the modern counterterrorism
tactics essential to defeating groups like ISIS.
It is becoming harder to argue that the U.S. is getting a
good return on its investment in Egypt? What can the U.S. do to
break out of this unsatisfactory cycle?
There are two steps that Congress could take that would
advance the vital U.S. interests in Egypt's long-term stability
while ensuring a better return on investment.
For Washington to send a clear message, U.S. military aid,
which the Egyptian leadership values greatly, will have to be
put on or off the table.
First, Congress, should keep human rights conditions on
military assistance in the fiscal year 2019 appropriations
bill. The Trump administration made use of this conditionality
last August when it suspended $195 million in FMF funding in
part over human rights concerns.
As a result, after years of stalling, Egypt finally
arranged for a retrial in an infamous 2013 case in which 17
Americans received prison sentences on outrageous political
charges.
Egypt also reportedly forced North Korea to reduce the size
the of its Embassy in Cairo, Pyongyang's largest in the region.
While neither step merits releasing the $195 million, they
suggest that U.S. pressure is indeed having some effect.
In fiscal year 2019, Congress should continue such
conditionally and seek an end to Sisi's crackdown on civil
society, the release of political prisoners, and access for
U.S. military officials to the Sinai for end use monitoring.
These steps would both open up the political space that is
so important to Egypt's long-term stability and show that Sisi
is willing to address legitimate U.S. concerns.
My second recommendation is that Congress should reduce
annual military assistance to $1 billion as proposed in the
Senate appropriations committee markup.
Egypt views military aid as an entitlement and expects that
the U.S. will ultimately back down from any threat or attempt
to use it as leverage. This perception undermines U.S.
influence.
Consequently, reducing Egypt's military aid would send an
unmistakable signal that we expect more in return for our
support. The risks of imposing human rights conditionality and
reducing military aid are often exaggerated.
The Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty is no longer dependent on
U.S. aid or mediation. Egypt will not abandon the U.S. in favor
of Russia or China and cutting this aid will not degrade the
capabilities of an Egyptian military that needs better
training, not more weapons.
If these steps are taken, the U.S. will be in a stronger
position to persuade Sisi's government to open up political
space, reform Egypt's military doctrine, and address
radicalization.
At the very least, cutting Egypt's military aid will be a
service to the American taxpayer who has seen little return on
their investment in the present Egyptian government.
In closing, the U.S.-Egyptian relationship is no longer
working. I hope Congress will take this chance to recalibrate
it for a new era.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Excellent recommendations from all of
you.
Mr. Genser, you have represented some of the most well-
known human rights activists and political prisoners in recent
years, securing their freedom, their release, from a wide
variety of countries.
Please compare the case of your clients in Egypt to those
in other countries and are there certain aspects of Egypt's
legal system and approach to human rights that stand out and
what are the specific challenges that the accused face in
Egypt?
Mr. Genser. Thank you, Chairman Ros-Lehtinen. You have been
an extraordinary partner for so many victims of human rights
abuses around the world and especially in support of families
of political prisoners, and it's going to be very sad to see
you depart the Congress at the end of this term. We'll all miss
you.
So with respect to the situation in Egypt and political
prisoners, I think it's unmistakable that when you have tens of
thousands of people detained at any one time, the reality is
that most of them are being detained not even on trumped up
charges but on no charges at all, and you can't have due
process of law when you have tens of thousands being detained
at once, let alone probable cause for arresting these kinds of
people.
What my clients, Ola al-Qaradawi and Hossam Khalaf, have
suffered these USLPRs is emblematic of the problem. You know,
they were accused in media of being associated with the Muslim
Brotherhood, although they were, of course, cleared by
President Trump for their green cards.
So I would not find that to be a very credible accusation,
and they've been held on renewable detention orders for a year
and counting. Brought before judges that, you know, first heard
15-day renewals. Now it's every 45 days they appear.
They have had no access to their family for more than a
year. Neither of them have been able to have access to their
families, and even when they're brought to court, they aren't
even able to access their counsel.
They're in a glass aquarium all the way across the
courtroom and unable to even talk to their own lawyers, and
Egypt has presented no evidence of any kind that they have
committed any crimes, let alone that they would be prosecuted
for them and they are in this permanent state of renewable
detention.
This is a phenomena we see wide across Egypt, not just
against U.S. legal permanent residents or American citizens but
against ordinary Egyptians and real or imagined political
opponents of the regime.
You also have, of course, the reinstitution of the
emergency law which now has provided these alternate courts
that don't have basic due process protections and no right of
appeal and this is, obviously, a very, very dangerous trend
where in the name of counter terrorism operations people are
being sent to these kinds of court systems that have built-in
endemic and systematic problems, and ultimately, the judiciary
in Egypt, of course, is not independent or impartial as well.
So I think that this would--the situation in Egypt is very
analogous to the kind of situations that I have worked with
around the world in lots of different authoritarian contexts,
whether it be, you know, in Iran or a Cuba or Venezuela, you
know, or any one of a number of African countries that I've
worked in--the Gambia, you name it.
And I think the reality is that this is an authoritarian
ruler and President Sisi, who is determined to have his way not
only electorally but in terms of ensuring that there is no
legitimate peaceful dissent that has any power of any kind to
be able to challenge his rule, and I think that we see that
playing out in the form of the number of political prisoners.
I think that in any country around the world where you see
political prisoners that should be for everybody around the
world, a sign that this is a country that is moving in the
wrong direction rather than the--rather than the right
direction and Egypt, having tens of thousands or more political
prisoners, not even all of whom have been documented, and the
way that they're treated in prison is very emblematic of the
repression of the Sisi regime.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. Genser. Thank
you for your defense of political dissidents and we wish you
much success in your human rights work.
Thank you very much. I will ask Mr. Donovan to take over
for me, if he could, while I have some constituent appointments
in the side room, and with that I am pleased to yield to the
ranking member, my good friend, Mr. Deutch, of Florida.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Egypt has seen a multitude of changes since 2011's uprising
that led to a revolution. But looking at Egypt in its current
state, I think the message that a lot of us have here is our
concern about democracy.
And the recent Egyptian election indicator is that they
weren't free and fair. Minorities and opposing voices are being
repressed and Egypt's press and media are more and more
restricted.
Mr. Miller, you proposed retaining human rights conditions
on our assistance. We've had those conditions now in place over
the past several years. To what extent have they worked or what
more can be done to ensure that they do?
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Congressman, and I think that they
have, as I mentioned in my testimony, produced some results. We
have seen that--we have seen that--there's finally movement in
the 2013 NGO trial in which 17 Americans, 43 defendants
overall, were charged and sentenced to up to 5 years of jail.
We've also seen, according to the Egyptians, that they
forced the North Koreans to reduce the size of their presence
within Cairo. In prior years, conditionality played an
important role in getting the release of political prisoners--
Aya Hijazi, Mohamed Soltan, other figures. It does produce
results.
Now, they may seem small bore, but I think there's a reason
for that. Part of the challenge is pressure only works if the
other side believes that you're going to stick by it--that
you're going to adhere to the conditions you laid out, and,
unfortunately, over the past 40 years, the U.S. has tended to
capitulate after applying pressure on the Egyptians.
And that's part of why I think coupling the conditionality
with a reduction in assistance overall to send a message that
the $1.3 billion isn't sacrosanct, that is not simply enough to
fulfil these conditions but we want a genuinely different
approach, will translate into better results.
There really hasn't been a good test of conditionality
partly because we haven't stuck firm. If we stick firm in the
future, I am fairly confident that we are going to get better
results as well.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you.
Dr. Dunne, so other than reducing the amount of assistance,
what's the best way to message--the most effective way to
message on human rights to the Sisi government and has the
administration done it? What more can the administration do to
send that very clear message?
Ms. Dunne. Thank you, Congressman.
Well, two things--I would say what the current
administration has done that I think is effective is establish
some specific benchmarks. It seems to be that when they
withheld the $195 million last summer, they established some
specific benchmarks that they were looking for and that is I
think the Obama administration didn't do that as clearly.
They withheld some assistance after the military coup but
it wasn't really clear and then they ended up releasing it
without gaining anything. So that wasn't very effective.
What the Obama administration did that I think was, in a
way, better though was the public messaging. I haven't seen as
much. I've seen a little bit. There started to be a little bit
of public messaging from the Trump administration about
concerns.
There was a little bit about the concerns about how the
elections were run and so forth. But particularly, I think, as
we move forward into a situation in which President Sisi I
think is going to be looking around to see is it all right with
everyone if he stays in office indefinitely and so forth--is
there going to be any reaction to that internationally.
You know, there could be, I think, better public messaging
and clearer and more consistent private messaging about these
issues as well as conditions on aid--I mean, just discussing
human rights and democracy issues.
Mr. Deutch. So you talked about benchmarks being one way to
effectively move the needle on this. But what should that
public messaging look like and who should it be coming from?
Ms. Dunne. The public messaging that is most heard in
Egypt, I think, is from either very senior members of the U.S.
administration, such as the President and Cabinet members, or
from Members of Congress.
Whether they speak here or whether they speak when they
visit Egypt and so forth, I mean, that's the--it has to be a
news maker, so to speak, in order to get across because I think
it's very important that not only the Egyptian government hears
the message.
Of course, Egyptian government figures can hear the message
privately. But when it's made public, that indicates, you know,
to the Egyptian public and so forth that these issues are
being--are being raised with their government and I think it's
important to get that across.
Mr. Deutch. Great. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Donovan [presiding]. The gentleman yields.
The Chair recognizes himself, since I am the only one left
up here.
Let me just ask all of you one question and maybe everybody
could contribute or give me their thoughts. It seems that in
order to try to correct bad behavior in the area of human
rights, we withhold military aid.
The Egyptians probably, I suppose, say then we still have
to protect our own nation--we'll have to go elsewhere for that
military aid. And where do they go? North Korea.
So we tell them, you can't go to North Korea or we are
going to withhold more military aid. So it seems like we are
squeezing a balloon a little bit, to me.
So could you guys give me your opinion on how we could be
more successful to get them to crackdown on the violations on
human rights and at the same time not let them go to an area
where they're violating international laws and going somewhere
else for the aid that they need to protect their own nation
from their enemies?
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Congressman. I think that's very
much a legitimate concern and we have to be attentive to the
second order effects of the policy positions that we take.
I think it's worth emphasizing, though, that the $1.3
billion Egypt receives is well in excess of what they actually
need in order to combat their problems.
As I said before, it's really not an equipment problem. I
spoke with many U.S. senior military officials and they told me
that the Egyptians are obsessed with magic boxes.
They think there's a technological solution to everything
that will deal with IEDs, that will deal with insurgents, when
in actuality it's a question of how they use the equipment.
And, unfortunately, the Egyptians haven't been receptive
when the U.S. has offered training in counter terrorism
doctrine and tactics.
Regarding the assistance level where they're going to go,
what they want from North Korea, primarily, is missile parts
and the reason they want that is because no one else will sell
it to them.
If they don't get equipment from the United States, they're
as equally likely to go to France or the U.K. as they are to go
to Russia or China.
Now, there may be employment consequences for that and
there's a concern about whether we are appropriately
subsidizing U.S. defense contractors.
But in my--based on my personal experience, if we took the
money we took away from Egypt and gave it to another country,
they're going to order a lot of the same stuff. So there
actually isn't going to be a net impact on how much money is
going to subsidize the American arms industry.
Mr. Donovan. Anyone else care to comment?
Yes, Doctor.
Mr. Tadros. I think the issue is often framed and discussed
in terms of the money itself and the value of the money has,
obviously, diminished over the years.
The $1.3 billion, and it was even much more--$2 billion at
the time that the peace treaty with Israel was signed--is,
obviously not the same as what it buys today.
But more important to Egypt is the spare parts that they
need for the weapons that they have been buying for 30, 40
years from the United States, and also the very fact of a
relationship with the United States.
It matters to be an ally of the world's superpower in terms
of prestige in the region, in terms of many things for them,
getting economic aid from the World Bank and the IMF.
So I think the issue is not just the money there but
there's also a lot of things involved. In terms of actually
impacting their policies, I think it depends on how life and
death issue the policy is for them.
The question of whether to--how to deal with the Muslim
Brotherhood, for example, is viewed by the regime as a life and
death issue. They did conduct a military coup.
They removed these guys and put them to prison. You don't
conduct a coup and then go home and relax. You either rule or
you're jailed or die for it.
So there are questions that, for them, no matter whether
it's $1.3 billion or $10 billion, he's not going to put his
life in danger for that amount of money.
But there are many other issues where we can have a serious
discussion with the Egyptian regime on things that don't
threaten the regime's continuation--questions related to media,
to bloggers.
Dr. Dunne mentioned bloggers who are not even a threat to
the regime or not part of any threat that there is for them.
The question of the conditions of Christians in the country and
many other issues that you can have an impact and leverage on
because they are not life-threatening for them.
Mr. Donovan. Dr. Dunne.
Ms. Dunne. In my experience, Congressman, I don't see
President Sisi as resorting to other countries like North Korea
or even Russia because the United States has put pressure on
him.
The Egyptian-North Korean relationship goes very, very far
back, and what I have seen is that President Sisi wants to
diversify and sort of have all of the above--have all the
relationships with all these different players as much as he
can.
Now, the only question, I think, in terms of the United
States is that is that all right with us. So, obviously, it
wasn't all right with the United States for Egypt to have the
kind of security relationship it has with the United States and
also be buying weapons illicitly from North Korea.
Another issue that arose recently was the Russian
government asked for access to Egyptian air bases, you know,
and so that's a question--is that all right for the United
States for--you know, I think that President Sisi will have as
many--as many relationships as he can and it's not a question
of he's taking one because he isn't getting it from someone
else.
He just wants to diversify his relationships as much as
possible and then we will have to decide if we are going to
have a close security relationship--how much of that is okay
with us and how much is not.
Mr. Donovan. I thank you all for your comments.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Schneider.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you and, again, thank you to the
witnesses for joining us today.
Normally, I try to go from the general to the specific but
I think I am going to flip that on its head today and start
with a specific and, if there's time, talk more general.
One of my particular concerns is the status of the LGBTQ
community in Egypt. Last fall, as you may know, dozens of LGBTQ
Egyptians and their allies were arrested and detained after a
young Egyptian flew a rainbow flag at a concert in Cairo.
And prior to that there have been other mass arrests dating
back all the way to the Queen Boat incident more than 15 years
ago.
So, Dr. Dunne, I will start with you, but open the question
to anyone. Essentially, three questions--any update on the
situation for the LGBTQ community in Egypt and has the recent
crackdown ended or is it still going.
The second question would be are there ways that the broad
international community can have an impact on the environment
for the LGBTQ people within Egypt, and the third piece is I
would love your thoughts on the U.S. Government's response to
these human rights abuses in Egypt.
Ms. Dunne. Thank you, Congressman.
Yes. Sadly, I mean, this has been a long-running story in
Egypt--you know, targeting, harassment of the LGBTQ community
and it was--has been very much revived in the last couple of
years and, unfortunately, it really has happened mostly under
military-dominated governments and so--in Egypt specifically.
What I have seen, Congressman, is that it--there are times,
and it's hard to explain why the government or actors--security
actors within the government will decide to go after to target,
to beat members of this community and to prosecute them,
humiliate them publicly, and so forth.
What I have seen is that will tend to--that kind of
harassment will tend to abate when there is international
attention and also when Egyptians themselves start speaking up,
which happened in a case a couple of years go where Egyptians
themselves started to object.
But in the case that you mentioned with the people who were
arrested at the concert, I believe that not all of them have
been released yet--that some of them have been stuck in
detention, because there wasn't quite as much attention to that
case from the U.S. administration as there had been to some
previous cases.
There was a bathhouse case, the Queen Boat case you
mentioned from many years ago. So it's really important to
speak about these things publicly and for Egyptian officials to
hear about them from Members of Congress as well as the
administration.
Mr. Schneider. Great.
Mr. Tadros. Mr. Miller.
Mr. Tadros. I think there's the reality of the nature of
society there. It's a winning social issue for the government.
When they engage in such practices they are intended to
shore public support for the government so that the government
is defending values of the Egyptian people and tie the
community and the Western attention to it to Western attempts
to weaken Egypt and conspire against it.
So I think the regime periodically engages in such
practices when it serves the intention of shoring up local
support for its policies.
Mr. Schneider. Mr. Miller.
Mr. Miller. I think this speaks to an important point.
There's an assumption that the secular ex-general must be more
progressive or more socially tolerant than the former Islamist
President, and the reality--President Sisi's policies are often
no better and, in some cases, worse than former President
Morsi's on social indicators.
LGBTQ rights is one example--also, blasphemy cases. There
have been an increase in blasphemy cases under President Sisi
as compared to President Morsi, which has a disproportionate
impact on Coptic Christians, for instance.
While most of the cases involve Muslims, most of the
defendants who go to prison are Christians.
So in many respects, partly because Sisi is not labelled as
an Islamist, he feels freer to cater to the conservative
impulses in Egypt that Mr. Tadros mentioned.
Mr. Schneider. Great. Thank you.
And with the few seconds I have left, the big question,
more general, more than half of Egypt's population is under the
age of 25--actually, 24.
The population is expected to grow to 130 million in the
next decade. They're trying to bring that number down. But
demographics has to play into the economic impact and also
broader human rights expectations of both these young people
and it could be a challenge but it could also be an
opportunity.
So if I could have the indulgence of another minute I would
love your thoughts on that as well.
Ms. Dunne. Yes, Congressman. This is the mega issue for
Egypt is its rapidly growing and youthful population.
Population growth in Egypt had been slowly declining but now
it's turned around and it's been growing rapidly again.
The labor force is growing rapidly and even with an
economic growth statistic, a GDP growth right now of I think
5.4 percent, that sounds good.
To us in the United States, that sounds excellent. But with
the population growing with, you know, more than 2 million
Egyptians joining the population every year, that doesn't go
very far.
So, you know, there's a crying need to address the
population growth issue itself. Egypt has done some things but
not nearly as much as some others, even others in the Middle
East region have done about that.
And then there's a great need to generate jobs and that is
another problem of the economic program of President Sisi.
While he has instituted important austerity measures, there's
been much less in terms of facilitating private sector growth,
the growth of small and medium enterprises that really could
generate a lot of jobs.
It remains an economy and even increasingly is an economy
in which the playing field is heavily tilted toward the
military in which the military has really been gobbling up a
lot of the state contracts and so forth and therefore, you
know, it's a very worrisome issue.
Just the last thing I would say is about water. Egypt is
going to be, because of its population growth, facing a very
serious water shortage within not too many years.
Mr. Schneider. Great.
Thank you. I am out of time. Thanks for the extra time.
Mr. Donovan. Did you want to comment, sir?
Mr. Schneider. Oh, thank you.
Mr. Tadros. If I may. I think the demographic challenge is,
obviously, there. The economic part of it is important. So is
the educational part.
Egyptian education does not prepare this new generation for
the kind of jobs that the new world needs from them. I think
there a need to look into U.S. efforts to support educational
reform to Egypt both in terms of addressing radical ideas that
exist in the textbooks and the kind of anti-tolerance messages
that are there as well as looking at the educational system as
a means to help the country address its problems.
The water resource issue is very important as well. The
conflict--the growing conflict between Egypt and Ethiopia has
the potential of becoming an actual war and I think it's in the
best interests of the United States to deal with this issue
before it truly reaches an explosion point.
Mr. Donovan. I thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just before we wrap up, I wanted to ask a couple questions
about the Egyptian military operations, particularly in Sinai.
They have sustained significant losses.
Can someone speak to the U.S. counterterrorism support for
the Egyptian forces? Mr. Miller, can you speak to that?
Mr. Miller. I would be happy to, Congressman.
There is ongoing support and it's largely of two
dimensions. One is intelligence support. We provide them with
information on the location and identity of extremists who are
operating in the Sinai and that helps them to intercept them.
But the major problem, as I said before, was the training
dimension. Egypt employs a conventional obsolete approach to
asymmetric threats that isn't appropriate to dealing with
insurgents, that isn't appropriate to dealing with terrorists,
and repeatedly the United States, going back to the late Bush
administration--the George W. Bush administration--has tried to
have this conversation with the Egyptian military--the need to
reform how they approach these threats, to focus on building
allegiances with local populations, understanding that the
intelligence they provide is the key to success and paying
attention to how they're impacted by what's taking place.
The impact has been tremendous. You have 3,000 additional
homes destroyed during just this operation. You have over 3,000
families who have been forcibly relocated. That's not the way
you win a counterinsurgency campaign.
But I think that the U.S. Government would be happy and the
military will be happy to provide additional training in those
areas. Unfortunately, every time we've offered it the Egyptians
normally say, well, you guys, you failed.
You failed in Afghanistan. You failed in Iraq. You have no
idea what you're doing. Just give us the weapons and let us do
the job our way.
And while we understand their frustration and we understand
that we are not perfect--we made mistakes--we wish they would
make use of our mistakes and incorporate them into their
approach, moving forward.
But until they're willing to accept that type of training,
to have a dialogue on how they approach these threats,
unfortunately, I don't think they're going to achieve
sustainable success against these militants.
Mr. Deutch. And so just to follow up, given the focus on
military strikes as the response--the sole response--are there
efforts to address the drivers of the extremism--of the
ideology in Sinai?
Mr. Miller. We tried to have those conversations with
Egyptian officials, and Mr. Tadros was talking about the need
to have these conversations.
In my experience, not just in the Obama administration but
in the first months of the Trump administration, the Egyptians
wanted to treat the relationship like a Chinese menu. They
wanted to discuss what was important to them and they wanted to
ignore what was important to us, and often that meant these
types of issues. They ignore the connection between
radicalization--between imprisonment, between torture, and
radicalization and they say, we know how to deal with it.
I remember being in a meeting with President Sisi where he
said, there are two ways to deal with terrorists--you either
lock them up or you kill them.
Obviously, that leaves something to be desired, according
to modern understandings of how you deal with terrorists and
insurgents, and while that may be emotionally appealing at a
certain level, it's unlikely to be efficacious.
It's unlikely to produce those results, and that's one of
the reasons why I think we need to reset the relationship.
Under the current construct, we are not able to have the
conversations we need with the Egyptians because we are
overwhelmingly focused on what equipment they want and what
equipment they're going to receive rather than having a genuine
strategic discussion about our goals and their goals and how we
can better work together.
Mr. Deutch. Mr. Tadros or Dr. Dunne, do either of you have
comments?
Mr. Tadros. I think for--I mean, Egypt has been fighting
the group in Sinai--the Islamic State affiliate--for 6 years
now.
All previous military campaigns--there have been large
military campaigns--they have all failed. The Egyptian regime
has announced numbers of about 3,000 or more that they've
killed of these terrorists and arrested another 16,000 of
terrorists in Sinai while all estimates of the actual number of
fighters of the Islamic State ranges from 700 to 1,000.
So they're, obviously, not ending the threat there. They're
killing and arresting the wrong people and not ending the
threat. The last military campaign that was started in February
shows much more positive signs of success.
For the first time, they focused on the communications of
the Islamic State, which has both diminished the ability of
them to carry coordinated attacks because they operate more as
independent cells that coordinate then large attacks but each
is focused on its own area of operation--as well as limited
their ability to use media and to talk about their operations
and build support.
I think also a very important development is the fact that
this operation comes after the major massacre of more than 300
peaceful Moslems praying in their mosque. The brutality of the
Islamic State--the fact that they targeted normal Moslems--not
the security forces, not the Christians, but just regular guys.
I think this also helped build popular support in the Sinai
for the military to finally deal with that situation. So while
the potential for a return of major attacks by the Islamic
State remains, I think we've seen more positive signs in the
last couple of months.
Ms. Dunne. Just briefly, Congressman, I want to add that
while--you know, we will see what the results of the most
recent military campaign in the Sinai were, you know, perhaps
there--we will see a diminution of the militancy in the Sinai.
It's really too early to say yet.
But what really concerns me is what is going on inside of
Egyptian prisons. When we see tens of thousands of people,
almost all of them young people--the vast majority young men--
and we hear about the kinds of conditions--the torture, the
brutality, the solitary confinement, the lack of medical
treatment, and that they're often exposed in prison to
militants from ISIS and other extremist groups who seem to have
free rein to talk to people and recruit and so forth, it really
makes me worried.
I mean, that's another reason to pay a lot of attention to
the human rights problems in Egypt--first of all, from the
point of view of principle but also out of concern that this is
a radicalization factory--that it will be producing militants,
you know, for many years to come, I fear.
Mr. Donovan. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
California, Mr. Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much. I apologize to--I
missed most of hearing today. As usual, you're scheduled for at
least two or three really important things at exactly the same
time.
Any discussion of Egypt is an important thing. It is vital
because if the Egyptian government would happen to come under
the domination of a radical Islamist, the entire Middle East
would be destabilized and there would be war. There would be
war and millions of people killed.
I remember, and I understand when we can look at--with a
very, how do you say, principled look and say, this is the
standard we have. Even if--and no matter what's going on in a
country they can't do this.
But I think that when we look at Egypt today, we better
calculate what the danger is and not--I mean, I remember when
the Shah of Iran was overthrown. I remember that, and I
remember how we basically threw him under the bus, as they say,
and what did we get for that?
What did we get for demanding that the Shah restrained
himself in the street demonstrations and these organizations
efforts to get rid of him?
Well, what we got was a brutal mullah dictatorship that
even today, as we speak, is murdering its own people and trying
to suppress those people's aspirations.
And let us note for the record I hope that if anything
comes out of this hearing it's that we support the people of
Iran who are trying to overthrow the mullah dictatorship.
And with that said, I would hope that if they manage to do
that and they manage to set up an interim government that we
don't all of a sudden start having such a high standard that we
are judging them by that another mullah regime can beat them
down and take power.
We saw it with Qaddafi. Qaddafi was a bad guy. Qaddafi made
some deals with us and with the Russians to get rid of his
nuclear weapons. He made a deal with us to make sure that the
radical Islamic terrorism would not be used in Libya.
And guess what? We decided to go with the pure Democrats
and what do we have now? We have terrorists who were in control
of about a third to a half of Libya and total chaos.
Saddam Hussein--Saddam Hussein was a bad guy, and I don't
think it was--I certainly believe that we should have tried to
help the people in Iraq at the time but we ended up sending
U.S. soldiers down there.
When the United States is trying to make up its mind what
to do, we better do it rationally and we shouldn't be doing it
based on some--on an analysis that is not in firm ground of
reality.
So with that said, just what you just mentioned about
President el-Sisi, who I think is one of the great champions of
stability in that part of the world and without him I believe
that there would be many more people dying.
I believe that the--especially if as Morsi would have
continued the direction he was going, just the same direction
Erdogan is going today, I think that leads to death,
instability, and it leads to far less freedom in the long run.
Yes, someone who is a terrorist, yes, it doesn't bother me
that he wants to either string him up or whatever he wants to
do with him. Quite frankly, it is a good thing when a terrorist
is put out of commission, whichever way they figure out how to
do that.
Now, I realize that I've spoken too long now, but I should
give you all a chance to refute everything I just said, which
is fine--which is part of the process here.
But let me just say we better be darn realistic when we are
dealing with these--with these challenges because if we end up
with more people dying and more tyranny in the long run because
we've held someone up to a standard that is not appropriate for
that particular moment, shame on us.
And by the way, I just--I will finish up with saying much
of the criticism I've heard of el-Sisi and is regime has been
just that. It's been criticism based on a standard that should
not be used at this moment.
So with that said, go right ahead and--I know you have some
disagreement with me so but go right ahead and do so. Whoever--
--
Ms. Dunne. Thank you, Congressman Rohrabacher.
You know, I have to say I really share your concerns that
if Egypt would come under the domination of a radical Islamist
regime or leader that it would destabilize the entire region. I
agree with you entirely.
My worry is that the degree of repression under President
Sisi could be taking the country in exactly that direction--you
know, that there is really--at this point there are not--the
normal channels through which, you know, peaceful differences
of opinion through formal politics, electoral competition in
the Parliament, through a free media, through civil society
organizations and so forth--frankly, things that Egypt had to a
greater degree under President Mubarak in the past than they
have now, you know, and even then Egyptians, you know,
eventually revolted against Mubarak--that without these
outlets, I really fear that there could be a breakout of
violent radical, you know, opposition to President Sisi,
particularly, you know, if he tries to remain in officer more
or less indefinitely.
So, you know, that is my concern. I don't think anyone here
is suggesting that the United States should do anything like
intervene in Egypt or the way it did in Iraq or even
participate in an intervention the way it did in Libya.
But to somehow use what influence we have to try to
persuade the Egyptian leadership to open up those channels for
the peaceful expression of dissent and for peaceful political
competition so that Egyptians can find their way forward
without future destabilization and an increase in violence.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much.
Mr. Donovan. Seeing that there's no other members seeking
recognition, I thank the witnesses for sharing your expertise
and your opinions with us.
This committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:09 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
Material Submitted for the Record
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]