- MILITARY CONSTRUCTION, VETERANS AFFAIRS, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
[Senate Hearing 116-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
MILITARY CONSTRUCTION, VETERANS AFFAIRS, AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
----------
TUESDAY, APRIL 9, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 2:57 p.m., in room 124, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. John Boozman (chairman) presiding.
Present: Senators Boozman, Murkowski, Collins, Rubio,
Daines, Schatz, Leahy, Tester, Reed, Udall, Baldwin, and
Murphy.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT MCMAHON, ASSISTANT SECRETARY
OF DEFENSE FOR SUSTAINMENT
opening statement of senator john boozman
Senator Boozman. Good afternoon. The subcommittee will come
to order.
We meet today to discuss the President's fiscal year 2020
budget request for military construction, family housing, and
base realignment and closure for the Department of Defense. I
would like to begin by recognizing today's panel. Today, we
will hear from representatives of all the military services as
well as the Office of the Secretary of Defense.
For three of our witnesses, this will be their final
appearance in front of our subcommittee before their
retirements this summer, which I am sure you have mixed
emotions about being in front of the subcommittee. Joining us
are the Honorable Robert McMahon, Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Sustainment. Lieutenant General Gwendolyn Bingham,
Assistant Chief of Staff of the Army for Installation
Management, who is retiring after 38 years of service. And we
very much appreciate you.
Vice Admiral Dixon R. Smith, Deputy Chief of Naval
Operations for Fleet Readiness and Logistics, retiring after 37
years of service. Again, thank you for your service.
Major General Vincent Coglianese, Commander of the Marine
Corps Installations Command and Assistant Deputy Commandant,
Installations and Logistics, who is retiring after 36 years of
service. And again, we appreciate all of you and all that you
represent very, very much.
Brigadier General John Allen, Air Force Deputy Chief of
Staff for Logistics, Engineering, and Force Protection, and
Director of Civil Engineers, who is not retiring, but I also
want to thank you for your 27 years of service.
The fiscal year 2020 base budget request of $11.2 billion
reflects a 9 percent increase over the fiscal year 2019 enacted
level of $10.3 billion. While it is great to see an increase in
the MILCON request for the second consecutive year, reversing
years of underfunding, while simultaneously building ready and
resilient installations will remain a challenge.
The increased complexity of facilities needed to support
today's weapons systems and new platforms is driving complex
designs, higher costs, and aggressive construction schedules.
Additionally, efforts to support several multibillion
dollar recapitalization initiatives culminate in large and
complex projects taking up a greater share of the budget. We
are all aware that this portfolio has been taking on increasing
levels of risk for years, and affordability continues to
decrease as cost of the construction projects continues to
rise. This is evident in this year's request as the top 20
percent of projects account for half of the budget.
The fiscal year 2020 budget request begins to improve our
infrastructure, but the total MILCON request is still less than
3 percent of the total Department of Defense budget. Congress
and departments must collaborate to find innovative solutions
to deliver facility investments with constrained resources.
This is an urgent need, given that MILCON not only supports new
weapon platforms, but are interdependent on purpose-built
infrastructure, but it also provides for hospitals, schools,
and housing to improve the quality of life for our service
members and their families.
To that end, I am pleased that the Office of the Secretary
of Defense and the services are developing and implementing
efforts on infrastructure management and reform. I look forward
to learning more about the services implementing these
initiatives and hearing how they will improve existing
processes. The fiscal year 2020 Overseas Contingency Operation
European Deterrence Initiative request is $645 million, a
decrease from the fiscal year 2019 enacted level of $921
million.
I would be remiss if I didn't note that the $9.2 billion
emergency request to support hurricane reconstruction efforts
and the national emergency at the southern border. The damage
at Tyndall Air Force Base and Camp Lejeune is truly
devastating, and I think we must rebuild in a smart, thoughtful
manner as quickly as we responsibly can.
I also believe that border security is an urgent need that
should be a priority. Clearly, work remains to be done in order
to achieve the level of border security that the American
people are calling on Congress to deliver, and this will
require a whole of government effort.
I don't think I am exaggerating if I say the specific
request in front of the subcommittee is unprecedented and will
spark passionate debate among my colleagues. However, I remain
hopeful that the subcommittee can work together in our
traditional bipartisan fashion to develop a bill that supports
the Department and our service members.
Before we turn to our witnesses, I would like to recognize
my colleague Senator Schatz for his opening remarks.
opening statement of senator brian schatz
Senator Schatz. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you to all of these great public servants on the panel.
Reviewing the Defense Department's military construction
request for fiscal year 2020 means that we are also
reconsidering the projects that Congress funded for fiscal year
2019. We funded those projects because the Department asked for
them, because you told us that they were necessary. Now Acting
Secretary Shanahan has directed the services to go back and
take a second look to see if that is still true.
No one has outlined the criteria DoD is going to use to
decide what projects to delay or defund to pay for the wall.
The Department needs to provide specifics on how it will decide
which projects are now on the chopping block. And when we
finally see the list of projects that DoD is willing to cut for
the wall, we need to know how the Department decided because
there is a concern that the White House may have promised to
protect projects in certain States in exchange for votes by
members of this body on the President's emergency declaration.
So let us be clear about what will happen if this process
remains obscured. If you decide a prior year project is worth
cannibalizing to pay for the wall, you also just decided that
it is less important than every other project in the Future
Years Defense Program. It falls off for 10 years. That goes for
service-specific projects as well as Defense-wide agency
projects.
Additionally, the Department is asking us to write a
separate check for $3.6 billion to pay for what, I am not
entirely sure. And it is not clear the Department has fleshed
that out either. We have to assume it is to pay for fiscal year
2020 projects that you are up here defending that may get cut
next year, for next year's emergency declaration and raid for
the border wall. I see no reason to provide that funding.
There is also this idea that there will be--that we will
backfill any project that DoD delays to pay for a wall that
Congress has already said it won't do. We have to reject this
for what it is, an undermining of our constitutional role as
appropriators. This committee has a tradition of giving the
Department flexibility to move money to meet urgent needs, but
we will not weaken our oversight by giving you lump sum funding
for some unknown purposes, whether it is for border wall
construction, hurricane recovery, or housing. If you don't give
us more information, we will be forced to put more restrictions
around funds that we appropriate.
Every day this goes on, we are seeing the erosion of our
trust and confidence that has been part of this committee's
work with the Department. We get that none of this is your
call. You are responding to a policy directive, but you need to
know that this whole process and the uncertainty around it has
frayed our working relationship. We do need answers, and we
expect you to carry the messages you are hearing back to your
service chiefs and the Acting Secretary.
Setting aside the border wall, the fiscal year 2020 request
is largely a good news story. The base budget request
recognizes that we badly need to invest in military
infrastructure, and you have used less war funds to fund your
total requirement. The request includes important improvements
to training ranges, piers and wharfs, and airfields. We are
also seeing increases across the Guard and Reserve, and I hope
the Department can continue to build on this.
And let me end by recognizing three of our witnesses who
are making their last appearance: Lieutenant General Bingham,
Vice Admiral Dixon Smith, and Major General Coglianese. I want
to thank you for your decades of service. I want to thank you
all for everything you do for our country. I want to especially
recognize Dixon Smith, his wife, Kiki, their service in Hawaii
and our friendship.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Boozman. Mr. McMahon, I now recognize you for your
opening statement.
summary statement of hon. robert mcmahon
Mr. McMahon. Chairman Boozman, Ranking Member Schatz,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, on behalf of myself
and my service colleagues, thank you for the opportunity to
present the President's fiscal year 2020 budget request for the
Department's sustainment programs. My written statement has
been submitted for the record.
As the Assistant Secretary for Sustainment, I focus on
supporting the National Defense Strategy through three
strategic objectives. First, creating and sustaining resilient
installations. Second, ensuring safe places for our members and
their families to live, work, play, and pray. And third,
enhancing material availability of Department of Defense
weapons systems. Our fiscal year 2020 request continues the
Department's efforts in achieving these objectives and
rebuilding our military into a more capable, lethal, and ready
joint force.
Our installations are our power projection platforms. And
investments in infrastructure, environment, and energy ensure
they are ready to support the defense of the Nation. We are
requesting $21 billion for the military construction and family
housing appropriations to construct or acquire facilities
needed to beddown new mission capabilities, restore and
modernize enduring infrastructure, eliminate those that are
excess or obsolete, and begin hurricane recovery.
Aside from MILCON, we are requesting $10.4 billion for
sustainment and almost $5 billion for restoration and
modernization, a 7 percent and 80 percent increase over our
2019 request, respectively. While this is a significant
improvement, we continue to take risk in these areas. Because
we must adapt to a variety of threats in increased installation
resilience, we will continue to focus on robust infrastructure,
sound land management, increased energy resilience, improving
cybersecurity, and the effects of a changing climate.
We are also committed to protecting the quality of life for
our personnel and their families. Our primary focus here is
ensuring access to safe, high quality, affordable family, and
unaccompanied housing. To that end, our budget includes $1.3
billion to support our worldwide non-privatized family housing
inventory, which includes more than 34,000 Government-owned and
7,100 leased units. This request also demonstrates our
continuing commitment to modernized, unaccompanied personnel
housing, with more than $674 million requested for construction
and renovation projects supporting more than 3,900 trainees and
permanent party personnel.
With regard to housing privatization, it was the right
thing to do, improving the quality of on-base housing and
providing the necessary long-term investment our personnel
deserve. That said, recent media coverage reveals deficiencies
that we must address. The Department is committed to working
with our housing privatization partners and you to provide the
best housing possible.
Last month, I testified on the potential support the
Department of Defense may provide in the construction of a
border barrier. This request includes $9.2 billion of emergency
funding to restore resources that may be reallocated in fiscal
year 2019 should the Acting Secretary of Defense choose to
exercise 10 U.S.C. 2808 authority and for unspecified fiscal
year 2020 military construction to build border barriers.
Additionally, this amount includes funding to rebuild
facilities damaged by Hurricane Florence and Michael. Our 2020
budget also requests $3.6 billion for environmental programs, a
$188 million increase over last year's request. This includes
$254 million in the BRAC environmental account, focusing on
restoration, compliance in adopting new technologies to reduce
cost and accelerating cleanup.
Finally, energy is an essential enabler of military
capability. And to that end, we are requesting $150 million for
the Energy Resilience and Conservation Investment Program to
fund projects that improve resilience and security, save energy
and water, reduce costs, and most importantly, contribute to
our mission readiness.
We appreciate Congress' and this subcommittee's continued
support as we work together to provide the best support
possible to our soldiers, sailors, airmen, and Marines, and
their families. And I look forward to your questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Robert McMahon
introduction
Chairman Boozman, Ranking Member Schatz and distinguished members
of the Subcommittee: Thank you for the opportunity to present the
President's fiscal year 2020 budget request for the Department of
Defense programs supporting Sustainment.
The New Sustainment Organization
With my confirmation as the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Sustainment, we have consolidated the former Logistics and Materiel
Readiness and the Energy, Installations & Environment portfolios into a
more holistic organization focused on sustaining warfighter support. As
the principal sustainment official within the senior management tier of
DoD, my mission is to advise and assist the Undersecretary of Defense
for Acquisition and Sustainment, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, and
the Secretary of Defense in providing guidance to the Secretaries of
the Military Departments with respect to sustainment support. I
prescribe policies and procedures for facilities management, energy,
environment, infrastructure, logistics, materiel readiness, and product
support. In addition, I exercise authority, direction and control over
the Office of Economic Adjustment and Director of the Defense Logistics
Agency.
Sustainment is big business. We support warfighter capabilities
through over 585,000 facilities, located on more than 500 bases, posts,
camps, stations, yards, and centers around the world, with a facility
replacement cost exceeding $1 trillion, not including the value of the
27 million acres of land that our installations occupy. Additionally,
defense logistics alone represents a quarter of the Department's
budget, while sustaining nearly $1 trillion in materiel assets,
including 275 ships, 14,000 aircraft, and almost 500,000 combat and
other ground vehicles. We manage approximately, 5,000,000 stock
numbers, 100,000 suppliers, 90,000 requisitions per day and an
inventory valued at nearly $100 billion. The Defense Logistics Agency
has annual sales of $38 billion.
As the head of this enterprise, my strategic objectives are to a)
enhance materiel availability of DoD weapon systems; b) create and
sustain resilient installations; and c) ensure safe places for our
members and their families to live, work, play, and pray.
The fiscal year 2020 budget request supports the National Defense
Strategy's (NDS) three lines of effort: rebuilding readiness and
lethality; strengthening alliances and partnerships; and improving
performance and affordability through reform. Investments in
infrastructure, environment, energy, logistics, materiel readiness, and
weapons support are crucial for NDS implementation. Every mission the
DoD Components undertake to defend this nation is supported by DoD
installations, which are our power projection platforms.
fiscal year 2020 budget request--military construction and family
housing
The President's fiscal year 2020 budget requests over $21 billion
for the Military Construction (MilCon) and Family Housing
appropriation, which includes $9.9 billion for the base budget MilCon
requirements, $1.3 billion for family housing, $0.6 billion for
Overseas Contingency Operations, and $9.2 billion for responding to
emergencies. This represents a $9.8 billion increase from the fiscal
year 2019 enacted level primarily due to the aforementioned emergency
funding, which will be used to restore funding which may be reallocated
in fiscal year 2019 to build border barriers should the Acting
Secretary of Defense choose to exercise the 10 U.S.C. 2808 authority.
This funding will also be used to rebuild facilities damaged by
Hurricanes Florence and Michael, and for unspecified military
construction to build border barriers.
This budget request continues the Department's priorities to
establish a foundation for rebuilding the U.S. military into a more
capable, lethal, and ready Joint Force. This funding will be used to
construct or acquire facilities needed to bed-down new mission
capabilities, restore and modernize enduring infrastructure, eliminate
those that are excess or obsolete, and begin implementing projects
supporting hurricane recovery.
military construction
We are requesting $9.9 billion in the base budget for military
construction across the Services and Defense Agencies--an increase of
approximately $1.1 billion from the fiscal year 2019 enacted base
budget. This increase is largely due to a need to fund the balance of
projects that Congress incrementally funded in fiscal year 2019; to
support new capability/mission (e.g., F-35A and KC-46) bed down
requirements, force structure growth, operations and training,
maintenance and production, unaccompanied personnel housing, and
replacing antiquated infrastructure at enduring installations in the
United States and overseas.
This request includes $2.6 billion for the Defense-Wide Components
including $267 million for fuel infrastructure; $697 million for
recapitalization of National Security Agency and National Geospatial
Intelligence Agency facilities; $494 million to address new
capabilities/mission, force structure growth, and infrastructure for
Special Operations Forces; and for specific programs such as the NATO
Security Investment Program and the Energy Resilience and Conservation
Investment Program.
In addition, the Defense-Wide request also contains $256 million
for medical facility recapitalization including the third increment of
$97 million of a $510 million project for the Walter Reed Medical
Center Addition/Alteration; $50.0 million for the second increment (of
a $381 million, five increment project) for a new hospital at Fort
Leonard Wood, Missouri; and other smaller ambulatory care center/dental
and support facilities. All the projects are crucial for our continued
delivery of the quality healthcare that our service members and their
families deserve.
overseas contingency operations
The fiscal year 2020 OCO budget request includes $645 million in
MilCon, a decrease of $277 million from the fiscal year 2019 enacted
amount, to support critical global defense posture requirements focused
primarily in European areas, including the ongoing European Deterrence
Initiative (EDI). EDI enhances readiness in Europe to deter Russian
aggression and provides our allies a clear indication of the United
States' long-term commitment to Europe. This MilCon funding includes
unspecified minor military construction and planning and design funds
for airfield, facility, and force protection upgrades. The improvements
continue our efforts to strengthen combat readiness and theater Joint
Reception, Staging, Onward Movement, and Integration capabilities in
the region.
dod emergency funding
As noted earlier, the fiscal year 2020 budget request includes $9.2
billion of emergency funding to restore resources that may be
reallocated in fiscal year 2019 to build border barriers should the
Acting Secretary of Defense choose to exercise the 10 U.S.C. 2808
authority, to rebuild facilities damaged by Hurricanes Florence and
Michael, and for unspecified military construction to build border
barriers.
family and unaccompanied housing
In return for the sacrifices they make in service to our nation,
Service members and their families expect a safe and secure place to
live, good schools for their children, access to good medical care, and
a viable relocation process that respects their household goods. The
Department is committed to protecting the quality of life for military
personnel and their families by ensuring access to safe, high-quality,
affordable Family and Unaccompanied Housing where they will want to
live. The environment in which our Service members and their families
live impacts their quality of life, their ability to do their job, and
the Department's ability to recruit and retain. Ensuring a positive
housing experience and quality of life is critical to support personnel
readiness for new and current missions and strategic initiatives
worldwide.
Our fiscal year 2020 budget request includes $1.3 billion to
support our worldwide family housing inventory, which includes more
than 34,000 government-owned and 7,100 leased family housing units.
This request contains $293 million for construction of new housing and
about $1 billion for operation and maintenance of DoD's government-
owned and leased family housing units, oversight of privatized housing
on our U.S. installations, and provisioning of housing support services
to assist military members with housing issues such as resolving
landlord issues or providing information on the local housing market.
The requested funding demonstrates our commitment to provide safe,
quality, affordable housing and housing support services to U.S.
military personnel and their families.
The Department's fiscal year 2020 budget request also demonstrates
our continued commitment to modernizing Unaccompanied Personnel
Housing, with more than $674 million requested for nine construction
and renovation projects that will improve living conditions for more
than 3,900 trainees and permanent party unaccompanied personnel. This
includes $73 million for the second phase of a training barracks at
Fort Sill, OK; $164 million for a bachelors enlisted quarters complex
at Navy Base Guam; $110 million for a recruit barracks at Joint Base
San Antonio, TX; and $134 million for a bachelor enlisted quarters
project at Marine Corps Base Hawaii. Our modernization effort includes
a focus on improving privacy and access to amenities that are important
to our unaccompanied personnel.
Now that the Department has privatized most of its CONUS-based
housing, a primary role for the Office of the Secretary of Defense is
to ensure these projects maintain quality housing where military
families will enjoy living while sustaining the projects' long-term
financial viability. To support this goal, the Department is requesting
$3.5 million to help administer the Military Housing Privatization
Initiative (MHPI) program. These funds are critical for us to monitor
MHPI project financial health; respond to Office of the Management and
Budget guidance related to oversight of Federal credit including annual
credit subsidy re-estimates for government direct loans and loan
guarantees; and conduct analyses of MHPI projects under financial
stress that may require a restructure or modification (e.g., as a
result of hurricane damage). Our oversight of the MHPI program includes
privatized family and unaccompanied housing, as well as lodging the
Army privatized at 40 U.S. installations over the last 13 years.
military housing privatization initiative
Under the Military Housing Privatization Initiative (MHPI)
legislation established in 1996, the Military Departments have
privatized 99 percent (more than 200,000 units) of installation family
housing in the U.S., with more than 80 MHPI projects currently in place
across approximately 150 installations.
The Department is confident that housing privatization was the
right thing to do. Privatization has dramatically improved the quality
of on-base housing and has facilitated the long-term investment
necessary to maintain high quality housing. The MHPI allowed the
Military Departments to leverage private sector expertise and funding
to improve the quality of installation housing in the United States
much faster than DoD could have done through traditional military
construction and ongoing operation and maintenance funding.
Under the MHPI, Military Departments conveyed their existing
government housing units to competitively selected privatization
entities (i.e., the MHPI projects). MHPI projects operate under long-
term (50-year) ground leases and associated legal agreements with a
Military Department, with one 25-year option period. In return, the
MHPI projects assumed ownership of the houses and the responsibility
for operation, maintenance, construction, and replacement of the
housing during the lease term, in accordance with the authorities as
defined in Title 10, United States Code.
In light of the media reports and recent hearings on the poor
conditions and service some military families experienced over the last
several years, I am increasing the oversight my office provides to
ensure the Military Departments fully and effectively exercise their
responsibilities to ensure that privatized housing is managed in a
manner protective of human health and the environment. This includes
establishing new reporting requirements and programmatic reviews
regarding Military Department monitoring of potential hazards in
privatized housing, such as reporting on the number of child falls from
windows in MHPI (or military-operated) housing.
The Department and our housing privatization partners are committed
to working together to increase our collective communication with
military families to better ensure they have a positive experience
living in privatized housing. This will start with the issuance of a
Resident Bill of Rights. We will be working with Congress, the Military
Departments, the privatized housing owners, and military families to
articulate the responsibilities and expectations between renters and
lessors. We will also be increasing our engagement with military
families throughout their residency. Through increased engagement, we
will better educate military families about their roles and
responsibilities to help identify any issues with housing conditions,
and the roles and responsibilities of the privatized partner and the
installation housing teams. Our commitment to increase engagement also
extends to Military and Veteran Support Organizations and advocacy
groups such as the Military Family Advisory Network.
In all cases, we commit to work with our housing privatization
partners to ensure any and all resident concerns are addressed in a
highly responsive, timely and professional manner, with emphasis on
expediting resolution of any concerns involving potential health or
safety issues. We want our military families to know that we truly care
about their experience living in privatized housing and that we want to
collectively do better in delivering safe, high quality, affordable
housing where our military members and their families will want and
choose to live.
The Department of Defense understands that the family is important,
and we honor the sacrifice that Service members and their families make
to serve our nation. The Department recognizes we have a moral
obligation to military families to provide safe and quality housing,
and we take that obligation seriously. We are committed to the long-
term success of the MHPI projects and MHPI program, and will continue
our oversight of the MHPI portfolio to ensure delivery of quality
housing for Service members and their families over the life of the
projects. Bottom line, this requires a twin focus: ensuring our
residents have a positive experience living in privatized housing, and
ensuring the long-term viability of the MHPI projects for future
military families.
facilities sustainment and recapitalization
In order for the Department's facilities to support the goals of
the National Defense Strategy, they must be well maintained and
renovated periodically. Over the last 2 years, the Department has
increased its funding to sustain and modernize existing facilities.
While our Components must still take risks in maintaining facilities,
this budget request continues to improve our overall funding and reduce
risk in our most important infrastructure.
Facility Sustainment funding, which includes the regularly
scheduled maintenance and repair or replacement of facility components,
is the foundation of the Department's investment to maintain the
condition of our facilities. These periodic and predictable investments
must be made across the service life of a facility to slow its
deterioration and optimize its performance to support the safety,
productivity, and quality of life of our personnel, while also reducing
long-term recapitalization requirements. The Department's Operations
and Maintenance (O&M) funding for Facility Sustainment in the fiscal
year 2020 budget request is $10.4 billion, representing a 7 percent
increase compared to our fiscal year 2019 budget request. This
investment improves our collective sustainment rate to over 86 percent
of our Facilities Sustainment Model requirement. This is still short of
our 90 percent goal, but nonetheless represents significant movement in
the right direction.
In addition to Sustainment funding, Restoration and Modernization
funding enables renovations and upgrades to ensure a facility can
support assigned missions. Thanks to authority provided in the fiscal
year 2017 National Defense Authorization Act, the DoD Components are
increasing their pursuit of opportunities to more cost-effectively
repurpose existing facilities to accommodate new missions. Our fiscal
year 2020 budget request includes almost $5 billion in the Operations
and Maintenance account for facilities restoration and modernization,
an increase of almost 80 percent over our fiscal year 2019 request. As
with our sustainment program, this also represents movement in the
right direction to address the backlog of requirements in aging and
obsolete facilities.
environmental and safety programs
Installations are key platforms for our nation's defense.
Therefore, we must make them resilient and a ``safe'' place for not
only our service members, but their families living on our
installations and our surrounding communities. The Department's
environmental investments support these objectives through activities
ranging from managing critical habitat and avoiding training
restrictions to addressing drinking water health advisories and making
the best use of limited cleanup dollars. The President's fiscal year
2020 Budget requests $3.6 billion for environmental programs, which is
an increase of $185 million compared to the fiscal year 2019 request.
We are requesting $1.3 billion to continue cleanup efforts at the
remaining Installation Restoration Program (IRP) sites and Military
Munitions Response Program (MMRP) sites. The IRP is focused on cleanup
of hazardous substances, pollutants, and contaminants, while the MMRP
is focused on responding to unexploded ordnance and munition
constituents at former military ranges. This includes $1.1 billion for
``Environmental Restoration,'' which encompasses active installations
and Formerly Used Defense Sites (FUDS--sites that DoD transferred to
other Federal agencies, States, local governments, or private
landowners before October 17, 1986). The remaining $254 million is for
``BRAC Environmental.''
Progress Towards Cleanup Goals
Goal: Achieve Response Complete at 90 percent and 95 percent of Active and BRAC IRP and MMRP sites, and FUDS IRP
sites, by fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2021, respectively
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Status as of the end of
Status as of the end of
Projected status at the
fiscal year 2017
fiscal year 2018
end of fiscal year 2021
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Army.................................
91%
91%
94%
Navy.................................
82%
83%
88%
Air Force............................
83%
86%
92%
DLA..................................
86%
85%
95%
FUDS.................................
84%
86%
92%
Total............................
86%
88%
92%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
By the end of 2018, the Department, in cooperation with State
agencies and the Environmental Protection Agency, completed cleanup
activities at 88 percent of Active and BRAC IRP and MMRP sites, and
FUDS IRP sites, and is now monitoring the results. During fiscal year
2018 alone, the Department completed cleanup at over 469 sites. Of the
roughly 39,500 restoration sites, more than 33,500 are now in
monitoring status or have completed cleanup.
Our focus remains on continuous improvement in the restoration
program: minimizing overhead; adopting new technologies to reduce cost
and accelerate cleanup; refining and standardizing our cost estimating;
and improving our relationships with State regulators through increased
dialogue. All of these initiatives help ensure that we make the best
use of our available resources to complete cleanup.
However, challenges remain that slow our progress. For example,
unregulated or emerging chemicals of concern, such as perfluorooctane
sulfonate (PFOS) and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), are becoming a top
priority and require the DoD to reprioritize or reopen previously made
decisions which will cause delays in achieving our goals. Additionally,
some sites have no feasible solution to clean up the contamination, and
as a result, the Department is making significant investments in
environmental technology to identify new potential remediation methods.
environmental technology
A critical part of DoD's approach to meeting its environmental
obligations and improving its performance is the continued pursuit of
advances in science and technology. The Department has a thirty-year
record of researching, developing, and transferring innovative
environmental technologies from the laboratory to actual use in the
field. Many of these technologies are also now widely used by other
Federal agencies and industry, benefitting the nation as a whole.
The overall fiscal year 2020 budget request for Environmental
Technology is $178 million, centered on two key programs--the Strategic
Environmental Research and Development Program (SERDP--focused on basic
and applied research) and the Environmental Security Technology
Certification Program (ESTCP--focused on validating more mature
technologies to transition them to widespread use). The fiscal year
2020 budget request includes $66 million for SERDP and $39 million for
ESTCP for environmental technology demonstrations, with an additional
$27 million requested specifically for energy technology
demonstrations. These Defense-wide environmental technology programs
coordinate closely with the Military Services to ensure research,
demonstration, test and evaluation are focused on the Departments most
pressing environmental needs.
These programs have already achieved noticeable results and have
the potential to significantly reduce long-term costs by implementing
new ways of treating groundwater contamination, to increasing training
land availability by developing more effective management strategies
for installation managers, and to reduce the life-cycle costs of
multiple weapons systems through development and demonstration of
innovative coatings and materials. During the past 2 years, we have
also launched an aggressive initiative to address management issues
associated with the use of Aqueous Film Forming Foam (AFFF) including
development of fluorine-free alternatives for AFFF, as well as
development of more efficient and cost-effective sampling, analysis,
and treatment options for AFFF-related chemicals including
perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS), perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), and
related per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). In the critical
area of installation energy, we are focused on proving technologies and
solutions that cost-effectively improve the energy security and
resiliency of our installations, and that protect our energy assets and
facilities from cyber-attacks.
improving installation and climate resilience
DoD must adapt current and future operations to address a variety
of threats and increase the resilience of our installations. We
recognize the effects of a changing climate are a national security
issue with potential impacts to Department of Defense missions,
operational plans, and installations. We have been and will continue to
be proactive in developing comprehensive policy, guidance, and tools to
mitigate these impacts, with a focus on robust infrastructure, sound
land management policies, and increased energy resilience.
From a resources perspective, DoD is incorporating climate
resilience as a cross-cutting consideration for our planning and
decisionmaking processes, and not as a separate program or specific set
of actions. Specifically, the Department considers resilience in the
installation planning and basing processes. This includes consideration
of environmental vulnerabilities in installation master planning,
management of natural resources, design and construction standards,
utility systems and service, as well as emergency management
operations. The Department has been proactive in developing policy,
guidance, and tools to mitigate the impacts of a changing climate.
These mitigation strategies focus on infrastructure and land
management.
From a policy perspective, the Department has published several
issuances to ensure the Services and Joint Staff integrate climate
scenarios into planning. DoD Directive 4715.21, Climate Change Adaption
and Resilience, assigns responsibilities to components to incorporate
climate considerations into planning for infrastructure and operations.
DoD Instruction 4715.03, Natural Resources Conservation Program,
requires consideration of climate impacts during development of
Installations Natural Resources Management Plans. In 2017, the
Department updated DoDI 6055.17, DoD Emergency Management Program, to
ensure the consideration of an all hazards approach to manage risks,
including weather and climate related impacts on military
installations.
Additionally, the Department regularly updates its building codes,
known as Unified Facilities Criteria (UFCs), to reflect updated or more
stringent industry and Federal standards. Over the past year, DoD has
updated the Master Planning and High Performance and Sustainable
Building Requirements UFCs to strengthen climate considerations. The
Department has and will continue to develop tools for installation
planners and engineers to assess climate impacts and develop mitigation
strategies. Recent examples include The Planning Handbook on Climate
Change Installation Adaptation and Resilience, produced by Naval
Facilities Command (NAVFAC) in January 2017, and the Coastal Assessment
Regional Scenarios Database (CARSWG) database with regionalized sea
level scenarios for DoD sites worldwide.
environmental conservation and compatible development
The Department continues to manage its land, water, and airspace to
ensure our military and civilian personnel have the access they need to
conduct mission-essential activities. As training, testing, and
operational requirements expand and new weapons systems are introduced,
access and use of ranges becomes increasingly important. The fiscal
year 2020 budget request for Conservation is $445 million. The
Department will invest these funds to maximize our flexibility to use
lands for military purposes and to address incompatible land uses
beyond our fence lines.
The Department's lands and waters are vital to readiness. However,
they also support a diverse array of fish and wildlife species,
including nearly 500 that are federally protected under the Endangered
Species Act, and over 550 that are at risk of needing listing
protection. Managing for healthy and resilient natural landscapes, such
as reducing fire risks, avoiding wildlife conflicts, removing invasive
species, and improving range and training areas, provides the
conditions necessary for mission-essential activities.
Regulatory protections related to threatened and endangered species
and their habitats can pose significant mission challenges by
restricting use of our existing ranges and training areas, or limiting
our development of new infrastructure. In recent years, there has been
a marked increase in the number of species being petitioned and
evaluated for listing under the Endangered Species Act. To better
address these issues, we have initiated a partnership with the
Department of the Interior to target conservation efforts for species
of primary concern to the Department.
The three primary goals of this initiative are to facilitate
species recovery and de-listing, establish local and regional
partnerships to recover species or prevent new species from being
listed, and to develop innovative tools and approaches that provide
greater regulatory predictability.
The Department's participation in broader conservation partnerships
for listed species is beginning to see returns on those long term
investments. This past year the Lesser Long-Nosed Bat, a species that
resides on three Southwest installations, was considered recovered and
removed from the list of threatened and endangered species. This
success alleviated training restrictions related to Unmanned Aerial
Vehicle (UAV) operations and use of pyrotechnics on 18,743 acres at
Fort Huachuca, AZ. Four additional species are also currently being
evaluated or have been proposed for either a status change from
endangered to threatened, or removal from the list of threatened and
endangered species.
Building on this success, we will continue to work with our
Federal, state and non-governmental partners to develop new and
innovative regulatory approaches that streamline processes and provide
greater mission flexibility. We will also be working to develop more
comprehensive initiatives that better capitalize on both our on-
installation conservation programs and our off- installation
conservation partnerships through the Readiness and Environmental
Protection Integration Program.
readiness and environmental protection integration program
The Readiness and Environmental Protection Integration (REPI)
program supports DoD's efforts to build a more lethal and resilient
force. Investments protect training, testing, and operational assets of
the Department, contributing to installation resilience and sustainment
of existing and new mission capabilities. Through the REPI program, we
engage in a long-term and cooperative strategy to ensure military
mission sustainability by limiting incompatible development near our
installations and ranges. Protecting these lands using the REPI program
is a more cost-effective approach to sustain military readiness for the
Department and the taxpayer than settling for suboptimal test and
training alternatives or workarounds, such as replacing compromised
assets with new range construction or relocating missions. This
cooperative land protection also provides direct benefits to our
partners and neighboring communities through the conservation of
limited resources shared by the installation and its neighbors. REPI
initiatives contribute to the longevity of working farms, forests, and
ranchlands; increase recreational opportunities for nearby residents,
active military families, and veterans; and increase the installation's
military value. The REPI program invigorates public-private
partnerships that strengthen military installation ties to local
communities. These local alliances help to foster an increased level of
communication and cooperation, which enables installation commanders to
better accomplish their vital test, training, and operational missions.
In the last 16 years, REPI partnerships have protected more than
586,000 acres of land around 106 installations in 33 states. In
addition to the tangible benefits of preserving DoD's existing
training, testing, and operational assets, these efforts have resulted
in significant contributions to the economic health and recreational
opportunities for local communities.
One example of a REPI initiative is working to sustain the F-35
mission at Hill Air Force Base (AFB). Located in the fastest developing
locale in the state of Utah, Hill AFB anticipates that without the REPI
program, the arrival of the F-35 will face significant encroachment
challenges in the next 5-10 years. Challenges such as public safety
concerns, noise and nighttime lighting complaints, and water
availability pose potential threats to the F-35 mission. Experts at
Hill AFB say flight test patterns may have to be rerouted or aircraft
launch hours may have to be restricted without encroachment mitigation.
In addition to directly preserving and enhancing key mission
capabilities through innovative partnerships, the REPI program has
developed an approach that supports land use and habitat conservation
practices beyond installation boundaries to ensure military
installations do not become refuges of last resort for threatened,
endangered, or at-risk species. Under this approach, DoD engages with
other governmental and non-governmental partners who work with private
landowners to develop voluntary initiatives and agreements that promote
practices that help avoid or mitigate regulatory restrictions on
training, testing, and operations on DoD lands. These efforts ease the
on-installation species management burden and reduce the possibility of
restricted activities.
Within the Department's $445 million budget for conservation, $75
million is directed to the REPI program. The REPI program is a cost-
effective tool to protect the nation's existing training, testing, and
operational capabilities at a time of decreasing resources.
To further REPI investments, DoD, along with the Departments of the
Interior and Agriculture, continues to advance the Sentinel Landscapes
Partnership to work with private and non-Federal landowners to conserve
large landscapes where conservation, working lands, and national
defense interests converge. Established in 2013, the Sentinel
Landscapes Partnership further strengthens interagency coordination and
provides taxpayers with the greatest leverage of their funds by
aligning Federal programs to advance the mutually beneficial goals of
each agency. From 2014 through 2018, seven Sentinel Landscapes have
been designated. In 2018, DoD and the Military Services invested
approximately $22 million in the seven Sentinel Landscapes, which will
further leverage funds from Federal, state, local, and private
partners. In 2018, the U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resources
Conservation Service awarded $7 million in Regional Conservation
Partnership Program funding to develop the North Carolina Sentinel
Landscapes High Priority Protect Program. The investments made in
Sentinel Landscapes help ensure readiness and protect operational
flexibility.
addressing perfluorooctane sulfonate (pfos) and perfluorooctanoic acid
(pfoa)
Ensuring the health and safety of our Service members, the families
living on our installations, and the surrounding communities is one of
our top priorities. This includes the investigation and cleanup of PFOS
and PFOA in drinking water where previous Department of Defense
activities are determined to be the source. DoD has committed
substantial resources in the last 3 years and has taken significant
actions to respond to concerns with PFOS and PFOA.
One commercial product that contains PFOS and PFOA is Aqueous Film
Forming Foam, or AFFF. Besides D)D, this highly effective firefighting
foam has been used by airports, fire departments, and the oil and gas
industry, among others. However, AFFF only accounted for approximately
3-6 percent of PFOS production in 2000 and DoD is just one of many
users.
The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act (CERCLA) provides a consistent approach across the Nation
for cleanup. This includes prioritizing sites for cleanup using the
CERCLA risk-based process--essentially worst first. The Defense
Environmental Restoration Program statute provides authorities to DoD
to perform and fund cleanup actions and requires they be carried out in
accordance with CERCLA. The first step is to identify known or
suspected releases. DoD has identified 401 active and Base Realignment
and Closure installations with at least one area where there is a known
or suspected release of PFOS or PFOA. The Military Departments then
determined if there was exposure through drinking water. If so, DoD's
priority is to quickly address unacceptable levels of PFOS/PFOA in
drinking water. As of today, no one is drinking water above EPA's
drinking water lifetime health advisory of 70ppt where DoD is the known
source.
With the exposure pathway broken, the Military Departments are
prioritizing sites for further action using the longstanding CERCLA
risk-based process--essentially worst first. These known or suspected
PFOS and PFOA release areas are in various stages of assessment,
investigation, and cleanup. As DoD moves through the CERCLA process, we
will work in collaboration with regulatory agencies and communities,
and share information in an open and transparent manner. We are
committed to funding the remainder of assessments and investigations as
we move into the later phases of CERCLA process.
DoD has also committed significant funds in research and
development to identify and test fluorine-free AFFF. As previously
discussed, our SERDP and ESTCP programs launched numerous efforts and
on-going projects from small scale to field demonstrations. At the
conclusion of these projects, the Department will have invested $60
million in PFAS-related research and development, with additional
research and demonstration projects under consideration for funding
beginning in fiscal year 2020.
We have already taken steps to remove and replace AFFF containing
PFOS from our supply system and to prevent new releases of AFFF. The
Military Departments no longer use AFFF for maintenance, testing, and
training activities. When AFFF is used to fight a fire, it is contained
to prevent releases to ground water.
Currently, no fluorine-free version of AFFF meets the military's
stringent performance requirements to extinguish petroleum fires. We
have solicited research projects to identify and test the performance
of fluorine-free AFFF. These efforts support DoD's commitment to
finding an AFFF alternative that meets critical mission requirements,
while protecting human health and the environment, and will represent
$10 million in research and development funding.
In summary, DoD is taking immediate actions to reduce the risks
from PFOS and PFOA. Our efforts reinforce DoD's commitment to meeting
critical mission requirements while protecting human health and the
environment. The Department recognizes that this is a national problem
involving a wide array of industries and commercial applications, as
well as many Federal and state agencies. Therefore, it needs a nation-
wide regulatory solution.
department of defense energy programs
Energy is an essential enabler of military capability and the
Department depends on energy- resilient forces and facilities to
achieve its mission. In fiscal year 2018, the Department consumed over
85 million barrels of fuel to power ships, aircraft, combat vehicles,
and contingency bases at a cost of nearly $9.2 billion. At over 500
worldwide military installations, the Department spent $3.4 billion in
fiscal year 2018 on energy to power over 585,000 facilities and 160,000
non-tactical vehicles.
The National Defense Strategy outlines an operational environment
where ``every domain is contested--air, land, sea, space, and
cyberspace,'' and the ``homeland is no longer a sanctuary.'' Preparing
for the battlefield of 2025 and sustaining installation and operational
energy resilience necessitates the assured delivery of cyber-secure
fuel and power in contested environments against near-peer competitors.
To enable resilient, efficient, and cyber-secure energy for Joint
forces, weapon systems and installations, the fiscal year 2020
President's Budget includes approximately $4.2 billion in energy
investments, including both operational energy (the energy required for
training, moving, and sustaining military forces and weapons platforms
for military operations) and installation energy (the energy used to
power permanent installations and non-tactical fleet vehicles).
In support of operational energy, the Department is requesting $3.5
billion to upgrade and procure new equipment, improve propulsion, adapt
plans, concepts, and plan wargames to account for increasing risks to
logistics and sustainment, and enhance how the Department considers
energy in developing new capabilities. As the Department responds to
changing threats in Europe, the Indo-Pacific, and the Middle East,
these initiatives are increasing capability and decreasing risks for
warfighters deployed around the globe.
In support of installation energy, the Department is requesting
$698 million to for energy resilience and energy conservation
initiatives, most of which are directed to existing buildings. This
includes $548 million in the Military Component Operations and
Maintenance accounts for sustainment and recapitalization projects,
which generally involve retrofits to install improved lighting, high-
efficiency HVAC systems, double-pane windows, energy management control
systems, and new roofs. The remainder ($150 million) is for the Energy
Resilience and Conservation Investment Program (ERCIP), which is a
MILCON account that funds projects to improve energy resilience and
security, save energy and water, reduce energy costs, and most
importantly, contribute to the mission readiness of our military
installations.
Our mission is to sustain warfighting readiness and lethality by
providing all energy-related policy and governance for programs and
activities that enable resilient, efficient, and cyber- secure energy
for Joint forces, weapon systems and installations. To do so, the
fiscal year 2020 President's Budget supports initiatives across four
primary areas, outlined below.
energy resilience
As defined in Section 101 of Title 10, energy resilience is the
``ability to avoid, prepare for, minimize, adapt to, and recover from
anticipated and unanticipated energy disruptions in order to ensure
energy availability and reliability sufficient to provide for mission
assurance and readiness, including mission essential operations related
to readiness, and to execute or rapidly reestablish mission essential
requirements.'' To this end, the Department has been engaged in the
following programs that increase energy resilience for our weapons
systems and installations.
Energy Resilience and Conservation Investment Program (ERCIP).--
ERCIP is a key Department tool to enable more robust energy security.
DoD is requesting $150 million for this program for fiscal year 2020,
including $113 million for energy resilience projects and $37 million
for energy conservation projects. The ERCIP portfolio has a combined
Savings to Investment Ratio (SIR) of 1.63. In other words, every dollar
we invest in ERCIP is returned to the Department with a discounted cost
savings of $1.63 over the lifetime of the project, demonstrating that,
in many cases, energy resilience does not have to come at a price
premium. For example, at Beale Air Force Base, ERCIP funding will
provide an electrical substation which will provide a secondary source
of power from an alternate power provider to ensure the Global Hawk
mission has the reliable power it needs. At Anniston Army Depot, the
project will provide on-site generation and grid controls which assure
critical production and maintenance of combat vehicles during extended
grid outages. Both projects provide improved energy resilience to their
critical missions.
Micro-reactor Demonstration.--As directed in the fiscal year 2019
National Defense Authorization Act, DoD and DoE are in the planning
stages for a pilot program to demonstrate a commercially developed,
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) licensed, micro-reactor to power
critical loads at a permanent domestic military installation by
December 2027. The demonstration will evaluate the energy resilience
capability and the cost effectiveness of micro-reactor technology.
Operational Energy Capability Improvement Fund (OECIF).--Overseen
by the Under Secretary of Defense for Research & Engineering, OECIF
supports operational energy research programs. The fiscal year 2020
President's Budget requests $70 million to initiate new projects and
sustain projects started in fiscal years 2017-2019. Ongoing initiatives
include efforts to increase the energy performance of unmanned systems,
enhance power and thermal management for high pulse power weapons,
wirelessly transmitting energy in the far field, and 1 year analytical
studies to identify operational energy science and technology gaps.
Installation Energy Resilience Policy and Governance.--The Military
Departments continue to implement energy resilience initiatives aligned
with Department of Defense Instruction 4170.11, Installation Energy
Management. This is the first policy the Department issued to define
energy resilience; critical energy requirements; and operation,
maintenance, and testing requirements for energy resilient systems.
Standardized Mobile Electric Power Systems.--In August 2018, the
Department established a DoD family of mobile electric power
generation, distribution, storage, and management systems. This policy
addresses the growing need for power at contingency bases with a
standardized, interoperable, and maintainable family of equipment,
while allowing mission-driven exceptions. The effort decreases the
logistics burden--and risk--for deployed forces while enabling advanced
equipment to reach the field at lower cost in less time.
Installation Energy Plans.--The Department's ongoing energy
efficiency efforts not only contribute to energy resilience by reducing
critical loads, but have also lowered our base operating costs by $5.4
billion since fiscal year 2005. In May 2018, the Department expanded
its Installation Energy Plan (IEP) policy to require the integration of
energy resilience and cybersecurity at all installations. The process
of comprehensive energy planning will provide a holistic approach to
identifying, evaluating, and mitigating energy risks to critical
missions. The IEPs are slated for completion by the end of fiscal year
2021.
Training and Education.--Across the Force, there is a need for
uniformed and civilian personnel who are prepared to develop and
implement effective solutions for energy resilience and cybersecurity.
For civilian and military installation energy managers, we finalized
the Energy Manager Competency Model. Additionally, we foster
collaboration among the Sustainment organization, the Department of
Energy, and other agencies to communicate key priorities and coordinate
inter-departmental events. For example, the annual Energy Exchange,
Defense Logistics Agency's Worldwide Energy Conference, and the Federal
Utility Partnership Working Group, provide relevant training for our
workforce. In addition, for uniformed personnel, we are working to
bolster energy-informed, risk-based decisions by expanding the Defense
Logistic Agency's Joint Petroleum Seminar and Joint Petroleum Officers
Course.
energy risk
To prioritize resources, the Department is identifying, assessing,
and integrating energy-related analyses and risks into Department
decisionmaking, as follows:
Energy Informed Wargames.--To better evaluate and mitigate the
effects of energy disruptions on the mission, we are actively engaged
in integrating energy risks into our wargames and exercises. In 2018,
my office participated in three events sponsored by the Army, Defense
Logistics Agency, and USTRANSCOM. With the integration of realistic
constraints to logistics capacity and threats to our fuel storage and
distribution, our efforts will improve Department decision- making in
operation plans, concept and capability development, and program
investments. Looking ahead, the Department anticipates executing a
Joint energy wargame by the end of fiscal year 2019 that evaluates
energy risks in the Indo-Pacific area of operations.
Energy Resilience Exercises.--In alignment with U.S. Code and DoD
instruction, we are performing full-scale and black-start energy
disruption exercises of our energy resilience and backup power systems
to evaluate risks to the readiness of our military installations. In
fiscal years 2018 and 2019, the Department will have completed three
tabletop exercise and five black-start readiness exercise tests at
critical military installations. There is another planned black-start
readiness exercise to be completed by the conclusion of fiscal year
2020.
Energy Resilience Tools and Analyses.--The Department continues to
identify and develop critical energy requirements, models, and metrics
for decisionmaking across the installation and operational energy
portfolios. For installation energy, the DoD commissioned the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Lincoln Laboratory (MIT-LL) to
address a congressional requirement to evaluate the costs, risks, and
benefits associated with energy resilience and mission readiness
against energy supply disruptions on military facilities and
installations. Site-level assessments conducted across a number of
military installations identified critical energy requirements and
metrics for the purposes of identifying energy resilience projects.
Also, the life-cycle cost analysis tool, which assesses tradeoffs
between mission performance and costs, is now being assessed for
enterprise-wide adoption across the Department.
energy performance
The Department continues to leverage alternative financing
authorities that ensure lower cost, resilient energy performance across
DoD installations. Through mechanisms such as power purchase
agreements, performance-based contracts, enhanced use leases, utility
energy service contracts (UESCs), utilities privatization, and energy
savings performance contracts (ESPCs), the Department has awarded over
three billion dollars in alternative finance contracts to ensure energy
performance, efficiency, and resilience on our military installations
since 2011. In accordance with more recent congressional direction, the
Department issued revised policy to integrate energy resilience and
cybersecurity considerations into these alternative financing
mechanisms.
The Department takes full advantage of non-Federal financing for
distributed energy projects to ensure the energy resilience of our
installations. This approach minimizes DoD capital investment by using
contracts that incentivize industry to fund infrastructure resilience
improvements. When the business case supports it, the Department
pursues distributed energy projects with microgrid-ready applications
able to sustain continuous power in the event of a disruption. Both the
Air Force at Hill Air Force Base and the Army at Fort Huachuca awarded
ESPCs last year, which included implementation of on-site generation.
In addition, the project at Fort Huachuca includes a microgrid, which
will ensure the delivery of available, reliable, and resilient power
while reducing life cycle costs through an ESPC with our industry
partners.
Further, my Energy team is conducting a Defense Energy Resilience
Bank study, also known as the DERB, to review best practices from the
commercial finance industry and lenders to implement and accelerate
alternative finance for energy resilience project development. This
multi-stakeholder collaboration with government and industry partners
is critical to develop integrated and holistic alternative finance
projects that ensure the Department's energy resilience objectives are
met cost effectively.
cyber secure facilities
Reflecting the role of our facilities as nodes for projecting and
sustaining power, the Department is reducing the cyber risks to
facility related control systems (FRCS) to ensure reliable power for
critical missions. Similar to our approach to energy resilience, the
department integrated cyber security into our energy policies and
guidance of the course of the last year. For example our military
installations are including cyber security considerations in the
development of their installation energy plans, along with the pursuit
of alternative finance. Specifically, FRCS considerations are now
integral to utility privatization agreements, ESPCs, and UESCs.
Further, to build a FRCS defense posture, the Department recently
began developing cybersecurity plans to account for the capabilities
and resources required to implement controls on its highest prioritized
assets and systems. We will continue to work with the Department's
Chief Information Officer and Principal Cyber Advisor toward solutions
and resources ensuring FRCS are defensible, survivable, and resilient
to operate and sustain critical functions in a cyber- contested
environment. Additionally, in July 2018, the Deputy Secretary of
Defense issued a memorandum, Enhancing Cybersecurity Risk Management
for Control Systems (CS) Supporting DoD Owned Defense Critical
Infrastructure, mandating the Components cyber secure these critical
systems.
additional high interest programs
border security
On April 4, 2018, the President directed the Secretary of Defense
to support the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) in securing the
southern border, including assistance to ``stop the flow of deadly
drugs and other contraband, gang members and other criminals, and
illegal aliens into the country.''
On February 15, 2019, the President declared that a national
emergency exists at the southern border of the United States that
requires the use of the armed forces, making available certain
emergency authorities, including Section 2808 of Title 10, U.S. Code.
Section 2808 provides that, in the event of a national emergency
declaration requiring use of armed forces, ``the Secretary of Defense,
without regard to any other provision of law, may undertake military
construction projects, and may authorize the Secretaries of the
military departments to undertake military construction projects, not
otherwise authorized by law that are necessary to support such use of
the armed forces.''
At this time, the Acting Secretary has not decided whether use of
Section 2808 authorities is necessary. No military construction funds
may be obligated under Section 2808 unless the Acting Secretary
determines that military construction projects are necessary to support
the use of the armed forces in addressing the national emergency for
which the armed forces are required. To inform his decision, the Acting
Secretary has requested from DHS a list of proposed border barrier
construction projects, prioritized in order of effectiveness, that DHS
considers to be most effective in improving the effectiveness and
efficiency of DoD personnel supporting Customs and Border Protection
(CBP) and securing the southern border. DHS provided its input to DoD
on March 20, 2019.
In support of the Acting Secretary's consideration of Section 2808,
DoD is conducting a deliberate process to identify MILCON projects that
could be used as funding sources, if necessary, for MILCON projects to
support the use of the armed forces in connection with the national
emergency. Should the Acting Secretary determine that use of Section
2808 authorities is necessary, we will provide you the information on
affected projects as soon as it is available.
Additionally, the Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) is supporting
Secretary of Defense-approved Requests for Assistance from the
Department of Homeland Security via validated and Service- funded
requisitions. As of February 28, 2019, DLA has provided over $7.7
million worth of Class IV materials for the construction of 202 miles
of fencing, in addition to over $3 million in subsistence, $56,000 in
clothing and individual equipment, and $3.3 million of re-utilized
material in support of operations. DLA remains well positioned to
support additional requirements.
military construction reform
Reform of the military construction process, although not
represented as a budget request item, continues as an important effort
of my office. Our goal is nothing less than to ensure warfighters are
provided delivery of fully-mission-capable facilities within the
timelines stated. We are looking for ways to reduce cost where
possible, but perhaps more importantly, to improve communication
between stakeholders and timeliness of completed facilities which fully
meet user requirements over their expected service lives. We are
continuing our proactive assessment of recent challenges in MilCon
project delivery and program management to identify improvements in the
MilCon process and implement reforms in a number of key areas, to
include: improving identification of project requirements; enhancing
collaboration between resource sponsors, end users, and construction
agents to ensure projects meet mission requirements within budget
constraints; selecting the best engineering and acquisition strategy to
cost-effectively meet mission requirements; identifying risk mitigation
measures before cost or schedule changes adversely impact the mission;
and increasing awareness and accountability at all levels of management
and performance as problems arise. The Department is also consulting
with our industry partners to identify commercial best practices to
lower costs, save time, measure performance differently, and improve
project quality in support of the warfighter.
guam and the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands (cnmi)
As Acting Secretary Shanahan recently testified, China's
increasingly provocative behavior in the Indo-Pacific, particularly in
the South China Sea (SCS) should concern us all. Between 2013 and 2018,
China increased its air and sea incursions into the SCS twelvefold. Our
posture in the Indo-Pacific, specifically in Guam and the Commonwealth
of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI) continues to be critical to
countering China's influence.
The Department continues to work on the relocation of approximately
5,000 Marines from Okinawa to Guam. This initiative reduces the burden
on our Japanese allies, while bolstering regional security in the
Pacific. Its focus is on sustaining a forward-deployed responsive force
that counters the reach of the People's Republic of China, the
aggressions of North Korea, and other regional threats, while ensuring
the capability to provide regional support at a moment's notice. Marine
Corps forces realigning in the Pacific will establish an improved force
composition, installation construction and modernization, and new
strategic hubs, of which Guam will be the most significant. This
venture between the U.S. and the Government of Japan will enhance
interoperability and strengthen deterrence in the Indo-Pacific Region.
The main cantonment area on Guam for the Marine Corps will be known
as Marine Corps Base Blaz, to honor Marine Brigadier General Vicente
``Ben'' Tomas Garrido Blaz, the highest ranking Chamorro to have served
in the Marines, located at Finegayan in the Northwest. We are still in
the land clearing phase of construction with approximately 85 percent
of land clearing complete. The North Ramp of Andersen Air Force Base
(AAFB) will be home to the USMC Air Combat Element housing the MV-22
(Osprey), the H-1, and the CH-53 platforms. Hangar 1, which houses the
Ospreys is completed and operational. Overall, the North Ramp
construction is approximately 50 percent complete. AAFB Northfield,
which is directly above the cantonment area, provides a live-fire
training range for small arms and will provide a multi-purpose machine
gun range. The south side of AAFB will provide urbanized training.
Apra Harbor, located in the southwest of the island, will be a sea
embarkation hub. It will have the capability to support all vessels
that support USMC operations, black bottom vessels and high speed
vessels. Apra Harbor will also provide forces with refueling piers and
an ammunition wharf. Improvements at Apra are approximately 60 percent
complete.
The relocation is expected to achieve initial support capability in
the mid-2020s, contingent on affordability and environmental analyses.
The fiscal year 2020 budget request includes $277 million in MilCon and
Planning & Design funding, including $91.2 million for the second
increment of a multi-purpose machine gun range on Guam. Overall, the
Government of Japan has committed $3.1 billion to fund this relocation
and has already transferred $2.023 billion of its commitment to the
U.S. Treasury. We are also asking your support to authorize the use of
up to $13 millionof funds appropriated in 2014 to mitigate the effects
of the military construction workforce on the healthcare system of
Guam, as identified during the National Environmental Policy Act
process related to the Marines' relocation to the Territory.
Another initiative to increase our capabilities in the Indo-Pacific
region is the Air Force's construction of facilities and infrastructure
for Divert operations at Tinian International Airport. The Department
signed a lease purchase agreement in November of last year and
anticipates signing the final lease agreement this May. This represents
a major milestone in one of the more challenging transactions we have
worked. Divert operations would occur as training exercises to support
readiness in the event other locations in the western Pacific are
unavailable to support standard operations. For example, humanitarian
assistance staging, including noncombatant evacuation operations, could
also occur at the airport in the event of an emergency or disaster.The
Divert initiative is estimated to cost $380 million. For fiscal year
2020, the budget request includes $316 million to construct fuel tanks,
a fuel pipeline, hydrant system, taxiway, and parking apron.
As the westernmost U.S. territory in the Pacific, Guam and CNMI
offers tremendous potential to posture the U.S. for the future, engage
with our regional partners, and train to maintain core competencies.
This is why we continue to pursue live-fire training ranges and
training areas in the CNMI. These capabilities would fulfill INDOPACOM
training shortfalls and be the only U.S. venue to conduct Marine Air
Ground Task Force, Joint, and Combined-level live-fire amphibious
assault and maneuver from the sea, with supporting naval gunfire and
close air support. The environmental analysis for this is on-going. A
key element of the analysis is a construction capacity study that will
forecast the amount of construction activity CNMI can support.
I would be remiss if I did not mention the devastation caused by
Super Typhoon Yutu. On October, 24, 2018, the Category 5 hurricane-
equivalent storm made landfall on CNMI. Its 180 mph winds caused
devastating destruction in the region and according to the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, it was the second strongest
system to hit U.S. soil in recorded history. However, despite the
catastrophic damage from the typhoon, the CNMI has chosen to continue
moving the Air Force Divert initiative forward, demonstrating the
strength of our relationship.
Workforce Issues in Guam and Commonwealth of Northern Mariana Islands
Stable economies in Guam and the CNMI, underpinned by a sustained
labor pool, are critical to the Department's ability to implement the
National Defense Strategy. Reliable access to a sustained labor pool in
these forward-most territories is a national security issue that must
be addressed if we hope to mitigate expanding Chinese influence and
achieve our national security objectives in the region.
We thank Congress for the relief provided in the Northern Marianas
Island U.S. Workforce Act of 2018 passed last July. Extending the
transition period for the full application of Federal immigration laws
by 10 years (to December 31, 2029), and Guam and CNMI's exemption from
the H-2B nationwide cap, will buy Guam and the CNMI time to work toward
an interagency endorsed, long-term solution for ensuring sustained
access to a viable labor pool Without long- term access to a foreign
labor pool, the economies of these isolated U.S. territories will
suffer and the cost of ongoing defense projects could skyrocket beyond
their current estimates.
military aviation and installation assurance siting clearinghouse
The Military Aviation and Installation Assurance Siting
Clearinghouse continues to protect the Department of Defense's ability
to train, test, and operate as the nation expands its renewable and
other commercial energy development and power transmission. The
Department appreciates the statutory changes made by Congress in the
fiscal year 2018 National Defense Authorization Act to codify the
Clearinghouse role in DoD's Title 10 responsibilities, and is actively
implementing the new requirements to better protect DoD missions. As an
example, the Clearinghouse now notifies state Governors and solicits
their input on energy projects where DoD has made an initial
determination that a project will have an adverse impact to a mission.
This increase in visibility helps protect DoD missions by identifying
any state concerns with an energy project at an early point in the
review process, as well as by identifying any state procedures that may
assist DoD in finding a compatible siting solution.
As a result of congressional direction and our own efforts, we are
effectively evaluating the mission impact of commercial energy projects
and implementing affordable and feasible mitigation solutions to
protect DoD missions. In CY 2018, the Department reviewed over 5,000
applications for energy projects through the FAA's Obstruction
Evaluation Process, which continues our historical increase of
approximately 20 percent per year. Of these 5,000 projects, 795 were
wind development projects. Commercial wind development typically poses
the greatest compatibility challenge to DoD due to the height and the
physical obstruction that wind turbines can pose in low level flight
routes, and adverse impacts to radar systems. DoD has resolved concerns
with numerous energy projects though collaboration between the
Clearinghouse, the Military Departments, local communities, states, and
energy developers, thereby maintaining the Department's ability to
train, test, and operate while enabling development of alternative
energy resources.
Protecting and Enhancing our Training and Test Range Infrastructure
The Clearinghouse is also leading the Department's efforts to
develop a strategic plan for training range investments. In order to
ensure that our testing and training range infrastructure is sufficient
to support the National Defense Strategy, we are assessing our ranges'
ability to support training for peer and near-peer adversaries. This
assessment will result in a strategic plan for range investment to
address identified gaps, improving combat credibility by offering
opportunities for more realistic maneuver, attack, and opposing force
engagement. The strategic plan will be completed in fiscal year 2020
and will complement a parallel assessment of test ranges by the Test
Resource Management Center.
accelerating materiel readiness recovery
Accelerating materiel readiness recovery is one of my near-term
imperatives in alignment with the National Defense Strategy to increase
lethality. Overall sustainment readiness is a foundational component of
military strategy and pacing aspect of producing uninterrupted U.S.
military capability. There is no one-size-fits-all approach--no silver
bullet solution to the challenge before us today.
Effective and efficient public and private industrial capabilities
& capacity is the end state we seek as the Department's accountable
agent for enterprise level sustainment outcomes. Our strategy for
accomplishing this follows three lines of effort; accelerating materiel
availability improvement, strengthening the viability of the organic
industrial base, and operationalizing sustainment reforms. Maintenance,
at both the field and depot levels, is foundational to our ability to
rebuild readiness, as our National Defense Strategy directs us to do.
My team is laser- focused on getting Mission Capable (MC) and
Operational Availability (Ao) rates where they should be--challenging
the status quo, reversing negative trends, and driving an aggressive
reform agenda based on improved data-driven decisionmaking and
leveraging best commercial practices. This is no small task given a $78
billion annual spend for maintenance activities alone, and a workforce
of over 606 thousand DoD personnel.
You are undoubtedly aware of the 80 percent Mission Capable memo
that was signed this past September for F-16, F/A-18, F-22, and F-35
critical aviation assets. Our intent is to apply that same level of
attention and visibility across all of our fleets--air, ground, and
sea. So let me focus on what we are doing at the enterprise level to
drive enduring change and improvement. Foremost, we are accelerating
Materiel Availability improvements across our fielded fleets. I've
charged my team with setting performance targets and measuring progress
across the entire enterprise. I now can access and leverage over 1.5
billion maintenance and supply transactions going back to 2005; a
virtual goldmine in my estimation. We are refining our capabilities to
understand the specific causes of availability loss and/or cost drivers
at the enterprise level and synthesizing that information to inform
decision makers about cost and availability relationships for every
weapon system.
We are also improving the viability of our organic industrial base
capabilities. While our metrics initially focused primarily on mission
and field-level outcomes, our next priority is depot performance and
its contribution to overall supply chain effectiveness. We are working
in concert with the Deputy Chief Management Officer's Cost Management
team to map baseline costs of material and maintenance operations and
to improve enterprise supply demand visibility and decisionmaking. We
are also exploring and applying opportunities for broader application
of commercial best practices within our public depots and repair
activities.
product support for weapons systems
Sustainment supports Department decision makers with comprehensive,
timely, relevant and actionable assessments for weapon system
development and acquisition. More specifically, we provide the DoD
enterprise with policy, processes, guidance and tools that drive
effective product support planning and execution at best value; and
lead the cultural transformation necessary to deliver optimal life
cycle product support.
As part of these efforts, we are pushing initiatives to address
Operating & Support (O&S) Cost projections early in the program life-
cycle that do not fully capture the cost to achieve the readiness
levels our warfighters need. Requiring Sustainment Risk and O&S Cost
Risk analysis significantly earlier than is currently the norm, by the
Analysis of Alternatives (AoA) Phase, will enable Affordable Readiness
of critical sustainment cost drivers (manpower, spares, consumables,
and fuel efficiency). In addition to establishing and filling the
supply chain, it also means establishing essential and early repair
capability of depot level reparable and line replaceable units (DLR and
LRU) by the scheduled Materiel Support Date--well-prior to initial
operating capability (IOC) plus 4 years. We must balance near-term
production cost with the long-range readiness of deployed fleets and
fielded systems--that in reality coexist in the POM process. We also
continue to improve policy and governance of the ``middle tier
acquisition authority'' granted to the Department by Congress in order
to accelerate the delivery of emerging capabilities into the hands of
the warfighter. This authority provides streamlined pathways for middle
tier acquisition technologies that can be prototyped within two to 5
years, or be put into production within 6 months and completely fielded
within 5 years.
My Product Support team is especially focused on improving aircraft
availability and reducing sustainment cost for the F-35 program. We are
working with our allies and partners to develop sustainment
capabilities where appropriate; supporting numerous ongoing cooperation
efforts, including information exchanges and engagements to facilitate
interoperability and enhance relationships; providing logistical
expertise to develop partner logistics capacity; and supporting
Geographic Combatant Commands in developing their country assessments,
their Security Cooperation Programs, and their Foreign Military Sales
packages.
logistics support to the warfighter
The core competencies of Supply, Transportation, Equipment
Management, Contingency Support, and Logistics Policy and Compliance
were integrated under the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Logistics as part of forming the new Sustainment organization. The
Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) also performs a critical logistics role
as the nation's combat logistics support agency. DLA manages the global
supply chain--from raw materials to end user to disposition--for the
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Coast Guard, 10 combatant
commands, other Federal agencies, and partner and allied nations.
We secure our supply chains, institutionalize Operational Contract
Support, and implement policies and strategies to mitigate threats from
vendors in overseas locations. The Department seeks ways to strengthen
our supply chains to support critical capabilities. Logistics personnel
work closely with the Acquisition community to prevent procurement of
counterfeit, defective, and malicious material. Efforts to encourage
the development of supply chain standards is paying off as the
Government Accountability Office (GAO) removed Supply Chain Management
from its 2019 High Risk Report. Additionally, DLA supply chains drive
over $35 billion in goods and services annually, providing 86 percent
of the Military Services' spare parts, and nearly 100 percent of fuel.
By staying synchronized with the Services' plans, DLA will take the
required steps to proactively acquire and position material for
aviation systems, land systems, and maritime systems, as well as
industrial hardware, clothing and textiles, construction and equipment,
medical, subsistence, and fuel and energy to ensure the readiness of
our military forces.
Since 2007 the Department has consistently worked to establish
Operational Contract Support (OCS) as an enduring capability to support
current and future operations. In August 2018, the Department began
implementing 15 critical actions endorsed by the Joint Requirements
Oversight Council (JROC) to fully integrate OCS across the Department,
to strengthen the ability to perform OCS tasks, and ensure OCS supports
all phases and ranges of joint military operations. Within OCS, Vendor
Threat Mitigation (VTM) is critical. VTM is the capability to identify,
assess, and mitigate risks posed by vendors supporting DoD operations
outside the United States to ensure we do not do business with those
entities that support our adversaries. Efforts are underway to mitigate
risk to operational effectiveness and institutionalize OCS solutions by
the end of 2022.
We also understand the need to build logistics-related alliances
within and outside our Federal Government structure and have taken
action to build ties with other Agencies, industry leading companies,
and allies to improve operations. One partnership success example is
the General Service Administration (GSA) acquiring more mission support
vehicles for conversion from an expensive DoD-owned to a DoD-leased
fleet. This action reduced DoD vehicle sustainment cost over the past 5
years by $217 million (15.7 percent). Additionally, DLA provides some
level of materiel or service support to about 40 Federal agencies, 50
states, 300 localities, and 115 international partners. DLA has the
capacity to augment Federal contingency responses domestically and
internationally. Hurricane-season demand topped $1.2 billion in support
in 2017 and $105 million in 2018.
Another important effort is the Logistic Reform Team, with a focus
on identifying common sets of metrics and tools to measure and monitor
our contribution to warfighting capability in terms of availability of
weapon systems and cost per day of availability. Continued support of
ongoing efforts to reform logistics processes not only increases weapon
system readiness, but also drives down sustainment costs. The Team is
evaluating sources of sustainment and commodity procurement processes,
innovating our logistics processes to outpace our adversaries, and
increasing transparency and governance across the enterprise.
Readiness for the warfighter is also improved through DLA's organic
industrial base program, where appropriated funds are used to enable
industry a means to meet known surge requirements within our long term
contracts when they don't have business case to do so otherwise.
Reaching beyond sustainment organizations, we are partnering with
the personnel community to improve the military personnel relocation
experience by modifying the household goods relocation process.
In support of audit readiness, we are taking actions to improve
accountability of mission critical assets and to achieve a clean audit
in the Department. We are reviewing notices of findings and
recommendations received from independent public accounting firms and
performing assessments of potential valuation methodologies for General
Equipment, including weapon systems, for consideration as the
Department-wide approach for properly valuing them. This will improve
the integrity of financial data, which positions the Department to
operate more efficiently and apply costs savings toward improving
lethality. Additionally, we are working with the audit community and
USTRANSCOM on the implementation of an enterprise-level transportation
management system that will be a significant building block towards
auditability.
f-35 enterprise
The Sustainment organization touches the F-35 enterprises across
multiple domains. F-35 sustainment continues to be a major focus area
of the Department, as we work to increase readiness to meet the 80
percent Mission Capable rate goal set as well as reduce F-35
sustainment cost to align with the Service-budget-informed
affordability constraints. As part of the strategy to meet these goals
within the fiscal year 2019-2024 timeframe, the Department named U.S.
Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM) and the Defense Logistics Agency
(DLA) as the Global Transportation and Distribution Provider, as well
as the Product Support Provider for F-35 North American Warehousing. In
this capacity, they will provide wholesale and retail warehousing
infrastructure and management supporting Air Logistics Complexes and
Fleet Readiness Centers, along with management of designated commercial
warehouses within the North American Region. Additionally, DLA and the
Services have developed organic supply chain initiatives to improve
readiness and lower total lifecycle costs. Further, we issued an
updated F-35 Life Cycle Sustainment Plan fiscal year 2019 that
identified eight success elements necessary for the Department to
improve readiness and cost to meet warfighter needs.
In fiscal year 2018, the Department accomplished a major
acquisition milestones across the F-35 sustainment enterprise. Our
teams improved air vehicle availability by 3 percent through our
reliability/maintainability progress, delivered Block 3F Air System,
completed Phase 2 Global Supply Solution Capability and Capacity (for
fiscal years 2020-2022), reduced DoD ownership costs from fiscal year
17 actuals, and planned for the Autonomic Logistics Information System
re-architecture.
state and community engagement--office of economic adjustment
The request for the Office of Economic Adjustment ensures it may
continue to support its many engagements with states and communities
who are key partners to help the Department meet our mission. Specific
program lines supported by this request include: compatible use
engagements to lessen the impairments on our local missions brought
about by civilian development and activity, including energy project
siting; industry efforts that promote installation resilience through
improved understanding of local and regional supply chains'
susceptibility to funding fluctuations and cyber attacks; mission
growth efforts to plan and deliver the necessary public services and
infrastructure to support our forces; and, in a few rare circumstances,
operational support to sustain Local Redevelopment Authorities as they
await the disposal of property previously excessed through base closure
actions. These funds will also permit the necessary oversight and
execution of more than $700 million in obligated projects to improve
public schools on our military installations that support the education
of 11,000 military dependents annually; nearly $300 million in
transportation improvements to improve access to many of our premier
medical facilities for wounded warriors, their families, and our
medical personnel; and, close to $180 million in outside the fence
investments on Guam for water and waste water systems to support our
Indo Pacific efforts. These projects are critical to support quality of
life issues for our service members and their families.
conclusion
Thank you for the opportunity to present the President's fiscal
year 2020 budget request for DoD programs supporting sustainment. We
appreciate Congress' continued support for our enterprise and look
forward to working with you as you consider the budget request.
Senator Boozman. Lieutenant General Bingham.
STATEMENT OF LIEUTENANT GENERAL GWENDOLYN BINGHAM,
UNITED STATES ARMY, ASSISTANT CHIEF OF
STAFF FOR INSTALLATION MANAGEMENT
General Bingham. Thank you, and good afternoon, Chairman
Boozman, Ranking Member Schatz, and the distinguished members
of this committee. On behalf of over 1 million soldiers and 2.2
million family members serving on installations around the
globe, we are grateful for your timely passage of the fiscal
year 2019 authorization and appropriations bills and for your
continued support.
Thank you, too, for the opportunity to discuss the
importance of installations to Army readiness. Soldier and
family housing and quality of life programs are an investment
in the Army's most valuable asset, our people. To that end, we
remain deeply troubled by the media reports and firsthand
accounts from our soldiers and families of poor environmental
health and safety conditions, as well as poor customer service
in Army privatized housing.
The Army and CEOs of our privatized housing companies have
heard loud and clear that we must do a better job for our
soldiers and their families. Soldiers and families who choose
to reside on our installations have an enduring right to safe
and healthy homes and barracks.
The Army completed a 100 percent review of our total
housing inventory, inclusive of Government-owned housing,
privatized housing, and unaccompanied soldier barracks. We will
use the information obtained from these visits and inspections
and subsequent ones to continually address all life, health,
and safety deficiencies and to improve existing processes and
controls for housing oversight.
We are enhancing training for our commanders, improving
work order tracking processes, conducting quarterly town halls,
and implementing accountability in the entire system. This
accountability is an enduring mandate and mission. We owe this
to our soldiers and their families.
Army installations generate, project, and sustain every
aspect of combat power. Our military construction budget
request for $2.3 billion is aligned with the Secretary of the
Army's priorities of readiness, modernization, and reform, with
an enduring commitment to caring for our soldiers, civilians,
and their families.
America's Army stands ready to deploy, fight, and win our
Nation's wars. With your continued support in providing
predictable, adequate, sustained, and timely funding, our
installations will remain ready, secure, and resilient,
enabling mission readiness and quality of life for soldiers,
civilians, and families.
Again, thank you for this opportunity to appear before you
today. I look forward to your questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lieutenant General Gwen Bingham
introduction
Chairman Boozman, Ranking Member Schatz, and Members of the
Subcommittee: Thank you for your continued support to our Soldiers,
Civilians and their Families who serve this nation. The Army is
grateful for the diligent work of this Committee and Congress on timely
passage of the fiscal year 2019 Authorization Act and Defense and
Military Construction (MILCON) appropriations bills. Your support
provides greater flexibility to address mission critical infrastructure
requirements that affect warfighting readiness.
Army Installations generate, project, and sustain every aspect of
combat power.
Our facilities and infrastructure support one million Soldiers and
2.2 million Family members serving on installations worldwide. In this
fiscal year 2020 Budget, the Army is requesting $2.3 billion in
Military Construction appropriations, a 13 percent ($264 million)
increase over our fiscal year 2019 request. This budget will improve
installation readiness, strategic power projection, and Soldier and
Family readiness.
Predictable, adequate, sustained and timely funding for
installations enables all aspects of warfighting readiness--our top
priority. Installations support the National Defense Strategy by
generating and projecting ready forces from locations around the globe.
Army installations, National Guard Readiness Centers, and Army Reserve
Centers must be ready, secure, and resilient to enable the Army to
train, fight, and win our nation's wars. We are focusing our efforts
and resources on the priorities of Readiness, Modernization, and
Reform, with an enduring commitment to care for our Soldiers,
Civilians, and their Families.
As a result of deliberate investment in places where our Soldiers
and Families live, we have made significant improvements in our
barracks and government-owned housing. With the fiscal year 2020 budget
request, our cumulative investments since fiscal year 2017 will have
improved 21 thousand barracks spaces and increased the proportion rated
as good and adequate to 87 percent. The fiscal year 2020 request will
also allow us to achieve a 90 percent good or adequate quality level
for all Army-owned Family housing. Specific projects are listed later
in this statement.
The President's fiscal year 2020 budget request includes increased
investment levels for Facility Sustainment Restoration and
Modernization (FSRM). Increased funding will allow us to address some
of the maintenance backlog; conduct more deliberate preventive
maintenance activities and recap our most critical need facilities.
Working with all Army Commands, we have made great strides over the
past year to identify those facilities that directly contribute to the
Army's highest priority operational missions. We will allocate the
funds you provide to us, now and in the future, on facilities that
support power projection, mobilization, and warfighter mission needs
such as barracks, airfields, ranges, and maintenance facilities to
achieve installation readiness.
soldier and family readiness
Soldier and Family Housing and Quality of Life programs are an
investment in the Army's most valuable asset--our people. We are deeply
troubled by the reports in the media and from our Soldiers and Families
of poor conditions and poor customer service associated with privatized
housing. We have prioritized and implemented changes in processes and
procedures across the installation management enterprise to address
known issues, and our assessments continue. The Army remains committed
to improving infrastructure and services that enable Soldier readiness
and support Soldier and Family resilience, thus allowing Soldiers to
focus on their mission.
The Army Family Housing budget allows us to provide homes and
related housing services to Soldiers and their Families living around
the world. For fiscal year 2020, the Army requests $141 million for
Family housing construction. This will fund the fourth and final
increment of $83 million for new housing at Camp Humphreys, South
Korea, which meets Commander, U.S. Forces Korea requirements for on-
post housing. The request also improves poor and failing housing units
in Baumholder, Germany, for $30million, and replaces failing housing at
Tobyhanna Army Depot, Pennsylvania, for $19 million.
We are requesting $358 million to sustain all Family Housing
operations; cover utility costs; ensure proper maintenance and repair
of government Family Housing units; lease properties where required;
and provide privatized housing oversight. We are committed to providing
our Soldiers and Families the best living conditions possible,
commensurate with their service to our nation.
We are also investing in our unaccompanied Soldiers' quality of
life by constructing a $32 million permanent party barracks at Fort
Hood, Texas. To address deficits at our Initial Military Training
locations, we are requesting funds for Advanced Individual Training
(AIT) barracks complexes at Fort Sill, Oklahoma, and Joint Base
Langley-Eustis, Virginia for $73 million and $55 million, respectively,
and a reception barracks complex at Fort Jackson, South Carolina for
$54 million.
strategic power projection
The Army's request for MILCON provides secure and sustainable
facilities to meet the Army's emergent needs in three critical subsets
of installation readiness: Power Projection, Mobilization, and
Warfighter Lethality. For fiscal year 2020, we apply $1.8 billion of
our budget request to Strategic Power Projection; $1.4 billion for the
Regular Army; $211 million for the Army National Guard (ARNG); $61
million for Army Reserve (USAR); and $66 million for the Army portion
of the Base Closure Account.
The $1.4 billion Regular Army MILCON request will allow us to move
forward with critical projects that enhance the Army's ability to
compete against our Nation's adversaries. fiscal year 2020 projects
include a Cyber Instructional Facility ($107 million) at Fort Gordon,
Georgia; an Aircraft Maintenance Hangar ($62 million) at Hunter Army
Airfield, Georgia; and a Powertrain Facility Maintenance Shop ($86
million) at Corpus Christi Army Depot.
Our $211 million ARNG budget request is focused on recapitalizing
readiness centers--the heart and soul of the National Guard--as well as
ranges to allow the Guard to be ready to perform Federal missions.
Several of these projects will consolidate units and functions into a
single facility allowing the Guard to close multiple older facilities.
The $61 million fiscal year 2020 budget request for the USAR
replaces our most dilapidated and failing facilities. An additional $9
million will support critical needs through the Unspecified Minor
Military Construction account.
We appreciate the funding Congress provided the Army in recent
years to meet the most pressing needs on our installations. The fiscal
year 2020 $5.9 billion FSRM budget request sustains this trend and gets
us closer to meeting our full sustainment requirements. The $3.5
billion sustainment portion of the request represents an increase to 85
percent of the total modeled requirement and will allow us to conduct
more deliberate preventive maintenance activities. The $2.2 billion
restoration and modernization portion of the request, an increase of
$600 million over the fiscal year 2019 request, will enable the Army to
continue addressing our most critical maintenance backlog requirements.
Commanders continue to optimize their resources and facilities by
consolidating units into our best facilities; maximizing space
utilization; and disposing of excess facilities.
installation readiness
The Army's energy security and sustainability program continues to
reduce our reliance on external utility systems; improve energy and
water efficiency; increase reliability and efficiency of energy and
water systems; and enable mission readiness. As our adversaries
continue to develop capabilities to disrupt commercial power grids, we
appreciate the continued support of Congress for the Army's energy
security and resilience initiatives in order to ensure our ability to
train, mobilize, and project power from our installations to support
warfighter requirements.
Reliable energy and water supplies are crucial enablers for
maintaining Army mission readiness. The potential disruption of energy
and water services from cyber- attack or extreme weather events pose a
continuous threat to installations and the missions they support. The
Army has established requirements to secure critical missions by
ensuring secure access to energy and water; reliable infrastructure
conditions; and effective system operations, including holistic
planning and exercising of emergency operations plans with scenarios
that address grid outages.
Our installation energy budget request is focused on enhancing
mission effectiveness. The Army continues to leverage private sector
expertise and investment to improve system reliability; reduce
consumption; and improve energy and water resilience. The Army leads
the Federal government in the use of Energy Savings Performance
Contracts and Utility Energy Service Contracts.
Our fiscal year 2020 environmental program budget request of $914
million will keep the Army on track to meet cleanup goals and maintain
full access to important training and testing land, both integral
components of Army readiness.
The Army manages more than 13.8 million acres of land on which we
interact with endangered species; preserve historic sites; and restore
critical or contaminated land. Performing these functions effectively
permits us to respect environmental requirements and continue Army
operations while protecting our Soldiers and Families.
conclusion
America's Army stands ready to deploy, fight and win our Nation's
wars. With your continued support, our installations will remain ready,
secure and resilient to enable Total Army mission readiness and provide
a high quality of life for Soldiers and Families. As the Army
modernizes its weapon systems, our facilities must keep pace. We
appreciate your continued assistance to ensure our Army has the best
facilities for the best fighting force in the world.
Senator Boozman. Thank you. Vice Admiral Smith.
STATEMENT OF VICE ADMIRAL DIXON R. SMITH, UNITED STATES
NAVY, DEPUTY CHIEF OF NAVAL OPERATIONS FOR
FLEET READINESS AND LOGISTICS
Admiral Smith. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Boozman, Ranking Member Schatz, and distinguished
members of the subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to
provide an overview of the Navy's fiscal year 2020 military
construction budget request. On behalf of our sailors and their
families, thank you for your continued support of the Navy, its
military construction program, and our 71 installations around
the world, which enable the Navy the Nation needs.
The missions accomplished at and from the shore enable a
bigger, better, and more ready Navy as we engage in a great
power competition. We undertake a deliberate annual review to
prioritize our proposed investments and ensure that we provide
the necessary investments to underpin the fleet's mission in
support of the National Defense Strategy. The Navy's fiscal
year 2020 MILCON budget request of approximately $1.5 billion,
includes 22 projects that will increase lethality and
strengthen alliances.
The proposed investments deliberately target new platform
capability, fielding and employment, recapitalization of
waterfront and shipyard infrastructure, foundational
warfighting missions, including power projection and shore
requirements to maintain our global presence.
Additionally, our facilities sustainment, restoration, and
modernization request of $2.3 billion will help to improve
sustainment of our most critical facilities. This is the fourth
consecutive year Navy has increased FSRM funding. The Navy will
begin to reduce the facilities maintenance backlog with the
fiscal year 2020 budget request, but it will take several years
of a consistent resourcing to achieve full recovery.
Recognizing that shore readiness is an enabler for force
generation and critical logistics capabilities to support the
fight, our fiscal year 2020 request helps to maintain the
positive momentum from the three previous budget cycles.
However, the path to full readiness recovery will take a long-
term commitment of resources, predictable funding, and time.
It is a privilege to testify before the committee today and
share the details of our proposed fiscal year shore
investments. Congress is our critical partner to achieve the
Navy the Nation needs. With stable and predictable funding, we
continue to invest smartly, driving efficiency and ensuring the
best return on the investment for the Nation, our sailors, and
civilians.
Again, thank you for your support for the Navy's shore
infrastructure programs, and I look forward to your questions.
Thank you.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Vice Admiral Dixon R. Smith
Chairman Boozman, Ranking Member Schatz, and distinguished members
of the Committee, it is an honor to appear before you representing the
thousands of Navy Sailors and civilians at our seventy-one
installations worldwide. Thank you for the opportunity to testify about
how our fiscal year 2020 Military Construction (MILCON) request best
provides these dedicated professionals the facilities they require to
carry out their mission aligned to strategy.
The President's National Security Strategy clearly sets forth the
priorities directing our Navy to maintain ready forces and invest in
readiness to maintain ``The Navy the Nation Needs'' which includes
infrastructure maintenance and modernization. Further, the Navy is
supporting the National Defense Strategy (NDS) that articulates the
Department of Defense's mission--to maintain a lethal, resilient, and
rapidly innovating force. Today I look forward to sharing with you our
proposed MILCON projects that enable fleet lethality as well as support
for our service members and their families.
Our shore infrastructure is an integral component to achieving the
six pillars of the Navy's mission: (1) a bigger, (2) better, (3)
networked, (4) talented, (5) agile, and particularly (6) ready fleet.
To enable that ready fleet in fiscal year 2020, the Navy is requesting
nearly $2.3 million in facility sustainment to support infrastructure
worldwide. The MILCON resourcing of $1.47 billion allows for the
execution of 22 projects, to include six overseas projects in support
of the global reach and persistent presence of a forward-deployed naval
force.
On behalf of the CNO, I also want to express the Navy's
appreciation to Congress for enacting the fiscal year 2019
Appropriations Bill that funds increased shipyard investments and
contributes to improving necessary infrastructure that enables the
Fleet and our warfighting missions.
Today I would like to share with you how the Navy plans to align
our Shore Infrastructure portfolio in fiscal year 2020 to maintain
resiliency and lethality in The Navy the Nation Needs.
military construction
In fiscal year 2020, the Navy made a deliberate investment in
military construction (MILCON) to increase lethality, capacity and
capability. The MILCON budget request includes 22 projects, planning
and design (P&D), and unspecified military construction at a value of
$1.47 billion.
More than 80 percent of the MILCON program is in direct support to
the National Defense Strategy's highest priorities of increasing
lethality, strengthening alliances, and enabling new Navy Platforms and
Missions. This program also invests in restoring warfighting readiness
and further advancing the restoration of our Naval Shipyards and
support to the Navy Reserves.
Increasing Lethality/New Platform ($898 million, 14 projects)
--Ammunition Pier--Seal Beach, CA ($95 million)
--CMV-22B Maintenance Hangar--Coronado, CA ($87 million)
--Alert Force Facility--Fairfield, CA ($64 million)
--Pier 8 Replacement--San Diego, CA ($59 million)
--Replace SSN Berthing Pier 32--New London, CT ($72 million)
--Master Time Clocks and Operations Facility--Washington, DC ($76
million)
--Targeting and Surveillance System Facility--Jacksonville, FL ($32
million)
--EOD Compound Facilities--Guam ($62 million)
--Magazine Consolidation, Phase 1, West Loch--Pearl Harbor, HI ($54
million)
--Runway 08/26 and Taxiway Hotel Extension--China Lake, CA ($65
million)
--D5 Missile Motor Receipt/Storage Facility--Hill Air Force Base, UT
($51 million)
--Mariner Skills Training Center--Norfolk, VA ($79 million)
--Undersea Vehicle Maintenance Facility--Kitsap, WA ($25 million)
--Communications Station--Sigonella, Italy ($77 million)
Strengthen Alliances/European Deterrence Initiative (EDI) ($298
million, 5 projects)
--Pier 5 Replacement--Yokosuka, Japan ($175 million)
--Electrical System Upgrade--Bahrain ($53 million)
--EDI: Joint Mobility Center--Rota, Spain ($47 million)
--EDI: Small Craft Berthing Facility--Rota, Spain ($13 million)
--EDI: In-Transit Munitions Facility--Rota, Spain ($$10 million)
Shipyard Investment ($100 million, 2 projects)
--Dry Dock Flood Protection Improvements--Norfolk, VA ($49 million)
--Dry Dock 4 and Pier 3 Modernization--Puget Sound NSY, WA ($51
million)
Supporting the Navy Reserves ($25 million, 1 project)
--Main Gate Relocation--New Orleans, LA ($25 million) MILCON Planning
and Design ($100 million)
MILCON Planning and Design ($100 million)
Unspecified Minor Construction ($46 million)
facilities sustainment, restoration, and modernization (fsrm)
Further, the fiscal year 2020 budget requests $2.3 billion to
sustain infrastructure, and improve our facility sustainment from 80
percent of the Department of Defense (DoD) model in fiscal year 2019 to
85 percent in fiscal year 2020. While still below the DoD goal of 90
percent facilities sustainment, this is the fourth straight year the
Navy has increased this funding level in its budget request,
acknowledging our commitment to a more balanced investment to support
Navy wholeness. The Navy will begin to reduce the facilities
maintenance backlog with the fiscal year 2020 budget request with
consistent resourcing to achieve full recovery.
family housing
Our Sailors and their families deserve safe, quality living
quarters and commands must advocate for their health, safety, and well-
being. The Navy takes this issue very seriously, and is taking
deliberate action to identify problems and work with our commands and
Public Private Venture (PPV) partners to ensure we develop a working
relationship that supports the provision of quality housing operations.
Immediate action has been taken to reach out to every family in Navy
housing and to develop remediation plans to ensure our Sailors' living
conditions in government family and PPV housing offers the quality of
life standards which they deserve.
To that end, we have directed required actions by our Navy commands
to assess current conditions, address family concerns, evaluate PPV
relationships and oversight, and provide findings to Commander, Navy
Installations Command to adjust business practices that will ensure an
expeditious, enduring, and comprehensive resolution.
In order to continue operations while planning for overall housing
improvement, the fiscal year 2020 Family Housing budget request
provides $281.3 million for the operation and maintenance of almost
7,000 government-owned homes, leases for approximately 1,700 units,
major maintenance and repair to more than 500 units, and oversight of
nearly 40,000 privatized housing units. The Family Housing construction
request of $27.8M million will assist in the elimination of inadequate
units at Naval Station Rota, Spain and Fleet Activities Yokosuka, Japan
by renovating 82 homes.
base operating support
Our fiscal year 2020 budget request invests $4.73 billion in base
operating support, a slight decrease from fiscal year 2019 ($4.75
billion), essentially unchanged since the enactment of the Budget
Control Act in 2013. This funding level provides compliant outputs and
service levels at our installations, and we prioritize resources to
minimize impact to mission, force protection, and quality of life at
the expense of other base operating support functions. While funding
for installation services and facility support has been constrained,
the Navy remains committed to deliberately and effectively managing
each base operating support program within available resourcing.
base realignment and closure (brac)
The Navy's fiscal year 2020 budget request includes $158 million
for installations closed in previous BRAC rounds; $148 million of this
is for environmental cleanup. The Navy has completed disposal of 94
percent of property (177,842 acres) with the remaining 6 percent
representing 11,151 acres at 16 former installations. Over 50 percent
of the remaining property is at two BRAC 2005 installations (NAS Joint
Reserve Base Willow Grove, PA, and NWS Concord, CA). The majority of
the remaining property transfers are planned to occur by 2027. There
are 27 former installations (with no property remaining for transfer)
which still require environmental cleanup or monitoring.
I appreciate Congress' support of the environmental cleanup efforts
at the former Hunters Point Naval Shipyard. Fraudulent contractor work
delayed property transfers in support of redevelopment, and extensive
rework on low-level radiological cleanup is expected to begin in 2019.
Additionally, PFOS and PFOA have impacted public and private drinking
water supplies at multiple BRAC installations. In fiscal year 2019,
initial sampling and/or evaluations will be completed at 35 former
installations with known or suspected PFOS and PFOA. Over $73 million
has been spent as of 1 October 2018 and future costs for cleanup are
expected to increase as EPA and state guidance/regulations evolve.
conclusion
The Navy the Nation Needs requires shore infrastructure worldwide
that can support and win both a short and prolonged fight. Therefore,
the Navy continues to prioritize the readiness of the force through the
balance of resourcing. We are steadfastly focused on prioritizing
investments that increase naval power as directed by the National
Defense Strategy. Thank you for your unwavering support and commitment
to our Navy's readiness, as well as your dedication to the Navy's
service members and their families.
Senator Boozman. Thank you. Major General Coglianese.
STATEMENT OF MAJOR GENERAL VINCENT A. COGLIANESE,
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS, COMMANDER,
MARINE CORPS INSTALLATIONS COMMAND, AND
ASSISTANT DEPUTYCOMMANDANT, INSTALLATIONS
AND LOGISTICS (FACILITIES)
General Coglianese. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Boozman, Ranking Member Schatz, and distinguished
members of the committee, as the Commander for Marine Corps
Installations Command, I am eager to continue to work with you
to improve our installation infrastructure. Marine Corps
installations represent an invaluable national asset. They are
fundamental to combat readiness and to generate combat power.
As stated in the National Defense Strategy, our
installations are both at stateside and forward deployed, are
vulnerable to a growing host of sophisticated threats.
Mitigating these threats requires continuous support from
Congress to strengthen our ability to operate and maintain
these assets and to set the condition for future development
and the relevance of our installations.
Additionally, our installations are home to our Marines,
sailors, and families. We must provide safe housing and
sufficient community support infrastructure for their well-
being.
Although Florence hit landfall over 6 months ago, the
Marine Corps at Base Camp Lejeune, Marine Corps Air Station New
River, and Marine Corps Air Station Cherry Point are still
reeling from the impact. The storm was a gut punch. It was the
second-wettest storm on record. We sustained damage from 35
inches of rain and a hurricane-force wind that was crawling
over our base at single-digit miles per hour.
Additionally, other Marine Corps regionals--regions and
installations took a knee on their critical readiness projects
that are focused on life, health, and safety as we diverted
funds to the affected bases on the east coast. We are grateful
to OSD and Congress for recently approving $400 million in O&M
reprogramming for fiscal year 2019.
These funds will immediately go to recovering operations
down at Camp Lejeune, yet the money is not enough for this
year. We still need to pay back the Marine Corps' other
installations across the other regions. It will require
additional funding in 2019 and the support of Congress.
The total hurricane recovery is a cost of $3.7 billion,
including 31 replacement projects. The 31 projects will
actually replace 133 buildings. That will cost nearly $2
billion to repair--to replace, I am sorry. The repairs to the
existing buildings will cost $1.3 billion. The remaining $400
million will go towards related equipment.
Since the storm, the Marine Corps and Navy Facilities
Engineering Command have been driving at the problem shoulder
to shoulder and have addressed the immediate life, health, and
safety concerns at a cost of about $244 million with our
limited operations and maintenance accounts.
Marines and sailors are still occupying buildings and homes
in need of repairs. Over 3,300 Marines and sailors are
displaced across Camp Lejeune area and now are determined to
make do in degraded facilities or poorly configured workspaces
such as trailers. Due to Hurricane Michael, we have depot-level
maintenance facilities exposed to the elements at Marine Corps
Logistics Base Albany, impacting mission readiness.
Over 900 facilities across our east coast bases have been
compromised. Five hundred of these buildings have been severely
damaged and cannot be occupied. Camp Lejeune is home to the II
Marine Expeditionary Force and represents over one-third of
combat power in the Marine Corps.
Critical ranges and training areas support II MEP and
Marine Corps Special Operations Command, and they remain
degraded. Damaged infrastructure to roads, railroad trestles,
beaches impede our strategic mobility and capacity to deploy.
Family housing, both on base and the surrounding community,
has been severely impacted. We have Marines executing permanent
change station orders to Camp Lejeune this summer, and due to
lack of housing, many are making the hard choice to temporarily
leave their families behind.
Marines are resilient, expeditionary, and adaptable.
However, we are going to need some help to keep faith with them
and ensure their optimal readiness. The Marine Corps fiscal
year 2020 military construction budget includes 18 projects
valued at approximately $1.5 billion. It focuses on supporting
recapitalization and new platforms and training.
The Commandant's infrastructure reset strategy, when
properly resourced and implemented, will improve infrastructure
lifecycle management. We must prioritize infrastructure reset
over the long term. We must improve infrastructure lifecycle
management and ensure the infrastructure investments are
aligned with the Marine Corps capability-based requirements
that support our warfighting mission and contribute directly to
the current and future force readiness.
The amount of damages these hurricanes caused to our
infrastructure cannot be overstated. More importantly, it has
impeded our ability to support the mission and the capabilities
of Marines and sailors stationed in North Carolina and Georgia.
With your continued support, we will fix these bases while
improving their resiliency.
Thank you for your time and the opportunity to speak on
behalf of the Marines, sailors, and civilians, and their
families. I look forward to your questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Major General Vincent A. Coglianese
preface
Chairman Boozman, Ranking Member Schatz, and distinguished Members
of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Marine
Corps installations infrastructure programs which are critical to our
ability to train forces and maintain readiness. Thanks to the strong
support we have received from Congress, the Marine Corps has been able
to make significant improvements in the quality and condition of our
installation infrastructure.
Marine Corps installations represent an irreplaceable national
asset. They are fundamental to combat readiness, particularly the
generation of combat power. Additionally, they are home to our Marines,
Sailors and their families, and will continue to be integral to their
quality of life through housing and community support infrastructure.
As Commander, Marine Corps Installations Command, and the single
authority on all Marine Corps installation matters, the protection of
our installations is my number one priority. There are several
challenges in the current operating environment, and all the signs
indicate those challenges will compound and grow. The most recent
National Defense Strategy asserts the homeland is no longer a
sanctuary, and recent asymmetric attacks on military installations
across the country highlight the insider threat. Our installations are
vulnerable targets for a growing host of sophisticated threats intent
on disrupting and degrading our ability to generate combat power in
support of the National Defense Strategy. Ensuring the protection of
life and property serves to ensure our ability to execute those
essential operations that enable the training and deployment of our
combat forces. Maintaining the maneuver space to adapt and evolve our
protection measures must occupy a central place in our conversations of
modernization and readiness. It is imperative we have the ability and
authority to execute investments that afford protection against both
inside and outside threats.
The operation and maintenance of these installations, as well as
their future development and use, require long-term planning, careful
investment, and timely program execution. Implementation of the
Commandant's Infrastructure Reset Strategy will ensure our
installations are capable of supporting Marine Corps operations well
into the future.
The Marine Corps has installations and support infrastructure
worldwide valued at more than $110 billion that are used to train,
house, and provide quality of life for Marines and their families. This
infrastructure must be properly maintained to prevent degradation of
our capability to support these mission-essential tasks. Adequately
protecting our installations, supporting new warfighting and training
capabilities, and sustaining infrastructure are top installation
management priorities for the Marine Corps.
impacts of hurricanes florence and michael
Although Hurricane Florence made landfall over 6 months ago, Marine
Corps Base Camp Lejeune, Marine Corps Air Station New River, and Marine
Corps Air Station Cherry Point are still recovering and feeling the
impacts. Camp Lejeune, home to the II Marine Expeditionary Force, is a
huge source of generating combat power. Several headquarters buildings,
training facilities, and aircraft hangers were affected. Many of our
ranges and training areas supporting II Marine Expeditionary Force and
Marine Corps Special Operations Command remain degraded. Damaged
infrastructure, to include roads, railroad trestles, and beaches, have
degraded our strategic capacity to deploy.
Roughly 800 buildings between the Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune,
Marine Corps Base New River, and Marine Corps Air Station Cherry Point
have been compromised. About 500 of those buildings have been damaged
severely and are incapable of being occupied. Between Hurricane
Florence and subsequently Hurricane Michael which damaged facilities at
Marine Corps Logistics Base Albany, we have a $ 3.4 billion
requirement.
For the $3.4 billion hurricane recovery requirement, 30 replacement
projects--to include new military construction and demolition--will
cost nearly $ 1.7 billion. Repairs to existing buildings will cost $1.3
billion. The remaining $400 million will go to replacement for
destroyed IT systems and other repairs.
Between September 2018 and December 2018, the Marine Corps and
Naval Facilities Engineering Command addressed immediate life, health,
and safety issues at a cost of $78 million in Facilities Sustainment,
Restoration, and Modernization (FSRM) funding.
During this same time period, the Marine Corps developed its $1.3
billion FSRM repair estimate and further transitioned to construction
design and contracting strategy. Since January 2019, we have been
acting on our plan by releasing requests for proposals to industry. To
date, our only financial recourse has been to divert FSRM funding away
from every other base and station in the Marine Corps into North
Carolina and Georgia. This self-financing strategy will not fully
repair the hurricane damage. A self-financing strategy guarantees
degradation of our infrastructure in California, Arizona, Hawaii,
Virginia, South Carolina and any other state in which there is a Marine
Corps installation. Additionally, this self-financing strategy will
also impact our ability to meet our Infrastructure Reset Strategy
goals--especially when considering our plans for demolition and
elimination of poor and inadequate facilities.
Hurricane recovery will take years to complete given the impact to
our previously outdated infrastructure that was not designed to survive
hurricane force winds and rain. We look forward to working with
Congress to implement and support recovery efforts at the impacted
installations.
impact of budget uncertainty
With Congress' strong support, the Marine Corps has made
significant progress over the last 10 years in replacing old and
unsatisfactory infrastructure. We appreciate actions taken by Congress
to enact the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 that provided relief from
the Budget Control Act defense spending caps in both fiscal years 2018
and 2019. However, budget uncertainty beyond fiscal year 2019 will
erode our readiness and will continue to have negative impacts on our
ability to make long-term decisions necessary for a healthy
infrastructure portfolio. Long-term reduced funding of installations
requirements will result in gradual degradation of our infrastructure
and create a bow wave of increased future costs to return these assets
to adequate condition. Your Marine Corps requires continued support
from Congress with predictable budgets over a sustained period in order
to maintain and improve infrastructure readiness.
To maintain near-term operational readiness in previous years, the
Marine Corps was forced to accept risk in its infrastructure portfolio.
Taking risk in the facilities sustainment, restoration and
modernization, and military construction programs resulted in the
degradation of our infrastructure, which in turn increases lifecycle
costs. Improving the current state of our installations is the single
most important investment to support training, operations, and quality
of life.
The Marine Corps has prioritized military construction projects
that support new weapons platforms (primarily the F-35) and other
projects associated with life, health, and safety concerns. Congress
has been very supportive of prior military construction budget
requests. Thanks to Congress, the Marine Corps has received funding for
many projects that positively impact readiness and training.
As part of ongoing business reform initiatives, the Marine Corps'
Infrastructure Reset Strategy seeks to improve infrastructure lifecycle
management and ensure infrastructure investments are aligned with
Marine Corps installations that are capable, adaptive, and economically
sustainable platforms from which to generate readiness and project
combat power in a fiscally constrained environment. Implementation of
this strategy consolidates and appropriately resets the infrastructure
footprint within existing installations to improve operational
readiness and generate resources for reinvestment. Successful execution
of this strategy will depend on future budget stability as well the
provision of additional funds to recover from Hurricanes Florence and
Michael.
Our installations provide three critical force enabling functions.
First, they are deployment platforms from which our expeditionary
forces fight and win our Nation's battles; second, they are where our
Marine Air Ground Task Forces (MAGTFs) train and hone their combat
readiness; and third, they house our Marines and families. We must
prioritize the Infrastructure Reset Strategy--we must improve
infrastructure lifecycle management and ensure infrastructure
investments are aligned with Marine Corps capability-based requirements
to support the warfighting mission and contribute directly to current
and future readiness.
military construction
The Marine Corps' fiscal year 2020 Military Construction (MILCON)
program includes 18 projects valued at approximately $1.488 billion
which is an 89 percent increase over the fiscal year 2019 enacted
budget of $786 million. This increase is primarily due to additional
funding for projects supporting recapitalization, new platform, and
training.
Marine Corps MILCON requirements are driven by operating force and
other mission requirements such as: (1) introducing new platforms or
weapons; (2) relocating forces to better position assets to meet the
national military strategy; (3) meeting force protection or safety
standards; (4) enhancing or replacing infrastructure that is in poor or
failing condition; (5) meeting new and improved training standards for
the 21st century Marine Corps; (6) modernizing critical infrastructure;
(7) improving utilities reliability and resilience to support
readiness; (8) meeting environmental regulations and laws and energy
reduction mandates; (9) improving training areas to include aerial/
ground ranges; and (10) acquiring land needed to support training.
The primary focus areas of the fiscal year 2020 Marine Corps MILCON
budget request include: (1) supporting the beddown of new capabilities
and platforms; (2) providing infrastructure to support force
relocations; (3) recapitalization and replacement of inadequate
facilities; and (4) training and concept development/testing. Our
fiscal year 2020 budget accomplishes the following:
--Supports new platforms such as Joint Strike Fighter (F-35), CH-53K
King Stallion helicopter, and Amphibious Combat Vehicle (ACV)
with new aircraft and vehicle maintenance facilities and
training buildings.
--Supports implementation of Force 2025, the future Marine Corps,
which will be increasingly reliant on naval deployment,
preventative in approach, leaner in equipment, versatile in
capabilities, and innovative in mindset.
--Supports planning and execution of the Marine Corps' Wargaming
Program of simulation and modeling of future warfighting
environments.
--Provides training and quality of life infrastructure to support the
relocation of Marines from Japan to Guam.
--Replaces and modernizes numerous inadequate and obsolete facilities
and infrastructure in order to improve operations, quality of
life, and training.
--Supports our Reserve component with operational and training
facilities via the unspecified minor construction program.
infrastructure sustainment, restoration, and demolition
The President's Budget for fiscal year 2020 funds 88 percent of the
OSD facilities sustainment model requirement for the Marine Corps. When
restoring and modernizing our infrastructure, we prioritize life,
health, and safety issues and efficiency improvements to existing
infrastructure and focus on repairing only the most critical components
of our mission critical facilities. By deferring less critical repairs,
especially for non-mission critical infrastructure, some facilities
will continue to degrade causing our overall facilities maintenance
backlog to increase.
The first step in addressing this backlog is reflected in the
Marine Corps request of $79 million in fiscal year 2020 for the
demolition of 2.7 million square feet of failing and obsolete
facilities to enable implementation of the Commandant's Infrastructure
Reset Strategy.
family housing
Our worldwide family housing inventory is 93 percent privatized,
which has improved the homes in which our families live and other
support infrastructure such as community centers, playgrounds, and
``green spaces'' that help create neighborhoods and a sense of
community for our Marines and their families. Combined with traditional
military construction, privatized housing will continue to build and
improve the homes necessary to supplement local community housing.
The overall goal of the Military Family Housing Privatization
program is to provide safe, quality, and affordable housing to our
military families comparable to what is available on the local economy.
Our Public Private Venture (PPV) partners are responsible for providing
the day-to-day operations. The Marine Corps is responsible for
providing the required oversight of the homes to ensure that they are
habitable, that any identified health concerns are properly addressed
and that residents are being charged fairly for services received,
including billing under the Resident Energy Conservation program
(RECP).
The Marine Corps views their role as a top priority, and takes the
following steps to hold PPV companies accountable for providing
suitable housing for our service members:
--Ensures that the PPV partner maintains a 24-hour hotline and
responds to maintenance requests in a timely manner
--Works with the PPV partner to provide seminars and educational
materials to residents with tips on home maintenance and energy
conservation
--Tracks systemic issues on a monitoring matrix and works with the
PPV partners to resolve
--Requires annual certifications by the PPV Partner certifying
compliance with applicable environmental regulations
--Participates in annual condition assessments to assess the
suitability of the homes and neighborhoods
--Publicizes the three-step resolution process for residents: (1)
Contact the PPV office; (2) Contact the Regional PPV Manager;
(3) Contact the Installation Housing Office--ensures engagement
at all levels to keep homes habitable
--Requires PPV partners to disclose any known hazards at move-in and
have residents sign applicable mold, lead, or asbestos
addendums acknowledging their awareness of the hazard and any
recommended precautionary measures
--Reviews resident comments on surveys
--Proactively initiates audits and/or special studies and reviews
mitigation plan when warranted
The Marine Corps is actively engaged with ensuring that privatized
homes are safe, suitable, and affordable. The Commandant of the Marine
Corps recently issued a directive to address concerns about living
conditions in both on- and off-base housing. The Commandant directed
all Marine Corps commanders and senior enlisted leaders to request a
voluntary home visit with each Marine and Sailor in their command
(regardless of rank) who resides in government quarters, privatized
military housing, or an off-base civilian rental property. The intent
of the visits is to: (1) raise awareness of the member's living
conditions to ensure it is safe, secure, and environmentally healthy,
(2) identify maintenance or safety issues affecting the residence,
determine any actions taken to date to remedy them, and determine how
the chain of command can assist in the resolution process, and (3)
ensure our members and their families are aware of and understand the
support processes and programs available. Our Marines, Sailors and
their families should know their leaders care for their well-being and
are both ready and willing to help.
Recently, the Marine Corps stood up its Housing Improvement Team
with the goal of reviewing opportunities to improve Marine Corps
oversight and the performance of the PPV partners. This team is
additionally working with the other services in a collaborative effort
to share best practices and a universal way forward. Some of the
current opportunities being reviewed by the Housing Improvement Team
include:
--Working with the other services on a joint Resident Bill of Rights.
--Assessing areas to amend the Business Agreements to allow
additional DON discretion and review of incentive fee criteria
and structure.
--Evaluating the Marine Corps Housing Office staffing levels to
ensure the Marine Corps is appropriately staffed to complete
additional oversight of our PPV partners while providing
increased resident advocacy support. Marine Corps will also
look to increase training and education for its housing staff.
--Reviewing with our PPV partners options for maintenance process
improvement, including technology based forums like mobile
phone applications for tracking service tickets and other
possibilities.
--Educating and encouraging installation leadership to become
actively engaged with the PPV partner including performance
review, resident satisfaction, and budget and recapitalization
input. Additionally the Marine Corps will look to better train
installation leadership for PPV awareness and interaction.
--Reenergizing the Operating Force Command engagement and feedback
for housing improvement and resident advocacy.
The Marine Corps is not requesting any new family housing
construction in fiscal year 2020 through either traditional MILCON or
through the use of privatization authorities. However, we are
requesting $19.9 million in the family housing, construction
improvements account for the sustainment and restoration of 44 enlisted
family housing townhouse units at MCAS Iwakuni, Japan in order to
continue with the renovation of Iwakuni housing neighborhoods along
with design for future projects. This will provide much needed
improvements to quality of life for our Marines and their families
stationed overseas.
conclusion
The Marine Corps must quickly recover the devastating effects of
Hurricanes Florence and Michael, and continue implementation of our
Infrastructure Reset Strategy. As outlined in the National Defense
Strategy, our installations must prove resilient in the face of the
threats we face. We must modernize our installations to protect our
blunt and surge layer forces and reassure our partners and allies. Our
operational capabilities are adapting to meet these changes, and we
need to invest in a next generation installation infrastructure to
match the growing MAGTF capability. Your support is crucial as we begin
to develop installation infrastructure to support our Next Generation
MAGTF. The fiscal year 2020 budget request supports this premise.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today. I look
forward to working with you to sustain the warfighting capability, the
readiness of our power projection platforms and quality of life of the
Marine Corps.
Senator Boozman. Thank you. Brigadier General Allen.
STATEMENT OF BRIGADIER GENERAL JOHN J. ALLEN, DIRECTOR
OF CIVIL ENGINEERS, DEPUTY CHIEF OF STAFF
FOR LOGISTICS, ENGINEERING, AND FORCE
PROTECTION, UNITED STATES AIR FORCE
General Allen. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Boozman, Ranking Member Schatz, and distinguished
members of the subcommittee, I am honored to appear before you
today to represent the Air Force.
The Air Force fights from its bases. They serve as our
power projection platforms from which we build, deploy, and
employ ready forces. Decades of challenging fiscal conditions
and global operations have required that we accept managed risk
in installation infrastructure, which, left unchecked, will
negatively impact Air Force missions. The fiscal year 2020
President's budget request takes the first steps in a years-
long path to recovery to ensure our installations are ready to
confront future threats.
The result is a budget request aligned with the National
Defense Strategy to enhance readiness for the high-end fight.
To stabilize and sustain our installations, the Secretary of
the Air Force signed the Infrastructure Investment Strategy,
which provides a framework for investments in facilities
sustainment, restoration, modernization, and recapitalization.
This strategy is being executed along three primary lines
of effort. First, we will restore readiness to our power
projection platforms. Second, we will cost effectively
modernize our infrastructure. And third, we will drive
innovation in installation management. Our military
construction budget request is a key enabler of the
Infrastructure Investment Strategy and has increased by $400
million from fiscal year 2019.
Aligned with the National Defense Strategy, the MILCON
program prioritizes resources to the high-end fight,
demonstrates strength to our adversaries and commitment to our
allies, and supports global posture through new weapon system
beddowns and aging infrastructure recapitalization.
In fiscal year 2020 the Air Force will leverage MILCON
funds to set deterrence conditions in the European theater,
enhance partnerships and regional resilience in the Indo-
Pacific, and strengthen logistics infrastructure to rapidly
support operations in the Levant.
Our MILCON request also supports continuing modernization
of our aging aircraft fleet, including hangars, maintenance and
training facilities, airfields, and fuel infrastructure that
aircraft require to achieve full operating capability. fiscal
year 2020 MILCON funds will also address urgently needed
existing mission recapitalization focused on the nuclear
enterprise and research development tests and evaluation
infrastructure.
Equally as vital as the Air Force MILCON budget is the
facilities sustainment, restoration, and modernization account,
which provides a non-MILCON pathway for mission-critical
projects. This year's requested FSRM budget represents a
considerable increase over the previous year, setting the stage
for consistent, stable, and predictable funding for Air Force
installations.
In addition to strong installation infrastructure, ready
and resilient airmen are critical components of a lethal,
powerful Air Force. The Air Force remains committed to
providing airmen and their families with quality housing and a
sense of community on our installations. The fiscal year 2020
President's budget request focuses military family housing
funds on eliminating inadequate housing from our Government-
owned inventory.
The fiscal year 2020 President's budget request, coupled
with the Installation Investment Strategy, invests in a
resilient and lethal force ready to fight and win in an era of
great power competition. I thank you again for the opportunity
to testify today, and I look forward to your questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Brigadier General John J. Allen, Jr.
introduction
Chairman Boozman, Ranking Member Schatz, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for your continued support of the U.S. Air
Force. I am honored to appear before you today to represent our Airmen
and their families and to discuss the Air Force's fiscal year 2020
budget request.
The foundation of Air Force readiness and lethality is an
integrated network of installations which enables global power
projection and provides safe, healthy communities for our Airmen and
their families. Decades of challenging fiscal conditions and global
operations have required that we accept managed risk in installation
infrastructure which, if left unchecked, will negatively impact Air
Force missions.
In preparing the fiscal year 2020 President's Budget request, the
Air Force deliberately evaluated both today's needs and the
capabilities required to confront future threats. The result is a
budget aligned with the National Defense Strategy to enhance readiness
for the high-end fight by supporting resilient installations and
airmen. Ready and resilient installations are inextricably linked to
the Air Force's ability to generate air, space, and cyber capabilities
and deliver unmatched global advantage as a member of the joint team.
This budget request balances installation readiness, capability, and
capacity with the need to maintain and field a credible and affordable
force today and into the future. Ultimately, in this era of great power
competition, our priorities center on strengthening a lethal, ready Air
Force positioned to compete and win in the high-end fight.
infrastructure investment strategy (i2s)
The Air Force fights from our installations. Generating combat
power is about more than buildings and pavement; strategic location,
surge capacity, airspace, and ranges are all critical components of
readiness and lethality in support of the National Defense Strategy.
To stabilize and sustain our installations, we introduced the
Infrastructure Investment Strategy (I2S) last year. The I2S provides
the framework for necessary investment in facilities sustainment,
restoration, modernization and recapitalization. The I2S is being
executed along three primary Lines of Effort:
--Restore Readiness to Power Projection Platforms.--Resilient and
ready Air Force installations demonstrate strength to our
adversaries and commitment to our Allies
--Cost Effective Modernization of Infrastructure.--Air Force
installations require investment for sustainment and
modernization to assure mission readiness
--Drive Innovation in Installation Management.--Air Force
installations build and rely on strong relationships with
communities and private sector partners to leverage new
technologies
Four imperatives will align and unify these lines of effort: (1)
adequate and stable funding, (2) smart infrastructure business
management, (3) unified efforts across the enterprise, and (4)
revitalized squadrons. The I2S ensures mission-driven investments are
timed to optimize lifecycle costs, maximizing space use in facilities
in good condition and demolishing or divesting from those that are not
cost effective to sustain or repair.
The Air Force is implementing private sector best practices to
ensure that we acquire and manage facility sustainment, restoration,
and modernization materials and services as a single, efficient
enterprise. These include developing cost management strategies
specific to different spending categories, leveraging data to improve
the timing of sustainment and recapitalization actions, and
establishing standards of services and equipment to achieve economies
of scale. These efforts to improve enterprise-wide cost efficiency are
becoming increasingly critical as highly technological, fifth
generation fighter aircraft arrive at various locations, requiring a
larger logistical and sustainment footprint.
Additionally, the Air Force has vastly improved asset visibility
through sustainment management, geospatial information systems, and in-
depth facility condition assessments. As of October 2018, we have
completed Facility Condition Assessments for 75 percent of all
facilities, which are captured in our sustainment management system.
This data enables unprecedented future requirements identification. We
can ``see'' current requirements and ``predict'' future requirements
through life-cycle degradation analysis. By leveraging asset visibility
in conjunction with operations research analytics, we are able to run
scenarios that include varying investment levels and varying policy
decisions. These scenarios inform senior leaders of strategic
investment trades, shaping future planning to ensure our installations
remain mission- ready.
military construction
The I2S focuses on mission-driven, well-timed investment, but the
foundation is a recommitment to adequate, stable resourcing for Air
Force infrastructure through our military construction (MILCON) and
facility sustainment, restoration and modernization (FSRM) accounts. To
support a dynamic global posture and increase lethality, our military
construction (MILCON) budget has increased by $400 million from fiscal
year 2019, bringing the fiscal year 2020 request to $2.72 billion.
Aligned with the National Defense Strategy, the MILCON program
prioritizes resources to the high-end fight, demonstrates strength to
our adversaries and commitment to our allies, and supports global
posture through new weapon system bed-downs and aging infrastructure
recapitalization.
Combatant Command Infrastructure
Our fiscal year 2020 MILCON request supports combatant commander
requirements in Europe, the Indo-Pacific, the Middle East, and North
America. We remain committed to efforts initiated by European Command
(EUCOM) in fiscal year 15 to reassure North Atlantic Treaty
Organization allies and European partners of the United States'
commitment to our collective security and territorial integrity. The
fiscal year 2020 European Deterrence Initiative (EDI) MILCON program
builds on fiscal year 2019 efforts to set deterrence conditions in the
theater and enable the joint team and our allies to respond quickly to
aggressive regional actors. fiscal year 2020 EDI MILCON investment
enhances EUCOM's materiel prepositioning options and improves airfield
capacity, fuel systems, and munitions storage at bases in Iceland and
across mainland Europe.
The Air Force recognizes that a rapidly growing China aims to
undermine long-standing alliances and displace American influence in
the Indo-Pacific region. Our fiscal year 2020 budget request includes
several infrastructure investments in the Pacific to enhance our
partnerships and regional resilience. Our fiscal year 2020 budget
request also enhances global reach and military cooperation between the
United States and Australia through expansion of tanker capacity at
RAAF Tindal, Australia.
In support of Central Command, our budget request also includes two
projects to continue the development of Muwaffaq-Salti Air Base in
Jordan. These projects strengthen the resilience of logistics
infrastructure needed to rapidly support operations in the Levant.
Lastly, in support of Northern Command, our budget request includes
funding for Air National Guard fighter alert shelters at Truax Field,
Wisconsin.
New Mission Infrastructure
The fiscal year 2020 President's Budget request supports continuing
modernization of our aging aircraft fleet. The request includes
facilities supporting Air Force weapons system acquisition and
modernization programs including the F-35A, KC-46A, T-X, Presidential
Aircraft Recapitalization, and UH-1 replacement. Achieving full
operational capacity for new weapons systems depends not only on the
aircraft acquisition, but on the delivery of necessary hangars,
maintenance and training facilities, airfields, and fuel
infrastructure.
Major elements of our MILCON request supporting fleet modernization
include KC-46A flight training facilities at Travis Air Force Base,
California; and infrastructure enabling continued beddown of F-35A
aircraft at Eielson Air Force Base, Alaska, Nellis Air Force Base,
Nevada, and Royal Air Force (RAF) Lakenheath, United Kingdom.
Additionally, this year's budget requests funding for the final
increment of the Presidential Aircraft Recapitalization hangar and
maintenance complex at Joint Base Andrews, Maryland. Lastly, our
request includes projects at Joint Base San Antonio, Texas, for the
planned T-X replacement of the T-38C, and a project at Kirtland Air
Force Base, New Mexico, supporting replacement of the UH-1.
Existing Mission Infrastructure
Our budget request substantially increases funding for urgently
needed existing mission recapitalization compared to fiscal year 2019.
Recapitalization efforts focus on two mission critical areas: the
nuclear enterprise, and (2) research, development, test, and evaluation
infrastructure. The fiscal year 2020 budget funds construction of a
Weapons Storage Facility at Malmstrom Air Force Base, Montana, and the
Ground Based Strategic Deterrent Mission Integration Facility at Hill
Air Force Base, Utah. The weapons storage facility will replace an
array of 24 facilities averaging over 50 years old with a modern
consolidated facility, while the Ground Based Strategic Deterrent
facility will provide a central hub for the research, development, and
acquisition efforts necessary to replace the Minuteman III
intercontinental ballistic missile. The fiscal year 2020 request also
funds the second increment of construction for a new, state-of-the art
laboratory space at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Lincoln
Laboratory, a federally funded research and development center focused
on solving problems with direct national security implications.
facility sustainment, restoration and modernization
While facility sustainment, restoration, and modernization (FSRM)
funds are not appropriated by this committee, they are equally as vital
as the Air Force MILCON budget, providing a non-MILCON pathway for
mission-critical projects. The two funding streams work together to
deliver ready, resilient installations. This year's proposed FSRM
budget represents a considerable increase over the previous year.
Coupled with our MILCON spending, the FSRM budget will enable our
Infrastructure Investment Strategy to provide adaptive infrastructure
that assures combat readiness and lethality. The fiscal year 2020
President's Budget request includes $4.1 billion in funding for Air
Force FSRM, a 40 percent increase in funding over the fiscal year 2019
President's Budget request.
The Air Force measures FSRM investment as a percentage of plant
replacement value (PRV), which is the estimated cost to design and
construct replacement facilities, utilities, and infrastructure to meet
modern standards. fiscal year 2019 represented a low point for FSRM
spending, reducing our infrastructure investment level to 1.5 percent
of PRV. This investment level fell significantly below the Air Force
minimum target of 2 percent and the industry standard of 4-6 percent.
In fiscal year 2020, the Air Force will begin a substantial
infrastructure investment increase to restore the health of our
installations. The fiscal year 2020 President's Budget invests in FSRM
at 2 percent of PRV, which represents a marked increase from last year.
This correction sets the stage for consistent, stable, and predictable
funding for Air Force installations and underpins the readiness and
lethality those installations provide in support of the National
Defense Strategy.
housing
Ready and resilient Airmen are a critical component of a lethal,
powerful Air Force. The Air Force remains committed to providing Airmen
and their families with quality housing and a sense of community on our
installations. To better understand the scope of potential health and
safety problems in our housing inventory, the Secretary and Chief of
Staff of the Air Force directed a 100 percent review of our homes. The
initial results are driving immediate fixes and will guide long term
actions to ensure our families are living in healthy and safe homes.
The fiscal year 2020 President's Budget seeks $398.6 million for
both military family housing construction and military family housing
operations and maintenance. These funds will support our continued
focus on eliminating inadequate housing from our inventory and
correcting health and safety deficiencies.
Our military family housing construction request of $103.6 million
will fund construction of 76 homes and supporting neighborhood
infrastructure at Spangdahlem Air Base, Germany; whole house
improvement of 12 government-owned homes on Yokota Air Base, Japan; and
whole house improvement of 29 government-owned historic homes at
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio. Our military family housing
operations and maintenance request of $295 million will fund efforts to
sustain, improve and modernize our government-owned inventory of
approximately 15,200 family housing units. Combined, these funds will
ensure we continue to support the housing needs of Airmen, their
families, and our Army, Navy and Marine Corps teammates housed in our
government-owned inventory.
In 2013, the Air Force met our goal of privatizing family housing
at all stateside locations, including Alaska and Hawaii, through 32
housing projects at 63 installations with an end-state of 53,237 homes.
Our focus in the United States is now on the long-term oversight of
this portfolio of privatized homes.
We are also committed to ensuring unaccompanied Airmen are provided
quality housing on our dormitory campuses. Funded out of the Air Force
FSRM account, our investment strategy for dormitories focuses on
restoration and modernization of these facilities in their existing
configurations. This strategy will meet the Department of Defense goal
of 90 percent adequate dormitory rooms for permanent party
unaccompanied Airmen and reduce the requirement for replacement
construction. This enables us to focus MILCON funds on modern, formal
training facilities for our newly recruited Airmen, such as the Airman
Training Center at Joint Base San Antonio, Texas included in the fiscal
year 2020 President's Budget.
conclusion
Prior years' fiscal challenges have led the Air Force to accept
managed risk in infrastructure. The fiscal year 2020 President's Budget
request increases infrastructure investment to strengthen the Air
Force's global network of installations, focusing on innovative, cost-
effective installation management and facility sustainment,
restoration, and modernization. The military construction portion of
the budget will support combatant command priorities, new weapon system
beddown, and aging facility recapitalization. The military family
housing portion of the budget will sustain and improve our inventory of
government-owned homes. Together, these investments will secure our
global power projection platforms and provide safe communities for our
Airmen and their families.
In an era of great power competition, the Air Force must prioritize
enabling a lethal force to compete and win in today's and tomorrow's
fights. The fiscal year 2020 President's Budget request prioritizes
investment in the ready and resilient Airmen and installations that our
nation's high- end fights demand.
Senator Boozman. Thank you.
General Coglianese, you testified that over the past 6
months, the Marine Corps has dedicated a significant amount of
resources to hurricane recovery for installations at Camp
Lejeune, New River, Cherry Point, and Albany, all of which have
come from within current funding levels. What--I guess the
question really--or two or three things. What impacts are being
felt across the Marine Corps due to cash flowing recovery
efforts for hurricanes Florence and Michael? So, the cash flow
situation. And then also, what are the operational impacts as a
result? And then, finally, what impact will those risks have on
short-term and long-term funding requirements?
General Coglianese. Yes, Chairman, thanks for the question.
Cash flow is seriously impacting the rest of the Marine
Corps. So by putting the--we had to stop the bleeding and make
the repairs. If you fly over Camp Lejeune or New River today,
it will look like blue tarps from the sky. So we patched it. We
stopped the bleeding. We did our due diligence, 31 military
construction projects that are ready to go as far as 1391. We
do need PD to further refine those projects.
What we basically did is, basically, the idea to stop the
money going from the west coast and the Pacific and flowed it
all to Camp Lejeune. So there is projects that are health and
safety issues--runway repairs, gas line repairs in Camp
Lejeune--they all basically came to a stop to do the right
thing to help Camp Lejeune and the east coast. But unless we
get additional money, those projects that are critical projects
and are not ``like to have'' projects, we will not be able to
restart.
We have several bids in third and fourth quarter that will
expire for the rest of the region. So that is impacting the
entire Marine Corps.
Operations, I think we made kind of a quick recovery down
in Camp Lejeune. But if I can just name a couple kind of
anecdotal stories. There is a control tower, range tower, at
Cherry Point that controls all of the airspace for the ranges.
That has been decimated. So those people now are working in a
makeshift facility. So that has an impact.
You have young Marines who work on aircraft, and now they
have to be moved into another hangar and doubled up. Aviation
maintenance is critical, and now that is going to affect
aviation maintenance just because it affects the quality of
life of the Marines.
And then if you just kind of take the overall quality of
life of the Marines, sailors, and families. If you have to PCS
to Camp Lejeune, you are away from your family plenty of times
because of war or deployments. If you have to now leave them at
Camp Pendleton to go there because of shortage of housing and
such, that just has greater impacts or long-term impacts, I
think, on the health of the Corps and retention and things like
that. And that is just few of many, many stories.
If I could just leave you one more. There is a building in
Cherry Point that all of our counselors work out of for family
counseling, substance abuse, and all. And that pretty much was
decimated, and now we have counselors shoved in all different
nooks and crannies around Cherry Point. And what is happening,
people are not going to counseling because those services are
not readily available. So those kind of things are just
anecdotal stories, sir.
Senator Boozman. Very good.
General Allen, a similar question. You are suffering the
same thing. Can you tell us how that is affecting you as far as
self-financing, trying to self-finance as we go forward?
General Allen. Thank you, Yes, sir. Understand. First, let
me thank the subcommittee for the reprogramming request that
you all passed. General Coglianese mentioned it in his
statement. But for the Air Force, that was $200 million in O&M,
which is very helpful this fiscal year 2019.
Our requirement at Tyndall for O&M is $750 million in
fiscal year 2019. Five hundred fifty million dollars of that
has already been cash flowed from other places where the O&M
was programmed. And on top of that, we need $150 million in
MILCON planning and design to be ready for the MILCON rebuild
that will be ready in fiscal year 2020.
So that is the magnitude of what we are dealing with at
Tyndall. If you factor in where we think we may be with Offutt
as a result of the flooding on the Missouri River here in the
last month that number could grow to over $1 billion total that
we need to be looking at cash flowing.
So without an additional relief this fiscal year, our
comptroller has put together a proposal for our Secretary that
essentially involves a triage of how we manage O&M to get us
through the rest of the fiscal year. So to your question, if we
have to invoke that triage plan, we will have to really stop
new recovery activity at Tyndall, probably in the May
timeframe. In the Offutt timeframe, we will do the same in
recovery or I am sorry, at Offutt Air Force Base, we will do
the same in recovery there to slow down that recovery.
In addition, about $270 million of O&M FSRM projects that
won't be awarded until after the first of May will just be
deferred into the next fiscal year. So that is about 62
projects. And then also our weapons system sustainment
accounts, the accounts that we use to maintain airplanes, will
be impacted, as will flying hours later in the fiscal year.
So just an idea of some of the impacts that are resulting
from the cash flow.
Senator Boozman. Thank you.
Senator Schatz.
Senator Schatz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary McMahon, I want to start with this $7.2 billion,
and I want to make sure that we have at least a similar
understanding of what is being asked for. Here is the way that
I understand it, just in colloquial terms. If we could go as
quickly as possible, that would be great.
The first $3.6 billion is essentially backfilling. And the
second $3.6 billion is sort of forward funding, running the
same play in the next fiscal year. Is that about right?
Mr. McMahon. Yes, sir, with $2 billion going toward
hurricane relief as well. Out of the 9.2----
Senator Schatz. Out of the 7-point. Okay, so sorry. $3.6
billion backfill, $3.6 billion forward funding, running the
same play, and then $2 billion for hurricane relief. Okay.
Mr. McMahon. Yes, Senator, that is correct.
Senator Schatz. Okay. So Acting Secretary Shanahan has
asked Chairman Dunford to give his military advice on projects
that can be cut for border wall construction. So who else
provides input into this process?
Mr. McMahon. Senator, first, rather than ``cut,'' I would
use the word ``deferred.'' We have committed since day one on
this, no projects will be cut. It is simply deferring. We have
got a process defined that no project that is scheduled to be
awarded in fiscal year 2019 will not be impacted.
Senator Schatz. Okay, rather than quibble with you about
language, who else is providing input into what will be moved
to the right? And in my view, if it moves to the right, it may
fall off, but we will have that conversation offline because it
is longer.
How does this process work? Who gives the input--and I will
give you a couple of questions. Who gives the input? Are the
service secretaries and chiefs developing prioritized lists to
give to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs? And does this process
provide sort of for a pass back?
In other words, can all of the people at this panel argue,
I think persuasively, that there is just no room, for instance,
in the Air Force MILCON budget to free up $100 million or $700
million, or whatever it may be, for the wall, given natural
disasters, deployments, urgent needs? You paint a picture of
pretty urgent needs and some unexpected expenses. And so the
question is, are you in a position, are these individuals in a
position to push back?
Mr. McMahon. Senator, to the first part of your question,
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs provides independent advice to
the Acting Secretary as to whether or not there are any
projects that were presented by the Department of Homeland
Security meet the requirements that we can utilize 2008--2808
funding.
Senator Schatz. Does the information flow from the service
branches to Chairman Dunford?
Mr. McMahon. That is a determination looking at the list of
projects that were provided by DHS back to the Department of
Defense. It does not talk about specific MILCON projects. To
that part of the question, each of the services and a list of
all of the unawarded projects have been provided to the
Congress. Within that list, they now have the opportunity, if
there is a requirement--no requirement has been defined yet.
Senator Schatz. ``They'' meaning the services?
Mr. McMahon. The services.
Senator Schatz. Okay.
Mr. McMahon. Have an integral play--the four ladies and
gentlemen to my left are the ones that initiate that process,
working through their service secretaries.
Senator Schatz. But do they get, like, do they get a target
dollar amount to go and find? Or is it their discretion to say,
listen, I can only free up $28 million, or are they ordered
each to find some dollar amount, and how does that work?
Mr. McMahon. Senator, beyond, at this point in time, that
is a level of detail that, quite frankly, we are not down to
yet as to what projects across the four services would actually
be tagged because today there is no requirement because the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs has yet to define if any of the
projects presented meet the minimum requirements to be funded
under 2808.
Senator Schatz. Okay, I see. So that is a fair answer. We
are not there yet because you have the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs has to interact with the Department of Homeland Security
and so on, pursuant to the statute. I get it. You can just see
how this puts us in at a minimum, an awkward position.
But to put a finer point on it, it is quite difficult to
fund additional requirements, right? And to do what we normally
do, which is to listen to you, to trust you, and then to lay
down money for those needs when there is 9 odd billion dollars
that is sort of not just outside of the regular order, but
outside of our ability to even see it, right, at this point.
And so this creates great difficulty for the committee to do
its job in the normal fashion.
And I understand, you know, you did not initiate this
process. You may not even like this process. I don't want you
to comment on that. But it does create difficultly when you are
talking about bases and installations that have been
essentially destroyed, and you need help.
My view is, I am staring at this $7.2 billion and say,
well, there is some money. Right? And I would argue, especially
from this committee, that that $7.2 billion ought to be used
for these needs and not the wall. And if we decide, as a
Congress, to fund the wall, we should do it the old-fashioned
way, we should fund a wall. We don't want to fund MILCON to
some high amount and then let the money get raided because no
one wants to admit that they are funding a wall.
I will come back for a second round.
Senator Boozman. Senator Murkowski.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Bingham, I want to address my first question to
you. And to the three of you who will be retiring, just let me
add my thanks and appreciation for your years of service.
This is regards to infrastructure readiness and the
initiative that is being pursued in Alaska called the Alaska
Infrastructure Readiness Initiative. This is to look at urgent
unfunded needs, and the senior leaders in U.S. Army Pacific are
working this, working a similar initiative in Hawaii. And what
we are looking at in Alaska are things like indoor heated
storage and maintenance facilities for the Stryker, a need for
adequate indoor facilities to conduct physical training in cold
conditions, improvements to JPARC to improve the training.
Can you speak to me just very quickly here about whether or
not we are on track with this initiative to really help advance
what the senior leadership team is looking to and how we can
address these unfunded needs in infrastructure?
General Bingham. Thank you, Senator Murkowski. I appreciate
your question.
I can tell you that we are aware of several of those
projects, future projects are programmed for Alaska. We are
looking forward to working with General Brown and the USARPAC
team on what he will bring into the building as it relates to
that initiative you described.
Senator Murkowski. And so do you think this is something
that there can be an agreement specific to this initiative, not
unlike what I understand is being pursued in Hawaii now?
General Bingham. I am not the decisionmaking authority on
that, your question. But we will certainly take that back to
the building, as you have asked me.
Senator Murkowski. Well, I appreciate that. And as you do
that, I would like you to look at one of these issues that have
just raised, which is this warm storage for the Stryker
vehicles there at Fort Wainwright. We have got a situation
where we just don't have warm storage. You have got 7-month
winter season. It takes about 72 hours of winter maintenance
before they can basically get warmed up to be ready to respond,
which is a challenge most notably.
So I guess the question is, is whether or not Congress
might be able to fund a temporary solution through the Army
procurement accounts in 2020 and whether or not we can work
with you to address this in the short term before we can get to
that longer-term solution.
General Bingham. Again, thank you so much for your
question. Though I am not the decisionmaking authority, we
certainly recognize the need, and I look forward to working
with you and your team on the issue that you just raised.
Senator Murkowski. Well, I appreciate that. It is a
priority for us up north. So thank you for that.
This is a question for you, Vice Admiral Smith and General
Coglianese. Earlier this morning in the Armed Services
Committee, Senator Sullivan was able to pose a question to the
Secretary of the Navy and I also understand to the Commandant.
This relates to the prospects of ADAC as an opportunity for
Marine training activities.
Secretary Spencer was up in the State with Senator Sullivan
last year, was very interested in helping to facilitate
operations in this area. ADAC, as you all know, has been
relatively quiet in many decades. But the potential there for
training opportunities and also with existing infrastructure, I
think, is quite promising.
Do either one of you have anything that you would care to
add to what was already discussed this morning? And I guess
more specific to this committee is, what would the funding look
like for us as the Appropriations Committee to consider what a
training opportunity for the Marines out in ADAC would be?
General Coglianese. Senator, thanks for the question.
I wish I listened to the testimony, I would be better
prepared for what the Commandant said. I am not sure what he
said.
Senator Murkowski. He was all positive and all good. He
said just bring it on.
General Coglianese. Well, whatever he said, I double down.
Senator Murkowski. There you go.
General Coglianese. But I would tell you that the
Commandant, in every discussion he has about our facilities or
wherever we are located, it is always about training. Whether
it is Hawaii or in the Pacific or everywhere we are at, I mean,
every day there is a question about training. If we cannot
train, there is no sense in us being there. And I know he is
very open-minded, he has talked about Alaska and the
opportunities, part of Pacific, obviously.
And so, he is definitely open-minded and talked about it. I
have no idea about cost or funding or what the requirement
would be. But I know the Commandant is definitely open-minded
about using Alaska and training in Alaska.
Senator Murkowski. Vice Admiral Smith.
Admiral Smith. Yes, ma'am. Thank you, Senator.
I know that we are looking at what is the art of the
possible up in Alaska. ADAC is one of those things. There is no
decisions yet, but again, we are seeing what the art of the
possible is. Because, to the general's comment, where we can do
training and where we can leverage opportunity for increased
and advanced training, especially where we are in great power
competition and what is up there in Alaska, we are going to go
see what we can do, ma'am.
Senator Murkowski. Well, we would certainly welcome you up
to get more eyes on the situation, but we think that we have a
pretty good opportunity again for training areas as well as
infrastructure there.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Boozman. Senator Udall.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, all
of you, for being here and very much appreciate your service.
The Department of Defense, the New Mexico congressional
delegation, and the Appropriations Committee worked hard to get
several MILCON projects that would support national security
needs, including an information systems facility at White Sands
Missile Range. This project will enable White Sands to continue
the missile defense, hypersonics, and other tests that are
vital to national security.
Furthermore, military construction projects like this one
have already been approved by Congress but are at risk of being
sacrificed for the President's ill-advised border wall. These
MILCON projects were all requested in your budgets. So I think
we can safely assume you support them and believe they are
important to military needs. Is that correct? Is it just a
yes--it looks like everybody is nodding. So I am going to say
for the record, we are all on yes there.
And I have introduced legislation that would reiterate and
make crystal clear that we intended these funds to go to these
projects and prevent MILCON funding from being raided for a
southern border wall. Would anyone here oppose Congress
including language like that on future appropriations bills to
protect MILCON project funding from being taken? Mr. McMahon?
Mr. McMahon. Senator, clearly, every project that comes
before this subcommittee is important to the services and
important to the Department. It is a matter of priorities
within the Department of Defense through the President, who is
the commander-in-chief, of how best to utilize that based upon
the actions of the Senate and the Congress.
Senator Udall. Yes, well, I just hope, and I think this was
said by several other members earlier, that the advocates here
for the military know and understand, the career people here,
how important and how hard you have worked over the years to
devise a process for MILCON to go forward. And now to have what
you were really preventing, a lot of that was the politics of
it, of trying to get it in to be a solid process. And now we
have the politics of the White House in the middle of this.
So I just hope all of you, when you get asked, as Senator
Schatz was talking about, what you feel ought to go forward,
that you push back. I realize what you can and can't say here,
but it is very important for you to speak up in terms of what
is a national security need and what isn't.
Let me ask about hypersonic testing. I know General Bingham
knows this well. This hypersonic testing at White Sands Missile
Range, including a point-to-point testing envisioned by the Air
Force for transportation and space research and development
based out of the Space Rapid Capabilities Office at Kirtland
Air Force Base, is an important next step toward developing a
hypersonic capability. Is the Air Force or Army considering
future MILCON at White Sands to support these needs?
General Bingham. Well, thank you for the question, Senator
Udall.
And as you know, having commanded White Sands Missile Range
for nearly 2 years, it is absolutely a national treasure. I
will tell you that White Sands is playing a key role in
implementing hypersonic test flight. We have been actively
engaged in OSD's Test Resource Management Center to explore
long-range flight corridors, and I suspect that will continue
into the near future.
Senator Udall. General Allen, anything from the Air Force
perspective on that?
General Allen. Senator, I will just say I don't have any
hypersonic-related MILCON in the Future Years Defense Plan
right now, but that very well could change in the future.
Senator Udall. Great, thank you.
Mr. McMahon. Senator, if I could add one comment to that?
Senator Udall. Yes, please go ahead.
Mr. McMahon. One of the things that we recognize is the
potential encroachment in the northern areas above White Sands.
We have taken action, working with local developers and some of
the power companies, to ensure to the best of our ability that
that encroachment will not take place because we recognize it
to be a national treasure.
Senator Udall. Yes, and we are working on that with you, I
believe.
Mr. McMahon. Yes, sir. Thank you.
Senator Udall. Thank you very much. You know, military
families in New Mexico live in privatized military housing,
have communicated concerns about the dilapidated conditions and
health issues in their homes, which include health issues like
lead paint, black mold, pesticide use. I understand, responding
to this, that you all or the DoD is working to propose a tenant
bill of rights. What will this bill of rights entail, and how
will it address the needs of military families?
Mr. McMahon. Senator, if I might for my colleagues? They
are intimately involved with this, as are their Assistant
Secretaries with my staff. Very simply, what we are trying to
do is ensure that what has occurred over the last couple of
years does not happen again. It gives a greater voice to our
residents. The bill of rights specifically talks about
protecting them, providing them with an understanding of what
they should expect from our privatized partners, as well as a
methodology by which if they have an issue, that issue can be
resolved.
In general terms, that is what we are looking at. But
provides in clear guidance, oh, by the way that our private
partners have agreed to. And tomorrow, I will meet with many of
the families organizations to make sure they are comfortable
with that as well.
Senator Udall. Yes. And when you visit with these young
families and how dedicated they are to the service to the
country, it is just so discouraging and disheartening to hear
them describe some of the conditions in this housing. So I hope
that we can all get on the same page and make sure that we are
going to invest and make sure this does not happen again.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Boozman. Senator Collins.
Senator Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank all of you for your service, but particularly the
three of you who will be retiring, we are very grateful.
Admiral Smith, speaking of national treasures, another
national treasure is in the State of Maine. It is the
Portsmouth Naval Shipyard, as I am sure you know. It plays a
crucial role in ensuring that the Navy's submarines are able to
accomplish their missions worldwide.
Last year, the Navy requested and Congress appropriated
$162 million for three very important military construction
projects at the shipyard, including the vital Drydock Number
One Super Flood Basin improvement, a portal crane rail
extension project, and the replacement of a consolidated
warehouse.
Completing these projects on schedule will ensure that the
shipyard can dock both Los Angeles Class and Virginia Class
submarines and execute Los Angeles Class service life
extensions by fiscal year 2021. These projects now have award
dates before September 30th. Do you anticipate executing these
projects on schedule?
Admiral Smith. Thank you, Senator. I appreciate that.
And yes, that shipyard is phenomenal. It does great work up
there. As you know, I have had the opportunity to visit on more
than one occasion, and it is a great workforce and a great team
up there. At this point, we are on track to award those three
MILCONs, ma'am.
Senator Collins. Thank you. That will come as a great
relief, and it is so important to the Navy as well.
I want to follow up on the Senator from New Mexico's
concerns about the reports of substandard housing for our
military families. I have been very concerned about a report
that was published in Seacoastonline.com talking about black
mold, vermin, and lead paint at a particular housing, apartment
building really, called Admiralty Village, which houses 200
military families who work at the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard and
in other military capacities in the Seacoast region.
The descriptions are very troubling. I don't think it is
fair to ask you to respond on the fly to the specific
allegations in this story. I would note that the Portsmouth
Naval Shipyard recently held a town hall and offered all
residents an inspection, and that is certainly a good first
step. What I do want to do is to provide you with a copy of
this story, which has much more in-depth reporting and to ask
you to respond.
This is an example of an apartment building that I believe
was originally built by the Navy but then privatized. And it
just has not been kept up to the standards that all of us would
want for our military families.
So I will submit this to you as part of a record question,
with the permission of the chairman, and ask you to
specifically respond.
Admiral Smith. Yes, ma'am. Absolutely.
Obviously, the care and the feeding of our sailors and
their families is of the utmost importance. We have learned a
lot here, as we all have stated. I have not seen that specific
article, and I look forward to seeing it.
And the more information we can get on where we are on
housing in reality and from different perspectives to enable us
to get after this aggressively is more than welcome. So I look
forward to reading that and getting back to you, ma'am.
Senator Collins. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Boozman. Thank you.
Senator Baldwin.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Schatz.
I am concerned that the DoD is not addressing important
readiness issues for no other reason than the President has
directed billions of dollars from our defense budget to be used
for a wall that he promised Mexico would pay for.
General Bingham, your 2020 budget includes $211 million
reserve fund to address the dangers within military housing.
And if there is a need for this spending, I don't understand
why it should wait a year unless it is because the Army can't
afford it because of the funds that are being spent on the
wall.
And Admiral Smith, we have heard estimates that the
shortfall in ship depot maintenance in this year alone is in
the hundreds of millions of dollars and perhaps approaching $1
billion. And it doesn't seem clear if there is a strategy to
fund these needed repairs in light of how much is being spent
on the wall.
General Coglianese, the Marine Corps reports that there is
a $451 million shortfall to address hurricane damage at Camp
Lejeune and Cherry Point. A reprogramming could solve this
shortfall in a matter of days, and it is why General Neller
wrote his memo raising alarms about the readiness and fiscal
solvency of the Marine Corps. The only reason I can think of
for not providing the Marine Corps with a second reprogramming
is because of the amount of funding being provided for the
wall.
And General Allen, the Air Force reports an $899 million
shortfall this year for repair of Tyndall and Offutt Air Force
Bases. And again, it seems like this could be quickly addressed
by a reprogramming, except that billions in defense funds are
being spent on the wall.
So Congress has not been presented with a request from the
President to fund the disaster costs that are burdening the
Marine Corps and the Air Force. Reprogramming dollars are being
prioritized for the wall and not your readiness concerns. My
question for the panel is simple, what is your plan for dealing
with these costs, when they are clearly taking a backseat to
the wall?
Mr. McMahon. Senator, if I might start, and then I will let
my partners respond as they need to. First, many of the things
that you have identified here are significant issues
exacerbated by the weather issues that we had last year with
both at Tyndall and Camp Lejeune. The challenges that we face
in many cases are O&M issues viz., military construction
funding issues.
And so, part of the effort with the reprogramming that we
went through was to resolve that. That resolves in part some of
the issue for fiscal year 2019, but it clearly, as you have
heard in testimony thus far today, does not take care of all of
the issues that we will face in 2019. I am not privy at this
point to know whether or not the Department through the
President will submit a supplemental, but clearly, there is a
requirement out there, as is there across the board for
disaster relief.
With regards to military construction, I think there is a
recognition within the Department that there is a need for
additional dollars to be able to both support the wall and
other issues. The approach that we have taken, coming before
the Congress, is an attempt to recognize that there is a near-
term requirement as well as a back funding that would be
requested. And I think the appropriations the President's
request that came forward recognizes that we can't do without
that $3.6 billion that we requested and that you approved and
authorized in 2019, but we are requesting that it be back
funded in 2020.
Senator Baldwin. Does anyone else wish to make any
comments? If not, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Boozman. Our distinguished Vice Chairman of
Appropriations, Senator Leahy.
Senator Leahy. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I have also had a concern about money that is being
transferred for the border wall, especially as we have had a
number of votes on this. As you know when the Congress voted
overwhelmingly to give $1.6 billion for the wall, the President
vetoed that bill saying it was not enough, closed down the
Government for 35 days, cost us tens of billions of dollars,
but then signed the bill for $1.3 billion.
I couldn't figure that out, why that happens. There was a
congressional vote on what it was, Republicans and Democrats.
Now I worry that money is being taken to a backdoor way to
build the wall.
With a son who trained at Camp Lejeune, and I look at the
damage to Camp Lejeune, and I have talked with him and with
friends of mine who trained there also. I might ask, General,
do you have enough money to put Camp Lejeune back where it
should be?
General Coglianese. Senator, good seeing you again.
No, sir. We need the $451 million, as the Commandant has
testified this year for fiscal year 2019 in O&M money, and that
is just for repairing things. We have asked for $2 billion in
military construction for 31 projects. And that is 31 military
construction projects that replaces actually 133 buildings at
Camp Lejeune, New River, and Cherry Point.
Senator Leahy. I know that area well. I emphasize it was my
son who trained there. I didn't train there. I don't think I
ever would have made it through, even with my Italian half.
Secretary McMahon, on March 7th, I joined Senator Schatz
and Durbin, Udall, others, Democratic members of the
subcommittee, to a letter to Acting Secretary Shanahan asking
that he provide a list of projects deemed less important than
building a wall on the southern border that could be put at
risk in order to pay for the wall.
We have not gotten a response. When will we be told which
projects will be deferred or canceled in order to fund the wall
and why they are less important?
Mr. McMahon. Senator, where we are in the process today is
that the next step is for the Acting Secretary to request
feedback from the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs as to whether
any of the efforts being requested do, in fact, meet the
criteria necessary for 2808 funding. Once we understand whether
or not there is a requirement that can be supported, we will
work with the services to have them identify which projects
could be deferred.
We have provided some initial guidance--
Senator Leahy. Which projects could be deferred because
they are less important than the wall?
Mr. McMahon. Right now, today, Senator, what we have done
is identify that any project that is scheduled to be awarded in
fiscal year 2019 is taken off of that list, and a project that
is scheduled not to be awarded until fiscal year 2020 would be
one of those considered. Each of the services will look at that
criteria. But the intent and the belief being that with the
support of the Congress, that funding would be backfilled for
any project that would be--
Senator Leahy. But that does--as you know, that doesn't
really answer my question. We are told this is beginning right
now. And that we have to take this money right now to build
this wall because of the pressure on the United States. You
don't have a list of what can be cancelled right now to pay for
the wall. Is that correct?
Mr. McMahon. That is correct, Senator.
Senator Leahy. Thank you. And I appreciate that.
I was encouraged to see the Army include a replacement for
the Mountain Warfare School within the unfunded priorities
list. The current facility is nearly 40 years old. And I will
submit some questions to the record on this. Obviously, I will
support a replacement.
And as the Army undertakes a long-term effort to relocate
and rebuild National Guard Readiness Centers, let us make
sure--and I know General Bingham, I know you have been
concerned about this--that we are making sure that they meet
all standards regardless of gender, that they be incorporated
in their design and readiness. And will you assure me of that,
please?
General Bingham. I can. Thank you.
Senator Leahy. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for letting me step in. I
apologize. It is a busy day in the Appropriations Committee. We
are also holding a hearing with the Secretary of State just up
the hall on his budget. But thank you all. I know most of you
well and thank you for being here.
Senator Boozman. Thank you.
Senator Daines.
Senator Daines. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I can tell you in Montana we are very proud of the men and
women of the 341st Missile Wing. They work very hard each day
to maintain our nuclear arsenal. Those ICBMs, make sure at the
highest state of readiness. I want to be sure from the onset
that we aren't doing them a disservice with hyperbole and loose
rhetoric about crumbling infrastructure for perhaps political
purposes.
Secretary McMahon, if our missileers got the call tonight,
are you confident their systems will perform as expected?
Mr. McMahon. Senator, after 34 years in the United States
Air Force, I know they are.
Senator Daines. Thank you. I am confident as well. And
would you agree that our military installations are improving
today as a result of increased investment in defense and a
renewed focus by this administration on the threats facing our
Nation?
Mr. McMahon. Senator, they are. We have a long ways to go.
There is still risk, but we are making the effort, and over the
last couple of years, we have done very well in being able to
reduce that risk.
Senator Daines. For fiscal year 2020, the President has
requested $235 million to update the structures where nuclear
munitions are stored and maintained at Malmstrom Air Force
Base. I feel confident the White House and the Senate both
understand the value of maintaining a credible nuclear
deterrent, but some of our colleagues in the House seem a bit
more naive or perhaps just simply uncooperative.
General Allen, how damaging would a continuing resolution
be to the Air Force's modernization strategy if the House and
the Senate can't reach an agreement by October 1st?
General Allen. Thank you, Senator.
Well, it delays our recovery. So in my opening remarks, I
talked about this fiscal year 2020 budget request would be a
considerable increase over fiscal year 2019. So absent that
fiscal year 2020 appropriation, we won't have that considerable
increase in funding to begin that recovery--to include the $235
million WGF facility at Malmstrom.
Senator Daines. Thank you.
And I know the Air Force is working diligently on
Malmstrom's missile maintenance facility, which was slightly
delayed. Are we back on track now to have a contract in place
this summer?
General Allen. Yes, Senator. We were working diligently to
get an above-threshold reprogramming request through, and I
understand that that came to the Hill today. We are on target
for a June of 2019 award for that project.
Senator Daines. Great. Thank you.
Last year, I was pleased this committee was able to
accelerate the much-needed ramp expansion at the Great Falls
International Airport, where our Guard C-130s operate. I
understand the design is currently about 70 percent complete.
General Allen, by all indications, this project appears to
be moving along and should be completed on schedule. Would you
agree with that assessment?
General Allen. Yes, Senator. We are looking at September
for award.
Senator Daines. Thank you.
And with the natural disasters we saw in 2018, whether it
is Montana wildfires to Gulf Coast hurricanes, how can Congress
help the Air Force hedge against the risk of unforeseen
expenses?
General Allen. Sir, I would say right now our O&M
requirements in fiscal year 2019 are our highest priority in
general recovering from severe weather. Is that answering your
question?
Senator Daines. It does, yes. Thank you.
Mr. McMahon. Senator, may I pile on for just a second to
that question?
Senator Daines. Yes.
Mr. McMahon. I think one of the most important issues for
the Department, as well as for our Congress, is how do we
create resilient installations? We have talked a little bit
about weather. We have talked a little bit about a climate, but
it is a much broader issue than that. That gets into cyber, it
gets into water, it gets into energy. And I think with the
Congress, I would encourage us together to figure out how we
take a more holistic approach to ensuring that our
installations are fully resilient.
Thank you for letting me.
Senator Daines. You bet. Thank you. Thanks for that
comment.
In summary, and General Allen, I appreciate your time last
week. I was glad with discussing the readiness and the quality
of life issues facing our airmen. As you know, Montana can get
kind of cold there in the wintertime. We had some 40 degree
below kind of weather this past winter. To maintain the Air
Force's physical standards in those conditions, you have got to
have adequate facilities.
For years, the indoor fitness center there at Malmstrom Air
Force Base has lagged behind other northern-tier bases, but
there never seems to be enough funding to bring it up to an
acceptable standard. The fitness center is a priority for the
military serving in Malmstrom. General Allen, I ask that you
continue to work with us to get Malmstrom the improvements it
needs and make this a higher priority in the Air Force.
General Allen. Senator, based on our conversation, I asked
my staff to reach out to the installation, which they have
done. We will continue to work with the Wing, and if it will
help you, we will be happy to come over and spend more time
with your staff to talk about that project.
Senator Daines. Thank you, General Allen.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Boozman. Thank you.
Now we have talked about some, lots of really important
things today. A couple of members have already brought it up,
but I think maybe one of the most important things that we
talked about was the privatized housing and the problems that
we have had.
And so what we have got this challenge. I would like to
know, and we will start with you, General Bingham. I would like
to know if this has changed the service's attitude as far as
who is responsible. You know, when somebody complains, what are
we going to do? Who in the past, it seems like we have maybe
not been as good as we should be. Tell me how it has changed
the services.
General Bingham. And thank you, Chairman Boozman, for your
question.
I will tell you, first and foremost, we want to assure our
service members and their families that we absolutely care for
their well-being. We want them to feel safe and know that they
are in safe housing. And so to that end, we are sparing no
effort to make sure that this partnership, called Residential
Communities Initiative, works as it was intended to do.
To that end, we are putting commanders and leaders back in
the process associated with hearing the voice of our service
member and families as residents inside of that. And we know
that is important. It is not a one-time fire and forget. This
is a continual process. And as I mentioned in my opening
remarks, we want to make sure that we put in place processes
and procedures that are enduring because our service members
and their families so deserve all of that.
And I think one of the major takeaways is really trying to
recapture and re-garner the trust from our families and our
service members. Because what makes a ready service member is
making sure that he or she does not have to worry about their
families. Housing is very important to them and to us as
leaders. And we want to reassure them that we are trustworthy
stewards of them and all that make them the ready service
members that we aim for them to be.
Thank you for your question.
Senator Boozman. Anybody else got anything to add.
Admiral Smith. Mr. Chairman, we are clearly in a better
place because of PPV housing. Having said that, we also clearly
took our eye off the ball. And we have a responsibility to our
sailors and their families to make sure that if they are having
issues we support them.
As you know, the CNO directed a 100 percent contact of all
our families to understand what their issues are and concerns.
He addressed small unit leadership, our chief petty officers
and our division officers, to know and advocate for their
sailors. And when that doesn't work, the chain of command
advocate for them.
So you asked, has it changed? What is different? We have
refocused, doubled down on our responsibilities to take care of
our men and women, sir.
Senator Boozman. Very good. Does the fiscal year 2020
request include adequate funding to mitigate and address what
we want to do with the issues? Mr. McMahon.
Mr. McMahon. Senator, what I would tell you is that we are
able to work some of the non-privatized housing issues. Quite
frankly, one of the challenges that we face is an O&M shortfall
and unfunded request requirement for additional manpower within
our housing offices, which is one of the key issues that we
identified as a root cause problem of where we are today.
Support from the Congress for that funding I think would assist
us to be able to get our housing offices back to where we would
like them to be.
Thank you for the question.
Senator Boozman. Well, let us help you with that. I mean,
we look as far as I am concerned, you are responsible for
getting this fixed. And on the other hand, let us help. I think
I can speak for the committee, this is something you heard from
both sides. This is something that we are all very, very
concerned about. So be sure and let us know how we can help so
that we truly can fix this.
Senator Tester.
Senator Tester. Well, first of all, thanks. Thanks to you
all for being here.
And Mr. Chairman, I appreciate you taking some time so I
could get back here. Thank you very much.
I will be very, very quick because I think most of what I
have in my portfolio to ask has already been asked, but this is
a really important question for you, General Allen that I think
Senator Daines touched upon. It deals with mission
recapitalization, which I think we both can agree on that is
very urgent, especially as it applies to our nuclear
enterprise.
And so I am glad to see that the weapon storage facility at
Malmstrom is included in this budget request. It is a project
that I have been advocating for that the base needs, that the
airmen need at Malmstrom, and I can't wait for construction to
begin. The question, as it applies to this budget, though, is I
am concerned about possibly these dollars getting reprogrammed,
creating a potential--another delay.
For obvious reasons, and I know that many people have
spoken about dollars taken out of the military budget to be
used for a wall on the southern border, I think, quite frankly,
that is a mistake. We are taking one security measure and
making it weaker by trying to beef up another one. So I guess
my question is, is can you assure me that these dollars will
stay in the budget? That if the President asks for dollars that
you will say, no, this is too important for our nuclear
enterprise to put off any longer?
General Allen. Senator, I can't give an assurance of what
will happen should that project be appropriated. But I can
assure you that I understand and advocate for its mission
importance for all of the reasons that you said.
Senator Tester. Well, I would just say that, and I know
that the President is the commander-in-chief, and I know that
there are rules that have to be put forth here. But I have been
down at the southern border, and I have been at Malmstrom Air
Force Base. And I understand what is going on relatively well
on the southern border after spending 2 days down there. And I
understand relatively well what is going on at Malmstrom Air
Force Base.
This facility has been on the books for a while now. You
know that. I mean, what is more important than weapons storage?
And this isn't talking about storing .22 rifles, this is
nuclear weapons. And so, I would just say, do what you can do
to push back to make sure these projects move forward. They are
that important.
General Allen. Yes, Senator, I agree. And it is a good
project. It is a long time coming. It is pegged to the work we
did at F.E. Warren for the same kind of a project. You know,
site adapted for the conditions in Montana. We are very
comfortable that it will be ready to go when the money comes.
Senator Tester. Thank you. The only thing I would also ask
you to do is hold those contractors' feet to the fire. I think
we are building these in phases to save money, and it
distresses me when the next one is going to cost more than the
last one, not less.
Thank you very much.
Senator Boozman. Senator Schatz.
Senator Schatz. Thank you.
Secretary McMahon, on the $7.2 billion in particular, I
understand where we are in the process. Do we have your
commitment to keep us informed? Let us start with that.
Mr. McMahon. Senator, as we move forward in the process, we
will keep you informed at the different gates that we reach. If
a project is selected to be deferred, that information will
flow to the Senate and to the Congress as well.
Senator Schatz. So there is sort of two ways to do this.
First of all, I trust you. And so, I don't want to nail this
down to every 10 days you write me a letter. But if we are not
going to do sort of a time certain update, which I am
comfortable with, then we have to be comfortable that if
anything significant happens that is relevant to the
jurisdiction of this committee, that you will not wait 2 or 3
weeks to tell us. Because my sense of this is that the DHS and
the Joint Chiefs piece of this is the rate limiting factor, and
then after that, things may move relatively quickly.
So if we are on a recess for a week and you just wait for
the next, you know, oversight hearing, that does not count as
keeping us informed. So do I have your commitment to keep us
informed as we go along? Anytime anything significant happens
and erring on the side of informing us, that you will keep us
abreast of every significant step in this process?
Mr. McMahon. Senator, what I would like to do is rather
than just give an unqualified yes, is take that question for
the record, go back and make sure that it is clear in all of
our collective minds how best to communicate with the Congress
to ensure that we are transparent and keep you informed. If I
could do that, sir?
Senator Schatz. I mean, I don't love that answer, I have to
tell you. I think this isn't a gotcha. I am not saying give us
a letter every Friday to tell you where you are at. I am just
telling you that in terms of maintaining this working
relationship, we ought to be informed if anything major
happens. Now if something is classified or whatever, we can
sort of deal with that. But it seems reasonable that you ought
to be able to tell us what is happening as we go along.
Mr. McMahon. Senator, what the short answer to your
question is, yes, it is reasonable that we would do that. What
I want to make sure is that what you think is significant and
what the Department thinks is significant rather than to commit
something that is beyond my ability.
Senator Schatz. Fair enough. And this is why I trust you is
because when you say yes, you want to be sure that you can
follow through on this.
A couple of other topics. Climate change, extreme weather,
severe weather. We have clearly been hit in each of the
services, and it is costing us a lot of money. So without sort
of getting into a solution set, is it fair to say severe
weather is costing the Department of Defense more money over
the last couple of years than it was previously?
And what ought we to do about that? I think you know a fair
amount about resilience. I am not satisfied that as, say,
General Allen has sort of immediate needs to get back up and
running, that he has the time to develop a plan for a new Air
Force Base that is resilient in the context of climate change.
So how do we make adjustments on the fly? Because some of this,
we can't do a 5-year plan, but still sort of meet our needs?
Mr. McMahon. Senator, there is probably both a short-term
and a long-term answer to your question. For example, at
Tyndall Air Force Base, I know the Air Force has taken an
approach that said what is it that we build long-term
resilience into the installation to get it to where it needs to
be based upon weather and climate and the impact that they have
had? On a longer term, as we build new facilities, what we are
looking at is an entirely different set of standards than what
we have used in the past that say how do we ensure that there
is resilience in the installations based upon the standards
that we are using for actually building it?
Senator Schatz. Are those standards written yet, or you are
developing them?
Mr. McMahon. In many cases, those are written. They exist
today. In some cases, they are evolving as we move forward.
Senator Schatz. Do they differ among the services?
Mr. McMahon. I don't know the answer to that question. I
think they are the same.
General Coglianese. So, Senator, I would say that the lens
we use probably now that is most significant is the mission
assurance lens. So we do assessments. And the correlation and
the relationship of power, water, key structures and
facilities, the information, we have a good portion of that
information.
What we need to do, and what we are trying to do, is take
action on that information. So understanding interdependencies
and the relationships, and Florence taught us a lot. Whether it
is a control tower that controls air for North Carolina or a
power station that is a single feed or something like that to
an installation, we realize what the interdependence are and we
need to invest in those interdependence to make sure we had the
resiliency to withstand whether it is natural disaster or cyber
or DSCA type of event.
Mr. McMahon. Senator, the only thing I would add that as we
talk about this in the future with you, and we need to do that,
is that we take that holistic approach to installation
resilience, and we look beyond just weather and climate, but we
look at cyber, we look at water, we look at energy to take that
holistic approach to ensure that if we fix one, we don't leave
ourselves vulnerable.
Senator Schatz. Right. And the beauty of the electricity
piece is that it has really encouraging implications forward.
And so some of what is being done at the Joint Base Pearl
Harbor-Hickam and other places across the country, you know,
are not just science projects, but things we can use to save
lives and money over time. So I am pleased to see progress in
this area. I would like to be as supportive as I can of this.
And also, I would just like to understand what the new policies
are and so that I can lay eyes on them as we go along.
Mr. McMahon. Senator, let me take that question for record
and get with you and your staff offline and share with you some
of that information.
Senator Schatz. Thank you.
Senator Boozman. Well, thank you all again for being here.
We really do appreciate you and appreciate all of your efforts.
I hope we can continue to work very closely together as we try
and solve the various challenges that we face. And there has
been a great record of that in the past and, again, in a very
bipartisan manner on the committee.
To our retirees, General Bingham, Admiral Smith, General
Coglianese, thank you. And then, as importantly, thank you to
your families. This definitely is a family affair, and we do
appreciate your service and sacrifice through the years.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
For members of the subcommittee, any questions for the
record should be turned in to the subcommittee staff no later
than Friday, April 19th.
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
Senator Boozman. And with that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:25 p.m., Tuesday, April 9, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene subject to the call of
the Chair.]