- MASS MIGRATION IN EUROPE: ASSIMILATION, INTEGRATION, AND SECURITY
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
MASS MIGRATION IN EUROPE: ASSIMILATION, INTEGRATION, AND SECURITY
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON EUROPE, EURASIA, AND EMERGING THREATS
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
APRIL 26, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-123
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
or http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
29-966PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas
KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama
AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
TED S. YOHO, Florida
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
NORMA J. TORRES, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
Wisconsin
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
Amy Porter, Chief of Staff
Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director
Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------
Subcommittee on Europe, Eurasia, and Emerging Threats
DANA ROHRABACHER, California, Chairman
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
TED POE, Texas
BRAD SHERMAN, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
Wisconsin
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
WITNESSES
Mr. Robin Simcox, Margaret Thatcher Fellow, Margaret Thatcher
Center for Freedom, Davis Institute for National Security and
Foreign Policy, The Heritage Foundation........................
3
Marta Vrbetic, Ph.D., global fellow, Global Europe Program,
Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars...............
8
Victor Davis Hanson, Ph.D., Martin and Illie Anderson Senior
Fellow, Hoover Institution, Stanford University................
17
Mr. Wa'el Alzayat, chief executive officer, Emgage...............
22
LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING
Mr. Robin Simcox: Prepared statement.............................
5
Marta Vrbetic, Ph.D.: Prepared statement.........................
10
Victor Davis Hanson, Ph.D.: Prepared statement...................
19
Mr. Wa'el Alzayat: Prepared statement............................
24
APPENDIX
Hearing notice...................................................
54
Hearing minutes..................................................
55
The Honorable Dana Rohrabacher, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California, and chairman, Subcommittee on Europe,
Eurasia, and Emerging Threats:
The EU response to the migration crisis........................
56
Hungarian Ambassador letter to the Honorable Dana Rohrabacher
dated April 24, 2018.........................................
65
``Post-Brexit, Europeans More Favorable Toward EU,'' by Bruce
Stokes, Richard Wike and Dorothy Manevich, Pew Research
Center, June 2017............................................
67
Marta Vrbetic, Ph.D.: Material submitted for the record..........
68
MASS MIGRATION IN EUROPE: ASSIMILATION, INTEGRATION, AND SECURITY
----------
THURSDAY, APRIL 26, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Europe, Eurasia, and Emerging Threats,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 1 o'clock
p.m., in room 2200 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Dana
Rohrabacher (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Whereas, I have been informed that the
ranking member will be here momentarily and I have been given
permission by the staff and by Ms. Kelly, as well, that we can
proceed and he will be joining us.
Good afternoon. I call this hearing to order. The
subcommittee's topic for this afternoon is mass migration in
Europe, its history, the current reality, the consequences of
migration and what those consequences mean to the transatlantic
relationship.
Let me say that from the start what this hearing is not and
it is not and cannot simply be a discussion of recent Syrian
refugees going, pouring into Europe. Yes, that is part of the
discussion, but it is only one part of the discussion. This is
a big topic, one with a history which stretches back decades
and in terms of migration perhaps even centuries.
We cannot do justice to the issue or the lives of all the
people affected without being respectful of the history of what
we are talking about today. In recent history, European
demographics began to change dramatically after the Second
World War. The continent, depleted of manpower after the war,
turned to a guest workers program from Turkey, Morocco,
Algeria, and elsewhere. That was for labor to rebuild their
countries destroyed during the war. Additionally, as Europe's
colonial empires came apart, that too spurred migration from
Africa, the Asian Subcontinent, and the Middle East. Both the
collapse of the Soviet Union and the implosion of Yugoslavia
brought new migrants who sought safety, education, jobs, and
being reunited with their families.
In 2015, famine and collapsing economies in the Middle East
and Africa, as well as the wars in Syria and in the Middle
East, caused a spike in migration bringing more than 1 million
people into Europe, some of them fleeing ISIS or some of them
just desperate to get away from the horrible conditions in
refugee camps. Others came seeking employment and a means to
support their families. A small portion of those who entered
Europe came with bloody and radical intentions. A very small
percentage, very small number of these people were terrorists.
That, too, will be part of the discussion.
While the 2015 wave has tapered off, the ramification from
that event are still with us today. Politically, it has damaged
solidarity within the European Union as some states have
rejected the Berlin-Brussels position on geographically
redistributing asylum seekers throughout Europe. So it has
caused some problems there. And it has also raised sensitive
questions about how successful European societies have been at
assimilating past groups of immigrants.
It is prudent to ask how can European societies absorb
hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions of sub-Saharan Africans
and Arabs from the Middle East, many of whom are Muslims and
all of whom come from a vastly different culture than the ones
found in Europe, especially when reaching Europe is an
achievable goal now for so many and the mechanisms to return
failed asylum seekers and unlawful economic migrants is
woefully insufficient or maybe even nonexistent.
The answers have been clearer and they have been also,
however, unnerving to many European populations. From the
Brexit vote to the rise of the AfD in Germany, and yes,
elections in Hungary and the rhetoric about controlling borders
and maintaining cultures and preventing radicalization, all of
this has been a constant. For the United States, our European
NATO allies are among the most valuable partners we have. Their
reduced unity and increased political instability do not serve
our interests.
However, this hearing will shed some light on constructive
ways that we can approach the challenges that we are talking
about.
I will now turn to--Mr. Meeks is not here. Maybe Ms. Kelly,
do you have an opening statement? Okay. And we will find a way
to mark time until Meeks gets here, but I will instead
introduce all of the witnesses.
Starting with number one with Dr. Victor Davis Hanson, a
Senior Fellow at Hoover Institution at Stanford University. He
is a scholar of classics and military history and having
written nearly two dozen books, his latest is a history of the
Second World War, a book which is right on my desk ready to be
read and it has been there for a couple of weeks I might add
waiting for me. I appreciate that you have traveled all the way
from California to be with us today and to share with us your
understanding of this and put in perspective the history of
what we are talking about.
We also have with us Dr. Marta Vrbetic. Now with a name
like Rohrabacher, no one ever mispronounces my name, so anyway,
we are very happy to have you with us today. You are a Fellow
with the Global Europe Program within the Woodrow Wilson
Center. Previously, you were an Ambassador or Assistant
Professor, that is, of Government at Gallaudet University. And
she is an expert on European politics and conflict resolution.
Robin Simcox is a Margaret Thatcher Fellow at the Heritage
Foundation. He is widely published and an expert in
counterterrorism and counterradicalism and I am happy he is
with us today and serving as a witness.
And finally now, I am going to try to pronounce this
correctly, too. I have failed so far, but here goes, Wa'el
Alzayat. Got it. Okay. He is the CEO of the Emgage, an
organization that advocates for Muslim Americans and he has had
a distinguished career at the State Department, serving in the
U.S. Embassy in Iraq, the U.S. Mission to the United Nations,
and the Department's Syria Outreach Coordinator.
I want to thank all of you for being with us today. Should
we proceed? Okay. I would ask the witnesses to summarize your
testimony into 5 minutes. Anything you want to say more than
that you can put into the record and we will also get to a more
extensive dialogue once the questions begin.
So Mr. Simcox?
STATEMENT OF MR. ROBIN SIMCOX, MARGARET THATCHER FELLOW,
MARGARET THATCHER CENTER FOR FREEDOM, DAVIS INSTITUTE FOR
NATIONAL SECURITY AND FOREIGN POLICY, THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION
Mr. Simcox. Chairman Rohrabacher and distinguished members
of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
here today.
My name is Robin Simcox. I am the Margaret Thatcher Fellow
at The Heritage Foundation. The views I express in this
testimony are my own and do not represent any official position
of The Heritage Foundation.
My goal this afternoon is to highlight some of the
challenges Europe will face in the future due to both historic
and more recent decisions on mass migration.
First are the security concerns related to recently arrived
asylum seekers and refugees. The Islamic State of Iraq and al-
Sham or ISIS is known to have infiltrated Europe using the
unprecedented refugee flow. This was particularly common in
2015 when Chancellor Merkel opened up Germany's borders. Yet,
its ideology has also proven attractive to recent arrivals into
Europe who were not previously part of the ISIS orbit.
Forthcoming Heritage research documents the impact of the
recent influx of refugees and asylum seekers has had on
European security. Since January 2014, either refugees or
asylum seekers or those exploiting the migrant routes into
Europe have been involved in dozens of separate plots in Europe
leading to hundreds of deaths and injuries including that of
American citizens. The majority of these plots have direct ties
to ISIS.
Furthermore, the plots took place throughout Western
Europe, with Germany the number one target. The perpetrators
came from a broad variety of countries, but most commonly from
Syria. Several individuals even had their asylum applications
rejected but were unfortunately not immediately deported and
this includes those who carried out vehicular attacks in Berlin
and Stockholm.
Second are concerns over the doctrine of state multi-
culturalism in Europe. This doctrine accepts that different
cultures will live segregated lives with no expectation to
integrate, leading to the development of separate, parallel
societies with competing laws and customs. In the U.K., for
example, there are dozens of sharia councils. They adjudicate
on a variety of civil issues, including sharia-compliant
financial advice and resolving family disputes. These councils
operate legally under British civil law. However, one recent
U.K. Government report carried out for the Home Office
determined that these councils are encroaching on legal matters
outside their purview. This report stated that there are now an
estimated 100,000 sharia marriages without state recognition,
meaning that women do not have the legal rights they should
under U.K. law. Certain sharia councils were also adjudicating
on child custody and domestic violence issues. The Home Office
report went on to highlight ``claims that some Sharia Councils
have been supporting the values of extremists, condoning wife-
beating, ignoring marital rape and allowing forced marriage''
Thirdly, mass immigration can also adversely affect foreign
policy. In January 2014, The Guardian reported that senior
officials in the U.K.'s Ministry of Defence had assessed that
the reality of ``an increasingly multi-cultural Britain'' could
influence future strategic defense decisions. These Ministry of
Defence officials cited worries that British troops had largely
been deployed to Muslim-majority countries in recent years,
such as Afghanistan and Iraq. There were concerns about
deploying troops in the future to countries from which British
citizens or their families had historic ties. This was an
acknowledgment that U.K. policy could see strategic interests
abroad sacrificed for domestic security interests at home. And
despite the recent modest contributions to U.S. military
actions in Syria, there is nonetheless the possibility of
future constraints on the U.S.'s closest allies.
Chairman Rohrabacher, distinguished members of the
subcommittee, the humanitarian situation many refugees flee
from is, of course, horrific. Syria, especially epitomizes
this. Nations wishing to adopt the policy of controlled
migration in response is entirely understandable. Furthermore,
the concerns I have referred to in Europe do not exist solely
because of the most recent inflow. Europe has struggled with
integration and domestic security concerns for decades. Yet,
the most recent inflow has, unfortunately, exacerbated these
problems. As a possible solution, European Governments could
more rigorously vet asylum seekers, commit more resources to
counterterrorism, be more willing to deport those in Europe
illegally and place an expectation on newcomers that they
integrate into their new environment and respect core European
values.
Thank you for inviting me today and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Simcox follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Rohrabacher. Dr. Vrbetic.
STATEMENT OF MARTA VRBETIC, PH.D., GLOBAL FELLOW, GLOBAL EUROPE
PROGRAM, WOODROW WILSON INTERNATIONAL CENTER FOR SCHOLARS
Ms. Vrbetic. Chairman Rohrabacher, Ranking Member Meeks,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify before the House Subcommittee on Europe, Eurasia, and
Emerging Threats.
I will be speaking in my own name and the opinions
expressed in my testimony should not be understood as
reflecting the official views of the Woodrow Wilson
International Center for Scholars.
Since I have only 5 minutes, I will go and talk about the
most important issues that I find: How European politics is
changing, what impact might be on the transatlantic
relationship, and if I have time, I will go back to the Balkans
and the impact of the migration crisis on the Balkans in 2015.
First of all, as you mentioned, the anti-establishment and
far-right parties are gaining ground in Europe, as we have seen
the recent electoral victories in Austria, Italy, and Germany.
Chancellor Merkel took its centrist conservative party to the
left, and some of her supporters defected to the far-right
Alternative for Germany, AfD. And with just 13 percent of the
national vote, AfD has been able to disrupt German politics,
making it more difficult, for example, for Chancellor Merkel to
form the new government.
I should also say that Russia has been supporting some far-
right politicians in Europe and probably is doing so in order
to increase divisions within Europe and upset the established
governments.
Recently, the United States, joined by France and the
United Kingdom, launched air strikes against Syria. The German
Chancellor said the action was appropriate, but didn't join the
allies in taking the action due to the opposition at home.
Basically, the migration crisis, and everything that followed,
left the German Chancellor weaker. And we see here how the
transformation of European politics could possibly have impacts
on transatlantic relationship.
Furthermore, European leaders are beginning to worry about
the possibility of devastating far-right attacks which could
potentially radicalize Muslims, provoke more attacks by
radicalized immigrants and far-right groups, and lead to the
breakdown of law and order. I am referring to the hypothetical
scenario developed by the EU Institute for Security Studies,
which reflects some of the concerns in Europe right now.
Migration has also become a big source of contention in
Europe between the new democracies in the east and their
western counterparts, especially over how to reallocate 160,000
asylum seekers from Greece and Italy. The Visegrad Four
countries--Hungary, Czech Republic, Slovakia, and Poland--
remain opposed. They insist that the EU should protect its
borders and prevent migratory pressures, rather than distribute
asylum seekers. Germany and West European states insist on
solidarity and burden sharing.
Because I have very little time left, I will go to what the
United States can do and is doing to help Europe. First of all,
the United States and NATO should continue disrupting the
smuggling and trafficking across the Mediterranean, thereby
also helping protect European borders.
Second, there should be no repetition of the experience we
have seen in 2015 when 1 million migrants, virtually unvetted,
made it to the heart of Europe. Besides posing security risks,
and some of the Paris attackers passed through the refugee
shelters of the Balkans, the migration influx was destabilizing
the Western Balkans and Southeast Europe, causing lots of
quarrels among the countries that are still unstable and still
have neighborly disputes.
The United States should also urge Europeans to put their
differences aside. Eastern Europeans look up to the United
States of America, and we should urge them to end their present
quarrels with their Western counterparts. Eastern Europeans
should embrace solidarity and accept the need to shape the
common asylum policies in Europe. Western Europeans need to
stop talking down to Eastern Europeans and be ready to examine
their failing integration policies at home.
I am overtime, therefore I will end here, as there will be
more opportunity for discussion.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Vrbetic follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you.
STATEMENT OF VICTOR DAVIS HANSON, PH.D., MARTIN AND ILLIE
ANDERSON SENIOR FELLOW, HOOVER INSTITUTION, STANFORD UNIVERSITY
Mr. Hanson. Thank you. I will try to summarize very briefly
my written statement, Chairman Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Pull the microphone a little closer, we
are having a little volume problem there.
Mr. Hanson. What we see now is the largest group of
potential migrants since World War Two in the displaced persons
that were the result of the invasion of Russia in 1941 and the
Russian counter offensive. And it is a pool of 60 to 65 million
people would like to leave Asia, Africa, or Latin America, so
what we have seen is maybe the tip of the iceberg.
There is a commonality that we share in the United States
with Europe. It is always, almost always, a non-Western to a
Western phenomenon, that is, the former British Commonwealth,
the United States, and Europe have a greater propensity for
consensual government, free market economics, transparency in
the judiciary and that attracts people who want to enjoy that
atmosphere.
Most of the people who are arriving, unfortunately, are
coming under illegal auspices. They tend to not have language
fluency in the host country in which they arrive. They are not
often a diverse group of people. They tend to be concentrated
from a particular country or region and they are coming, as I
said, in unprecedented numbers. They cause a lot of political
ramifications for the host country. Politically, the divide is
often progressives who are at least stereotyped to be more
sympathetic to social welfare programs or more sympathetic
versus conservatives that are worried about tradition, customs
and are more skeptical. But more importantly, there is a class
divide. The elites who tend to favor open borders, if I could
use that term, through their influence and power, are often
immune from the ramifications of their own ideology. And the
lower and middle class native citizens deal with the problems
first hand and that has caused a rise in populist movements,
both left and right in Europe and the United States.
There is also a little bit of chauvinism on their arrival
because the demography is much more fertile, sometimes three to
four replacement numbers rather than 1.4 or 0.5 in Europe or
not even 2 in the United States and that tends to suggest that
you hear this term demography is destiny and it is a very
Orwellian situation where the arrival starts to dictate to the
host that they are the future of the country.
Let me just quickly say we in the United States are very
fortunate because we have about twice the number of migrants.
We have double the percentage of non-native born, but we have a
much stronger tradition of the melting pot. Americans are
racially, ethnically, and religiously diverse. You cannot
identify an American by his appearance in the way that
Austrians or Greeks are.
We have a country. Europe is a confederation. And the
Schengen Agreement, area agreement, the Dublin, are not as
successful in creating a uniform approach to the problem. We
have one border that is porous. Europe has many borders,
eastern and southern, land and sea, as anybody who has been to
the Dodecanese islands and seen what is happening.
We, in America, most of the people who come in have the
same faith as the host population, Christianity. That is not
true in Europe with the Islamist difference and disconnect.
People arriving to Europe are more inordinately male. They are
about 65 percent. Ours are about 55 percent. Males,
historically, are the root of most problems, especially the
younger they are.
Let me just conclude by suggesting there are strategic
ramifications for the United States that we often--and I don't
want to repeat what Mr. Simcox so eloquently pointed out which
I am in agreement with, but NATO is no longer using a draft.
Only two countries are left. It is a volunteer army. Experience
shows usually when you have a volunteer army, people from the
newer-arriving classes are the less economically successful
will join the military and that will have a larger number of
immigrants.
Secondly, only six countries in Europe are meeting their 2
percent goals of GDP and with this increased social cost,
whether it is actual or psychological, they will be more
reluctant to meet their commitments.
Germany has been the historic leader of Europe and it is
really suffering somewhat being discredited after the financial
north-south divide in Europe and then the Brexit divide of
which in both cases Germany was at the fore. They are creating
a great level of animosity, especially from Eastern Europeans
who felt that they had been condescended to by German
leadership. And I think this has enormous security
ramifications for the United States if Germany is not a
credible leader of the EU and the EU itself is not able without
a stricter political framework to address this. And we really
see an EU now cut not in half north-south but in four ways.
And then finally, we have strong ties to Israel and we know
now that the level of perceptible anti-Semitism is rising and
there has been an out migration to Israel. That has security
ramifications to the United States. And that is, I think,
mostly a result of incoming arrival. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hanson follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much and Mr. Wa'el Alzayat.
STATEMENT OF MR. WA'EL ALZAYAT, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, EMGAGE
Mr. Alzayat. Chairman Rohrabacher, honorable members,
thanks for having me here today. My name is Wa'el Alzayat. I am
CEO of Emgage which is a civic education and engagement
organization for Muslim and minority communities. As was
mentioned earlier, I served for 10 years at the Department of
State on Iraq, Syria, and a lot of the other easy to deal with
countries that we are all discussing. I served under some
incredible diplomats including Ambassador Samantha Power,
Ambassador Jim Jeffery in Baghdad twice. And I worked with
Ambassador Robert Ford on the very difficult Syrian crisis for
3 years. So I hope what I am sharing with here is understood as
my personal professional reflection on what I have seen
firsthand.
As has been mentioned, there are approximately 65 million
refugees worldwide, the largest since World War Two. And I know
we don't want to dwell just on Syria, but it was the Syrian
crisis that led to a 40 percent spike after 2011 in that
number. And that is a really in term of the annual
displacement. And Syrians right now are the largest number of
refugees, over 5 million.
And it is important to understand how we got here just very
quickly. It was the escape from terrorist organizations, but
mainly from the brutality of the Assad regime which was cited
by most refugees as the reason for their displacement. Most
Syrians I have spoken with and dealt with had no intention of
leaving their country and wish they were still there, had they
not been literally barrel bombed out of their homes. And we
have seen also subjugated to other means of torture including
chemical weapons, etcetera, etcetera.
On top of that, it was really the Russian intervention in
Syria in 2015 that led to an increase in that displacement on
top of the existing displacement. In fact, the same year Russia
entered the conflict in Syria, 1.2 million first time asylum
seekers applied in Europe, twice the number the year before. So
there is a direct correlation there.
So if we are serious about stemming the flow of refugees
into Europe, then part of the answer lies in civilian
protection in Syria and other countries that are hemorrhaging
people. Now with this latest wave of migration, there is
completely understandable anxiety. It is normal. The world is
shrinking. It feels like it is shrinking. And not always in a
good way.
But we need to level set a little bit. When we look at the
terrible phenomenon of terrorist strikes and attacks in Europe,
the majority have been done actually by European citizens, not
by immigrants and not by refugees. In fact, according to my
research and I am not an expert in this field, but this is my
research, from January 2016 to April 2017, only four asylum
seekers, four, were involved in terrorist attacks. Something
else is going on here.
Now clearly, the European project has not been as
successful in integrating its Muslim refugees and migrants as
we have here. That is clear to me. But why? There is a lot of
reasons being cited here, but we cannot neglect the
institutional discrimination and public sphere and particularly
in the job market, combined with strict interpretation of what
it means to be a citizen. This has alienated particularly
second and third generation children of immigrants who feel
disconnected from the only country they know.
But regardless of all of this, European Muslims are very
young. Over half is under the age of 30. These are the
continent's future. They are engaged and empowered and we know
they are already attached to their societies. For example, 76
percent speak the local European language as their native
language. Seventy-five percent regularly intermingle with non-
Muslims. And they identify with the host country and that
identification is increasing over time.
But more importantly, 94 percent said they felt connected
to the country they lived in. These are Muslims in Europe. With
the new defeat of ISIL on the battlefield, it is more important
than ever to distinguish its nihilist ideology. It has to be
defeated. But this requires engagement and tolerance rather
than demonization and bigotry. It requires trust building
between law enforcement and local communities. It requires
creating equal opportunity for everyone and requires respect
for people regardless of their faith and treating them as equal
citizens.
I know much is usually said about the Judeo-Christian
values. I can tell you that you can't have Judeo-Christian
values with Islamic values. They are inherently the same. They
worship the same God and follow the teachings of the same
prophets. Perhaps the best model of integration is right here
at home where religious freedom is guaranteed by the
Constitution and citizens are not asked to choose between their
faith and being American.
According to pure research here in 2017, Muslim Americans
overwhelming say they are proud to be Americans, believe that
hard work generally brings success in this country and are
satisfied with the way things are in their own lives, despite
100 percent increase in hate crimes against Muslims since 2014.
I, myself, I am one of those proud Americas who is also an
immigrant and a Muslim and a Syrian. It is the belief of the
ideals of America where we are judged by what we do rather than
the color of our skin that gave me the impetus to become a
public servant and the privilege to work on some of our
country's most challenging national security issues. I fear
those ideals are under assault.
I personally feel that the real challenges, the emerging
challenges facing Europe and elsewhere, it is not the refugees
or the migrants. It is the willful abandonment of our cherished
values of tolerance and equality under the law. I hope we can
all work together on resolving some of these real pressing
issues together in a constructive manner for the sake of our
country, our European allies, and really the world. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Alzayat follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, thank you.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good afternoon,
everyone. I apologize for being a little tardy. I want to thank
Chairman Rohrabacher for calling our attention to an on-going
concern of ours as we look at Europe from this side of the
Atlantic. Large migration flows into Europe including from
majority Muslim countries is not a new phenomenon. But let us
remember the flows from the Middle East, Turkey in the '50s and
the '60s and from the Balkans and Iraq in the '90s. So although
I know we will inevitably talk about Chancellor Merkel's
decision on Dublin as a pivotal moment, I would like for us to
keep in mind the changing nature of European populations
throughout the 20th century and earlier. Some facts have
changed, but we have been here before.
I also cannot help but comment on our own changing refugee
policies here in the United States. As the world rapidly
becomes a smaller place where transcontinental threats affect
us all, the Trump administration is acting, in my belief, in an
incomprehensible manner: By bombing Syria when he sees fit, not
solving the problem, and tightening our refugee policy here at
home, a policy that I might add has been very successful. Our
refugee policies and mechanisms, by the way, can teach other
societies, including those in Europe, best practices.
Before we criticize Europe for trying to integrate from
refugees from bloody massacres in Syria or often from regions
where are directly involved, I suggest we reflect a bit on what
it means when we turn away refugees.
Finally, on a personal note, my family came to New York
from the South, from South Carolina, in very difficult
conditions that I did not quite understand as a young boy
growing up. But they were internal migrants, looking for better
opportunities for their children and risked a great deal. They
had to travel 12 hours from South Carolina to New York. You go
12 hours, you can be almost anyplace else in the world today.
And although they were not escaping a conflict zone, I cannot
help but think of my family's experience when looking at videos
of families at the Hungarian border, for example.
And I understand that not all of these people are refugees.
I understand that they may not have the legal rights in Europe
and should be turned away after due process, but I cannot stand
for treating the traveler, the lost, the impoverished, the
naked, as nonhuman, as a disease coming to infect the West. It
pains me to see populations in Europe, political groups across
Europe, and even some voices here in Congress, treat fleeing
migrants, all of whom went through horrendous journeys, as a
political tool to scare their populations instead of
pragmatically addressing the causes, the difficulties, and the
opportunities of the situation at hand which is what we should
be doing.
As Europe or the EU grapples with newly-arrived migrants
and integrating refugees, I see this as a test of our liberal
values. Can our system, the one in which we fought world wars
and cold wars to build and protect, treat the individual,
regardless of race or creed, as one with equal rights and
opportunity. I believe that the United States can be an example
of how to successfully integrate new citizens from far away
countries with different cultures.
I proudly represent Queens, New York, which is one of the
most diverse in all of the United States. And although I know
that this may be difficult or uncomfortable for elements of
European and American societies to see, I nevertheless believe
in our values and institutions as we move forward. Let us look
to incorporate the youth and foster future leaders from all
walks of life for they will help today's leaders navigate this
change.
I look forward questioning and listening to our panelists
as we go forward and I think that this is not a new normal. And
if we are to protect our values, our way of life, our
societies, we have to have these difficult conversations about
race, religious, and individual rights in a free society. I
welcome this honest dialogue and I hope that our transatlantic
ties can only become stronger as we address the issues at hand
and address them collectively.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Mr. Cicilline, do you have an opening
statement that you would like to put in?
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Meeks. And I can't wait to hear it.
Mr. Cicilline. I want to thank you, Chairman Rohrabacher
and Ranking Member Meeks for holding today's hearing on mass
migration, Europe, and security.
Over the past several years, Europe has experienced
significant refugee and migrant flows as people have fled
conflict and poverty in bordering regions. This population
increase, coupled with horrific violent attacks, has led to
heightened concerns about terrorism and crime.
As we discuss this important issue, we should take care not
to conflate refugees or migrants with terrorists or criminals.
The vast majority of refugees who have sought shelter and
protection in Europe are running from brutal dictators, fleeing
environmental catastrophe, are seeking a home where they can
live, contribute, and worship in peace. It is clear to me that
the international community must do more to assist those in
need while ensuring the safety of all.
I want to thank the witnesses for your testimony about the
current efforts under way in Europe, the challenges that they
are facing, and ways that the United States can assist our
partners there.
I think yesterday we heard from President Macron who
identified the necessity of American leadership to shape the
21st century world order and the responsibility to stand up
against this tide of authoritarianism and the effort to
undermine important democratic institutions that are essential
to freedom and justice in our society.
And I want to just conclude by saying I strongly agree with
the final witness who just testified that the real challenge
that we face is not refugees and migrants. It is the systematic
undermining of our democratic institutions and as you said, the
willful abandonment of our values of tolerance, equality, and
the value and respect of human dignity. So I hope that we will
have a discussion that focuses on how we can promote those
universal values of human dignity and respect and universal
human rights and recognize that we are a nation that is renewed
in every generation by immigrants and refugees and the same
happens all over the world.
I thank you and I yield back.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I would like to thank our witnesses and
thank members of the subcommittee who joined us today.
I would like to just to get some fundamentals from Dr.
Hanson first. Do you see that--you are well known for your
analysis of history and a really detailed and in-depth
knowledge of this.
Mr. Hanson. We all agree to democratic tolerance and
liberal values, but we have to realize that whether we like it
or not, that is largely a Western phenomenon that doesn't exist
in Africa, or Asia, or Latin America with the same degree it
does in Europe and the United States.
So we are appealing to a tradition and that tradition has
emphasized that newcomers engage in a brutal bargain. They give
up something of their--we don't ask people who arrive here to
give up their food or culture or religion, but we do say they
have to give us something to be part of the whole, and that is
to accept democratic values and tolerance. And we know from
historical exempla that assimilation, integration, and
intermarriage, and I am speaking as both of my brothers are
married to people from Mexico, it only works when immigration
is measured, mostly legal, and diverse.
And what we really want to do then is to make Americans,
that is number one. Number two is we do have a lot of hate
crimes, but unfortunately, in the United States in the last 3
years most of the hate crimes have been of the anti-Semitic
nature and many of them have been the greatest perpetrator were
second generation Muslim youth. And so what I am trying to get
at is that it is not just the first generation immigration. If
you look at Fort Hood, if you look at Orlando, if you look at
San Bernardino, if you look at the Boston massacre, we who
integrate and assimilate people much better than Europe does,
have failed to stress the melting pot and the salad bowl has
allowed certain zealots to appeal to a second generation who is
more vulnerable to separatism and chauvinism than is the first
generation, because they grew up with a bounty of the United
States or Europe without the struggle and the ordeal of their
home country, so it is very important that we stress liberal
values of tolerance to the second generation that are much more
prone to violence as we see in Europe.
Mr. Alzayat is quite right. It is the second generation.
But the second generation is a phenomenon of massive
immigration.
Finally, I think all of us agree that we do a much better
job with the melting pot, and assimilation, and integration
than Europe, but we are not in a position, especially vis-a-vis
Europe to dictate how they are going to run their internal
affairs. What we need to do is prepare ourselves to react to
maybe their mistakes or their successes. And what we are seeing
now is that Europe is dividing left and right, east and west,
and north and south over immigration. And Vladimir Putin, for
example, is championing a chauvinistic view that has wide
appeal in Eastern Europe because elites in the EU have been
condescending and giving lectures to people about you have to
be more tolerant, you have to be more liberal minded. And yet,
they themselves are not subject to the ramifications because of
their influence and power and wealth. It is the lower middle
classes of Eastern and Central Europe that deal firsthand with
this and are most vulnerable to propaganda coming from
autocracies that say the Europeans don't represent you or it
has failed.
So it is a much more complex idea, but the idea that we can
give lectures to the Europeans about their French Revolutionary
values, it is wonderful that we would try to do that and we
should, but in a practical sense, we have to deal with the
realities that they may make unfortunate decisions and we have
to protect our security interests accordingly.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I was just informed that an amendment that
I was hoping would be discussed before, will be on the floor in
4 minutes, so that is how frustrating this job can be.
Dr. Hanson, thank you for making those points. I wanted to,
let me just say, we want America and we love America for its
openness and we are hoping that, as Dr. Hanson was indicating,
that what we are doing is making Americans out of them rather
than having them change those fundamental values that are
American and that relates directly to the insistence on some
people who are Muslims who are coming here on, and as they are
in London, demanding that they have sharia law and that their
families be governed under sharia law. I will just let you have
a go at refuting that, but isn't that a very legitimate concern
when you have a large number of Muslims coming into another
country and then suggesting that they have to have the rights
that are totally inconsistent with the culture here of how they
treat women and how they treat young girls, send them out to be
married at a young age, as well as some of the other elements
of sharia law that are totally inconsistent with our beliefs of
liberty?
Mr. Alzayat. Thank you for that question. You know, there
is a lot to unpack. I think here is there is the statement that
a lot of Muslims there and here want sharia law. Statistically
speaking, most Muslims according to most surveys do not want
sharia law, first of all, in the countries that they are living
in, particularly in Western countries.
Second of all, we need to understand what sharia law is.
Sharia law is the body of religious teaching that a devout
Muslim may choose to follow in their daily affairs. And now we
are talking here about praying, fasting for Ramadan----
Mr. Rohrabacher. As you know, no one is complaining about
that.
Mr. Alzayat. But that includes----
Mr. Rohrabacher. No one is complaining about that. When you
are complaining about that are things that go absolutely
contrary to what America is supposed to be about.
Mr. Alzayat. Correct. But there are no indications or any
evidence that Muslims in any place whether in Britain or the
United States have insisted on undermining the existing laws or
Constitutions and implementing----
Mr. Rohrabacher. There is no evidence that Muslims in
England or here have insisted that their families will be--they
will conduct themselves with their young daughters, that they
will be able to give them into fixed marriages or there have
been actually, what I understand murders of women who have
committed adultery. But that doesn't happen?
Mr. Alzayat. Of course they happen and they are horrible.
But we are talking about most Muslims or a lot of Muslims
versus a minority that is extremist and must be dealt with.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, we are dealing with a situation in
the modern world. It doesn't take all Muslims. If you have one
Muslim who goes like in San Bernardino where you had two Muslim
immigrants who murdered all of these social workers.
Mr. Alzayat. Same as white supremacists----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay, but the point is they are there and
that is impacting them and resulting in this death doesn't mean
because they represented only a smaller group of Muslims that
we shouldn't understand that there is a psychological part of
this whole equation that has led to the death of all these
Americans.
And, I might add, leads to situations in London and
elsewhere where you have violence or you have activities that
are going on that wouldn't go on. You don't have to say most of
them want it, but if you just have a certain number of people
there that have not--okay, being vetted you say. Well, I guess
that is the question. Should we--I am going to give up the
floor in 1 minute.
Should we be then vetting people who come from the Islamic
world as to what things they----
Mr. Alzayat. We should be vetting anybody who would like to
come to the United States.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay, right. But that is not what this
hearing--this hearing isn't about anybody. This hearing is
about how we deal directly with the Islamic migration.
Okay, so when we deal with Islamic migration, do you think
that we should vet Muslim would-be immigrants here, and they
should be vetted the same in Europe, to make sure that they do
not want to conduct various practices?
Mr. Alzayat. I think any immigrant to any European or
Western country, including the United States, should be vetted
to make sure that they have no ties with any illicit groups and
do not hold any illicit views. I do. But that should be for
anybody.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So you do believe then that we can ask a
Muslim whether or not he or she believes in four wives or some
sort of treatment or some sort of punishment of daughters that
is differentiated from sons? Do you think that is okay to vet
them for that? Deny them----
Mr. Alzayat. If it is applied consistently for the
applicant, I am fine for it.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay.
Mr. Cicilline. I wonder if the gentleman would yield? I
wonder if you have the same concerns about all of the teachings
in the Bible about mixing two kinds of fabrics, about stoning
for infidelity, you go through that list. Do we ask Christians
whether they should denounce those teachings? Nobody practices
those.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I would suggest that----
Mr. Cicilline. Great examples, if you Google all of the
claims that are in the Bible that people don't actually do
today because if you took them literally, cutting off the hand
of your spouse, would we make the same inquiry of Christians
coming in?
Mr. Rohrabacher. Christians and Jews and everybody else who
tries to come here should be vetted.
Mr. Cicilline. I think that is what the witness aid.
Mr. Rohrabacher. But I will suggest that the last time
someone like that who is an immigrant from another country who
exploded because of their deep faith in Judaism or
Christianity, I don't remember any incident right now because
where there deaths because of it.
Mr. Cicilline. Well, I think the witness said that most of
the deaths were caused by people who were citizens of the
country when they caused the attack. So that is a fact. We
ought to rely on some of evidence and not just sort of our own.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Can I give the time to the ranking member?
Mr. Cicilline. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Mr. Meeks, you have the floor.
Mr. Meeks. I was going to let David if he had anything else
to say. Because the thing I was going to say just about anybody
in America immigrated from somewhere other than Native
Americans and I know of a group that still exists in America
that was responsible for a whole lot of deaths. They are called
lynchings. They are called the Ku Klux Klan. These are
Christians and they believe in separation and they believe in
violence. They have been very violent in this country. They
immigrated from somewhere else. And many of them were involved,
not all of them, but many of them, they are still involved in
the democracy called the United States of America.
And so to--now I don't blame everybody that happens to be
Christians and/or white to say that that for minority who
believes in those things that means everybody believes that.
And I think what Mr. Alzayat is saying is that there is a small
minority. You can find a small minority of people of any faith,
of any ethnic group that are horrible people, but you don't go
after the whole spectrum when the overwhelming majority--
because it is human nature to have somebody that is evil. And
we want to stop out and make sort of the evil folks don't get
in or don't stay here. But that is not because they are not
evil because they are Muslim. Just like you don't--they are
evil people and we call them who they are.
But Muslims, if you look at the religion, it is a very
peaceful religion and that is what they teach and that is how
they live by. And for us to color it some other kind of way is
not going to resolve issues. It is going to cause issues. And I
think that what we are talking about, I mean, the fact of the
matter is in the United States previously all you had to do was
get here. When you came into Staten Island, you registered,
they didn't care, as long as you got here because it says give
me your tired, give me your weary, give me, you know, we want
you, except for those that were brought over in the hulls of
slave ships.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Do you want to give him a question?
Mr. Meeks. I am, but you opened the door. I wasn't going
that way at all, so there is no way in any good conscience
because I sit back and just allow, you know, me and you are
good friends, and I often have to come back after you have made
a statement, you take me off my game plan and I have got it on
automatic because I have got to address it because I don't want
the record to indicate that I can allow a statement that I so
180 degree disagree with to stand and to go.
I don't want the record to indicate to anybody that might
be listening to this hearing, who might be in this room, or
who--this is being recorded, that Gregory Meeks stood by and
just allowed the kind of questioning and the statements that
were just made to go without hearing my strong opposition to
those statements and to what was insinuated here.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Is that to be interpreted that you don't
believe in vetting people for their religious convictions that
may be violent and cause----
Mr. Meeks. I believe in vetting everyone, not just because
of their religious beliefs. I think that as a result, I want to
make sure--I don't care if you are a Muslim, if you are Jewish,
if you are Buddhist, if you are anyone who is going to come
here that you are evil and you are coming here to do harm, I
want to vet them, but not because you are a Muslim. That is not
what makes the reason why, just because you are a Muslim.
There are Christians that commit more crime in America than
anyone else. There are more Christians that commit crimes in
the United States of America than any other religious belief.
There has been more deaths of people of the Christian faith in
the United States of America than any other religion. And I am
a Christian, but I yield the question to Ms. Kelly.
Mr. Rohrabacher. You are next, Ms. Kelly. Go right ahead.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do associate myself
with the comments of the ranking member, but with the unrest in
the Middle East and Russia's invasion of Ukraine, Europe has
experienced increased migration flows not seen since the fall
of communism. Many European countries have taken in significant
numbers of refugees looking for employment and a better way of
life.
Many countries, however, have used the increased flows to
stoke xenophobic sentiments and push anti-immigration policies.
Many of these policies are aimed at Muslim populations, but
countries like Poland have taken in a significant number of
Ukrainians.
The Polish Government claims to host about 1 million
Ukrainian refugees of its territory. Many of these people are
migrant workers, in fact, filling the labor demand in a
currently well-performing economy. At the same time, there is
also tension between the local population and Ukrainians which
recalls troubling history between the two nations in the 20th
century.
Warsaw touts the fact that they host Ukrainians who are
more like the Poles culturally as a reason to not accept
Syrians.
I think it is important to note that the migration issue in
Europe is not just about Muslim populations. There are many
different groups immigrating to Europe, reports of anti-Ukraine
job postings reminiscent of the Irish Need Not Apply, are now
popping up in new reports out of Poland. And yet, Polish
unemployment is low and the immigration wave has delayed
Poland's migration aging by years.
Ms. Vrbetic, what type of rights do Ukrainians have when
they are entering the EU as migrant workers versus refugees? In
interest of full disclosure, my grandmother on my mother's
side, they are Ukrainian, so half of my family is.
Ms. Vrbetic. Thank you for your question. I am afraid I
wouldn't know about the rights of Ukrainians who enter into
Poland. I could research that and get back to you.
I am aware though that yes, Poland has accepted many
Ukrainians. Yes, I am aware of that.
Ms. Kelly. Can anyone else answer?
Ms. Vrbetic. I do have some other comments.
Ms. Kelly. Okay.
Ms. Vrbetic. If I could add to this general discussion.
Ms. Kelly. Sure.
Ms. Vrbetic. First of all, and I am making comments as
somebody who is an immigrant. Can you hear me? I am trying to
speak into the mic now. Someone who is an immigrant, and
somebody who was raised and born and Europe. I am a U.S.
citizen. I am a minority in several ways, including being
completely deaf, and you know, just a minority, lots of things.
So I do sympathize with many things that were expressed here.
And I think we may be talking past each other.
So let me tell you the reasons why I think that the
migration to Europe, that the solution is not just to accept
everybody who wants to come. First of all, because there are so
many migrants. We are talking about 60 million that might
appear at European borders, and when I use the term migrant, I
am using it as a general term. It can include asylum seekers.
It could include refugees. It could include those who are
seeking economic opportunity.
The second thing is, we are talking about the upcoming
problems in Africa, where there will be one third of the
world's youth by 2050. The youth bulge is usually associated
with protests and possibly radicalization. There will be no
jobs. There is no way that Europe can absorb all of the people
who want to appear on its borders, so this is the reason.
The second----
Ms. Kelly. I know you are--I only have a certain amount of
time myself, so I wanted to get another question in.
Ms. Vrbetic. I apologize. The first time in a hearing, so I
may not fully know the procedure.
Ms. Kelly. No problem.
Ms. Vrbetic. I apologize.
Ms. Kelly. Mr. Alzayat, I understand that many immigrants
to the U.K. come from outside the EU and are not new to the
U.K. In fact, we are looking at second or third or fourth
generation British citizens or French or Belgian who do not
feel like they are fully-fledged Brits. How can we work with
the powers that be, the old guard in economics and politics, to
open doors and provide equal opportunity to all citizens? This
is the tool against radicalization. What success stories have
there been if you know of and it seems like we only focus on
the negative aspects of all of this.
Mr. Alzayat. Thank you for that question. You know, it is
clear to me that true social integration requires investment in
education and also in employment as the basic ingredients. If
you look at France, they actually do a great job in education,
but the labor market is overly regulated and inherently
discriminatory. So you end up with well-educated minorities
with no jobs.
Germany does not have quite the same robust educational
system, particularly for minority communities especially in
early age, however--and there are more barriers, especially
because of the language, but a much more lax and welcoming
labor market. And as such, you see big difference in terms of
the perception of those communities of themselves, of the
connectiveness to the society and their success and their
income which by the way irrespective of that, it is still lower
actually than the white Europeans.
So really the way forward here is to invest more in
education of these children and providing job opportunities.
But another piece really is in Britain this has been, I think,
done in the right way. Islam needs to be recognized as one of
the major religions. And it needs to be true inclusivity of
people who are practicing that religion in the public sphere.
There was a comment made earlier that this fear that the
more Muslims there are in the armed forces of NATO or in the
policy circles, somehow that is going to negatively affect
European foreign policy and engagement abroad. I think the
opposite happens. You have a more committed, civically engaged
community that is helping you flesh out these ideas and tackle
some very difficult issues and giving you diversity of opinion
and credibility when engaging with those. And that is my own
experience as a representative of the State Department. I would
like to think that people like me and us actually help our
country be stronger when we engage abroad with people of
different faith, color, and religions.
Ms. Kelly. I know I am out of time, but when I listen to
you, I am very big in the gun violence prevention fight and I
can apply what you said to some of our urban areas, the
investment and education and employment would make such a
difference and more inclusivity. So thank you.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I am going to put the subcommittee on
recess for \1/2\ hour. And we will come back and hopefully
have--there have been some very profound statements made. I
certainly would like to hear some comments on them, but we will
be back in \1/2\ hour. This committee is in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Rohrabacher. This hearing is readjourned or
unadjourned, that is it. Reconvened, that is the word I am
looking for.
Okay, I have been running back and forth to the floor where
I had an amendment on the floor and it would not have been able
to be brought up unless I was there, and I want to thank all of
you for joining us today and being understanding of this hectic
schedule.
We had a very lively discussion and I would like Dr. Hanson
and perhaps Dr. Vrbetic, as well, to have a chance to comment
on what we were saying before. So Dr. Hanson.
Mr. Hanson. I think that we have to be precise in the
nomenclature when we talk about as was mentioned violence.
Violence is endemic in any society. There is such a thing
called politically-motivated violence and the statistics
suggest that politically-motivated violence with an agenda to
further a political cause in Europe and in the United States
most of the incidents in the last two decades or since 9/11
have been so-called Islamic inspired. That is what the
perpetrators have suggested.
Second is that a minority of Muslims are prone to violence,
I think that is correct. But when you are working with a pool
of 5 million over the last decade that have migrated or you
have 1.7 million in Europe, just 1 percent of that pool would
be 50,000 people, so that is something to watch. You can be
successful in 99 percent of the case, but if you have a group
of people who feel alienated from society and are prone to
radical Islamic doctrine, that is a large pool, given the
European inexperience and inability to assimilate in the
fashion that we do.
I think when we talk about hate crimes, we have to be very
specific. If you go to the FBI statistics, the group that is
most subject to hate crime violence are American Jews in the
United States of Jewish faith. At least according to FBI
statistics, the group that is most identified with perpetrating
those hate crimes are Islamic zealots. So it is not accurate to
say that American Jews are not the most--they are the most
targeted group, at least according to Federal statistics.
Again, I don't think that the United States, given our long
relations with Europe, it is very ironic that Europe is used to
lecturing us, but I don't think we are in a position to alter
fundamentally European policy. What our prerogative and our
duty is to do is to protect us and this question has affected
the NATO alliance, especially the southern flank with tensions
with Turkey and Greece over immigration. It has affected the
cohesion of the EU. It has affected NATO contributions. It is
especially, and I think we haven't talked about this, it has
made Eastern Europeans far more susceptible to the propaganda
of Vladimir Putin who is appealing in a populist sense. If you
go to Greece today, you can see that he is the most popular
figure there. And his message is a nationalist, populist,
Orthodox Christendom message that appeals to people who feel
that their own elites in the EU do not listen to what are often
legitimate worries about the ability to assimilate and
intervene.
And finally, I think it is sort of disingenuous to talk
about second generation as if that is not connected with the
first generation immigration pattern. If you look at Boston,
the Boston Marathon massacre, if you look at Orlando, if you
look at San Bernardino, if you look at Fort Hood, we have a
reoccurring pattern of second generation Muslims who have been
alienated or radicalized and have committed acts of terrorism.
So the problem is again with assimilation, integration,
intermarriage, and historically throughout society across time
and space, if you want to assimilate people, you want to
integrate them, you want to intermarry them, and make them part
of the body politic, then you don't have problems in the second
generation.
Most of the terrorist incidents that are connected with
radical Islam in Europe are second generation because of the
failure. And we know how we facilitate that process of
Americanization and that is by numbers that are manageable,
legal, and meritocratic and diverse. We want immigrants from
all over the world because having influxes from one particular
place or one particular group and not having them live among
the population in a dispersed manner makes it much more
difficult.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Dr. Vrbetic.
Ms. Vrbetic. Thank you, Chairman. I would just like to talk
a little bit about something that I read about Germany and
German schools and their canteens to illustrate the problem
that I feel there is with integration. Some of the German
schools are dropping pork from menu altogether, and this is
because they have a few Muslim kids. Now I am not suggesting
that there should be forceful assimilation in the sense of
forcing Muslim kids to eat pork. But I don't see why German
schools wouldn't offer a variety of choices so that the Muslim
kids take their lamb or vegetarians taken their vegetarian meal
and those Germans students who want to eat pork, they eat pork.
And they all eat this together in a canteen.
But instead, we have a situation there are a few Muslim
students, that the German schools drop pork from menu
altogether for fear of offending minority. And this is the
point that I am trying to make, and this is the issue of
toleration.
In liberal democracies, some just push this issue of
toleration to the extreme, and when we push it to the extreme,
we don't actually encourage toleration as in this case.
By the way, the issue came to the attention of the
lawmakers in Schleswig-Holstein, which is one of the German
provinces. They wanted to keep pork on the menu.
Going back to this issue, I see the problem between two
models. One is liberal multi-culturalism. We try to integrate
minorities within this framework. I have exceeded my time. Is
that correct?
Mr. Rohrabacher. No, go ahead. Go ahead.
Ms. Vrbetic. When we try to integrate minorities within
this liberal framework. The other is pluralist multi-
culturalism, where there are separate minorities, where we set
up parallel societies. And the problem with the issue of
toleration is that when you push it to the extreme, it becomes
politics of indifference. We don't interfere with these
communities and we permit, ultimately, some practices that
don't stimulate integration and where we end up with both
liberal and illiberal elements. I will end here.
Mr. Rohrabacher. That is a fascinating analysis. Thank you.
Mr. Simcox?
Mr. Simcox. The points I would make, first of all, on the
kind of the nature of the threat, it is certainly true that in
Europe most plots are home grown in nature. There is a little
bit more to that in somebody like Salman Abedi, for example,
who was the suicide bomber in Manchester last May was second
generation Libyan, so it was a home-grown case, but still a
refugee element. Yes, most are home grown.
But some of the numbers I have been doing on this between
2004 and 2017, there is 32 plots in Europe, so 8 a year, that
were perpetrated by refugees and asylum seekers. So it is not
an insignificant number and of course, that includes something
like Paris, November 2015, where there was obviously a very
large body count.
The other point I would make on the numbers, European
experience with integration and assimilation is obviously very
different to the U.S. I think the U.S. has always done this
much more successfully than we in Europe have, to be honest. So
I think of a country like Sweden where I was just there the
week before last. They took in 163,000 people in 2015. And
obviously, regardless, they consider themselves to be a
humanitarian superpower and that they view this as truly, it is
like an international obligation.
In terms of what ratio that would be in the U.S., that
would be like the U.S. taking in 5.2 million people. It is a
very significant number in Sweden. And Sweden, as many in
Europe, doesn't really have the experience of making this kind
of thing work, like you in the U.S. do. So I would just raise
that as one of the potential challenges a lot of Europe
countries are going to have to deal with.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Go for it.
Mr. Alzayat. So you know what is interesting is in the
European countries with the most refugees, you don't
necessarily see correlating fear of refugees. So in Germany,
specifically right? They took 1 million Syrians. Not only was
Chancellor Merkel at the end of the day elected to a fourth
term, but German public opinion of refugees is actually one of
the best in Europe. So why is that? Clearly, leadership and the
political rhetoric is having something to do with it.
In a place like Hungary and Bulgaria, where you do have
far-right parties, who literally were advertising on billboards
pretty racist themes against incoming migrants and the threat
that will pose to European women specifically, these are
societies that have nowhere near the amount of refugees, Muslim
refugees, as Germany, yet the public perception and views are
quite negative now.
I mean it is a clear indication to me that also leadership,
the rhetoric, the policies, play a big role in that. And
remember, we are talking about addressing an issue of
radicalization potentially.
So my question to everyone is do we think that
stereotyping, exclusion, demonization, guilty by association,
will lessen the problem of radicalization? Well, address it.
And I understand about the fact that maybe there are no more
refugees coming right now at the same levels, but the ones that
are in Germany, that are in Europe, what is the best way to
deal with this situation? They are there right now. It is quite
frankly, illegal under international law for those who have
been designated as refugees to be refouled to their country of
origin without their consent, particularly in places that are
experiencing war. So this is now the reality.
So my remarks regarding investing in education, in helping
them integrate, in entering the labor force, but also in
showing them that tolerance truly applies to them as well is
going to have to be key. In terms of percentages, God forbid if
50,000 Muslims in Europe were ISIL followers. We would have a
completely different conversation right now. We are talking
about tens. That is what we are talking about. That is the
number of actual attacks in the tens.
So it is clearly not 1 percent. It is .0001, whether here
or abroad. So we have got to assess the problem for what it is
and then when you look at that and compare it to the rise in
hate crimes, assaults by neo-fascists, and neo-Nazi groups
against Jews, against Muslims, and people of color, on both
sides of the Atlantic, to me, that is a real worrying trend.
And that is what I would really consider as an emerging threat
as well.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you. Can you hear me? Let's just
have Dr. Hanson's response.
Mr. Hanson. I think it is a little bit disingenuous
because----
Mr. Rohrabacher. A little louder, Dr. Hanson.
Mr. Hanson. Oh, I am sorry. We are the seeing the largest
out migration of Jews since World War II to Israel, and there
is a good chance that France within 10 years, if these rates
continue, will be--there won't be a sizable Jewish population
in France. It is not just terrorism because it is individual
attacks on Jewish people who were obviously identified as Jews,
Orthodox Jews. There are areas within Paris and I think we have
all been to places in Rotterdam and Brussels where if you were
to wear a yarmulke, you would be in danger of physical assault.
But that is not really the catalyst for that out migration. It
is a sense and my colleague here referred to it, there is a
sense that the government has lost the confidence and tradition
of Western values of tolerance and pluralism.
We are not talking about chauvinism and prejudice and I
think Representative Meeks made a good point. What we are
talking about is the Western tradition that we all understand
and tolerate differences in the periphery of culture, but we
unite on democracy and constitutional government and
transparency and these core Western values.
Often in inexperience with this number of immigrants or
maybe clumsiness or whatever the reason is, European
Governments have not been able to address this problem in a
liberal sense. They haven't been able to say we welcome you to
come in here and it is a two-way street. If you give up some of
your identity as all immigrants do and accept the core Western
values and that means that if you see people of a different
religion or your cultural traditions come in conflict with
tolerance and plurality, you have to give that up and we can
require that as the host country. But that hasn't been
happening in Europe. And that means that we have to deal with
it.
The other thing is we would like to lecture Europe and say
why don't you look at the United States and see how much a
better job we do, but that is not the way nations, there is no
international court of good manners. But what happens is we
have to make the adjustments of this problem and this problem
is going to affect Turkey's membership in NATO in the short
term. It is going to affect whether--we can deplore racism all
we want. I think we should, but there is a schism growing
between Eastern and Western Europe and it is giving Vladimir
Putin a lot of opportunities that we don't want. And we have to
deal with the world as it is, rather than what we would like it
to be.
So I agree with my colleague on the left that we have to
reach out, I mean literally the left, not the ideological left.
Mr. Rohrabacher. See, I can say both of those here.
Mr. Hanson. In a geographical sense, but what I am saying
is we have to reach out and try to suggest politely that
Europe, without being chauvinistic, might want to learn from
the melting pot tradition. It has made us the most diverse
country in the world. But in lieu that they might not do that,
we have to take security precautions in the United States
because I think the EU is seriously facing some existential
crises that are going to affect the national security of our
alliance.
Mr. Rohrabacher. We are talking about Western civilization.
We are talking about basically the melting pot theories. We are
talking about how people--and nationalism. These are forces at
play that are part of our analysis of what is going to happen
and how to approach this moment in history. And I don't think--
this is my opinion that Western civilization has brought more
freedom to more people. And the fact that freedom as we know it
exists where Western civilization is the dominant force and not
the Islamic world which if you look there I don't know any
examples of the democratic institutions that we are talking
about and we hold dear as Americans. Malaysia? Okay, there is
one. Maybe Indonesia, maybe. But when I take a look at those
countries that are the most Islamic in terms of actually taking
their religion so seriously, there is no freedom in those
countries.
In terms of the melting pot, I don't see that you can have
a melting pot with people who think that they will not meld in
with the notions that other people have a right to worship God
as they see fit. Because that is part of the melting pot theory
and you do have, I have seen, various opinion polls taken in
London, I believe it was, that suggested that those people,
those Islamic people in London, well, of all the people who
were saying no, people do not have the right to worship God as
they see fit, if it is different than my faith, almost all of
them are Muslims and almost none of them are Christians, saying
no, if someone disagrees with me and my faith, they don't have
a right to practice it. Almost all the ones who say well, and I
don't believe--Mr. Meeks, just to be fair about it, I don't
think the interpretation, I mean I know that we have been told
that we have to assume that Islam is a faith of peace and it
means--but Islam to some interpretations and correct me, you
probably know more about this than I do, that Islam means
submission. The more accurate interpretation is submission, not
peace. And for those who don't submit, it is anything but
peace. Is that right?
Mr. Alzayat. Islam comes from the word salaam and that is
peace.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. All right.
Mr. Alzayat. In fact, you know, the greeting of Muslims is
peace be upon you. It is not you shall submit to me.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay, well, I am sure--salaam alaikum.
Okay, well, I will have to admit that I just don't see any
countries in the world right now cutting the heads off where
Christians are cutting the heads off Muslims, but I have seen
the opposite. And all I am saying here is you don't--obviously,
you cannot put all Muslims in one category, but you can realize
that when you see things happening, if there is a significant
more of Muslims doing something that is something you don't
want to happen in your society, like refuse to recognize
somebody else's right to worship God as they see fit, well,
then you should be aware of that. That should be something and
also in second generation type of things where we are talking
about, yes, we have had people in our own country and our own
culture, Dr. Hanson, we have had our own people shooting kids
up at schools that have nothing to do with Islam, but in terms
of the Muslim population, the number of Muslims here and the
number of actual situations where second generation Muslims
have gone crazy, it is very demonstrable and I don't know
another case like in San Bernardino where you had that.
Dr. Hanson, basically, do you have second generation
Christians coming here and doing that? I don't remember one
case of that happening, where someone who has immigrated here
from another country and is a Christian or as a Buddhist or
some other religion, I don't know one case where the second
generation Buddhist or second generation Christian went out and
committed these mass murders. Maybe you can enlighten me.
Mr. Alzayat. You have fourth, fifth, sixth generation
Christians are committing it. So that is actually even more
worrying.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, that is skipping the question. Do
you have--that is getting around the question.
Mr. Alzayat. So when we have, for example, you know, well,
by the way when we say a white Christian, no one knows how
religious these people are or whether they are true believers.
In fact, I doubt their faith if they were true Christians, they
wouldn't do this. But that aside, you have statistically
speaking far more violence by white Christian males in this
country, statistically speaking, than any other group. Excuse
me, I didn't interrupt you. And so what you have is right now
amplification of a particular problem. It is a real problem.
Terrorism in the name of Islam is a real problem and needs to
be dealt with. We are not ignoring it, but what we are saying
is that are we being fair to the religion and its adherence and
people, the overwhelming majority of people who condemn it and
are looking for real ways to address it.
As Americans, we have to be honest about the numbers in
this country in terms of the actual attacks that have happened,
by which groups, and address them accordingly. From Oklahoma
City to the mail bombs in Austin, just a few weeks ago, to
Charlottesville, clearly other people--the Waffle House just a
few days, to the horrible school shootings----
Mr. Rohrabacher. And which ones of those were motivated by
religion?
Mr. Alzayat. They were all Christian.
Mr. Rohrabacher. It wasn't based on anybody's religion.
Mr. Alzayat. How do we know that the Muslims did it because
of religion and not just because they were horrible people or
they had mental illness?
Mr. Rohrabacher. I think that there has been indication.
Dr. Hanson, do you want to say something and then we will
let Mr. Meeks go.
Mr. Hanson. We don't know how disingenuous anybody is who
commits a crime, but we can only go on the pretext of what they
say and it is a matter of fact that violent incidents that have
a political agenda, the perpetrators have identified themselves
as self-appointed representatives of Islam and we don't have
corresponding numbers. In a country that is about 80 percent
self-identified as Christian, we don't have corresponding
numbers of people who commit violence against people who are
not Christian because of a Christian identity. That is just a
fact.
So to say----
Mr. Alzayat. Oklahoma City is a political bombing.
Mr. Hanson. No, it was not a Christian bombing.
Mr. Alzayat. Political terrorist bombing, in fact.
Mr. Hanson. It was not a Christian bombing against non-
Christians. When we go outside this building, most--you asked
me not to interrupt. I would request the same courtesy from
you. When we go outside this building, most of the people today
who commit traffic accidents, most of the people who jaywalk,
will be Christian. So that citation means almost nothing in a
predominantly Christian country.
What we are talking about is politically-motivated violence
by people who self-identify, even if they misuse the religion,
with a particular religion against people they feel are enemies
of that religion.
Mr. Alzayat. Well, that is Srebrenica.
Mr. Hanson. I am talking about inside the United States.
Mr. Meeks. Even in the United States, if I can----
Mr. Alzayat. In Srebrenica, there were 10,000 Muslims who
were butchered by fundamentalist Christians in Serbia in the
name of religion.
Mr. Rohrabacher. That is absolutely correct.
Mr. Meeks. But even in the United States----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Mr. Meeks.
Mr. Meeks. Let me just say this because I have to go.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Mr. Meeks has the floor.
Mr. Meeks. Because even in the United States, the Ku Klux
Klan identify themselves as Christians and they believe in the
Bible, slavery, the slave masters said that they could enslave
people in Christianity in the name of Christ. They believe that
is what they did.
You talk to white nationalists today, they will tell you
they are acting in the same manner as the Bible calls for, that
slavery is okay because it is in the Bible. I have met and
talked to them. When I was raised, my parents were raised in
the South and within my lifetime, a lot of what they have done
was in the name of Christianity and justified what they did by
being Christians.
Now in response also though to this whole--I think Mr.
Rohrabacher, what you just indicated in regards to this nation
or that nation, you know, they don't have Western principles,
etcetera, but let me just say this, even democracy, because for
me and my father, didn't have democracy in America. So
democracy that is something that is out there for most--I can
recall being in South Carolina and my grandfather, my father,
my mother, not being able to vote. I can recall being told I
had to get underneath the bed as my grandfather got on the
porch with a shotgun because folks who went to church on Sunday
morning were now coming to get the so-called N people. This is
in my lifetime that I have witnessed.
And then you also talk about democracies in many of these
other places, these places were places that were colonized by
the West and brutal dictators were put in place to keep them in
order. And this is less than 50, 60 years ago. They were
colonies of Western democracies. And there were certain things
that was done to put--and so some of what you talk was put into
place to keep them in certain controls, whether you talk about
the Middle East, whether you talk about Asia, whether you talk
about Africa, all of these places were colonized by Western so-
called democracies.
If you look at our country, 25, 30 years, 40 years, 50
years, this was the wild wild West, all kind of craziness was
going on. And so now we are 240 years later and there are still
problems. So to go after some other country who has a new
democracy, basically an infant, and try to compare it to the
democracy of the United States, which still needs a lot of
work, to me is like comparing apples to oranges.
And what we need to be doing in one sense, people are--one
of the things we have in common is our--we are all human. No
matter what our race or our religion, we are human. And so we
should be focusing on the human problems and people leave from
one area to another because there is a human problem that
exists. And so they all--that is why I used my family's
experience as an example of people trying to go someplace else.
My parents would never have left South Carolina if they had an
opportunity there. Never would have left. I might have been a
member from South Carolina instead of New York. But they left
because they needed an opportunity. They went to a place that
they thought they could have a better life for their family.
So it is the same thing when you have a lot of
individuals--they are not leaving Syria just because they want
to leave Syria. They are leaving Syria for a reason. In fact,
that was one of my questions. You know, sometimes it is easy
for us to say go bomb. But there is consequences, because we
don't look at the human lives that are affected by the bombing.
The women and children and men who are innocent, who just want
to--they leave because--they are not leaving because of some
kind of religion or something, their homes are bombed. There is
no place for them to go or to eat. They are starving. So if the
bombing didn't take place, we wouldn't have had some of this
situation.
I mean one of the questions I had, you know, I was going to
ask Mr. Alzayat, what role did the Russia bombing of Aleppo
have in forcing migration of hundreds of thousands of people to
Turkey? Did it play a role in that?
Mr. Alzayat. It played a direct role. I was the outreach
coordinator for Ambassador Robert Ford with the Syrian
communities, really, activists, NGOs, and opposition members as
well and our allies in Europe, particularly who were working on
this. And as soon as the Russians started bombing, they were
bombing--they were not bombing the terrorists. They were not
bombing ISIL. They were not bombing al-Qaeda. They were bombing
civilians who were opposed to Bashar al-Assad and what we term
the Free Syria Army groups with all of their imperfections.
And there was a direct correlation, so that when they were
bombing Aleppo, they were bombing the areas around Homs in
northern Syria and other areas. You saw massive movement.
Hundreds of thousands of people pushing into Turkey. At the
time, Turkey had almost close to 2 million people by then. And
so they released the valves to let people go into Europe and
that is the European migration crisis.
In a sense, it was weaponized against Europe. That is what
happened.
Mr. Hanson. If I could make a concluding remark. I think
the sins of mankind are what Representative Meeks enunciated.
Every country has had that history, Western or non-Western.
What is unique about the West it has a tradition of self-
critique, self-examination to rectify. The FBI destroyed the
Klan in the 1960s, and so even Klanwatch and Southern Poverty
Law Center now have branched out into other areas of hatred
because the country healed itself. It had a debate. It found
the right chords.
And that process of self-introspection is why people from
the Muslim world and the non-West come to the West. And so it
is the height of irony that people are coming to the West for
freedom and for diversity and self-critique and then when they
arrive the host has lost the confidence of its own traditions
to say to them, you came here for a reason. It wasn't just
economic opportunity, you wanted respect as an individual, so
all we require of you is that you adopt the customs and the
traditions that are not perfect, but we don't have to be
perfect to be good. And we have a unique tradition of self-
critique and change. That is all, I think, we are trying to
suggest is that Europe's problem is that for some reason we
don't have time to get into it, it has not been able to tell
its immigrant population that you have to assimilate. Not
change your food, your religion, your fashion, your cultural
pride and traditions, but to accept a body of tolerance for
everybody who believes, or looks, or acts in a different way.
And I know that minority of immigrants may be small, but the
pool is large enough that a very small minority can be very
volatile. In a country like Europe, it doesn't have our
experience with assimilation and immigration.
Mr. Simcox. I will only take 2 minutes. I would just make
the point, reiterate the point really that what applies to the
U.S., doesn't necessarily apply to Europe. You have had--the
melting pot in the U.S. has never worked in Europe in the same
way. And so I would just encourage us not to view these two
situations as entirely analogous.
Of course, the situation in Syria, there is no doubt it is
horrendous, horrendous what has happened in Syria. And there
has to be a response from the international community. It is an
irresponsible response, I believe, to say that Europe should be
the home of millions of people, that it didn't have the chance
to vet and somehow if Europe doesn't do that, it is not living
up to its international commitment through somehow being
unreasonable. This is a very, very difficult situation for
Europe. Integration has been failing in Europe for some time.
So adding millions more people into the mix is--obviously, the
humanitarian impulse is there, but we can't wish away the
problems that that sort of thing can create. So I would just
encourage us all to be at least aware of that and not
necessarily think of this as being just like the U.S.
experience.
Ms. Vrbetic. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would agree that
the terror acts are committed by a small group of people, but
what we are really talking about is what is the fact. And the
fact on European societies and European politics has been
tremendous. And this is what we worry about. How Europe is
changing politically and the divisions within Europe and this
is not good for Europe. Russia is certainly going to exploit
us.
And also, I wanted to say what I started talking, I think
Dr. Hanson took it over, and this is really that the European
societies need to have more confidence and make demands on the
minorities, clear demands for integration, not for
assimilation, but for integration and for respect of the
liberal traditions and I think that would be also a big
contribution to where it is having more cohesive societies in
Europe and toward eliminating some of the problems we are
talking about here.
Mr. Alzayat. Clearly, this is a difficult issue. These
societies are dealing with really frustrating dynamics. We are
all humans and we hate change and we also don't like insecurity
and Europeans have had to deal with that.
The question is what is the best way to deal with it? And
my argument is really based on our own experience here in the
United States. Integration cannot be forced. When you try to
force it, you get some of that toxicity. People have to want to
be French, to want to be German, and most of them do. That is
what I am trying to point out. Actually, most of them do.
Ninety-four percent said they felt connected to the country.
Seventy-five percent are intermingling with other religions. So
I don't know about that whole statement that they are not doing
that. They are. These are the facts.
And how we approach the subject is extremely important
because half of the Muslim population in Europe is under the
age of 30. Forcing them will not work. It will not work.
Engaging them, investing and educating them and removing
institutional, discriminatory barriers that society,
particularly, the educational system, encouraging them to be
public servants, civil servants, diplomats, police officers,
soldiers of their new country, is one of the best ways. Or let
them do whatever they want. They don't have to be held to any
higher standard, but it is that freedom to express their
religiosity, as long as all of them support the tenets and the
principles of the Western European order, freedom, respect of
the individual, absolutely. It is what every human being
irrespective of their religion deserves.
And so I thank you for the opportunity today. You know, we
are not going to resolve this today, but anything that will
help people abroad and make us safe here, we are game for it,
so thank you for inviting us.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, I thank all of you and I will
reserve the final statement for the chairman, but I did
appreciate the lively discussions we had. Mr. Meeks and I are
very close friends, so don't think that because he gets excited
and I may get excited at times that we are anything but very
good friends and respect each other's opinion.
With that said, I think that as I say, the issues that are
at the heart of this discussion has something to do also with
how you value Western civilization and whether or not you
believe that the influx coming in from the Middle East that is
going into Europe today will in some way diminish Western
civilization's influence on humanity. And I have to say that I
think, I believe, that that is what is happening. No matter
what you can say about vetting and what may be the goals,
etcetera, that in the end what we will see is a diminishing of
the influence on humankind of what we call Western
civilization.
I think that to a degree that you have got nationalism at
play in Eastern Europe and elsewhere in Europe, it is that
these people and like the Pole, for example, who are
instrumental in defeating the Muslim advance into Europe and
stopped them at Vienna, that is something they are very proud
of there. And I can see where that is part of their framework,
they say. We will defend Western civilization. And that is
their nationalism, it is an expression of their nationals. And
it is probably true with the Hungarians. And it is probably
true with these other countries that we are talking about.
Whether or not this influx from, in a very trying situation,
where people desperately are trying to escape a war zone,
whether or not that is something that is more important to take
care of them than in other people's view than to preserve
Western civilization only if that does not in some way threaten
it. But I believe a lot of people do believe it is a threat and
do believe that there will be major impact on their way of
life. And I think that that is not an irrational thing,
although I think you have made a really good case today.
Seriously, you have done a really good job of presenting
thoughtful challenges to what I just said which is fine. That
is fine.
And I will say that I do not think nationalism is a bad
thing, but it can be a bad thing. Obviously, Adolph Hitler was
a bad guy, but to the degree of nationalism is used as it is in
the United States to say we are Americans and we believe in
this, we believe in freedom, that is different. It is a
different thing.
And if we have people who, it is not racial, but people who
come in that have another faith from what Western civilization
has done for the United States which has been predominantly a
Christian, Western-oriented population from early on. Yes, we
stole it from the Indians. I admit it. Okay. There is no doubt
about that. But by and large, the people who came to the United
States were Christians, who came here seeking freedom, but they
all weren't required, for example, where there were a lot of
Catholics around, they didn't outlaw the eating the meat on
Friday.
When I was younger, I remember that the Catholics didn't
eat meat on Friday. Now I understand that has been changed now,
but I remember that very well. At no time did Catholics
advocate that in their town that they not sell or eat meat on
Friday. There is something there that indicates that when you
are taking a poll and again, I wish I had a poll here to show
you, that indicates that those people who adamantly believe in
Islam are willing to say that other people should not have that
right to make their choices, I think that is why you saw these
beheadings, what happened in the Middle East.
In terms of the number of people who are suffering there, a
lot of it, you are right. It has nothing to do with Islam. It
has everything to do with power grabs by power mongers.
I will have to say this about Assad. I think he is no
better or worse than the other dictators there, whether they
call themselves kings or royal families or just the power
brokers or whatever title they have given themselves, when
someone challenges them, they slaughter the opposition. And
that is one thing that I think is not acceptable. But it also
may mean that we should not necessarily be jumping into that
whole can of worms and thinking that we are going to start
giving the orders and telling people how to solve the problem
because I think it is going to be a long time before that
problem is solved.
And with that said, I am sorry for going on. I just want to
thank all of you. I think there's been--we didn't come to any
conclusion, but I think this has been very provocative today.
So thank you and this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:56 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
Material Submitted for the Record
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Dana Rohrabacher, a
Representative in Congress from the State of California, and chairman,
Subcommittee on Europe, Eurasia, and Emerging Threats
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Dana Rohrabacher, a
Representative in Congress from the State of California, and chairman,
Subcommittee on Europe, Eurasia, and Emerging Threats
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Dana Rohrabacher, a
Representative in Congress from the State of California, and chairman,
Subcommittee on Europe, Eurasia, and Emerging Threats
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Note: The preceding document has not been printed here in full but may
be found at https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=108229
Material submitted for the record by Marta Vrbetic, Ph.D., global
fellow, Global Europe Program, Woodrow Wilson International Center for
Scholars
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]