- LEGISLATIVE BRANCH APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
[Senate Hearing 116-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
LEGISLATIVE BRANCH APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
----------
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 3, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 3:24 p.m., in room SD-124, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Cindy Hyde-Smith (Chairman)
presiding.
Present: Senators Hyde-Smith, Murphy, and Van Hollen.
UNITED STATES SENATE SERGEANT AT ARMS AND DOORKEEPER AND
UNITED STATES CAPITOL POLICE
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR CINDY HYDE-SMITH
Senator Hyde-Smith. Good afternoon. The subcommittee will
come to order.
I would like to welcome everyone here to our second fiscal
year 2020 budget hearing for the Legislative Branch
Appropriations Subcommittee. I apologize we are late getting
started. We had a vote on the floor. But hopefully everyone
will join me when they have an opportunity to run over here
like I did.
Today we have with us the Honorable Michael Stenger,
Sergeant at Arms of the Senate, and Matthew Verderosa, Chief of
the U.S. Capitol Police.
I appreciate your willingness to appear before the
subcommittee today, and I certainly look forward to your
testimony.
The vital services provided by both of your agencies enable
Members of Congress to do our jobs and maintain an open
democratic process. We appreciate what you and your teams do
every day to protect us, our staff, and the millions of people
who visit our Capitol each year.
Also, I'd like to thank you both for you taking the time to
meet with me before this hearing and letting me know a little
bit more about your agencies.
The total budget request for the Sergeant at Arms is $214.6
million. This represents an increase of $3.8 million, or 1.8
percent, above the fiscal year 2019 enacted level. This funding
level includes an increase for the Senate IT Help Desk
contract, continues the protection of our networks, and
provides for the services that support the day-to-day
operations of the Senate.
The Capitol Police request for fiscal year 2020 totals
$463.3 million, an increase of $7 million, or 1.5 percent,
above the fiscal year 2019 enacted level. This increase
supports an additional 57 sworn personnel to continue to meet
the needs of the Capitol Police Board's 5-year plan to cover
known vulnerabilities and mission expansion. It also covers
expenses associated with supporting the Republican and
Democratic National Conventions, which will be in 2020.
I look forward to our discussion today and learning more
about the requests from your agencies. And when Senator Murphy
gets here, we will certainly recognize him.
Okay, I am going to go ahead and get started, and if you
want to go ahead, we can start with you, as giving an opening
statement, the Honorable Michael Stenger.
STATEMENT OF THE HON. MICHAEL C. STENGER, SERGEANT AT
ARMS
ACCOMPANIED BY:
JENNIFER HEMINGWAY, DEPUTY SERGEANT AT ARMS
DICK ATTRIDGE, CHIEF OF STAFF
BRIAN MCGINTY, ASSISTANT SERGEANT AT ARMS, OFFICE OF SECURITY
AND EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
JOHN JEWELL, ASSISTANT SERGEANT AT ARMS, CHIEF INFORMATION
OFFICER
KRISTA BEAL, ASSISTANT SERGEANT AT ARMS, CAPITOL OPERATIONS
MIKE CHANDLER, ASSISTANT SERGEANT AT ARMS, OPERATIONS
TERENCE LILEY, GENERAL COUNSEL
ROBIN GALLANT, CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
KATRINA SIMS, EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT
Mr. Stenger. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman, Ranking Member Murphy, and distinguished Members
of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you today and present the Sergeant at Arms 2020 budget
request. I ask that my formal testimony be submitted for the
record.
The budget request reflects a modest increase of 1.8
percent over the fiscal year 2019 enacted budget. We continue
to remain good stewards of the funds entrusted to us by
providing oversight and management, and, most importantly,
focusing our resources on the operational needs of the Senate.
Safety and security of the Senators, their staff, and
visitors, both here and abroad, and ensuring the legislative
process goes unimpeded remains our top priority. I can provide
this support because of the talented leadership I have behind
me: Jennifer Hemingway, my Deputy; Dick Attridge, my Chief of
Staff; my Assistant Sergeant at Arms, Brian McGinty; John
Jewell; Krista Beal, and Mike Chandler. On my executive staff,
I have with me today: Terence Liley, my General Counsel; Robin
Gallant, my Chief Financial Officer; and Katrina Sims, my
Executive Assistant.
Preparing for emergencies and protecting the Senators and
their staff remains the primary mission of my Security and
Emergency Preparedness Directorate. Through exercises and
drills, we continue to train Senate staff on threats and how to
react to them. My request provides us with the funds necessary
to continue with this mission. It will further allow us to
connect the Joint Emergency Mass Notification System with the
new digital signage throughout the Senate buildings.
My Intelligence and Protective Services maintains
collaborative partnerships with the United States Capitol
Police and the many law enforcement and intelligence agencies.
These partnerships have proven to enhance our situational
awareness with the Senate community, particularly during
significant events and activities at the Capitol and State
office locations.
My budget request affords the necessary funding to plan for
these events, such as the upcoming Republican and Democratic
National Conventions and planning for the fiscal year 2021
Presidential Inauguration.
We recently created the Office of Member Outreach and
Security Coordination to work closely with the Capitol Police
to implement security initiatives and provide ongoing guidance
to Members and their staff when planning and attending events.
We will continue developing this office to ensure the Senators
and their staff have the most current information on issues,
such as threat level, specific areas of concern, and local law
enforcement contact information.
Cybersecurity threats remain a significant risk for the
Senate. In 2016, we developed a cybersecurity awareness program
to provide real-time actionable information to users. We will
continue developing and refining assessments for offices
following industry and government's best practices to mitigate
risk.
We have collaborated with academia, including Virginia
Tech, Harvard, and Carnegie Mellon University. We intend to
expand our partnership in protection approach through expanded
collaboration with Northern Virginia Community College, the
University of Maryland, George Mason University, and George
Washington University. Further, we plan to continue awareness
sessions with the offices.
We have consolidated all State office support providing
State offices one point of contact for assistance. The State
Office Support Program provides staff training to the State
offices on topics such as ``Responding to an Active Shooter''
and ``Stop the Bleed.'' Our budget supports continuation of
these efforts.
Developing and implementing a hybrid cloud strategy remains
another key goal. Such strategy will allow us to move
appropriate applications to the cloud after analyzing data
protections. We are recompeting the support contract for the IT
Help Desk to provide the Senate community with more highly
trained technicians and improved responsiveness. We are in
partnership with the Secretary of the Senate on a multiyear
project to modernize the financial management information
system. The first three modules are scheduled for initial
implementation this year, which will allow for the retirement
of the legacy system.
A number of day-to-day support operations ensures the
Senate can conduct business in a safe environment. For example,
mail security and postal handling serves a critical safety
function for the Senate. Our chamber operations, recording
studio, and media galleries support the ability for Senators to
communicate with their constituents and help ensure
transparency in the legislative process.
To conclude, the Sergeant at Arms proudly serves the Senate
with an array of departments that supports the legislative
process. The fiscal year 2020 budget request enables us to
continue to provide solid security and logistical support,
posturing us to plan for requirements in future years.
We look forward to working closely with you and the
subcommittee staff and thank you for your continued support.
This concludes my opening remarks. I will be happy to
answer any questions. Thank you.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Michael C. Stenger
Chairman Hyde-Smith, Ranking Member Murphy, distinguished Members
of the subcommittee; I appreciate the opportunity to testify in support
of the Sergeant at Arms' budget request for fiscal year 2020.
The SAA respectfully requests $214.6 million in appropriated funds;
a 1.8 percent increase from the fiscal year 2019 enacted level. This
level of funding supports our continued focus on the safety and
security of Senators while providing a range of technical and
administrative services. Our requested increase will allow us to make
needed investments in our information technology infrastructure and
support our 920 full-time equivalents.
As I begin my second year as Sergeant at Arms, I am pleased to
share, with your continued support, how we have made steady progress in
meeting our mission.
emergency preparedness
We continue to educate, train, and exercise emergency plans and
procedures to ensure Members and staff are equipped with the necessary
knowledge, skills, and tools to prepare for, mitigate, respond to, and
recover from a variety of emergencies. Using guidelines from the
Congressional Accountability Act, we worked with Senate offices to
update 115 Emergency Action Plans during fiscal year 2018 that provide
detailed evacuation routes and elevator locations for the mobility-
impaired. Further, we assisted 25 offices with drafting their
continuity of operations plans strengthening the Senate's ability to
continue performing its essential functions during and after disruptive
events. We also supplied and maintained emergency supply kits,
annunciators, and escape hoods, offering personalized preparedness,
alert notification, accountability, and equipment training. We
distributed guides informing staff on how to respond to threatening
situations, protestors, and other emergencies. With infants and
children now visiting in the Senate Chamber, we added baby escape hoods
and coordinated with the Architect of the Capitol (AOC) to have infant
chest pads included with Chamber Automated External Defibrillators.
Readiness and protection of Members, staff, and visitors remains
our primary focus. Working with the United States Capitol Police
(USCP), we conducted over 30 annual evacuations, shelter in place and
internal relocation drills, as well as the first offsite Chamber
exercise allowing staff to observe and participate in realistic
emergency scenarios and gain an appreciation of law enforcement
responses. Further, we trained more than 3,000 staff on essential
topics, including protective actions, emergency action planning, and
ALERTS/Remote Check-In procedures. The Responding to an Active Shooter
class, which is taught with USCP, remains our most popular course on
how to react and what to expect from law enforcement. For fiscal year
2019 and fiscal year 2020, we plan to host Preparedness Fairs and
invite response organizations during the September recess. This fair
teaches staff about the services local emergency response organizations
provide. Being prepared for emergencies at work and at home ensures a
resilient work force. During protests and medical emergencies, the SAA
uses a Mapping Tool that allows us to view Senate office building
floorplans, identify room ownership, and gather contact information for
impacted offices. We plan to expand this tool to create an `incident'
view, allowing us to observe data from multiple floorplans and
buildings over an extended period. We also plan to analyze the Senate
Emergency Operations Centers (SOCs) to update and standardize
capabilities, replacing outdated equipment and developing a mobile SOC
capability to support emergencies when building access is denied.
During fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019, we expanded the Joint
Emergency Mass Notification System (JEMNS) to support the Library of
Congress (LOC) and Congressional Research Service, and finalized
unification of the mass notification systems throughout the Capitol
complex. For fiscal year 2020, we plan to connect JEMNS with new
digital signage throughout Senate buildings. Additionally, we are
piloting a program with the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
to install an alert beacon in their hearing room that JEMNS will
trigger. This beacon will provide a silent visual notification to the
Chief Clerk who can determine a response to the emergency message. We
are also leading the Joint Audible Warning System project to replace
the outdated annunciator system and better protect life and safety with
a target implementation date of fiscal year 2020. In fiscal year 2018,
we led an effort to activate the first Joint Legislative Branch Call
Center Plan to handle large call volumes during a mass casualty event.
Our fiscal year 2020 budget request includes funds to develop the core
services and capabilities of a Family Assistance Center.
We are also finalizing the modernization of an outdated radio
system. These radios rely on a system of radio towers and repeaters
that we maintain instead of commercial cell tower systems. We continue
to collaborating with the House, USCP, AOC, and LOC to update, manage,
and exercise joint communications plans and procedures for various
additional communications devices. We are also working with the
executive branch and other partners to continue to expand priority and
preemption cellular services to select Senate users during highly
congested events.
security planning and police operations
In coordination with USCP, we provide security and law enforcement
support for the Senate community. This year's efforts included: (1)
coordinating 1,227 Senate campus access requests; (2) working with the
Committee on Rules and Administration and USCP to identify and publish
numerous door and barricade restrictions during recess periods, special
events, and holidays; and (3) representing the Senate on a joint
Senate, House, USCP, and AOC campus security-working group.
Additionally, we coordinated security coverage for 411 committee
hearings and more than 50 Member-specific security requests.
My office provides real-time situational awareness through USCP
Command Center support. Our staff are on duty all hours the Senate is
in session and throughout normal business hours during periods of
recess to allow for communications between my office, USCP, and the
Senate community throughout routine operations, special events, and
emergencies. Approximately 648 security events, a 74 percent increase
over the previous year, were monitored through this program last year.
My staff also provided security oversight and coverage during the State
of the Union address, summer concert series, and demonstration
activities in Senate office buildings.
In fiscal year 2020, we expect an increase in Member specific
requests. My office stands ready to assist Member offices with
coordinating security and law enforcement needs in either capacity.
intelligence and protective services
We recognize the value of maintaining collaborative partnerships
with various Federal, State, and local law enforcement, intelligence,
and force protection entities to synchronize information, identify
security risks, monitor threat streams, and maintain situational
awareness to ensure appropriate mitigation and prevention strategies
are deployed to protect the safety and security of the Senate,
domestically and abroad. Expanding social media platforms and the
availability of open source materials allow individuals to spread
malicious intents and activities to a large audience. We proactively
research and analyze such material and engage with community partners
and subject matter experts to maintain security-related situational
awareness and identify threat data against Members, their families, and
staff. We discovered approximately 130 comments of concern, which we
referred to USCP resulting in 24 criminal threat violations, a 33
percent increase over the previous year. For fiscal year 2020, we
anticipate social media awareness as well as threat discoveries to
increase as social media platforms become a prominent communication
method and open source intelligence technology develops further.
We collaborate with USCP and other law enforcement agencies to
ensure appropriate notification and communication with specifically
targeted Members and staff while continuously monitoring, evaluating,
and conducting vulnerability, risk, and threat assessments to determine
and apply suitable security measures and protective operations
coverage. Additionally, we provide situational awareness for the Senate
community regarding significant upcoming events or planned activities
in and around the Capitol complex and State offices, which may
adversely affect Senate business. Finally, we collaborate with USCP and
other agencies to support contingencies; oversee security operations;
and perform incident management and response action planning for major
events including Inauguration, State of the Union, Senatorial retreats,
National Conventions, televised concerts, joint sessions of Congress,
and other high profile National Special Security Events such as the
Lying In State or In Honor of a government official in the U.S. Capitol
Rotunda. Key events we will support in fiscal year 2020 are the
Republican and Democratic National Conventions and the 2021
Presidential Inauguration.
office of member outreach and security coordination
We created the Office of Member Outreach and Security Coordination
to collaborate with USCP and implement several security initiatives,
law enforcement outreach efforts, and protective services objectives to
ensure Members and their staff receive the necessary guidance, tools,
and support when planning and attending national public events. Weekly
emails to Administrative Managers, Chief Clerks, and Schedulers offer
simple methods for requesting law enforcement coordination and security
assessments to mitigate concerns at public events with Members in
attendance. We provide offices with a final product highlighting the
overall threat level, specific areas of concern, and local law
enforcement contact information. This extensive outreach initiative has
led to almost 218 Law Enforcement Coordination and Assessment requests,
a 187 percent increase over the previous year, and we anticipate a
similar activity level for 2020.
id office
We partnered with multiple Senate divisions to manage ID badge
requests. Almost 12,000 new and updated Congressional and Press IDs
were issued during fiscal year 2018. We anticipate our fiscal year 2020
volume to be consistent with this requirement. In coordination with the
Chief Information Officer, we intend to support various capabilities as
outlined in the Homeland Security Presidential Directive (HSPD) 12,
including email encryption, two-factor authentication, and secure
remote network access throughout fiscal year 2019 and fiscal year 2020.
We recently updated our badging software to meet National Institute of
Science and Technology standards, which are considered best practices,
and will proceed with upgrading badge production hardware to support
the growing demand for Smart Cards and proximity-based IDs.
parking operations
Parking Operations continues to plan for staff vehicle needs during
ongoing renovations throughout the Capitol complex. Long-term
construction projects such as the Russell Senate Office Building's
exterior rehabilitation will continue to affect various permit holders
over the next 4 years. In collaboration with the AOC, we remain
committed on limiting disruptions during the Thurgood Marshall
Judiciary Office Building garage renovation. During fiscal year 2020,
we will upgrade the permit management application process to streamline
enforcement, enhance collection efforts, improve accuracy and deliver
real-time updates from field Parking Specialists.
cybersecurity response
We are in the fourth year of transforming cybersecurity from a
reactive to proactive program defending the Senate. In the fiscal year
2018 budget, the Appropriations Committee authorized 56 contractor to
FTE conversions. As of February 28, 2019, we on boarded 49 FTEs and
expect to have all 56 on board by September 2019. We developed a
Cybersecurity Awareness Program to provide real-time, actionable
information to users. This 3-pronged Partnership in Protection approach
focuses on continued awareness sessions to offices, expanded academic
collaboration, and completed rollout of a commercial cybersecurity
training platform. The result was the completion of 50 Cybersecurity
Awareness sessions to member offices, available to both D.C. and State
staff, committees and support agencies. To add, 100 percent of all
Senate staff completed training on cybersecurity principles using the
commercial training platform and to assess the effectiveness of
training, we continue to perform phishing tests against users. We will
continue providing this training throughout fiscal year 2020 and update
it based on adversarial threats.
In fiscal year 2020, we intend to develop a methodology to perform
advanced resiliency assessments for offices. These assessments--to
include coordinated penetration tests, vulnerability assessments and
advanced phishing assessments--will follow industry and Federal
guidelines to determine the level of cybersecurity risk for Senate
offices and provide suggested actions to mitigate risk.
cio security enhancements
We continue to work closely with offices on multi-factor
authentication (MFA) to enhance the security of Senate IT
infrastructure. With the help of input from Senate offices, we procured
an MFA solution in November 2018. In fiscal year 2019, we integrated
the MFA solution with our Privileged Access Management (PAM) and
Virtual Private Network (VPN) solutions and started piloting its use
with these services in the SAA and with several offices. The pilot will
run through May. Provided the pilot meets our expectations, we will
expand enrollment to all Senate offices, completing deployment in
fiscal year 2020.
To address the ongoing need for increased security of highly
privileged accounts, we expanded enrollment into PAM to include the
accounts used to administer offices' Constituent Services Systems
(CSS). PAM significantly increases the security posture of Senate
information systems, protecting the most sensitive data by limiting
exposure of privileged credentials and protecting access to those
credentials with two-factor authentication. In March, we will begin
offering PAM pilots to interested Senate Offices; we expect PAM to be a
standard offering in fiscal year 2020.
The Identity and Access Management (IAM) program will enhance data
security by centralizing the on-boarding, identity maintenance, access,
and de-provisioning of identities requiring access to applicable Senate
systems. IAM implementation is underway with planned deployment during
August 2019 through 2020. With the increased adoption of cloud services
across the IT landscape, this program can extend access and identity
governance beyond the local on-premises systems to provide the same
security to the cloud and support our increasingly mobile workforce.
enterprise and network services
Developing a hybrid cloud strategy remains a key goal during fiscal
year 2019 and fiscal year 2020. We remain focused on a cloud strategy
centered on moving appropriate software applications to cloud service
after careful analysis of data protections. During fiscal year 2020, we
will continue to evaluate bandwidth available to State offices and
upgrade as necessary to support emerging technologies such as improved
video conferencing capabilities between D.C. and a State office. We
will also evaluate the feasibility of relocating the Alternate Data
Center. Further, we will continue to replace, upgrade and modernize our
infrastructure and products for some of our core offerings such as
Internet protocol television, Domain Name Service/Dynamic Host
Configuration Protocol, and VPN services. We have begun offering a full
suite of virtualized solutions with the CSS being the most recent
example. Which includes disaster recovery, enterprise backup and high
availability.
The CIO supports the IT portion of our Continuity of Operations
programs through a variety of IT-related functions. In September 2018,
we awarded a contract and started executing a significant radio
infrastructure project, permitting the Sergeant at Arms to communicate
with multi-agency interactions on encrypted equipment during exercises
and real-world events. The support includes our Mobile Communication
Vehicles, network and phone communications for Alternate Chamber
Operations, Leadership Coordination Centers, Emergency Operations
Centers, and Briefing Centers. We provide secure communication support
to Senate offices and committees as required. The fiscal year 2020
budget is postured to maintain this program.
enterprise and system development services
We continue to support the Secretary of the Senate on implementing
a modernized Financial Management Information System. Three new
financial modules are scheduled for initial implementation this year,
with the remainder planned for completion in fiscal year 2020 and
fiscal year 2021. In an effort to modernize the legacy voucher signing
application, we worked with the Secretary of the Senate to evaluate and
deploy a new digital and electronic signature platform. This platform
now supports the digital signing of Senate purchase card statements and
vouchers. For fiscal year 2019 and fiscal year 2020, we will work with
our customers to expand an electronic signature capability, thereby
reducing manual efforts and streamlining business processes.
Working with Senate office staff, content providers and our
colleagues in the office of the Secretary of the Senate, we
collaborated to redesign and redevelop Webster, replacing the content
management system; developing a new, more responsive services
directory; and improving the user interface to expose valuable
information more readily.
it support communications
In fiscal year 2018, the SAA began expansion of the digital signage
system to approximately 60 locations within the Hart, Dirksen and
Russell buildings, with 54 new locations added over the next 5 years.
The expanded digital signage system will display graphical wayfinding
information and emergency notifications in addition to existing
directory information and hearing schedules.
The multi-year effort to upgrade and modernize the State office
telephony infrastructure for all 470-plus State offices is underway and
the first 50 offices have been completed. We expect to complete an
additional 145 offices in fiscal year 2019 and approximately 220 in
fiscal year 2020. It will provide each State office with new hardware,
increased flexibility, a feature-rich voicemail platform, and
additional security at a lower cost.
We are currently evaluating the legacy telephone system for the
Capitol and Senate buildings and plan to upgrade it, as well as the
adjunct systems. This Unified Communications and Collaboration (UCC)
platform will upgrade existing Voice Over IP telephone switch and
associated subsystems, including, but not limited to, voice mail,
instant messaging, contact center, integrated voice response systems,
audio/video conferencing, and any other collaboration tools that
support Senate offices. We have issued a Request for Proposal for
subject matter experts to assist in requirements development and design
for a new UCC platform and expect responses in mid-April. Our fiscal
year 2020 budget requests reflects our estimated increase for this
upgrade.
The IT Help Desk addressed approximately 11,000 questions from
Senate users annually in D.C. and State offices, taking trouble reports
and coordinating the activities of the technicians who respond to and
resolve the problems by phone, online and in person. In addition, the
installation team completed more than 6,600 installation projects over
the past 12 months. Since December 2017, we have coordinated the
procurement efforts for the recompete to this contract scheduled to
begin in fiscal year 2020. Based on lessons learned and user input, we
have adjusted the deliverables to provide the Senate community with
more responsive service from more highly trained technicians. The focus
for the new contract includes: introducing more stringent Service Level
Agreements with the vendor to increase customer satisfaction and adding
Service Level Objectives to the performance based work statement to
better measure success. The fiscal year 2020 budget supports this
planned improvement, which will assist Senators and staff in meeting
their responsibilities.
contingency programs
We aim to improve continuity capabilities in the event of
relocation, and we manage contingency planning efforts, to include the
Senate's ability to operate an Alternate Chamber. Operational plans are
developed and refined under the direction of the Joint Congressional
Continuity Board and with the executive branch to sustain a common
approach to continuity preparedness. We undertook several new
classified planning initiatives in fiscal year 2018, which required
comprehensive coordination. SAA staff facilitated open and constructive
working relationships with critical partners and made significant
progress on development of capabilities to ensure execution of our
essential functions with minimal investment. This will ensure
constitutional functions continue unimpeded during a contingency event.
Our comprehensive exercise program underwent a transition in fiscal
year 2018, resulting in a program focused specifically on continuity.
The continuity exercise program conducted over 14 exercises, tests, and
guided discussions. One example during fiscal year 2019 included the
successful execution of a Mobile Capabilities Exercise with joint
continuity partners such as the Secretary of the Senate, Party
Secretaries, House, Architect of the Capitol, Government Publishing
Office, and U.S. Capitol Police. This was a full-scale exercise
conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of emergency plans that govern
activities during a contingency event impacting the Senate Chamber.
Exercise planners provided an objective, independent analysis of our
programs and assisted in the validation and improvement of actionable
plans by identifying strengths, improvement areas, and lessons learned.
This approach continues to ensure we meet program goals in a manner
that benefits all Senate and partner organizations. In fiscal year
2020, continuity staff anticipate exercising multiple classified
programs as well as an exercise of the Senate Alternate Chamber in SH-
216. This full-scale exercise will test the ability of the Senate to
set up and operate an alternate Senate Chamber and select support
offices in SH-216. Major components of this exercise will include an
examination of the U.S. Senate Alternate Chamber Plan and the
establishment of Chamber equipment, furnishings, broadcast, and
connectivity to the Senate network.
printing, graphics and direct mail
We provide support to the Senate community through graphic design,
printing, photocopying, mailing, document preservation, logistics, and
secure offsite transfer of Senate material. As good stewards of fiscal
resources, we reduced equipment maintenance costs by approximately
$125,000 through contract negotiation, saving more than $1,200,000 by
locally producing charts for Senate floor proceedings and committee
hearings, and reducing postage by more than $1,000,000 by pre-sorting
and discounting 4.5 million pieces of outgoing Senate franked mail.
We continue to refresh and expand our hardware, software, and
production equipment to maintain and enhance the products and services
rendered to the Senate community. Through software updates and enhanced
training, we will continue to provide more integral communication
opportunities by using digital technology to create both print and
digital solutions for Senate offices throughout fiscal year 2019 and
into fiscal year 2020. We also expanded our graphic design consultation
service, first offered to the Senate community in fiscal year 2018. Our
talented graphic designers are available to provide creative and
technical expertise, and have held over 170 consultations since
inception in January 2018. Our fiscal year 2020 budget request will
allow us to provide a similar level of support as well as upgrade
existing infrastructure by replacing outdated lighting in the portrait
studio and continue to monitor technological advances in image capture
and production, with a specific focus on silent cameras.
senate post office
We test and deliver mail and packages to more than 180 locations
within the Capitol complex, while providing a messenger service to
multiple locations throughout the Washington metropolitan area. In
fiscal year 2018, our office safely processed and delivered more than
8.7 million incoming mail items while intercepting 156 suspicious
mailings that required an immediate response by the USCP. We prevented
delivery of an additional 720 mailings bearing characteristics with the
intent to disrupt Senate business and requiring further scrutiny by
USCP.
Our office began replacing older Postal Sentry mail-screening
workstations with the smaller Sentry Air System workstations in 2016.
In fiscal year 2020 we intend to purchase additional mail screening
workstations to ensure availability of the most current equipment for
all State staff. Providing mail safety and security training for both
D.C. and State offices remains vital to ensuring all Senate staff know
how to respond to potentially dangerous situations. We offer the
training through the web (static video), VTC, and webinars and
accomplish it in coordination with our State Office Programs Group.
capitol facilities
We support the work of the Senate by providing a clean,
professional environment in the Capitol. Our Environmental Services
Division cleans Capitol offices, hallways, and restrooms; moves
furniture for offices; and provides special event setups for 15 meeting
rooms in the Capitol and the Senate expansion space in the Capitol
Visitor Center. The Furnishings Division provides furnishings,
including stock and custom furniture, carpeting, and window treatments,
to Capitol offices. They also provide framing services for Senate
offices and committees. Their focus continues on realizing cost savings
and improved efficiency, while maintaining the same level of service.
Capitol Facilities ensures the highest level of service while the
Senate is in session and has established standard operating procedures.
Throughout fiscal year 2019 and into fiscal year 2020, we will focus on
improving equipment to maximize safety and efficiency, and undergo
upgrades to the online work order system that notifies staff of new
work orders and tracks workloads.
support services
Transportation and Fleet Operations
We procure, manage, and maintain Senate vehicles; operate the
Senate Daily Shuttle service; and provide the Senate with emergency
transportation and logistics support. The fleet includes trucks, vans,
buses, SUVs, electric vehicles, handicapped-accessible vehicles, and
Segways. In fiscal year 2018, staff transported more than 21,000
passengers through the SAA Shuttle Service and our fiscal year 2019
budget and fiscal year 2020 request have us postured to provide the
same level of support.
Photography Studio
We provide photo-imaging services for Senate offices and
committees. Our studio manages and maintains the Photo Browser
application that provides Senate offices a secure, accessible archive
to all photos accumulated during a Senator's term in office. Currently,
the Photo Browser system contains more than 1.5 million photo image
files. In fiscal year 2018, our staff photographed more than 110,000
images, produced more than 59,000 photo prints, and coordinated
scanning for end of term archiving of more than 89,000 photo images for
Senators leaving office. We are able to provide the same level of
service in fiscal year 2020 as we did in fiscal year 2019 without any
additional increase.
state office operations
We established State Office Operations in fiscal year 2018 to
consolidate and streamline State office support functions. We execute
all leasing, tenant improvement, project management, security, and
emergency preparedness functions for over 470 Federal, commercial, and
mobile Senate State offices across the United States. Our staff works
closely with commercial landlords, the General Services Administration,
and the Federal Protective Service to ensure Members' operational and
security needs are met in their State offices. In 2018, we completed 87
relocation and renovation projects, coordinating construction,
furniture, equipment, and delivery of IT services. We expect this
number to double in 2019, as the team works to support new Members and
all commercial lease renewals for the 116th Congress. In fiscal year
2020, our State office support will continue, focusing mainly on moving
new Members into permanent space and supporting off-cycle renovations.
We remain committed to ensuring the safety of Members and staff,
and continue to provide customized security systems, monitoring
services, and enhanced office security construction designs to State
offices without affecting Member office budgets. In 2018, we provided
physical security enhancements to 24 new State offices, as well as
enhanced security in 31 existing offices. Throughout fiscal year 2020,
those numbers are expected to increase as we move new Members into
permanent State offices and outfit each location with our recommended
suite of security enhancements.
Emergency preparedness training and familiarity with security
equipment equates to higher levels of compliance and readiness. In
2018, we trained more than 100 Office Emergency Coordinators, staff,
and interns through 26 webinars, and provided security awareness
briefings and active shooter training to 142 staff members at State
offices. Our focus on readiness and training will continue through
2020. We have worked closely with U.S. Capitol Police to update our
security awareness and emergency preparedness curriculum and have
planned for a 100 percent increase in the travel in order to provide
on-site training in State offices. We will also continue supporting the
requirement for State offices to comply with the Congressional
Accountability Act: assisting them with the development of recommended
emergency action and continuity of operations plans.
senate recording studio
In 2018, we provided 1,536 hours of gavel-to-gavel coverage of
Senate floor proceedings, including live streaming and archiving of the
proceedings on the Senate's website, www.senate.gov. We also coordinate
with other government agencies, such as the Voice of America and the
Department of State, to provide hearings to a larger audience. Further,
we enable Senators working in D.C. to communicate with their
constituents and news outlets back home. In 2018, the Studio produced
1,635 television productions, an increase of over 57 percent from the
previous year, and 1,088 radio productions. Throughout fiscal year 2019
and into fiscal year 2020, we have been systematically replacing the
technical plant within the Recording Studio. Moreover, we are
establishing a 30-year planning and programming document that will meet
the audio/visual replacement needs for committee hearing rooms as well
as other key meeting rooms within the Capitol complex.
periodical press gallery
The Senate Periodical Press Gallery serves the needs of accredited
news reporters for magazines, newsletters, non-daily newspapers and
online publications. Serving as a liaison between reporters, Senate
officials, and law enforcement remains our primary responsibility.
Media presence on Capitol Hill has increased dramatically over the past
few years. Our staff helps maintain crowd control in the Senate subway
and the Ohio Clock Corridor during votes and party caucus meetings. We
also coordinate press coverage of hearings, news conferences,
stakeouts, and other media events in the Capitol and Senate office
buildings. In addition, we review new press applications in
consultation with the Executive Committee of Periodical Correspondents;
renew approximately 1,000 press credentials each year; and maintain
daily Senate floor logs on the Senate Periodical Press Gallery website
(www.periodicalpress.senate.gov), which tracks legislative activity,
votes, and schedule updates. Reporters and Senate staff are also kept
informed about Senate legislative activity on the Gallery's Twitter
account (@Senate PPG), which grew over 20 percent in 2018 to 8,900
followers. Our 2020 budget request will allow us to continue providing
the same level of service.
daily press gallery
We issue approximately 1,600 credentials to journalists each year.
As custodians of the largest press complex on Capitol Hill, we serve
more than 100 reporters who work in the Press Gallery on a regular
basis. Further, we control access to the Press Gallery inside the
Senate Chamber, ensure gallery rules are followed, and coordinate with
Senate committees on press coverage for hearings and other events
around Capitol Hill. Our staff remains focused on modernizing services,
streamlining the online credentialing process, and maintaining real
time website updates on Senate floor proceedings and notifications to
Senate staff and reporters via email and Twitter (@SenatePress).
press photographers gallery
Our 2020 budget request allows us to continue to provide support to
press photographers and representing news organizations from across the
United States and around the world serves as our primary duty to
ensuring a liaison between news photographers and Congress. Since the
House of Representatives does not have their own press Photographers
Gallery, our staff supports the press photographers and Congressional
staff at House news events and hearings. We support press logistics at
many high profile hearings and events and coordinate with other SAA
offices, the U.S. Capitol Police, and Senate and House offices to
ensure press photographers have access without interfering with the
duties of the Congress. Equally important is our coordination of the
press logistic plans for continuity of government.
radio and television gallery
Our staff serves as the Senate's primary contact to the broadcast
news, ensuring the Senate's broadcast coverage rules are followed. We
function as liaison between Senate offices and the broadcast media. We
issue approximately 3,500 credentials each year to television and radio
reporters, producers, and technical personnel. We also maintain the
studio and technical infrastructure Senators use for news conferences.
In an effort to ensure live coverage capability, our staff conducts an
extensive connectivity maintenance program, to include the fiber optic
cabling throughout the Senate office buildings.
senate doorkeepers
As Doorkeepers, we provide access to those with Senate floor
privileges; enforce the rules of the Senate floor; and facilitate the
needs of Senators, Senate floor staff, and Senate Pages. We provide
support for a number of special events attended by Senators, their
families, and special guests. Moreover, we process approximately
200,000 visitors from around the world each year and ensure they can
visit the Senate Galleries safely. In keeping with safety, we also
undertake emergency preparedness roles balancing access and safety in
the Senate.
senate appointment desk
At the Senate Appointment Desk, we safely and efficiently process
thousands of Senate guests each year for business meetings or other
purposes. During fiscal year 2018, we processed approximately 230,000
visitors through our network of Appointment Desks located on the first
floor of the Capitol, in the basements of the Russell and Hart Senate
office buildings, and in the Capitol Visitor Center. Of these, more
than 108,000 visitors were in the Capitol complex for official business
or for a meeting with a Member, a Member's office, or a committee. In
addition, more than 29,000 international visitors relied on the CVC
Appointment Desk for Senate Gallery Passes and information.
human resources
Our office provides personnel services and advice to SAA managers
and employees. In addition, we provide workers' compensation, ergonomic
assessments, Americans with Disabilities Act accommodation requests,
and recruitment services to the broader Senate community. During fiscal
year 2018, the Senate Placement Office received 631 requests for
recruitment assistance from Senate offices and processed 28,505 resumes
from applicants seeking Senate employment.
Our fiscal year 2020 budget justification requests a small increase
to support the transit subsidy program for our employees. Further,
throughout fiscal year 2019 and fiscal year 2020, we remain committed
to work in concert with the Secretary of the Senate to streamline our
human resource efforts to leverage the efficiencies offered by
improvements to the HR information system.
joint office for training and development
As the Joint Office for Training and Development, we provide
training to all Senate staff so they have the resources and skills
needed to perform their jobs. We average about 3,000 attendees for in-
person classes and over 1,500 attendees for online courses annually. We
facilitate conferences for State office staff, and provide customized
training, facilitation services, and coaching to Member, committee, and
support offices averaging, about 1,800 attendees each year. During
fiscal year 2019, we will upgrade our online training and webinar
software, validate the skills needed by Member and committee office
staff, and continue to increase the library of online lessons created
in-house.
The mandated Health Promotion section provides health promotion
activities and events for the Senate community. Each year, this section
coordinates and hosts the 2-day Wellness Fair, which averages about
2,000 participants in health promotion activities, including screenings
for glucose, cholesterol, and blood pressure; exercise demonstrations;
and seminars on topics, including healthy eating and cancer prevention.
As of fiscal year 2018, we coordinated with the American College of
Surgeons and the Stop the Bleed Coalition to provide bleeding control
training for D.C. Senate staff. This lifesaving training started in
fiscal year 2018 and will continue quarterly. Our fiscal year 2020
budget postures us to continue providing needed education and training
for the entire Senate.
employee assistance program
Our Employee Assistance Program (EAP) offers a variety of
emotional, behavioral and work-related support resources and services
to staff, their family members, Senate Pages, and interns. In 2018,
nearly 1 in 13 Senate employees used the services of an EAP counselor--
an increase of 15 percent over the previous year and a 52 percent
increase in hours spent in direct service to Senate Staff. Further, 245
employees took an online mental health screening, 45 managers requested
a supervisory consultation; 2,355 employees attended an EAP training
activity; and 1,951 employees accessed resources for personalized
information and referrals addressing childcare, parenting, adult care,
aging, education, legal concerns, and/or financial issues. Because of
the increase in Senate use of the EAP, we moved one FTE from another
source during fiscal year 2019 to ensure the EAP was staffed to best
support the Senate. We believe the fiscal year 2020 budget and FTE
count will continue to provide the same high level of support to the
Senate.
conclusion
I want to thank you for your bipartisan support to the SAA. The
fiscal year 2020 Sergeant at Arms' budget request provides sufficient
funding to maintain a focus on continual improvements to the security
and support of the institution while remaining good stewards of
taxpayer dollars. We will work closely with you to ensure we meet your
needs in a timely and efficient manner.
Senator Hyde-Smith. Thank you very much.
Chief.
STATEMENT OF HON. CHIEF MATTHEW R. VERDEROSA
ACCOMPANIED BY:
STEVEN SUND, CHIEF OF OPERATIONS/ASSISTANT CHIEF
RICHARD BRADDOCK, CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER
GRETCHEN DEMAR, GENERAL COUNSEL
MICHAEL BOLTON, INSPECTOR GENERAL
GUS PAPATHANASIOU, FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE CHAIRMAN
Mr. Verderosa. Thank you and good afternoon, Chairman Hyde-
Smith, Senator Murphy, and Members of the subcommittee. Thank
you for the opportunity to present the Department's fiscal year
budget for 2020. Our collaboration with the subcommittee and
the Capitol Police Board has been key in our success in
achieving our mission. I greatly appreciate the support that
you all have given the Department and for your inherent
understanding of our multifaceted mission to keep the Congress
and the Capitol Complex safe and secure.
I am joined here today by my Chief of Operations, Assistant
Chief Steven Sund, Chief Administrative Officer Richard
Braddock, and my general counsel, Gretchen DeMar, as well as
members of my Executive Management Team. I am also joined here
today by Inspector General Michael Bolton, and USCP Fraternal
Order of Police Chairman Gus Papathanasiou.
Our overall mission is clear: to maintain the level of
protection necessary to balance access and security so that the
Congress can fulfill its constitutional responsibilities. Over
the past year, our officers have screened 11.2 million
individuals at building entrances and interior checkpoints;
we've managed an ever-increasing number of demonstrations which
are approved for specific outdoor demonstration areas; we have
secured and supported two Lying in State ceremonies and a Lying
in Honor ceremony; and we managed responses to numerous
instances of prohibited civil disobedience occurring across the
Capitol Complex. In addition, we investigated numerous credible
threats against Members of Congress.
Last October, our Hazardous Devices Team safely contained a
pipe bomb at the Congressional Mail Facility, one of 16 that
were sent to elected officials and public figures across the
country. The suspect was linked to several of the devices by
evidence obtained from the package sent to Capitol Hill. Our
work contributed to the identification of a suspect, which
assisted the FBI in apprehending him within days.
As law enforcement officers, we do not know what we may
face each day. We train and prepare so that we can respond to
any threat because lives depend on us. Our daily reality is
that the Capitol Complex remains an attractive target to
foreign and domestic terrorists. Each and every day we assess
all potential risks and adjust our strategies to address the
various threats. The Department continues to stay focused on
ensuring that we stay current on the latest issues facing law
enforcement, including new and emerging threats, and we're
working to align the serious security realities with our
strategic priorities within our available resources. Therefore,
we have developed our fiscal 2020 budget request of $463.3
million, which is an increase of 1.5 percent over last year's
enacted levels with a focus on continuing to equip and prepare
our workforce to be agile and responsive to the operations of
Congress and to keep the Capitol Complex safe and secure. Our
request includes a base funding for 2,072 sworn and 442
civilian positions. The additional sworn personnel will be
utilized to enhance the Department's ability to detect, impede,
and address persistent threats that continue to increase and
evolve.
We're also requesting one civilian position, an additional
civilian position, for the Office of Inspector General to
conduct additional work related to cyber infrastructure and
financial audits. In addition, our request includes funding for
protective travel, the hiring and training of new sworn
personnel, the management systems and technologies updates, and
required supplies and equipment. This funding will also address
increases in operating costs due to the required protective
services and travel needed to secure the 2020 National
Republican and Democratic Conventions as well as support the
preplanning and preparation for the 2021 Presidential inaugural
ceremony.
Chairman Hyde-Smith, the type of policing that our police
officers engage in is not typical of most police departments.
Our officers interact with thousands of people each day, and
they do it in a highly visible environment, and they balance
this public interaction with the need to be prepared at all
times to respond to potential threats and other emergency
situations. We understand that working for Congress requires
both maintaining an impeccable work ethic and accountability.
In this regard, I want to assure the subcommittee that my team
and I will continue to work closely with you and your staffs to
ensure that information about the Department and its operations
is provided in a timely and consistent manner.
I'm honored to lead an organization that takes such pride
in our mission and great responsibilities which we bear.
Mission focus is key to our ability to be successful, to serve
and protect, and to ensure that our employees go home safe
every day.
Again, thank you for your continued support of our
Department and the workforce as we carry out our important
mission. And I thank you for the opportunity to discuss the
Department's 2020 fiscal year budget request. I'm pleased to
answer any questions that you have.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Chief Matthew R. Verderosa
Chairman Hyde-Smith, Senator Murphy, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to present the United
States Capitol Police (USCP) budget request for fiscal year 2020. I am
joined here by some members of my Executive Management Team, as well as
my Executive Team: Chief of Operations, Assistant Chief Steven Sund;
Chief Administrative Officer Richard Braddock, and General Counsel
Gretchen DeMar. Also joining me are Chief Financial Officer Dominic
Storelli; Inspector General Michael Bolton; USCP Fraternal Order of
Police (FOP) Chairman Gus Papathanasiou, and USCP International
Brotherhood of Teamsters Chair Karen Gray-Thomas.
Mr. Chairman, the support of the subcommittee, the Congress, and
the Capitol Police Board has contributed to our success in achieving
our mission, as well as our ability to recognize and address the
dynamic nature of current threats. We greatly appreciate the support
that you and your staff have given the Department, for your
collaboration with our leadership team, and for your innate
understanding of the complexity of our mission and the challenges we
face.
Since 1828, the United States Capitol Police has steadfastly
protected the United States Capitol. In fact, in 1801, a lone watchman,
John Golding, was charged with taking ``as much care as possible of the
property of the United States,'' before construction was completed on
the Capitol Building.
In the 191 years that have passed, much about the Department has
changed, but our mission is fundamentally the same: To protect the
Congress--its Members, employees, visitors and facilities--so it can
fulfill its Constitutional and legislative responsibilities in a safe,
secure, and open environment.
We consistently work to maintain the level of protection necessary
to balance access and security. Over the past year, the Department has
managed an ever-increasing number of demonstrations; has secured and
supported two Lying in State ceremonies and a Lying in Honor ceremony;
has swiftly responded to critical incidents and civil disobedience,
most notably during the Senate Judiciary Committee hearings last fall;
and, has investigated numerous, credible threats against Members of
Congress or the U.S. Capitol.
In 2018, USCP officers screened 11.2 million individuals at
building entrances and interior checkpoints. On any given day, there
are numerous permitted activities in the various outdoor approved
demonstration areas. Daily, the Department facilitates the free
exercise of First Amendment rights of individuals and coordinates these
activities based on Capitol Police Board regulations under the Traffic
Regulations for Capitol Grounds.
With the addition of pre-screener officers at numerous posts
outside of the Senate and House office buildings, we have increased our
abilities to better secure and screen at building access points, and
thereby reducing the Capitol Complex's exposure to threats. Officers
are posted to observe the public entering the buildings; provide direct
communications with the interior officers in the event of an emergency;
engage observed armed individuals; and, serve as a visible deterrent to
those desiring to attack an entrance. The ultimate goal in deploying
the pre-screeners is to identify and mitigate threats before they reach
the interior security screening checkpoints. An added benefit to
utilizing pre-screeners is that they also monitor and manage the lines
of people queued to enter the buildings. The Department is sensitive to
ensuring a positive visitor experience and our officers re-direct
visitors to other entry doors for screening, which also enhances their
overall safety and security.
In October, our highly-trained Hazardous Devices Section personnel
safely contained a pipe bomb at the Congressional Mail Facility, one of
16 that were sent to elected officials and public figures across the
country. Our team also worked with the FBI to ensure that evidence was
preserved to assist in the FBI identifying the suspect. The FBI
Director noted that the suspect was linked to several packages from a
fingerprint lifted from the package sent to Capitol Hill. This work led
to the apprehension of the suspect within days of delivery of the pipe
bombs.
Our special agents in the Investigations Division are aggressively
pursuing all leads and investigating threats from many sources. As a
result of the June 2017 baseball practice active shooter incident,
there is a heightened awareness by Members and their staffs of how
important it is to be aware of their surroundings and the actions of
others for their own personal safety and security. Individuals are now
more apt to report unusual activities. We have continued to see the
number of threat assessment cases that we open and investigate grow
each year.
The Department maintains a significant, visible presence throughout
the Capitol Complex and other venues where groups of Members are
assembled. This includes having a security presence even where we are
not physically located. We routinely collaborate with the Senate and
House Sergeants at Arms to assess Members' State and district office
security and provide recommendations on ways to improve and enhance
security measures and practices. We also continue to provide security
awareness briefings for both local and district staff.
As law enforcement officers, we do not know what we may face each
day. We train and prepare so we can respond to any threat in an instant
because lives depend on it. We must be cognizant of any potential
threats at all times. The reality is that the Capitol Complex remains
an attractive target to foreign and domestic terrorists; therefore we
must continually assess the risks and adjust our strategies for
addressing any threat. We are constantly working to ensure that the
Department's tactics do not become predictable or routine, and that our
personnel are always prepared. It is with this in mind that we have
worked to align these security realities with our strategic priorities
and resources.
The Department continues to grow and transform to address new and
emerging threats. We have also made great strides in implementing law
enforcement best practices to further our strategic efforts as a model
law enforcement agency. Therefore, we have developed our fiscal year
2020 budget with a focus on continuing to equip and prepare our
workforce to be agile and responsive to the operations of Congress, and
keeping the Capitol Complex safe and secure. Our fiscal year 2020
request is $463.3 million, and represents an increase of only 1.5
percent over fiscal year 2019 enacted levels to meet mandatory salary
requirements, overtime for critical training, and general expenses.
The Department's greatest assets are its employees. And, for this
reason, the Department is committed to working closely with the Capitol
Police Board and Congress to ensure that we continue to invest our
resources into training, updating and replacing key equipment and
systems, and ensuring that our employees have the tools they need to
successfully do their jobs as well as advance their careers within the
Department. The Department implemented a number of new initiatives over
the last year that I believe will enrich our employees' professional
and personal development. These initiatives include, but are not
limited to, a new performance evaluation and communication system;
promotional processes for the ranks of Deputy Chief, Inspector,
Captain, Lieutenant, and Sergeant; a new employee recognition program;
anti-discrimination and anti-harassment training; and more
opportunities to attend professional development training and
conferences.
As Chief, it is my goal to recruit and retain officers who reflect
the makeup of those working in and around the U.S. Capitol as well as
those visiting and engaging in the legislative process. It is also
imperative that we build a strong leadership bench to build upon the
Department's legacy with a clear eye toward its future. In the coming
months with guidance and assistance from our Diversity Officer, the
Department will be implementing a formal mentoring program as well as a
peer support program. We also will be updating the Department's
strategic plan to specifically include diversity, equity, and inclusion
within the plan's overall goals and objectives. Further, the USCP will
be developing sub-strategic plans addressing human capital management,
recruiting and retention, training, succession planning and career
development, and diversity, equity, and inclusion. These consolidated
efforts will help to ensure that the Department continues to provide a
holistic framework to imbed these efforts into all aspects of the
Department.
As with all law enforcement agencies, personnel salaries and
overtime make up the majority of our annual budget. We regularly
analyze our workforce distribution to align job functions, assignments,
workload, risk management, and organizational readiness, along with the
threat assessments and mandatory mission requirements, within a dynamic
environment.
Our fiscal year 2020 budget includes base funding for 2,072 sworn
and 442 civilian positions. These additional sworn personnel will be
utilized to enhance the Department's ability to detect, impede, and
address threats that currently exist and continue to evolve.
Additionally, we are also requesting one civilian position for the
Office of Inspector General for the purposes of conducting additional
work related to cyber infrastructure and financial audits.
To support these efforts, the fiscal year 2020 funding request
reflects a 0.87 percent increase over the fiscal year 2019 enacted
level for personnel costs. This increase is necessary to fund the
overtime needs of the Department for the 2020 Republican and Democratic
National Conventions.
As you are aware, the Department's current sworn staffing levels do
not provide the complete and necessary resources to meet all of our
mission requirements within the established sworn officer utility or
the number of work-hours in a year that each officer is available to
perform work. This utility number is used to determine overall staffing
requirements. It balances the utility of available staff with annual
salary and overtime funding along with known mission requirements.
These known requirements include post coverage and projected
unscheduled events such as demonstrations, late-night sessions, and
holiday concerts. The utility number also estimates unfunded
requirements that occur after the budget is enacted, such as unforeseen
critical emergency situations, and providing adequate police coverage
of congressional hearings.
Because of the need to fill the mission requirement gap through
overtime, the Department must also utilize overtime to ensure that
officers can be offline for training, while meeting our daily mission
requirements. There are flexibilities that other law enforcement
agencies have to offset or defer daily requirements to allow for
officer training that our unique mission does not afford us.
Therefore, mission requirements in excess of available personnel
must be addressed through the identification of efficiencies such as
post realignment and/or reductions, technology, and cutbacks within the
utility. Where necessary, we meet this requirement through the use of
overtime. Based on the requested staffing levels for fiscal year 2020,
the Department's overtime projection is approximately $47 million. This
amount will cover base mission requirements, Republican and Democratic
National Convention support, our support of non-reimbursable events at
the Library of Congress, and the ability for sworn employees to be
backfilled while they attend mandatory and essential training.
For the Department's General Expenses budget, our request includes
items such as protective travel; hiring, outfitting, and training new
sworn personnel; supplies and equipment; management systems and
technology upgrades; and other non-personnel needs. We are requesting
$85.3 million for general expenses, which is an increase of $3.8
million over the fiscal year 2019 enacted level. This funding will
address increases in operating costs due to the required protective
services and travel needed to secure the 2020 Republican and Democratic
National Conventions, as well as to support the pre-planning and
preparation for the 2021 Presidential Inauguration ceremony.
As the Chief of Police, it is my fiduciary responsibility to look
at every opportunity within the Department to accomplish our mission
before asking for additional resources. In order to ensure consistent,
transparent, and effective management practices, as well as measure our
successes, we regularly benchmark our efforts to nationally recognized
standards set by professional law enforcement organizations such as the
International Association of Chiefs of Police, Police Executive
Research Forum, and the Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement
Agencies, Inc.
For the past 9 years, we have implemented uniform procedures to
effectively measure and justify USCP planning, program, and resource
requirements through a comprehensive, standardized, and repeatable
management process that we call the ``Force Development Business
Process.'' It provides a transparent decisionmaking process that
includes reviews and approvals by an Investment Review Board made up of
key agency management, and it provides a structure that is results-
driven and based on meeting operational needs. In addition, to ensure
the accuracy of our budget request, our fiscal year 2020 budget went
through multiple layers of review and validation, and is tied to
supporting documentation for each budget element.
Our Executive Management Team, and the Department as a whole, has
also benefitted from the assistance of the USCP Office of Inspector
General (OIG). The OIG routinely conducts audits, reviews, and
investigations and makes recommendations to the USCP for business
improvements, including audits of our programs that I have requested.
The Department continues to make significant progress in closing OIG
recommendations. Since the OIG was established in 2006, the Department
has successfully closed 90 percent of the 416 recommendations made by
the OIG.
I value the OIG's assistance in our efforts to further improve our
operations and performance. Michael Bolton was selected in January by
the Capitol Police Board to serve as the third USCP Inspector General.
He had served as the Acting Inspector General since March 2018, and
also served as Assistant Inspector General for Investigations since
August 2006. I appreciate the OIG's assistance in our efforts to
further improve operations and performance. I also am pleased to report
that the Department received its seventh consecutive unmodified
``clean'' opinion on our fiscal year 2018 financial statements from the
OIG. The long-term resolution of recommendations related to internal
controls, business processes, and material weaknesses remains of the
highest importance to me and our management team.
I also work closely with the Fraternal Order of Police Labor
Committee leadership on a host of issues of mutual concern. We have
collaboratively worked to implement policy and procedures, as well as
address the concerns of the rank and file. While we sometimes see
issues through different lenses, the Chairman of the Labor Committee
and I both want what is best for our employees. We understand that
working for a police department requires maintaining an impeccable work
ethic and requires accountability as we, as United States Capitol
Police officers, are held to a higher standard. We and our staffs work
diligently to ensure that we come to a resolution on topics with the
shared goal of supporting our overall mission.
Madam Chairman, the United States Capitol Police is the only police
department in the Nation that does what we do and with the high
visibility in which we do it. Mission focus will always be the key to
our ability to be successful, to serve and protect, and to ensure our
employees go home safe every day. The Congress relies on us to do our
jobs so that you may do the people's work in a free and open manner.
In closing, I want to assure the subcommittee that the United
States Capitol Police is committed to always being at the ready to
ensure that the Capitol Complex is safe and secure. Our fiscal year
2020 budget request was developed with great thought and discipline to
ensure that the necessary mission requirements were at the forefront of
our planning and prioritization.
We will continue to work closely with you and the subcommittee
staff to ensure that we meet the needs and expectations of the
Congress, as well as our mission, in a reasonable and responsible
manner. Again, I thank you for the opportunity to discuss the
Department's fiscal year 2020 budget request, its priorities, and
activities. I would be pleased to answer any questions that you may
have.
Senator Hyde-Smith. Thank you very much.
Now we will recognize Senator Murphy for any opening
statements he may have.
Senator Murphy. I'm happy to continue with the witness
testimony or with questions. Thank you very much.
Senator Hyde-Smith. Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you just--thank you both for your
service and I look forward to working with you and the Chairman
and Ranking Member on the budget.
Senator Hyde-Smith. Okay. I will start with my first
question for Mr. Stenger. In the Sergeant at Arms budget
request, it states that the Cybersecurity Division is working
to develop a 5-year strategic plan to bolster the Senate
cybersecurity posture and to modernize network infrastructure.
How will that plan build on the investments that we've already
made? And when do you envision having that completed?
Mr. Stenger. Mrs. Chairman, in 2016, we saw the need to
develop, harden, and modernize our systems to make them more
user-compatible. We have been moving forward since that time.
By the end of 2019, we will be up to 91 percent of the hires
that we were authorized. It's a difficult environment to hire
in due to the technical expertise that we're looking for. It's
very competitive. I'm sure when more technical companies move
here, it's probably going to be even more difficult to hire and
retain people.
So we move forward. We've recently worked with the Rules
Committee to do a cyber awareness training program, which
everyone was required to complete. I believe that in fiscal
year 2020, when we move forward with this budget, we'll be
ready to execute and implement the systems and the security
systems that we talked about doing a year, year and a half ago.
Senator Hyde-Smith. You have mentioned recently increased
hiring with the Cybersecurity Division. Given the high demand
that you just described with the technical expertise that
you're looking for, and competition with other agencies, have
we been able to hire the qualified staff we need for those
initiatives as well?
Mr. Stenger. Mrs. Chairman, I think we have. We look at
each hiring individually. We want to hire people that have the
technical skills, the loyalty, and the desire to work here,
even sometimes at a reduced salary that we can offer.
And the other thing that we have to be concerned about is
ensuring we hire the right people. We are not just concerned
about their technical skills, we are also concerned about the
potential insider threat. You want to make sure you're hiring
the right type of people here.
Senator Hyde-Smith. And we appreciate that concern no
doubt.
Do we have any questions from anyone else?
Senator Murphy. For both of our witnesses?
Senator Hyde-Smith. Yes.
Senator Murphy. Certainly. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I'm sorry that I was just coming from the vote, so I missed
your prepared testimony, and so maybe I'm asking you to repeat
some pieces of this.
MEMBER SECURITY OFF-CAMPUS
Chief Verderosa, you and I have had a number of
conversations over the years about security for Members off-
campus. I think I heard you finishing maybe some prepared
testimony. We set up in this last budget a new allocation of
money to be used to stand up additional capacity to cover
Member events off-campus. Can you just give an update onto how
that money is being spent?
Mr. Verderosa. Certainly. We have been employing that
funding in a number of ways based on the number of protective
details. In 2018, we had a significant number of events. In
2019--we already have had 47 events. That is, 47 events and 6
law enforcement coordinations. That's about the number, I
believe, that we did last year. We already have 69 future
events prepared. We've spent about 65 percent of the
appropriated funding for these particular National Capital
Region events. We're working very closely with Mr. Stenger's
office to ensure that we get the information.
I think there has been a great increase in the number of
events, which we have become aware of in terms of protection
coverage in this area. We look at protection from a global
perspective, so it's not singularly putting DPD, dignitary
protection agents, at an event. We look at the total assessment
for the event, and we'll deploy those resources necessary. They
can differ based on the venue, the type of event, the number of
Members that are attending.
Typically what happens is we'll have a perimeter secure,
we'll have the assets available to respond to any type of
situation, whether it's an individual or group. We'll have
protective intelligence teams out. We also have uniform
presence as well as plain clothes presence. If the venue is
required based on if it's an outdoor event, those types of
things, we can have our tactical team respond as well as do
hazardous device sweeps and canine sweeps prior to the event.
I think we have partnered very closely with not only the
Sergeant at Arms office but also our local law enforcement
partners. We recently hosted at COG, the Council of
Governments, Chiefs Committee. We gave a briefing to the other
chiefs in the area based on what our needs are, and we've
solicited their assistance, and we've gained great assistance
in the local areas in and around Washington, D.C., for those
events which require us to not only deploy, but would require
additional local response based on whether we know if there's
any demonstration activity or any type of activity that would
be handled in a non-protective way, such as local law
enforcement action.
We're very appreciative of the funding that we have gained,
and based on what we have in the hopper already in terms of
future events, it's going to be very busy the rest of the
fiscal year.
Senator Murphy. And, Mr. Stenger, this obviously relies on
the right information getting to Capitol Police. And there's a
subset of activities that you know about, that you may be
involved in, coordinating when there are big movements of
Members for official activities. But, of course, there's a
whole other set of activities that are political in nature in
which you have big numbers of Senators or House Members in a
particular place that may not involve immediate notification or
the knowledge of the Sergeant at Arms. How, if at all, have you
changed your protocols in making sure that all of that
information gets to the Capitol Police and the burden is
appropriately placed on everyone, including Members' offices,
to let the Capitol Police know when there are large gatherings
of Members off-campus?
Mr. Stenger. Senator, we created a section in the Sergeant
at Arms called the Member Outreach and Security Coordination
Section, which sends out a message every week, every Monday, to
the Members and the staff, chief clerks, chiefs of staff,
schedulers, asking for any information they would have as to
any activities, events with which the Member may be involved.
If there are any concerns, or even if they don't have concerns,
we ask them to provide that information. We coordinate that
with our Situational Awareness Team, which scours the Internet
for many things, such as threats or activities that are taking
place. We do this in conjunction with the Capitol Police.
You're correct, the information that we really seek is from
the staff as to what's going on. And they should never be
hesitant to provide us something. It's no burden on us. We've
created this unit. We work very closely with the Capitol
Police. We encourage people, anytime there's an event to report
it. It doesn't have to be in a State office, that can be right
here in town. So we've had over 200 events shared since October
1, 2018. It's an 87-percent increase since we started sending
out this notification and created this organization. We
encourage people to continue to let us know.
Senator Murphy. Thank you for that. And the need is there,
as evidenced by those numbers.
And then, Mr. Stenger, again, you may have done this in
your opening testimony, but can you just provide an update on
the Senate working group that was convened to talk about the
coverage for our personal devices? Senator Van Hollen and I
have been in a couple briefings in the last few weeks that I
think left all of us more concerned and more worried than we
already were about the threats to our personal devices and has
left me more befuddled as to why we don't just simply include
these devices under the umbrella of what is protected by the
services that you offer.
One of the options that I think was discussed at the
working group level was to provide an opt-in ability for
Members and Members' offices to receive services and advice
from the Senate Sergeant at Arms. And so I guess my question
would be, if that was the direction we were to pursue, do you
have the capability to do that with current levels of support
staff or would you need additional capacities?
SECURING PERSONAL DEVICES
Mr. Stenger. Yes, Senator, we facilitated the working group
and had a number of members, as you're aware, that provided
input. One of the things that I would give a little history on
is that some years ago people would hack and try and get your
financial information for financial benefit. Now they hack for
information. They try to get information, whether it's hacking
or just picking up a piece of paper with the information,
because information about people and things has value. So
you're right, it has expanded and will continue to expand
because it's not only that these groups target you, they will
target your family members if they can get the information.
So the working group came up with five options, and each
one requires more escalation with other groups, whether it's
Rules or Appropriations. The easiest one to do, which we've
already started to implement, is status quo with enhancements,
which means we are going to be much more proactive by going out
to talk to the staff and the Members and the folks up here
about advisories, training, information sharing, and a few
other things to make sure they're aware of the issues that are
out there.
There was an old adage about an educated consumer or user
is our best customer, and that's probably true of today's
environment. The second level that we would go to is what you
just discussed, where the Sergeant at Arms would seek
cybersecurity companies to provide security from threats. That
would be the next level up, but would require some changes to
law and possibly a change in appropriations. I couldn't say at
this time until I saw how in-depth we would do that and what
level we would take it to, but each one after that requires a
little bit more action, interaction, on our part. And I would
imagine that as you step it up, there will be incremental
increases in our budget requests. I think we would need to
bring in all the others that have to decide to determine what
legal and statutory changes would have to be addressed or
enacted.
Senator Murphy. I'll just make my case one more time for
those that haven't heard it. I think we have a double standard
today. I think that when there is a threat to our personal
security that is serious enough for around-the-clock
protection, we get it, really no questions asked. We have
coverage here and we have coverage in our private life if there
is a round-the-clock serious threat to our personal security.
We don't recognize that same standard when it comes to our
cybersecurity. If there is a threat to our personal devices, we
still tell Members they have to deal with that on their own
time with their own budget. And so I simply think it's time to
apply the same standard we do to personal physical security to
cybersecurity, understanding that that may take changes in
statutes, changes in rules, or changes in appropriation. I just
think for all of the information we've got about how under
threat our personal devices are at home and in our pockets, we
should square this circle as soon as possible.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Hyde-Smith. Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank you both again for your work and thank you and
your teams for your professional response to the pipe bomb
threats last October. If I recall, one of the pipe bombs found
its way into one of the mail sorting facilities in Capitol
Heights, Maryland, and I think it was addressed to
Congresswoman Maxine Waters. So I just--I know both of your
teams had responsibility in different parts of that in
responding to it, so thank you for that.
You know, my two colleagues here have really asked many of
the questions I had, which relate to cybersecurity.
So let me just ask you, Mr. Stenger, and I know we're not
in a--we're in open setting. But I think everyone recognized
the threat your team did. You hired more people. I understand
your update on where you are on that hiring. What is your
assessment right now of the threats, cyber attacks, made
against Senate offices? In other words, efforts on a daily
basis for folks to try to hack into the Senate systems, through
Members or through our staff? What is your assessment of that
threat today?
CYBERSECURITY
Mr. Stenger. Well, it continues. It continues to be a
problem and it's a threat. People are going to want
information, they want information about you, they want
information about other people that has value. We continue to
recognize the threat that's out there. We are looking at our
systems and we're dealing with the intelligence community, with
the law enforcement community, with the Capitol Police, and
with the private sector----
Senator Van Hollen. But can you--can you quantify that? I
don't think it's--you know, classified, just sort of talk about
what you sense on a daily basis in terms of the efforts to hack
into the Senate systems.
Mr. Stenger. Well, it goes on. It would be hard to quantify
how many, but it's a fairly substantial amount. I mean, these
are almost like robocalls to some degree. It could be
individuals up to organized groups, but they're not necessarily
sitting there trying to do an individual phone hack or
computer, it's almost like robocalling, they're just sending
out. So these things go on 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. So
it's difficult to say come up with a quantification of the
numbers, but it's a large amount.
Senator Van Hollen. How about foreign governmental threats,
hacking efforts?
Mr. Stenger. Well, it's--it's kind of difficult for me to
go into too much in an open hearing like this, but rest assured
that information has value, so everybody recognizes that, and
like I said, whether it's malicious actors that are individuals
or organized groups or funded by someone else. Value is value.
That is what they want. It is difficult for me to go into
specifics here, but people want information.
USCP RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES
Senator Van Hollen. I would just, you know, share the
sentiments expressed by Senator Murphy. It seems to me to be a
vulnerability in the overall system when--when people could
hack into some of the personal information devices.
To the chief, I know you work on a regular basis to
establish good relationships with local law enforcement in
States and around the country. How--how is that going? Do you
feel that you're getting the kind of responsiveness that you
need in terms of local law enforcement when you're, you know,
trying to establish relationships? And do you try and work
those relationships out before there is a specific threat?
Mr. Verderosa. We do, sir. We do. In the National Capital
Region, it's very easy obviously. We meet regularly,
particularly here in the District. I meet regularly with the
Assistant Director in charge of the Washington Field Office of
the FBI, with the United States Secret Service Director, Mr.
Alles, Chief Newsham, of the D.C. Metropolitan Police, the Park
Police, and all of our partners. And, you know, our dignitary
protection agents travel throughout the country with the
congressional leadership, and we also cover numerous other
Members when they're attached to CODELs or any other type of
organized events.
But we also do, on a daily basis, outreach and security
coordination for Member offices. We reach out. And part of that
outreach and coordination is doing assessments of public
events. We do an assessment of both open- and closed-source
information, and we reach out to the local partners, whether
it's a city police department, a sheriff's office, the State
police, or even other Federal agencies when we have events that
are occurring. So we virtually have feelers all over the
country every day. For instance, since calendar year 2019,
we've done 158 law enforcement coordinations, and we did 51
other outreaches to congressional offices, but part of that is
contacting the local police departments.
I also attend national conventions, and I also meet with
chiefs that come to Capitol Hill whether they are visiting
Members of Congress or here visiting the city on a law
enforcement issue.
We work very cooperatively. I find that we get, in
virtually every instance, complete cooperation whenever we have
a tasking or a request. In terms of our investigation and
enforcement actions, when we reach out to another jurisdiction
because there is a credible threat against a Member or
direction of interest case, which we may also use local laws,
when charging a suspect we get tremendous response. They
partner with us when we deploy our agents. They will conduct
interviews for us. They will do security checks of District and
State offices as well as Member residences with a credible
threat. And then, of course, we work hand-in-hand with the
joint terrorism task forces. We have task force officers on a
number of joint task forces. And we partner with the FBI on all
of these threat investigations, and, you know, in terms of even
with the U.S. Attorney's Offices throughout the country, we are
partnered, we're embedded, and I couldn't ask--I couldn't be
happier with the level of cooperation that we get.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you.
Can I have one?
So the Silver Spring incident, you know, the individual in
Silver Spring, Maryland, was that a case that was on your radar
screen for a while? How did--which law enforcement agency was
first----
Mr. Verderosa. We worked with the FBI.
Senator Van Hollen. Okay.
5-YEAR PLAN FOR ENHANCED SECURITY
Senator Hyde-Smith. Chief Verderosa, your budget request
this year includes funding for the final year in the agency's
5-year plan to mitigate certain concerns and meet expanded
mission requirements, such as the House garages and enhanced
screening in the House and Senate chamber galleries. The plan
would add an additional 57 sworn personnel for prescreening,
dignitary protection, and intelligence needs in the fiscal year
2020 budget. What is the timeframe for having the mission
requirements of the 5-year plan fully covered?
Mr. Verderosa. We should be able to complete the multiyear
plan in 2020 based on the funding requests and the salary
requests, assuming that our recruiting and our hiring process
continues at the pace that it's at. We look at security from
the global perspective in terms of keeping the threat as far
away as we can. Working with the Board to close those
vulnerabilities was very important. Also, to provide a visible
physical deterrent at doors in the office buildings was a top
priority. And we've been able to accomplish significant
progress with that. And with the continued hiring and training
in 2019 as well as the future in 2020, we should be able to
complete that mission I believe on time, on budget, and on
schedule.
OUT-YEAR COSTS TO SUSTAIN SWORN FORCES
Senator Hyde-Smith. Great. While the requested increase for
2020 is relatively small compared to the requested increases in
previous years, I worry that we will have additional costs in
future years to sustain the size of the force, especially after
adding another 57 sworn officers. Please tell us what we might
expect in terms of costs to maintain a force this size in the
years to come.
Mr. Verderosa. Sure. You know, based on the outlook in
terms of our projections, we were fortunate this year because
of the timing of our training classes that we were able to
absorb the hiring costs within our 2019 budget and scheduled
training to a point where we didn't need to ask for even half
year funding for those individuals. We will be making a request
in future years to support that salary level. And I don't have
the exact dollar figure now, but I can certainly submit it to
your staff and get you that number.
[The information follows:]
The additional out-year cost will be approximately $4.8 Million in
salaries and benefits to have 57 more officers on the force.
RECRUITING STANDARDS
Senator Hyde-Smith. Okay. Again, noting the growth in
recent years, have you been able to keep pace with recruitment
while continuing to meet the standards we expect in our USCP
officers?
Mr. Verderosa. I appreciate the question. Recruiting is a
phenomenon in this area because there are so many law
enforcement agencies that are vying for really good top-flight
candidates. We partner with USAJobs and we have both an in-
person and electronic process to attract candidates this year,
and it is becoming increasingly difficult to find candidates
that meet the standards. And the one thing I would note is that
we don't lower our standards, we wait until we find the right
people. And with that, we are able to go out, and we started a
new program which takes officers who are in the field who meet
certain criteria, have well-established records, who represent
the Department well, to go out and partner with our background
investigation team to recruit actively.
We've been fortunate. Over the last few years we haven't
had to send our recruiters out. We target-recruit military and
educational institutions, but we haven't had to do as much
physical recruiting going out and going to the job fairs as
we've done in years previous. We are starting up this program
and we're going to actively seek more candidates as we go
forward now. It was time to make that adjustment.
IMPLEMENTING A MANDATORY FITNESS REQUIREMENT
Senator Hyde-Smith. Okay. Chief Verderosa, in the report
you provided to the committee outlining the feasibility of
implementing a mandatory physical fitness program, you
highlighted certain legal, logistical, and cost implications.
What do you see is the biggest hurdle to implementing a
mandatory fitness requirement?
Mr. Verderosa. There certainly are logistical, legal, and
other essential function questions that have to be resolved
before we can implement a physical fitness program. We're
taking the approach with wellness in that we're looking at it
from a greater perspective than just physical fitness.
One of the areas that we're going to focus on, in
partnership with the Office of Employee Assistance and
partnership with the House Wellness Center, we are looking at
trying to relieve our officers of concerns and issues which
affect their ability to be here at work, to be productive
employees, and that goes into not only physical health, but
also mental health, mindfulness, the wellness program,
financial health, and we're looking at sort of a whole person
perspective because if you have a focused, more efficient
person who does not have to worry about day care, does not have
to worry about a health issue for a family member, or any type
of other distraction, then we have someone who is here, who is
focused, who has clarity of thought, and who is able to
respond. We also looked at, you know, any medical issues or any
type of issues that are prevalent in our workforce.
The difficult part of implementing a required program is
providing people with time and effort off post to prepare. For
us, we work our mission requirements short-handed based on
current FTE levels, so we work a tremendous amount of overtime,
we work all over the country, and we have long hours. Our
employees are here more with us than they are with their
families in a lot of cases.
And what we try to do is focus and prioritize the time that
they have on the clock to the really core prioritized mission.
One of the things that we would need to do in order to
implement a mandatory program is provide them opportunities to
be physically fit, which is more time off-post, which is more
time I have to backfill with overtime. I'd rather use those
personnel for mission focus and then try to leverage all of the
programs that we have to make them healthy.
We have a tremendous level of participation in our gyms. We
have three gyms: one at the USCP training academy, and two here
on the Hill. We have, you know, incentives in place and a lot
of programs. We have a fitness coordinator that helps design
programs for individuals. We're going to bring on a
nutritionist to help people maintain a healthy lifestyle. And
it's all part of the overall picture to make people more
effective here at work. And I think we have a very good plan. I
can certainly work with the staff to get you more details on
our approach to this. But I'm very encouraged with some of the
work that the House side is doing in terms of their wellness
center, as well as some of the things that we're working on
with our Diversity Office in terms of peer support and a
mentoring program, which all goes into the overall wellness of
the individual.
I think we're in good shape. Again, if I saw an issue, if I
saw officers needing medical attention, hospitals, and all that
kind of thing, we would take a different look, a different
approach. We've also surveyed a number of other agencies and
looked at the pitfalls and looked at the priorities that they
have had and how they implemented programs, and it really runs
the gamut from a voluntary to mandatory with consequences, and
which can be challenged in court and that kind of thing.
So it's really a larger program than just the physical
aspect of it. I do appreciate the question, and it's something
that we look at on a continuing basis.
Senator Hyde-Smith. Thank you.
Mr. Verderosa. You're very welcome.
IT HELP DESK
Senator Hyde-Smith. Mr. Stenger, you are asking for an
additional $3.4 million to improve the current IT Help Desk
contract, which supports Senators' offices and committees with
their IT needs. Will you explain to us the need for the
increase and what improvements the Senate community can expect
from this expenditure?
Mr. Stenger. Yes. Chairman, I think back in 2013 there was
a large reduction in the staffing of the help desk, I think it
was 35 percent. Since that time, they've lost another almost 30
percent of technical folks there, and their technical expertise
has dropped since then. The program expires--or the contract
expires in October of 2019. We have to find a replacement.
One of the benefits that we're hoping to get out of it is
to draw stricter guidelines for what's acceptable as far as
expertise and going out to support the community. I think
customer service is very important, and customer satisfaction
is very important. We have dropped in some of the levels of the
technical expertise because of the drawdown. So we need to
build that up. Technology continues to change on a daily basis,
so it's always competing and trying to make sure that you have
the most technically astute people.
I think the other benefit that you have on a help desk,
that we have if we staff it correctly, is you have a core of
subject matter experts that can advise your systems
administrators on the system in a better fashion than maybe
what's been taking place because of the continuing competition
for those assets.
Senator Hyde-Smith. And how does the IT Help Desk interact
with or supplement the system administrators' in Senators'
personal offices?
Mr. Stenger. They're the ones that would provide the
support for any IT problem. You may have a system administrator
that's not sure about something or doesn't have that technical
expertise, they're able to call the help desk. Last year, the
help desk handled 11,000 calls and 6,600 installations. So
they're out there to assist your staff, the system
administrators and others who may not have the expertise.
That's why we're trying to build this core up.
Senator Hyde-Smith. That sounds very helpful.
Any more questions?
Senator Murphy. Just a couple more.
INTER-JURISDICTIONAL POLICE COMMUNICATION
Chief Verderosa, I believe my first year in the Senate,
there was a tragic incident where a young woman from
Connecticut drove her car through a number of jurisdictions
ending up here on the Capitol grounds. And in surveying what
had gone right and gone wrong, one of the challenges that was
pointed out was the fact that she did, in a very short period
of time, cross several law enforcement jurisdictions going from
Secret Service to Metropolitan Police to Capitol Police. And it
is very challenging to convey information when something is
developing that quickly.
Without disclosing any protocols that should remain
private, have there been changes put in place since that time?
And is that an ongoing discussion to make sure that we are
maximizing the speed with which information transfers when
individuals are rushing from one jurisdiction to another that
may be a threat to the campus?
Mr. Verderosa. Sure. Oh, absolutely. We have made great,
great improvements in communicating with our partner agencies.
One of the things that we do for the Metropolitan Police and
for other police departments within the city, we have the
ability to communicate over our radio system directly. We have
the Metropolitan Police radio systems in our vehicles, so we
can talk car to car. I can answer a call to their dispatcher.
We get information immediately. We monitor their radios in our
command center and we know what they're seeing.
We also have the ability to talk on a direct line to the
core police departments' communication centers. So we have a
phone that picks up in the Secret Service JOC and the FBI's
Washington Field Office Dispatch Center. We also--and that
phone also picks up for the Metropolitan Police and the United
States Park Police.
So, when we have a multi-jurisdiction event, we no longer
have to go through the series of notifying a dispatcher to call
the supervisor; their watch commander talks directly to our
watch commander. The information is put out immediately over
our radio system, and we know what's coming. It's not perfect
obviously because communication still has to flow, but I think
we've made tremendous strides.
Our dispatchers have the ability to communicate basically
with any police department over the radio in the National
Capital Region over a unified radio channel. We have
relationships and other police departments' radio frequencies
on every officer's portable radio, to some extent, this
includes Park Police, Metropolitan Police, and some of us have
the Secret Service as well.
So I think the communication has improved greatly. We
monitor and coordinate responses when other agencies have
events. So say there's an event with the Secret Service down at
one of their locations, whether it's the White House or any
other event where they have jurisdiction. If it's a critical
incident, we're going to send a commander to--or an
intelligence agent to their command post, and they're going to
get direct information. We'll know what's going on, we'll know
who the subject is, and we can run those individuals through
our databases to ensure that if this threat to either the White
House or one of the monuments is truly a threat, we're going to
know if we have a threat against us based on this individual's
personal identifiers.
PHYSICAL FITNESS REQUIREMENTS ACROSS LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES
Senator Murphy. And then the last thing, just to follow up
on Senator Hyde-Smith's question about the survey you did on
physical fitness, I think you raised an interesting question
about whether there's a responsibility to provide time----
Mr. Verderosa. Right.
Senator Murphy [continuing]. On the clock or not. When you
surveyed other law enforcement agencies that did have some
physical fitness requirement, did they all provide on-the-clock
time for physical fitness, or did some of them expect or would
we find examples of agencies in which their expectation was
that physical fitness could happen off the clock?
Mr. Verderosa. Right. My recollection is that it ran the
gamut from some did, some didn't. Certainly, remedial, if
someone didn't pass a test, would be done in a programmatic way
in that you have to meet certain benchmarks for improvement,
and I believe that the remediation part, at a minimum, would be
on the clock. But I can follow up with you and get you more
specifics.
[The information follows:]
For those law enforcement agencies that we surveyed who have
physical fitness requirements, not all of the details are known about
the programs. This is in part due to the legal and logistical hurdles
that these agencies have had and are continuing to work through to
implement a program. However, we are aware that the United States
Marshals Service authorizes up to three hours of training per week
during duty time to participate in approved fitness-related activities
in preparation of meeting physical fitness and ability testing
standards.
Senator Murphy. Okay. Thank you. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Hyde-Smith. This concludes the Legislative Branch
Appropriations Subcommittee hearing regarding fiscal year 2020
funding for the Senate Sergeant at Arms and the U.S. Capitol
Police. I want to thank both of you for testifying today. I
also want to thank you for the tour of the USCP command center
when we had the State of the Union Address. You've both been so
accessible to me, and I really appreciate that. You've been
very kind and very, very accommodating. So I just commend you
both for that.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
The hearing record will remain open for 7 days, allowing
Members to submit statements and/or questions for the record,
which should be sent to the subcommittee by close of business
on Wednesday, April the 10th, 2019.
[The following questions were not asked at the hearing, but
were submitted to the agencies for response subsequent to the
hearing:]
Questions Submitted to Hon. Michael C. Stenger
Questions Submitted by Senator James Lankford
Question. Are you aware of any existing technology, software, or
application that could enable visual voicemail for the Senate's current
telephone system? Do those capabilities exist?
Answer. While the current telephone system does not have the
capability to convert voicemail to text, there are third party
solutions available in the commercial marketplace.
Question. What steps would need to be taken to implement? And what
would be the cost to implement? If these capabilities exist, why has
the Senate not already adopted them?
Answer. Implementing visual voicemail would require additional
equipment and resources with an estimated cost of $2 million dollars.
Given the capacity and lifecycle of the current telephone system,
focusing resources on design, procurement and implementation of a new
Unified Communications and Collaboration (UCC) system positions the SAA
to better support the Senate's communication requirements as a whole.
Question. If these capabilities exist, why has the Senate not
already adopted them?
Answer. The SAA is focused on a plan to transform constituent
communications capabilities for Senate offices. This plan includes
improving the constituent experience while increasing the Senate office
capability to receive, process and act on the communications. The voice
to text capability is just one example of what the SAA hopes to provide
to each office.
Question. Under the SAA's request for proposal entitled Unified
Communications and Collaboration (2019-R-029), are visual voicemail
capabilities being considered in the business requirements for the new
system?
Answer. Yes.
Question. If so, can SAA provide a timeframe of when visual
voicemail will be available for use in offices?
Answer. We will work as quickly as possible to determine how the
SAA might provide this capacity as part of our overall work to update
the Senate telephone system. To that end, we will soon begin working
with a competitively-selected vendor to develop the business
requirements and design the system architecture.
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
Senator Hyde-Smith. The next hearing of the subcommittee
will be held on Wednesday, April 10, at 3:15 p.m., in Dirksen
124, when we will hear testimony from the Congressional Budget
Office and the Government Accountability Office regarding the
fiscal year 2020 budget request.
Until then, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:15 p.m., Wednesday, April 3, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene at 3:15 p.m.,
Wednesday, April 10.]