- AMERICAN INFRASTRUCTURE AND THE SMALL BUSINESS PERSPECTIVE
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
AMERICAN INFRASTRUCTURE AND THE SMALL BUSINESS PERSPECTIVE
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD
APRIL 25, 2018
__________
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Small Business Committee Document Number 115-064
Available via the GPO Website: www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
28-921
WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
ROD BLUM, Iowa
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto Rico
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
JOHN CURTIS, Utah
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
STEPHANIE MURPHY, Florida
AL LAWSON, JR., Florida
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
VACANT
Kevin Fitzpatrick, Majority Staff Director
Jan Oliver, Majority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Adam Minehardt, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................
1
Hon. Alma Adams..................................................
2
WITNESSES
Ms. Marsia Geldert-Murphey, Chief Operating Officer, W. James
Taylor, Inc., Belleville, IL, testifying on behalf of the
American Society of Civil Engineers............................
4
Mr. Bill Schmitz, Vice President, Sales and Quality Control,
Gernatt Asphalt Company, Collins, NY, testifying on behalf of
the National Stone, Sand, and Gravel Association...............
6
Mr. Kevin Beyer, General Manager, Farmers Mutual Telephone
Company and Federated Telephone Cooperative, Chokio, MN,
testifying on behalf of NTCA-The Rural Broadband Association...
7
Mr. Bob Dagostino, President and CEO, Dagostino Electronic
Services, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA, testifying on behalf of the
National Electrical Contractors Association....................
9
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Ms. Marsia Geldert-Murphey, Chief Operating Officer, W. James
Taylor, Inc., Belleville, IL, testifying on behalf of the
American Society of Civil Engineers........................
21
Mr. Bill Schmitz, Vice President, Sales and Quality Control,
Gernatt Asphalt Company, Collins, NY, testifying on behalf
of the National Stone, Sand, and Gravel Association........
24
Mr. Kevin Beyer, General Manager, Farmers Mutual Telephone
Company and Federated Telephone Cooperative, Chokio, MN,
testifying on behalf of NTCA-The Rural Broadband
Association................................................
31
Mr. Bob Dagostino, President and CEO, Dagostino Electronic
Services, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA, testifying on behalf of the
National Electrical Contractors Association................
43
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
CCA - Competitive Carriers Association.......................
52
AMERICAN INFRASTRUCTURE AND THE SMALL BUSINESS PERSPECTIVE
----------
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 25, 2018
House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:58 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Steve Chabot
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, King, Brat, Blum,
Fitzpatrick, Evans, Adams, and Schneider.
Chairman CHABOT. Good morning. The Committee will come to
order.
I first of all want to apologize for us having a little
late start here. We, of course, had the President of France
addressing a joint session of Congress, and that is why we were
running a little bit late. So for that, we apologize.
Our nation is on the cusp of many major changes in its
transportation system. We have seen the development of GPS,
companies such as Uber and Lyft, and electric vehicles. These
innovations are transforming the movement of people, goods, and
services.
But our current transportation infrastructure system is,
simply put, stuck in a different generation. And,
unfortunately, our nation's small business owners often feel
these effects the most. On average, the typical American
commuter loses 42 hours of valuable productivity time each year
to traffic. Some of us who travel around D.C. might agree that
we lose more.
Currently, an estimated 20 percent of Federal roads provide
poor ride quality and 25 percent of bridges are fundamentally
obsolete--excuse me, functionally obsolete, as well as
fundamentally obsolete. I am willing to bet that every member
in this room can think of at least one urgent infrastructure
project in their district that they would like to see fixed
today.
While there are many that come to mind in my district, one
that is very important to small businesses alike is the Brent
Spence Bridge. This is a bridge that connects Ohio to Kentucky
and carries an estimated 172,000 vehicles on Interstates 71 and
75 each day, more than double its intended capacity.
To put this bridge's age in perspective, it was slated to
be dedicated--it ultimately was delayed for a short period of
time--during the week of President John F. Kennedy's
assassination. Because of that assassination the dedication was
delayed for a couple of days. Today it is labeled functionally
obsolete by the U.S. Department of Transportation.
As this Committee has learned in past hearings, broadband
deployment is also a crucial part of our nation's
infrastructure, particularly for entrepreneurs in rural areas.
As business owners continue to move to a more global
marketplace, access to broadband is crucial to keeping small
businesses competitive.
Unfortunately, about 39 percent of the rural population, or
23 million people, still lack access to broadband internet
service considered fast by the Federal Communications
Commission.
As with any major project, it is critical that small
businesses are not left out of the conversation. Small
businesses both create and rely upon our nation's
infrastructure system. And as they create two out of three new
jobs, they will likely be a driving force in repairing our
broken system.
I look forward to hearing from small business owners today
and their ideas for moving our nation's infrastructure into the
21st century.
And I would now like to yield to the acting Ranking Member,
Ms. Adams, for her opening statement.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all very much for being here.
Infrastructure is a critical component to our economy and
central to the nation's competitiveness. Port facilities help
in the distribution of goods and people across the world.
Utility systems provide the energy necessary to run factories,
allowing for the production of goods.
Telecommunications and broadband systems enable access to
critical information and affordable communication. The nation's
highways, bridges, and transit networks make possible the flow
of goods and services.
These systems form the economy's framework and are what
makes the country competitive by allowing us to work more
efficiently.
Investment in infrastructure promotes future economic
opportunities. In fact, 61 percent of the jobs directly created
by infrastructure spending would be in the construction sector,
12 percent in the manufacturing sector, and 7 percent in retail
trade. That is 80 percent in these three sectors alone.
Most importantly, 90 percent of these jobs are good paying
middle-class jobs, many of which are supported by our nation's
small businesses. Small companies dominate many of the sectors
that maintain, strengthen, and upgrade our infrastructure and
transportation networks. From construction to engineering to
architecture, small businesses are critical to maintaining our
infrastructure systems.
Accordingly, a robust and well-planned investment in our
infrastructure would benefit small businesses, both as users of
these networks and by creating business opportunities for them.
Unfortunately, the President's infrastructure plan unveiled
earlier this year would fall woefully short of this goal. His
plan slashes real Federal investments and shifts the burden to
cash-strapped States and local governments. It cuts more than
$168 billion from existing transportation and infrastructure
programs, and it allows large companies and foreign investors
to toll our roads and bridges.
This privatized approach would mean that many small
companies will be paying Wall Street companies to access
transportation arteries. Moreover, the Trump plan would largely
circumvent environmental safeguards, gutting clean water, clean
air protections, under the excuse of speeding up projects.
Although large Wall Street companies may benefit from this
radical new infrastructure approach, there is nothing in the
President's proposal that would guarantee small companies
receive their fair share of Federal contracts for the new
infrastructure upgrades.
I find it telling that in the 53-page document, the phrase
``small business'' does not even appear once. Absent an
assurance that small firms will receive their fair share of
this work, the small business sector should be very skeptical
of this plan.
All of us have an obligation to ensure that there is
adequate Federal infrastructure investment to stimulate the
economy and to ensure our nation's long-term competitiveness.
Doing so will ensure small businesses benefit both as
contractors and as those who use our infrastructure while
creating good jobs along the way. And it is my hope that
today's discussion can help identify strategies for
accomplishing that goal.
On that note, I want to thank the witnesses for being here,
and I look forward to your testimony.
I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back.
And if members have opening statements prepared, I would
ask that they be submitted for the record.
And I will take just a moment before I introduce the panel
this morning to explain our rules. We operate under the 5-
minute rule. There is a lighting system to help you to stay
within that. The green light will be on for 4 minutes; the
yellow light will come on and let you know you have got a
minute to wrap up; and then the red light will come on and that
means stop. But if you go on a little bit, that will be okay,
but try to stay within those parameters if at all possible.
And I would now like to introduce our panel.
Our first witness is Marsia Geldert-Murphey, Chief
Operating Officer with W. James Taylor, Inc., located in
Belleville, Illinois. She received both her master's and
bachelor's degree in civil engineering and her 25 years of
professional experience spans the public and private sectors.
Ms. Geldert-Murphey is testifying today on behalf of the
American Society of Civil Engineers.
And we welcome you this morning.
Our next witness will be Bill Schmitz, who is the Vice
President for Sales and Quality Control at Gernatt Asphalt
Company in Collins, New York. Gernatt Asphalt has 11 locations
across western New York that produce and supply sand and gravel
products.
Mr. Schmitz testified before our Committee in June of 2015
and will testify again today on behalf of the National Sand,
Stone, and Gravel Association.
We welcome you back to the Committee.
Our third witness will be Kevin Beyer, General Manager of
both the Federated Telephone Cooperative and Farmers Mutual
Telephone Company in Chokio, Minnesota. These two cooperatives
provide telecommunication services for over 2,700 square miles
in rural Minnesota.
Mr. Beyer will be testifying today on behalf of NTCA - The
Rural Broadband Association.
And we thank you for being here.
And I would now like to ask Ms. Adams if she would like to
introduce our fourth and final witness.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is my pleasure to introduce Mr. Bob Dagostino, President
and CEO of Dagostino Electronic Services, Inc., or DES, founded
in 1973. Mr. Dagostino has more than 45 years of experience
designing and installing innovative and comprehensive
communication solutions and related infrastructure for voice,
data, wireless security, and building automation.
He holds the credential of a building industry consulting
service international registered communications distribution
designer. He currently serves on the board of directors for the
Western Pennsylvania Chapter of the National Electrical
Contractors Association.
Mr. Dagostino, welcome. Thank you for testifying today.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
And Ms. Geldert-Murphey is recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENTS OF MS. MARSIA GELDERT-MURPHEY, CHIEF OPERATING
OFFICER, W. JAMES TAYLOR, INC., BELLEVILLE, IL, TESTIFYING ON
BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF CIVIL ENGINEERS; MR. BILL
SCHMITZ, VICE PRESIDENT, SALES AND QUALITY CONTROL, GERNATT
ASPHALT COMPANY, COLLINS, NY, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE
NATIONAL STONE, SAND, AND GRAVEL ASSOCIATION; MR. KEVIN BEYER,
GENERAL MANAGER, FARMERS MUTUAL TELEPHONE COMPANY AND FEDERATED
TELEPHONE COOPERATIVE, CHOKIO, MN, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF NTCA
- THE RURAL BROADBAND ASSOCIATION; AND MR. BOB DAGOSTINO,
PRESIDENT AND CEO, DAGOSTINO ELECTRONIC SERVICES, INC.,
PITTSBURGH, PA, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL ELECTRICAL
CONTRACTORS ASSOCIATION
STATEMENT OF MARSIA GELDERT-MURPHEY
Ms. GELDERT-MURPHEY. Thank you, Chairman Chabot and Acting
Ranking Member Ms. Adams and members. I appreciate the
opportunity to speak to you here today.
I am a licensed professional engineer and the Chief
Operating Officer for W. James Taylor, Inc., a woman-owned
small business. I have over 25 years of experience in civil
engineering, design, and construction, 18 of those years with
small businesses.
I serve on the Board of Direction of the American Society
of Civil Engineers, a professional engineering society with
more than 150,000 members representing 50 States. Over half of
ASCE's members work for private engineering firms and a
majority of engineering firms are small businesses.
Every 4 years, since 1998, ASCE has prepared a rating of
the nation's infrastructure in our Infrastructure Report Card.
In the 2017 Report Card, our nation's cumulative grade was a D-
plus.
Poor grades reflect the underinvestment in our
infrastructure. Our nation faces an infrastructure investment
deficit of $2 trillion over the next 10 years. The investment
gap has led to deficient roads and bridges, water main breaks,
inadequate ports and inland waterways, late flights, and so
much more.
Failing to close this infrastructure investment gap brings
serious economic uncertainty for small business. Businesses of
all sizes are directly impacted through this lack of investment
in our nation's infrastructure.
As ASCE highlighted in its 2016 economic study ``Failure to
Act,'' failing to close this infrastructure investment gap
brings significant economic consequences. If not addressed
throughout the nation's infrastructure sectors, the economy is
projected to lose almost $4 trillion in GDP, $7 trillion in
lost business sales, and a loss of 2.5 million jobs in 2025. On
top of those costs, each hardworking American family loses
approximately $3,400 in disposable income each year from the
underperforming infrastructure.
Our nation is at a crossroads. Languishing infrastructure
impedes our ability to compete in the global economy, which
provides meaningful opportunity for small business. We need to
increase our Federal investment to address the national
infrastructure deficit to achieve the economic conditions
needed for the 21st century.
To close the $2 trillion 10-year investment gap we must
increase investment from all levels of government and the
private sector from 2.5 percent GDP to 3.5 percent GDP by 2025.
We should begin with the following steps.
One, protect the competitive procurement of A/E services.
In 1972, the Brooks Act established the use of Quality Based
Selection, QBS, which bolsters small business interest by
providing services not solely based on cost but on
qualifications, increasing small business' competitive edge,
allowing small firms to compete with large firms.
Two, fix the highway trust fund by adding 25 cents to the
Federal motor fuel tax. The current user fee should be raised
and tied to inflation to restore its original purchasing power.
This idea has been led by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and
would provide a necessary infusion of $375 billion over 10
years and address the $1.1 trillion backlog of surface
transportation capital needs. This investment would undoubtedly
benefit small business.
Three, authorize programs to improve deficient
infrastructure by fully funding them in an expedited,
prioritized manner.
Four, recognize that some elements of transportation
policy, such as freight corridors and ports, require a more
strategic focus from the Federal Government.
And, finally, small businesses will benefit from
streamlining the project decisionmaking process. ASCE favors
the idea of ``One Agency, One Decision'' to reduce the time to
reach decisions on projects.
We must take these steps to ensure all businesses, and
especially small businesses, can thrive in the competitive
global marketplace.
When Congress is successful in crafting legislation to
increase investment in infrastructure, it will not only benefit
engineering firms, but any small business that relies on
infrastructure for its livelihood.
That concludes my formal statement. Thank you for your
time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady's time
has expired.
The next gentleman, Mr. Schmitz, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
STATEMENT OF BILL SCHMITZ
Mr. SCHMITZ. Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Adams, and the
members of the Committee, thank you for inviting me to testify
on behalf of the National Stone, Sand, and Gravel Association.
I am Bill Schmitz, Vice President of Dan Gernatt Gravel
Products.
NSSGA advances public policies that protect and expand the
safe and environmentally responsible use of aggregates that
build America's infrastructure and economy. Our industry
directly employs over 100,000 people and supports an additional
450,000 jobs throughout the economy. Aggregates are used in all
construction and public works projects.
Since 1946, the Gernatt family and their companies have
been proud to provide sand, gravel, stone, landscape aggregate,
hot mix asphalt, and trucking to western New York, Buffalo, and
northwestern Pennsylvania. Our locations are spread over three
rural counties where people struggle to find good paying jobs.
We applaud the administration for focusing on increased
infrastructure investment. However, we need the funding from
the Federal Government to be more robust, routine, and reliable
if we are to truly fix our nation's infrastructure woes.
Infrastructure projects help create jobs and allow the
movement of goods that are essential to the American way of
life. Our system must be modernized to meet current demands,
but it takes a long-term commitment. The highway trust fund
must be permanently fixed.
NSSGA also supports the administration's focus on
infrastructure improvements to rural areas where the investment
is desperately needed.
Rural areas lack a critical component of today's technology
infrastructure. In our case, the absence of broadband has cost
us hundreds of thousands of dollars to work around this lack of
connectivity.
I work with State and local governments on infrastructure
projects and permitting daily. These are important
conversations for my company. But decisions made at the Federal
level impact us more deeply.
When Congress delays the enactment of a highway bill or
puts off fixing the highway trust fund yet again, the impact on
small business is greater, especially in our industry. Since we
provide the material and we use the system, we need consistent
and steady direction from our Federal partners.
At Gernatt, we think of infrastructure in four ways. First,
the means to get our material to our customers. Second, the way
we communicate with our facility suppliers and customers.
Third, the materials that we provide that are used in
infrastructure projects. And lastly, the projects themselves.
We believe that streamlining the permitting for a road so
that it can be built in 2 years instead of 10 is a great stride
forward. However, if the material needed to build it takes 5 or
10 years to permit due to overregulation, then the cost of the
project is doubled or tripled and we are failing to fix the
root of the problem.
Like 70 percent of the NSSGA members that are small
businesses, at Gernatt we do not have the resources that larger
companies use to comply with confusing, overlapping, and
unnecessary regulations.
In 2006, the Corps of Engineers shut down our South Dayton
plant, suddenly designated part of our water treatment system
as wetlands, even though these same conditions had not changed
for 40 years. This decision reversed our decades-long dialogue
with the agency on this operation.
Even though we disagreed, we worked with the Corps to fix
this alleged disturbance. Unfortunately, the Corps had no clear
idea of what appropriate mitigation might be and forced us to
constantly change course in order to stay in business.
This lack of clarity was devastating and took hundreds of
thousands of dollars and 12 years to resolve, 12 years that
could have been spent with other projects and supporting our
workers and local community.
I would encourage this Committee to look at ways of
reforming our regulatory system so Gernatt does not have to
experience another unnecessary 12-year quest for answers.
As my personal experience shows, small businesses in all
sectors depend on clear and certain Federal rules and
regulations as well as robust investment in infrastructure.
Gernatt supplied material to the Ohio Street Harbor
Connector project in Buffalo, which cleaned up environmental
problems, created water side parkland and recreational ship
canal access, built a beautiful parkway. This project spurred
millions in residential and commercial development. When
regulators and small businesses work together great things can
and do happen.
Throughout America, thousands of small businesses like ours
partner with the government to improve the communities we live
and work in. In addition to streamlining
regulations, we must have predictable and steady
infrastructure funding that small businesses can depend on.
Thank you for my opportunity to speak today.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. It is good to have
you back.
Mr. Beyer, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF KEVIN BEYER
Mr. BEYER. Chairman Chabot, Acting Ranking Member Adams,
thank you for the honor to testify before the Committee today.
My name is Kevin Beyer, and I am the General Manager of Farmers
Mutual Telephone Company and Federated Telephone Cooperative,
which provide broadband, voice, and cable TV service in rural
Minnesota. I am also a board member of NTCA - The Rural
Broadband Association, which represents about 850 small rural
telecom providers in 46 States.
There appears to be widespread consensus that high-speed
broadband is now essential infrastructure and necessary to
modern life in America. The public policy questions that remain
are how to best ensure that the service is available,
affordable, sufficient, and sustainable in high-cost rural
areas that don't attract private investment on their own
without an underlying support mechanism.
It is important in the first instance to understand that
investment in many rural areas does not offer a practical
business case for broadband deployment. What rural consumers
can realistically afford to pay would not even cover the cost
of operating the network, much less the enormous capital
expenditures necessary to deploy broadband over vast and often
rugged terrain.
Additional resources are needed in such situations to help
make the business case for broadband investment in ongoing
operations. In addition, considerations should be given to
existing programs that would help to ensure such resources are
directed to the right places to promote and sustain such
investment.
For example, the Federal High-Cost Universal Service Fund,
or USF, provides direct support to keep broadband rates
affordable for small businesses and residential consumers. This
support provides the business case needed to justify spending
or borrowing the upfront capital needed to deploy scalable,
advanced broadband networks.
It is important to note that the High-Cost USF program has
undergone extensive reforms in recent years to reorient the USF
program towards broadband, ensure funding is targeted to where
it is needed, and define what the FCC considers an efficient
level of support in each area.
In addition, high-cost support recipients must meet
specified deployment obligations and geocode every new location
to which they deploy broadband utilizing USF support.
Leveraging the existing USF program in many infrastructure
initiatives would allow for quick and effective implementation
and help avoid the costly and time-consuming exercise of
building a program from scratch.
The USDA Rural Utility Service has long been an important
source of financing for many rural providers as they seek to
deploy advanced broadband networks. Congress directed RUS to
create a new $600 million rural broadband loan and grant pilot
program in its recent omnibus spending bill and included
language to direct the funding to areas with the worst service.
While this is a good start, even more resources will be
needed to spur broadband deployment, and we would encourage
Congress in future infrastructure initiatives to include the
same protections and also explicitly ensure that these efforts
complement ongoing USF and RUS programs rather than competing
with one another in a way that undermines the cause of rural
broadband and effective use of those resources.
Other key principles that should be considered as well:
Regardless of what mechanism is used to provide support,
funding recipients should have proven track records and
demonstrate the ability to deploy and sustain high-speed
broadband networks. Small businesses and others depend on
reliable service providers to locate and stay in rural America.
As consumers demand more from their broadband connections,
networks should be reliably upgradeable to even higher speeds.
Precious resources will be wasted if we aim only for the
capabilities needed today and miss out on the network
investments that should last for decades.
While the business case for broadband is the essential
first step, it is also important to address barriers to
deployments of networks. Congress should streamline permitting
processes to ensure small businesses with limited staff don't
expend scarce resources or suffer from significant delays to
secure costly and potentially duplicative approvals for network
construction.
We recognize that gathering more granular data on broadband
availability is important, but please take care to ensure that
such data is not collected in different ways by multiple
agencies. We should aim for only one set of reports to one
agency with consistent granular data that can be used to help
guide policy.
Again, it is my pleasure to be here today, and I look
forward to your questions and working with you on these issues.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Dagostino, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF BOB DAGOSTINO
Mr. DAGOSTINO. Thank you, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member
Adams, members of the Committee, for inviting me to testify
today. On behalf of the National Electrical Contractors
Association, NECA, I greatly appreciate the opportunity to
submit a statement for the record. The Committee is to be
commended for holding this important hearing.
My name is Bob Dagostino, and I am the Owner of Dagostino
Electronic Services. We are a Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, based
company founded in 1973 with over 100 employees that design,
install, maintain technology solutions for voice, data, video,
security, and control systems.
We at Dagostino Electronics are proud members of the
National Electrical Contractors Association where I have had
the honor to serve on the board of directors for the Western
Pennsylvania Chapter since 2015.
NECA's 4,000 contractors play a crucial role in the
construction and maintenance of our nation's power,
infrastructure, building, data centers, hospitals, schools, and
so much more, all with safety as our number one priority.
When natural disasters occur our linemen work long hours in
inclement weather conditions to restore power to our homes and
businesses. We have a track record of installing and
maintaining complex electrical and communication systems in
places like airports and rail systems. And we are working every
day to build the next generation of reliable power and
communication networks and infrastructure that will advance
this nation into the next digital revolution.
We at NECA are committed to empowering lives and
communities across this great nation.
After decades of underfunding our nation's infrastructure,
we are beginning to see the signs of reinvigorating growth.
While the recent proposal from the White House was encouraging,
NECA holds concerns over the lack of direct Federal funding.
More direct Federal spending is critical to ensure the safety,
security, and efficiency of our transportation, power, and
communication networks.
As this Committee searches to understand the relationship
between infrastructure development and small business, they
should keep in mind that work done well the first time by
qualified contractors and highly skilled tradespeople is the
very best return on investment that can be made. Therefore,
Congress should continue the application of the prevailing wage
laws on Federal infrastructure projects.
The next topic I hope to address is a paramount issue for
thousands of small businesses we represent, and that is prompt
payment. Even with deadlines imposed by prompt payment laws,
small business contractors continue to tell horror stories of
not receiving payment for months beyond their due date, if not
years on end. Small businesses knowingly assume risk by
agreeing to complete work, but they do so under the assumption
they will be paid within a reasonable period of time.
To begin the process of fixing these issues, we at NECA
encourage members of the Committee to continue their support
for the Representatives Fitzpatrick, Knight, and Murphy bill,
the Small Business Payment for Performance Act. Legislation
such as this is needed to address the burden placed on small
businesses by improper pay practices of the construction
industry.
The next matter concerning my company and many others
around the country is that no matter how much infrastructure
work comes down the pike there is no way to complete it without
an adequate workforce. That said, this Committee is well aware
of the workforce shortage we face in the trades. If our nation
is to address its infrastructure needs, it must first address
this problem.
In response to the challenge, NECA has turned to its 70-
year-old partnership with the International Brotherhood of
Electrical Workers that has produced the best electricians,
linemen, and communication craftspeople in our nation's
history. Our joint apprenticeship program with the IBW receives
no Federal money and educates students through as many as
10,000 hours of on-the-job and classroom education.
NECA believes that through these three simple objectives we
can responsibly address the skilled labor shortage, and they
are to further encourage our young people to recognize the
opportunities that a job in the construction and maintenance
trades presents; secondly, to financially incentivize young
people who choose this route and the employers who hire these
new workers; and third, to remove any regulatory roadblocks for
potential entry into the trades.
With all that said, as a small business contractor, I am
extremely encouraged by this Committee's efforts to understand
the role that small businesses play with infrastructure
projects. The overarching themes of funding, contract reform,
and workforce shortages can be found nationwide.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and we are
optimistic that this Committee remains committed to addressing
the challenges that face our nation's small
businesses and the need for the infrastructure investments
so this country can compete in a global economy.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. DAGOSTINO. You are quite welcome.
Chairman CHABOT. I will now recognize myself to begin the
questioning for 5 minutes.
And I will begin with you, Ms. Geldert-Murphey.
In your testimony you mentioned the ``One Agency, One
Decision'' policy for Federal permitting. Could you explain the
impact that that would have on small businesses and the
American economy?
Ms. GELDERT-MURPHEY. Absolutely. ``One Decision, One
Agency'' will reduce the time of delays on projects. And small
businesses in particular can't absorb the risk that goes along
with long delays on projects.
Large firms can absorb, they have the ability to absorb the
risks in delays. And so it is very, very important for small
businesses that we get a decision, we come to an answer. The
answer may be that the project can't be constructed, that it is
not appropriate, and that is fine.
Let's come to the answer so that we can move on and use our
resources on projects that are good for our economy and good
for our businesses. And small businesses can't tolerate some of
those delays in the way that large businesses can.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
And, Mr. Schmitz, I will turn to you.
Could you talk about the importance of strong
infrastructure in the rural areas and small towns? It seems
like we talk about it a lot in terms of our cities, but I think
sometimes the more rural areas get kind of short shrift. And if
you could talk about that, I would like to hear what you have
to say.
Mr. SCHMITZ. Oh, thank you very much. It is a great
question.
Our infrastructure, we are rural, farm-to-market
communities that we live and work in, and we have got firearms,
we have got other businesses. When the infrastructure is bad
and there is a detour on a road it is not oftentimes there is
another State highway available for 10 to 15 miles. Detours are
a killer to many small businesses.
Bridges are restricted, roadways are restricted. It costs
the businesses money. And in today's competitive marketplace,
those costs are borne by the small businesses. Employees cannot
get to work. Projects take much longer than they should when a
bridge is identified or a failing road is identified.
Oftentimes the length of time it takes to get permits to
reconstruct it is a huge burden. It is several years, 2 to 3, 5
years at times to reconstruct a bridge that had an unknown
structural defect.
Chairman CHABOT. Very good. Thank you very much.
Mr. Beyer, I will turn to you now.
This Committee held a hearing earlier this month on the
disappearing business case for investing in rural broadband
markets. What can Congress do to incentivize carriers, large
and small, to invest in deploying broadband services to rural
communities?
Mr. BEYER. Thank you for the question, Chairman.
The RUS program that they provided funding for will
certainly help in that case, but we need coordination and
funding through both the USF program and the RUS program and
make sure that they are not competing with each other to serve
the same areas.
Once the broadband is built and has provided the services
required by the program, we should make sure that those scarce
resources are not building duplicate networks over the top.
So coordination is one of the big concerns we would have.
And then, of course, the USF fund has been underfunded and has
continuing underfunding needs, so we would hope that additional
funds could be supplied to the USF program.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
And I have got about a minute left, Mr. Dagostino, so I am
going to conclude with you.
What would you say is the number one challenge that small
businesses experience due to lack of certainty from the Federal
Government when it comes to infrastructure or any of the groups
that you mentioned? What do you think is one of the most
significant challenges with respect to infrastructure?
Mr. DAGOSTINO. Well, one reality is that many of the
software programs that we as contractors use today are becoming
to be cloud-based solutions, which the connectivity of
broadband is critical so that our on-site people can have
collaboration on the project and efficiency, accuracies of
performing the work.
And we, as small businesses, are able to actually compete
against larger companies because of the fact that the software
that is cloud-based today gives us the same kind of competitive
advantage that they would of having such a large software
program. There is just one.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay. Thank you very much. I appreciate
it. My time has expired.
The acting Ranking Member, Ms. Adams, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Schmitz, what types of Federal highway projects will be
or currently are impacted by the highway trust fund and how can
we improve upon this resource?
Mr. SCHMITZ. The issue we have with the instability of the
highway trust fund is the States' abilities to properly plan
long-term transportation projects and transportation plans.
Without a steady source of funding, the planning and the actual
completion of projects is often impacted by delayed funding.
And especially in the Northeast where we operate, we are a
seasonal business. You all hear Buffalo, there is two seasons,
construction and winter, and this year the construction season
is going to be very short. So we have to be ready to go when
summer comes.
And it is not a 12-month program; it is 6 months. And we
need to know, we need that certainty, and stable Federal
funding translates to State programs that work, which
translates to local programs that work. So it is a trickle-down
effect.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay. Is private financing for construction
projects linked to the availability of resources in the trust
fund?
Mr. SCHMITZ. We have tried in New York to do some private
financing, but that is difficult with the uncertainty of the
Federal funding and matching funds. Again, the certainty of the
program is paramount. A fixed highway trust fund equals steady
funding, and people can plan 5 and 10 years out, and businesses
are willing to invest when they have the certainty of what is
going to happen in a few years.
Ms. ADAMS. Right.
Mr. Dagostino, rural areas can be hit hard by economic
instability given they are in isolation and in some communities
limited diversity of industries. What investments would be most
useful to spur growth in these regions?
Mr. DAGOSTINO. Well, coming from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
one of the industries that we had in there for many years was
the steel industry. And what brought the steel industry to
Pittsburgh was the natural resources of infrastructure of
rivers and railroad.
Today's digital era that we begin to live in today requires
connectivity, be it broadband, internet. So the rural area
needs to be served because it is no longer location, location,
location; it is connectivity, connectivity, connectivity.
Without that connectivity, the small business doesn't have
a chance. The farmers, agriculture, every facet is affected by
the lack of that infrastructure in place. And I am speaking
strictly on the technology component of that.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay. What Federal efforts do you suggest to
target infrastructure to these areas in order to facilitate
growth and attract small businesses to locate and remain in
rural communities?
Mr. DAGOSTINO. I would say that there are a few things. One
is, of course, the funding necessary to get some of these
projects off the ground to give certainty. Two, the
application, even if they go into a private partnership type of
environment. That, and to understand that the projects should
have more of a master plan, if you will.
Infrastructure consists of a combination of highways, high-
voltage tires, wireless connectivity, fiber optics, smart
cities. I think if we sit back more and create more of a master
plan that we can leverage the moneys that are spent across all
of these infrastructure efforts.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay.
Construction and manufacturing, which are both dominated by
small businesses, are sensitive to the business cycle. How can
infrastructure help firms mitigate the effect of these
instabilities?
And anyone may take that question. You have got about 45
seconds.
Ms. GELDERT-MURPHEY. I would be happy to answer that
question.
Ms. ADAMS. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. GELDERT-MURPHEY. Thank you.
You know, I think the important thing is that it goes back
to what we have all been saying, is that there needs to be
consistency, stability, reliability. We need to know that there
is strong Federal leadership in the infrastructure.
And so as long as there is strong Federal leadership in the
infrastructure, the States, the locals, the businesses, private
enterprise can follow along and do what they are designed to
do. But we need strong Federal leadership to progress our
infrastructure and have a strong economy, increase the GDP,
increase income, increase jobs.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from Iowa, Mr. King, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. KING. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank all the witnesses for your testimony.
I am sitting here listening to each piece of this
testimony. And, first, as background, I started a construction
company in 1975, and so I have got something in common with
everybody here along the way.
The engineering component that you have testified to, Ms.
Geldert-Murphey, and the sand and gravel and the surfacing, we
have done a lot of the support work for that and worked around
that a lot.
And then with the broadband piece, I was the first customer
of DSL service on two different telephone networks when they
connected.
And they said, ``Well, the reason we haven't really
deployed this yet is because we don't know how to price it.''
And I said, ``Wire it up to my place, because I am the guy
that doesn't care how much it costs. I have got to have it.''
And then with the electrical side of this thing, too.
So here is my reflection as I am listening. Last Sunday
after church I went over to look at my son's new shop for a
construction company, and I had watched it come together here
over the last few months. And it is almost close to done. It is
out in the country, a couple miles from the nearest town and a
mile from their house. Works out really great.
But what I am seeing in there--first, no, I have to reflect
a little bit. I built a shop in the country in 1979. I ended up
moving the office to town because we needed to be closer to the
post office when we put a bid in and to get that in by a
postmark time. And we drove to engineering firms to pick up a
set of plans and leave a $50 or $100 deposit for that roll of
plans.
That is how it was then. And today we download the plans
off high-speed internet and we bid electronically. And that
shop is set up now to where he can control the locks on it from
anywhere in the world, and he can watch the monitoring cameras
on what is going on inside and outside from anywhere in the
world, whether it is high-speed service, which is what you were
thinking, Mr. Beyer. You have to have the service on the other
end, too.
But it is fantastic the changes that have taken place. So
he has rural water there, he has all the electrical he needs.
That was built by the co-op back in the day. And then the fiber
optics coming in.
And I said, ``What kind of speed do you have?''
And he said, ``It is fiber optic. Anything I want to pay
for I can have here.''
So all of those utilities that you see in the center of the
city is out in rural Iowa, and there is nothing that can slow
him down that I can see in being competitive in his--except the
logistics--in anyplace in the world.
So I am thrilled by the progress we have made, but I am
also very well aware that that progress hasn't been made
everywhere. This is an exception as far as I view it.
So as I listened to the testimony, a couple of things came
to mind. One is, I want to let you know how much I support
high-speed services everywhere. We are controlling tractors
with them and managing farms with them, and it goes on and on.
And the imagination that we had 10 years ago doesn't begin to
look into what we are actually doing today.
But a couple of things that came up that I was concerned
about that I wanted to ask on is this, that I would think
everybody here as witnesses are interested in getting the most
out of the dollars we have to build the maximum amount of
infrastructure.
And so when the highway trust fund came up, I started to
think about when I came into this town I had the formula, and I
am not sure it is exactly the same today but it is close. They
announced that 28 percent of that trust fund was being used to
satisfy environmental and archeological requirements.
And I would say about 20 percent went to Davis-Bacon. That
is the standard number that I have used for a long time, Davis-
Bacon wage scales. Three percent went to trail. Seventeen
percent went to mass transit. That left about 32 percent for
roads and bridges, which is my shorthand version for trust fund
dollars.
Is that a concern to any of you, about actually building
more roads and bridges out of the trust fund dollar and getting
more out of the dollars we have, or is the ask ``let's add more
to the pie'' rather than redirect the spending within it?
I would start with you, Ms. Geldert-Murphey.
Ms. GELDERT-MURPHEY. Thank you. And I appreciate that
question.
You know, it is a twofold answer. Number one, we are
dealing with dollars on the Federal highway trust fund that
started in 1993 and haven't been increased or indexed since
then. So they don't have the buying power even in the
percentages that we were looking at before.
However, we do believe that we need to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of--that is in our ethics canon for civil
engineers--to protect the health, safety, and welfare. We
believe strongly in that.
However, we do believe, as we said, with the ``One Agency,
One Decision'' suggestion, that that would help expedite
matters and take time towards working towards projects and
funding working towards projects.
Mr. KING. I am going to run out of time here, so please.
Ms. GELDERT-MURPHEY. Okay.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
Mr. Schmitz, if the chair would allow me to let the
witnesses answer.
Yeah. If you could keep your answers relatively brief, but
we will go right down.
Mr. SCHMITZ. Okay. Thank you.
I would concur with what was just said. But if we can build
projects quicker, streamline coordination between agencies,
Federal and State, these projects that need to be addressed
could be built more timely and efficiently. And the key is a
standard plan, a long-term plan to do this so that we can move
forward.
Mr. BEYER. So in our case the USF fund is the underpinning
for us to be able to get loans and be able to keep a network in
place and operate that network at a rate that a consumer can
afford.
And, yes, it would be very good for agencies to have a
single reporting system that we could use, and instead of
reporting to every agency separately, report to one separate
form that would be shared across agencies.
But we do need additional funds in USF. The FCC has
recognized that and so has Congress.
Chairman CHABOT. Mr. Dagostino.
Mr. DAGOSTINO. In reference to the application of any
infrastructure in that nature, I would say that that creates a
pathway for us, a pathway to either lay fiber optics, a pathway
perhaps to connect an electric grid.
So, again, getting back to my earlier point of looking at
this on a master plan schedule would be the very most
beneficial that the government can do is to try to do it in
that fashion, keeping in mind that we want to get the work
performed by the most qualified individuals so that we get the
longest life cycle out of something. It is not just the initial
investment of cash, but let's look at it in more of a life
cycle than just the initial cost.
Mr. KING. Thank you.
Yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Evans, who is the
Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax, and
Capital Access, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dagostino, the Governor of Pennsylvania announced
investments of $60 million for 12 drinking water, wastewater,
nonpoint source projects across 12 counties to PENNVEST. Can
you put that in context a little bit when you talk about
connectivity versus location as a model of what you are
referring to in terms of this conversation?
Mr. DAGOSTINO. In reference to wastewater?
Mr. EVANS. Well, just in reference to--waste water is one
example. But the fact that here is a State making investment in
infrastructure. Can you just speak to--because you used the
word ``connectivity.''
Mr. DAGOSTINO. Connectivity, right.
Mr. EVANS. Yes.
Mr. DAGOSTINO. Right. And I think, well, in that case there
that what we are looking at also is maybe not so much a
centralized location but more of a distributive type of
topology, if you will, of these types of infrastructures so
that they can lend themselves to be either primary or secondary
path connectivity, support needs that we have today.
Mr. EVANS. Right. And the reason I probably ask you that is
this is the first time I have heard that term used in terms of
connectivity versus. Usually most people say location,
location. And what I am hearing you say is sort of like a new
world we are operating in.
Mr. DAGOSTINO. Most definitely. We are in a digital era.
Mr. EVANS. Right.
Mr. DAGOSTINO. The Internet of Things, the industrial
Internet of Things, the blockchain environment. There are so
many new things that are coming into that we need to prepare
ahead of time to address them, and to leverage these new
technologies to do one thing, and that is to make our lives
that much better.
Mr. EVANS. You sort of saw the direction I was going in the
questioning about the aspect of connectivity, as the gentleman
has just expressed, about local government, State government,
local government, and better use of the dollars.
Can you speak a little bit to that?
Mr. BEYER. I can speak a little bit.
So in our case, in Minnesota, we have a border-to-border
program that helps fund broadband build-outs. And that program
works in conjunction with Federal programs, such as the USF
program or RUS lending programs, that allow us to build fiber
optics to provide that connectivity that they are talking
about.
But the topography, as he speaks of, is more of a
distributed network, and we do need to get fiber connectivity
for the bandwidth that continues to grow that our small
businesses need to operate.
Mr. SCHMITZ. That is a very good question. In our case,
where we do business is where the natural resources are
deposited. So the most logical areas are where the natural
resources are good, which are often rural areas, and for us to
competitively compete in business and to do business we need
the connectivity of broadband.
And currently, as I said in my testimony, that we had to
invest in a private microwave network just so we were able to
do business in today's world. So it is very important for this
to be available not only to us, but to our customers, our
suppliers, our employees, so that we can communicate in today's
world.
Ms. GELDERT-MURPHEY. Thank you.
With regard to State and local agencies, particularly from
our perspective, we have seen a lot of them step up over the
last 4 years; 26 States have added a gas tax. But they need a
strong Federal partner. And that is what we have had in a long
time, and that is the way the system has been set up, to have
that strong Federal partner.
You know, as the Constitution has in the Commerce Clause,
that is to look at the farm-to-port cost. That helps the rural
areas, but understanding we need to have strong urban areas as
well.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back.
The gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Blum, who is the Chairman of
the Subcommittee on Agriculture, Energy, and Trade, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. BLUM. Thank you, Chairman Chabot.
Thank you to our panelists for being here today.
Congressman King is from western Iowa; I am from
northeastern Iowa. As I tour my district of 20 counties, the
number one economic issue in my district is lack of workers,
workforce development.
Highway and heavy contractors in particular, we cannot find
people to go out and do the work. And these are good-paying
jobs, with good benefits, that can't be exported to China or to
Mexico, one of the reasons I love infrastructure.
So I would like to hear from each of you, if you would, on
what can we do, what can your industry do, what can we do at
the Federal Government level, to ensure a more reliable stream
of workers.
I have talked to Treasury Secretary Mnuchin, I have talked
to Speaker Paul Ryan, I have talked to the administration, and
I have said the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act bill is a good thing for
business in our economy, get us growing at maybe 3 percent GDP
a year.
But I think we can grow 4 percent. But we need a couple
things to happen. One is we need welfare reform. You know, if
you are physically and mentally able to work, you should be
working, to put it simply. It is not a simple issue, but that
would summarize my thoughts on it. And secondly, we need tons
in Iowa of legal immigration to help supply the workforce.
So I would love to hear your thoughts on what your
industries are doing and what role can the Federal Government,
could we be playing or should we be playing, in finding you all
workers.
Ms. GELDERT-MURPHEY. I would love to tackle that one. Thank
you very much.
Mr. BLUM. I would love to have the answers.
Ms. GELDERT-MURPHEY. I think that it goes back to what all
of us on this panel have been saying, is consistency,
consistency, consistency, reliability. So the business cycle is
strong if there is strong funding and consistent funding in
place. Then we know that the work is available.
So the workforce that is out there is not attracted to a
business where you don't know as the ups and downs will come
and go for the business cycle. So that is number one.
Number two, we do need to have strong apprenticeship
programs. We do with our company as well, and that helps us. We
have got a lot of young people who come into the apprenticeship
program for our company, and they are grateful to see that they
can earn a good wage.
But once again, we have to have consistent funding to keep
the business strong, the business cycle strong.
Mr. BLUM. Mr. Schmitz.
Mr. SCHMITZ. I believe we really need to focus on
education. And one thing that our company has done is started
doing outreach to children in elementary school and explaining
to them about our industry, the construction industry, and the
fact that our great paying jobs and careers and working with
your hands and with machinery and building America is a good,
great way to make a living, and they should not feel ashamed
that they are not getting a 4-year degree.
There are great tradespeople. You can make a great living
as an electrician, as a plumber. These are good ways to do
that, being a bricklayer, a truck driver. These are jobs that
build America and they should be proud of it. And I think it
really starts as young with education in the schools.
Mr. BLUM. Is there anything the Federal Government should
be doing? I don't typically ask that type of question.
Mr. SCHMITZ. Well, I am not sure exactly----
Mr. BLUM. Because we do way too many things.
Mr. SCHMITZ. Right. And that is the key, but that is
something that I personally pushed. I was president of my local
school board and we pushed vocations. Being rural areas, we
need people. As you said, the farmers need people. I grew up on
a farm. There are not enough people in the rural areas to work,
and it is even worse in the city.
One of the things that could help is the Federal
Government's push for quotas, minority and women's business.
Sometimes those quotas misalign availability of people to work
on the jobs, especially in rural areas. Certainly urban areas
it is a great program, but we are so far removed from the city
that sometimes it creates an issue with quotas.
Mr. BLUM. Thank you.
Mr. Beyer.
Mr. BEYER. Thank you for the question.
We find that healthy communities are the biggest issue for
us because we do have people that are interested in our
industry, our technology. It is exciting, to some extent, as to
the broadband world grows.
But what we often lack is the additional job for that
spouse to come out to our area. And what needs to happen is we
need telehealth, telework, in order for that spouse to have
employment, and that takes those broadband networks for them to
be able to work from home and be connected to society and their
families when they move that way.
And all of that underpinned for us, as we look at it, is
that USF program needs to be sufficiently funded in order for
those networks to continue to be there, to be sustainable and
affordable to consumers.
Mr. BLUM. That is a good point.
And I hope I don't mispronounce your name, Mr. Dagostino.
Mr. DAGOSTINO. Dagostino. It is not a problem.
A few things that we are trying to do, and that is, in our
office we are bringing the children to our office to see what
work is all about. It is just good to get them involved as
early on. Helmets to hard hats is another thing that we
encourage to do.
And any of the acts that are presently in play right now,
for example, the 529 savings act, to be able to leverage that
towards ancillary costs that an apprentice may get going
through their process.
And that is some tax incentive for us as employers to hire
apprentice, that over the years it has gone from the counselors
in school directing all the students to head towards college.
And we did not really get a very good cut of the people that
are going through high school to move into the trades.
So I would encourage if somehow we could get plugged into
those counselors a lot better to give the students options.
Mr. BLUM. Great. Thank you very much. My time has expired.
It is a real issue, though, so thank you for your insight into
that.
I yield back the time I don't have, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman's time
has expired.
After consultation with the acting Ranking Member, we
decided that since we started late and in the interest of
respecting everybody's time, we won't go into a second round
here. I think the answers that we were given were very
comprehensive and very helpful.
And we are talking about a very important issue,
infrastructure, and the importance of it to the American
economy and especially the importance of including small
business in this effort.
So we want to thank you all for helping us to have more
insight than we did before we started this meeting.
And I would also ask unanimous consent that members have 5
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record. Without objection, so ordered.
and if there is no further business to come before the
committee, we are adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 12:57 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]