- DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
[Senate Hearing 116-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND EDUCATION, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
----------
THURSDAY, MARCH 28, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met at 10:09 a.m. in room SD-124, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Roy Blunt (chairman) presiding.
Present: Senators Blunt, Alexander, Hyde-Smith, Rubio,
Lankford, Murray, Durbin, Reed, Shaheen, Merkley, Baldwin, and
Murphy.
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Office of the Secretary
STATEMENT OF HON. BETSY DeVOS, SECRETARY
ACCOMPANIED BY LARRY KEAN, DIRECTOR, BUDGET SERVICE
opening statement of senator roy blunt
Senator Blunt. The Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor
Health, Human Services, Education, and Other Related Agencies
will come to order. We started a few minutes late; the good
news is I will submit part of my opening statement for the
record as a result of part of the delay being on me. Glad we
are here. This is our first budget hearing of this year.
Thank you, Secretary DeVos for appearing before the
Subcommittee again today to discuss the Department's fiscal
year 2020 budget request and help us kick off our process for
this year. Last year we passed the Labor-HHS bill prior to the
start of the fiscal year for the first time in 22 years. The
conference agreement received 93 votes on the Senate floor. It
is a pattern that I would like to see developed, but of course
you do not have a pattern until year two, and so being able to
do this again one more time would make a big difference. I hope
we begin a trend that starts today.
Last year we got 75 percent of the Government funded before
the beginning of the fiscal year. The lesson of the shutdown
should be that we should figure out what we did for 75 percent
of the Government and figure out how to get it done for 100
percent of the Government.
I would say the big obstacle we face in getting that done
is having a number we can work with, and I want to go back to
that as I talk about the budget that you have submitted. The
importance of having a number and having it early really
matters. We had that last year. Many of us on this Committee
advocated that that number that we would actually be able to
use would be available, maybe as part of the beginning of the
fiscal year for those agencies that were not funded last year.
I was disappointed that that did not happen, but it did not.
The fiscal year 2020 budget request for the Department is
$64 billion in discretionary funding. That is almost 10 percent
less than the amount last year.
Now the request, frankly, is similar to last year's request
in many respects. Like last year, it eliminates or consolidates
approximately 30 programs; it significantly reduces funding for
several others. All of the programs sponsored for elimination
or significant reductions were proposed to be eliminated last
year, too. I appreciate the decisions you have to make and just
as we approach this budget, we need to do that remembering that
while we are unlikely when we finally appropriate, to be bound
by the Budget Control Act, it is the law, and the
Administration does not have quite the flexibility to wait for
time to catch up with the law that we do.
Discretionary spending under the Budget Control Act would
reduce spending for non-defense by 9 percent this year. To
remind my friends on the Committee, President Trump did not
sign the Budget Control Act, President Obama did. Secretary
DeVos did not vote for the Budget Control Act, almost every one
of us who were here when we passed it, did. And that is the
law. It is a law that for the last couple of times, at least,
we have figured out that it did not seem to make sense in the
current circumstances, but it is the law as it was put
together, and it is still the law.
We would not be having this hearing in exactly the same way
if we would have come up with what I believe, would have been
more realistic numbers, both for defense and non-defense, as
part of ending last year's work. We did not get that done and I
hope we do get that done quickly.
The President's Budget proposes to reduce non-defense
discretionary by $55 billion. That is almost exactly the
reduction required by the law. The 9 percent that the law would
require the President to use as his top number is the number
that the President's Budget has submitted.
I agree that we really have to constantly evaluate programs
and be willing to reduce or eliminate funding for programs that
are ineffective and prioritize that funding elsewhere. In fact,
Senator Murray and I and others on this Committee did this,
particularly the first 2 years. We worked together when there
was no new money, we set some significant new priorities, and
by doing that, I think we either eliminated or combined 32
different programs.
So, we have capacity to do that, and we should have the
capacity to hear you out and look at the programs that you
think we need to look at more carefully.
There are programs here that are unlikely to be eliminated
in any final budget and I am sure they will be vigorously
discussed, but I would remind my colleagues the one reason we
have had, for 3 years now and for the first 3 years in well
over a decade, a bipartisan committee report out of this
Committee, is that we have worked hard not to make things we
agree on more partisan than they need to be.
This budget is not that much different from the budget the
President submitted last year. My guess is that the work of
this Committee will not be that much different from the work of
this Committee last year--the work of this Committee, what we
did last year, and we will see how this goes.
So, we are going to have this hearing today. Secretary, I
appreciate your willingness to take this job, the hard work
that you have put into this job, and I am sure there will be a
number of questions about the budget you have submitted.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Senator Roy Blunt
Good morning. This is our first fiscal year 2020 budget hearing.
Thank you, Secretary DeVos, for appearing before the Subcommittee today
to discuss the Department of Education's fiscal year 2020 budget
request and helping us kick off this year's appropriations process.
Last year we passed a Labor/HHS bill prior to the start of the
fiscal year for the first time in 22 years. The conference agreement
received 93 votes on the Senate floor. A pattern begins in year two,
and I hope this is the beginning of a trend that starts today.
The fiscal year 2020 budget request for the Department of Education
is $64 billion in discretionary funding, $7.4 billion, or 10 percent,
less than fiscal year 2019.
This request is similar to last year's request in many respects.
Like last year, it eliminates or consolidates approximately 30
programs, and significantly reduces funding for several others. All of
the programs proposed for elimination or significant reductions were
proposed last year too.
I continue to appreciate the tough decisions this budget forces you
to make, many the result of the caps in place from the Budget Control
Act. The President's budget proposes to reduce non-defense
discretionary by $55 billion or over 9 percent. The request for the
Department of Education is roughly in line with those overall numbers.
I agree that we should constantly evaluate programs and be willing
to reduce or eliminate funding for programs that are ineffective and
prioritize that funding elsewhere. We have made those difficult
decisions in previous budgets and I know we have more we could do in
that regard. However, as similar as this request is to previous ones, I
expect the Committee will have much the same reaction as it did to
those.
This subcommittee will not pass an appropriations bill that
eliminates large State formula grants that support afterschool
programs, STEM education, school safety, and teacher professional
development. We both agree, and I think the entire subcommittee does as
well, that decisions affecting the education of children should be made
as close to the student as possible--by parents, teachers, schools, and
school districts. That's exactly what these programs do, many of which
go directly to local school districts to be used for a range of
activities to best meet the needs of local communities.
Further, while some small, targeted grant programs may not have
widespread impacts simply because of their size, they can be life-
changing for the students and families they touch and build the
evidence-base for States and school districts to fund such activities.
For example, I have seen Special Olympics athletes compete in Missouri
and in the World Games. The limited funding this subcommittee provides
for Special Olympics leverages private resources to help schools
implement comprehensive policies to transform school climates and
ensure that students with disabilities are fully welcomed and included
in student-life. This funding has directly impacted the lives of
thousands of students both with and without intellectual disabilities.
It also provides a model for other schools and districts to support
this kind of work without direct Federal funding.
While the budget makes significant cuts to existing programs, the
budget request does include some new initiatives. For example, there is
a proposal for a new Adult Education Fast Track Apprenticeships for
Low-Skilled Adults program. This subcommittee has strongly supported
investments in apprenticeship programs through the Department of Labor
over the past 4 years. I would like to hear more details on how this
program would be aligned with and complement those programs.
Further, I am also interested in how we can support States and
schools in better preparing all students for college and careers. In
communities across Missouri, I hear about the importance of providing
students with the skills and opportunities to compete for the jobs of
today and the future. When I was in St. Louis in February with the
Secretary of Labor, we met with students taking part in a program run
by the St. Louis Community College's Center for Workforce Innovation.
This program offers students multiple career pathways, including pre-
apprenticeship in advanced manufacturing and pre-employment programs in
aircraft assembly, allowing students to apply any credits earned toward
a degree using Pell grants. I believe it is critical that students have
the opportunity to enhance their education in ways that both help them
earn industry-recognized credentials as well as supports their goal of
receiving a post-secondary degree. I will continue to support programs
that expand STEM education, high-quality career and technical
education, and promotes college affordability and completion with the
goal of getting students into good, well-paying jobs and careers.
Madame Secretary, thank you again for being here today. I look
forward to hearing your testimony and appreciate your dialogue with us
about these and other important issues that impact students at every
level in their academic careers.
Thank you.
Senator Blunt. And I would like to turn to Senator Murray
for her opening remarks.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR PATTY MURRAY
Senator Murray. Well thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Over the past 2 years, you and I have been able to pass
bipartisan spending bills that do invest in our children, our
students, our workers, our patients, women, families. That was
only possible because we did work together and found common
ground and rejected the Administration's harmful budget
requests, including proposals to gut funding for students,
teachers, and public schools and requests for Secretary DeVos's
privatization agenda.
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN
I am very pleased we were able to work together and pass
the most recent Appropriations bill from this Subcommittee
before the start of the fiscal year. Unfortunately, as we all
know, President Trump decided to hold half of our spending
hostage and shut down the Government earlier this year, and
that temper tantrum over a wall that Mexico was supposed to pay
for actually cost our--our economy $3 billion, and it forced
800,000 Federal workers to go without paychecks for over a
month.
In my home State of Washington, thousands of workers at
SeaTac Airport and across the State were forced to work without
pay, take out loans, forced to figure out how to make ends
meet, all because of this manufactured crisis. So, I hope we
can avoid that spectacle this year in this appropriations
process and keep the Government funded.
CRITICAL INVESTMENTS AND BUDGET PROCESS
In addition to rejecting Trump's harmful budget proposals,
we do have to reach a deal to lift the sequester caps and
restore critical investments in defense and middle-class
priorities. I was very proud to be able to reach a deal with
then-Speaker Ryan in 2013, to do exactly that, lift the
sequester caps and restore critical investments. And I am
really glad we have been able to build on that deal since then.
So, Secretary DeVos, with that in mind, I do want to
discuss your budget proposal in front of us today. I always say
a budget is a reflection of your values, and given that your
budget request fails to invest in our youngest learners, our
students in public schools, it fails to help students who are
struggling to better themselves in higher education, and it
fails the student loan borrowers who are saddled with debt--it
sort of speaks volumes about where your priorities lay and who
you are fighting for as the Secretary of Education.
It is also telling that at the same time as you sit before
us requesting these devastating cuts to public education, the
President's budget proposal is still pushing for your
privatization agenda, which neither the public wants, nor has
Congress authorized.
Now, I do want to dig into some of your requested cuts
today because I believe it is important to fully understand
your vision for the future of education in our country. Your
budget requests cut more than $4 billion from afterschool
programs and other needed investments in public school
students, including completely eliminating Federal support for
the program that supports our Nation's teachers and requesting
no additional funding for low-income students, students with
disabilities, at a time when many of our schools are struggling
to meet the needs of those students.
Additionally, I am disappointed that the budget zeros out
funding for Special Olympics education programs. You said this
is about tough choices, but you are also asking at the same
time, for more money for charter schools when you are having
trouble spending the increase Congress appropriated for that
last year.
So, this is not about tough choices, this is about you
prioritizing your agenda over students with special needs.
You have also, once again, failed to take any steps to make
our schools and neighborhoods safer by addressing common sense
gun safety measures or reducing the number of guns in our
schools. This budget proposes cutting funding to colleges and
universities too, that primarily enroll low-income students,
students of color, including Minority-Serving Institutions, and
it proposes to take more than $200 billion from the pockets of
student loan borrowers by making them pay back more, making
some pay back longer, and eliminating debt forgiveness for our
public servants.
These divisive proposals would not only harm students and
families, but they are in stark contrast with the efforts that
Chairman Alexander and I, along with our colleagues in the
House, are making to find common ground today and reauthorize
the Higher Education Act.
SEXUAL ASSAULT
So, Secretary DeVos, I do have many questions about your
budget proposals and other issues at the Department, but I do
also want to take a minute to address the epidemic of sexual
assault on our Nation's college campuses and your department's
proposed Title IX rule.
Over the past year I have spent a lot of time with brave
women who shared their experiences with me of being sexually
assaulted on a college campus. It was not easy for them to
share their deeply painful, and traumatic story, but they did
so because they wanted to help ensure it never happened to
anybody else.
I am very much in awe of these brave women, and men, who
have publicly shared one of the worst moments of their life,
and I am standing with them and will continue to fight the end
of epidemic sexual assault on our Nation's college campuses.
So, I was extremely disappointed and concerned when you
proposed a Title IX rule that would weaken those protections
for survivors and allow colleges to shirk their
responsibilities to investigate claims of sexual assault and
keep our students safe.
I believe if your rule goes into effect, campus sexual
assault will once again be swept under the rug, because
students will not feel comfortable coming forward knowing their
school is less likely to act when they have been assaulted.
So, I genuinely hope that you take the time to read some of
the 100,000 comments students and survivors have submitted on
that rule. And I hope you listen to their stories, listen to
these students, and start over on a rule that actually ensures
schools are doing everything they can to keep students safe and
gives students a fair process that does not force them to be
re-traumatized after they have reported an assault.
DEPARTMENT RESPONSIVENESS TO CONGRESS
And finally, I want to note how concerned I am about the
Department's responsiveness to this Committee's direction. Your
Department has slow-walked the hiring of staff at the Office
for Civil Rights despite explicit direction from this
Committee. You have ignored committee report language directing
the Department to protect student loan borrowers from unfair,
deceptive practices of student loan companies.
The Department has dismissed a Committee directive for a
new competition for an open textbook pilot program designed to
help our college students better afford higher education, and
you have ignored Committee directives to provide relief to
student loan borrowers who were cheated and defrauded by
predatory for-profit colleges, which now stands at 140,000
claims and counting.
What surprised me about this inaction is that during last
year's hearing, Chairman Blunt reminded you of the importance
of being responsive to our Committee. Additionally you have not
responded to a number of requests for information from me about
critical aspects of Department policy and administration, and I
know several of Chairman Scott and Chair DeLauro's letters are
also unanswered.
It is unacceptable and unconstitutional to ignore
Congress's oversight responsibilities and authority. So, I
expect answers to those letters as quickly as possible. And I
hope, in addition to answers to all of our questions today, we
get a commitment from you to respond to those letters in a
timely manner and be responsive to this Committee's direction.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Blunt. Thank you Senator Murray.
Secretary, welcome again today, and we will look forward to
your opening remarks.
SUMMARY STATEMENT OF HON. BETSY DEVOS
Secretary DeVos. Thank you Chairman Blunt. Chairman Blunt,
Ranking Member Murray, and members of the Subcommittee, thank
you for the opportunity to testify on the President's fiscal
year 2020 Budget.
LIMITS ON FEDERAL ROLE IN EDUCATION
I thought it would be useful to begin by recalling
Congress's commitment when it created the U.S. Department of
Education 40 years ago. Then, Congress vowed that the move
would ``not increase the authority of the Federal Government
over education, or diminish the responsibility for education,
which is reserved to the States.'' And, I will add, communities
and parents. This budget reflects a commitment to that
sentiment.
It also recognizes who actually funds the government's
budget--American taxpayers. And so, we propose Congress spend
their money wisely, efficiently, and with restraint. The
President's fiscal year 2020 Budget would reduce overall
funding for Department programs by $7.1 billion, which is a 10
percent decrease from 2019's appropriated level. The budget
eliminates, streamlines, or reduces funding for many programs
that are duplicative, are ineffective, or are nonprofit
organizations already appropriately supported by States,
communities, or private philanthropy.
Our proposed reduction is similar to last year's request
and the year before that, as well. I acknowledge that you
rejected those recommendations. I also acknowledge that it is
easier to keep spending, to keep saying yes, to keep saddling
tomorrow's generations with today's growing debt. But as it has
been said, the Government will run out of other people's money.
Over the past 40 years, Federal taxpayer spending on
education has increased about 180 percent, amounting to over
$1.2 trillion cumulatively, and yet we are still 24th in
reading, 25th in science, and 40th in math when compared to the
rest of the world. Doing the same thing and more of it will not
bring about new results.
SCHOOL CHOICE AND EDUCATION FREEDOM SCHOLARSHIPS
I propose a different approach--freedom. This budget
focuses on freedom for teachers, freedom for parents, and
freedom for all students. A great education should not be
determined by where you live nor by who you know; it should not
be determined by family income and education should not be old-
school, one-size-fits-all all approach. Every student is
unique, and everyone learns differently. Every child should be
free to learn where and how it works for them, where and how it
unlocks their potential.
That is why the President's 2020 Budget proposes a historic
investment in America's students--Education Freedom
Scholarships. Our bold proposal will offer a dollar-for-dollar
Federal income tax credit for voluntary contributions to 501(3)
nonprofit organizations that provide scholarships to school
students, not school buildings. These students, their families,
teachers, schools, States, all can choose to participate in the
program, or they can elect not to participate; it is a choice.
And since the proposal relies entirely on voluntary
contributions to nonprofit organizations, it will not take a
single dollar from local public school teachers, or public
school students. Indeed, our budget maintains current levels of
funding for Title I and IDEA (Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act).
And something else. Education Freedom Scholarships are not
only for students who want to attend private school. In fact,
some States may choose to design scholarships for public school
options, such as apprenticeships or transportation to a
different public school. States have the opportunity to be
really imaginative and to serve the unique needs of their
students.
We do not have to look far to see that education freedom
works. Thanks to a menu of options bolstered by the D.C.
Opportunity Scholarship Program, embraced by teachers, parents,
and students alike, more than half of students in the District
attend schools other than their assigned one. And there is
still significant unmet demand.
OTHER BUDGET PRIORITIES
We propose that Congress double the D.C. program's funding
to $30 million to meet those students' needs. This
Administration believes students of all ages should be free to
pursue multiple pathways to higher education and successful
careers. That is why this budget proposes to expand the use of
Pell Grants for quality, short-term programs. It also invests
in career and technical education and streamlines student loan
repayment. The latter is urgently necessary, because today,
Federal Student Aid holds $1.5 trillion in outstanding loans;
more than total auto debt, and credit card debt, and 43 percent
of those student loans are either in default, more than 30 days
delinquent, or are negatively amortized, and taxpayers are on
the hook for it all.
This budget consolidates numerous repayment plans and
raises the cap on a borrower's monthly payment to 12.5 percent
of discretionary income. This is one way the Federal Government
can become a more responsible lender. Policy should not entice
students into greater debt, nor should they put taxpayer
dollars at greater risk.
Education freedom is not just for parents and students--
teachers need greater freedom as well. We seek to empower
America's teachers and elevate their profession via this budget
with a new total investment of $370 million. I regularly meet
with a number of excellent teachers who tell me they would like
to choose their own professional development and customize it
for their needs. To that end, the budget requests an increase
of $170 million to focus on development that is controlled by
teachers, not dictated by the district office. These teacher
vouchers treat teachers as the professionals they are.
Teachers also tell me about the value of mentors or
residency opportunities. So, we are requesting $200 million to
enable new teachers more opportunities to learn from the best.
It is also essential that teachers and students be safe at
school. In the wake of tragic acts of school violence in our
country, President Trump asked me to lead a Federal Commission
on School Safety. To support the Commission's recommendations,
we request $200 million to help communities develop their own
school emergency plans and to focus on counseling and healthy
behaviors for their students.
In the end, budgets are about priorities. Ours are
students, parents, teachers, and taxpayers. If our country is
to remain secure, strong, prosperous, and free we need students
of all ages who are prepared to pursue successful careers and
lead meaningful lives.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Betsy DeVos
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Murray, and Members of the
Subcommittee:
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the President's fiscal
year 2020 Budget Request for the Department of Education.
The Department's mission is to promote student achievement and
preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational
excellence and ensuring equal access. We can best accomplish this when
we come alongside teachers and parents in their efforts to help each
student pursue the education that works for them.
This Budget supports this Administration's commitment to expanding
education freedom. It maintains funding for key formula grants and
makes targeted investments of taxpayer dollars in education freedom for
school leaders, for teachers, and for students and their families. The
Budget would also expand the opportunity to use Pell Grants for high-
quality, short-term training, enhance workforce development and career
and technical education, and streamline and improve student loan
repayment.
Elsewhere in the President's fiscal year 2020 budget, the
Administration is proposing a Federal tax credit to encourage voluntary
contributions, of up to a national cap of $5 billion each year, to
provide scholarships to elementary and secondary students. I would like
to make three key points about Education Freedom Scholarships that we
hope will help the tax credit win broad support in Congress.
First, it relies entirely on voluntary contributions to State-
identified, non-profit organizations that give scholarships to
elementary and secondary students. So, the proposal does not divert a
single penny from public school teachers or public school students. It
is merely a mechanism to empower families to choose the best
educational options for their children.
Second, it is not a Federal program. States will control the design
of their own programs. States will determine which students will be
eligible, which educational providers can participate, how much
scholarships should be, and every other detail.
Finally, the proposal is not just for students who wish to attend
private schools. States can decide to use scholarships to expand public
school options--such as career and technical education (CTE),
apprenticeships, dual enrollment programs, or transportation to out-of-
zone schools. We hope States will empower families to choose all
options including private education, but I am also committed to letting
States make their own decisions when it comes to their scholarship
programs.
The President's 2020 Budget also demonstrates fiscal discipline.
When it comes to domestic discretionary education spending over the
past couple of years, Congress has ignored the Administration's
recommendations. In fact, Congress has increased the Department's
discretionary spending by billions of dollars.
Since President Trump took office, Congressional appropriations for
U.S. Department of Education programs have increased dramatically--in
spite of the Administration's call to slow spending. We are not doing
our children any favors when we borrow from their future in order to
invest in systems and policies that are not yielding better results.
Overwhelming Federal debt may prove to be the single greatest barrier
that future generations will face in trying to achieve the full
potential of the American dream, and we cannot continue to kick that
can down the road. For fiscal year 2017, Congress appropriated a total
of $68.2 billion in discretionary funds. For fiscal year 2019, Congress
appropriated $71.1 billion--an increase of 4.2 percent.
American taxpayers cannot afford these sorts of increases. What's
more, this Administration dispenses with the tired notion that more
spending equals better results in education. For years, American
taxpayers have been asked to send bigger portions of their paychecks to
the Government, which promises more money will cure what ails
education. But too many students are still left unprepared. So, the
President's fiscal year 2020 Budget includes $64.0 billion in new
discretionary budget authority, a reduction of $7.1 billion from the
fiscal year 2019 appropriated level, or a 10 percent decrease.
American taxpayers have other reasons to be concerned about
education spending. Postsecondary education discretionary and mandatory
funding would make available $131 billion in new taxpayer-financed
student aid to postsecondary students this year, with $100 billion of
that total in new student loans, adding to the almost $1.5 trillion in
the Federal student loan portfolio. Federal Student Aid's loan
portfolio is the largest consumer loan portfolio in America--larger
than that of J.P. Morgan and Bank of America. And 43 percent of those
student loans are in default, more than 30-days delinquent, or
negatively amortized. Another 20 percent of loans are in forbearance or
deferment. Only 24 percent of all loans are being reduced by at least
one dollar in principal, which means the rest of them are growing in
size rather than shrinking, even if borrowers are meeting the terms of
their repayment plan and all legal obligations. American students need
to understand that they are digging themselves into a deep financial
hole and taxpayers deserve fiscal restraint because they are the ones
that could ultimately be left holding the bag. That is why the Budget
proposes crucial student loan reforms which I will discuss in more
detail below.
elementary and secondary education
In the area of elementary and secondary education, the Budget
request reflects our continued commitment to providing States and those
closest to students with the resources and flexibility to ensure that
students facing the greatest challenges can pursue a great education.
In particular, we have protected funding for the key formula grant
programs that support America's most vulnerable children. To supplement
State and local efforts to support nearly 25 million low- income
children, the Budget proposes $15.9 billion for the Title I program--
the same level as the fiscal year 2019 appropriation. And to help
support local efforts to serve nearly 7 million students with
disabilities, the Budget proposes $13.2 billion for Grants to States
under IDEA. That's the same level as the fiscal year 2019
appropriation.
This Budget builds on our efforts to give families more freedom, so
that families can find the best educational setting for their children.
It contains more than $650 million to support public school choice,
including $500 million for opening and expanding high-quality, public
charter schools and for helping finance charter school facilities; $107
million for public magnet schools; and $50 million for districts that
participate in a student-centered funding pilot that will help
districts transition to transparent funding systems where school
funding is based on student needs and money follows children to their
schools.
The Budget also includes new investments to empower teachers and
elevate the teaching profession. Specifically, we are proposing a $200
million demonstration project under the Education Innovation and
Research program that would provide individual professional-
development stipends, or teacher vouchers. These would replace
district-driven, one-size-fits-all professional development activities
with those that empower teachers to select training opportunities
tailored to their individual needs and those of the students they are
serving. In several conversations and roundtables I've recently hosted,
teachers consistently criticize the quality of the professional
development programs they are forced to attend. These stipends will
free teachers to study and learn what they know will most benefit
themselves and their students--not what's dictated to them from the
district office.
The request also includes $200 million for the Teacher and School
Leader (TSL) Incentive grant program to support a new competition
focused primarily on the expansion of quality teacher mentoring and
residency programs. Many of the classroom teachers I've met have spoken
with great passion about the important role that high-quality mentors
and residencies have played in helping them improve their knowledge and
skill and become excellent instructors. Those who weren't so lucky
describe how ill prepared they were for the classroom. We want to test
whether good mentors and residency programs can cost-effectively
improve both teacher induction and retention while creating compensated
leadership opportunities for teacher mentors so that they choose to
stay in the classroom, where their talents are most needed. The
proposed fiscal year 2020 TSL competition also would test the impact of
increased compensation on recruitment and retention of effective
educators in high-need subjects such as STEM and computer science.
This Administration is committed to ensuring that students are able
to learn in safe and secure educational environments. The Budget
includes approximately $700 million, an increase of nearly $200 million
compared to 2019 appropriation levels, for grant programs in the
Departments of Education, Justice, and Health and Human Services, to
give States and school districts resources they need should they choose
to implement the recommendations of the Federal Commission on School
Safety, which I co-chaired. At the Department of Education, we are
proposing a $100 million School Safety State Grant program that would
help build State and local capacity to identify and address the wide
range of school safety and student health concerns authorized under
Title IV-A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA). Our
request also would maintain support for other school safety programs
such as School Climate Transformation Grants, Project Prevent Grants,
and Mental Health Demonstration Grants.
To protect formula grants and to target our investments on key
priorities, the Administration reduced or eliminated funding for
several programs. We recognize that taxpayer funds aren't unlimited,
and that means making some tough but necessary choices. We know that
every program has a constituency that is impassioned about its
importance, but as American families well understand, in order to stick
with the budget, tough choices must be made and even beloved traditions
must be abandoned in order to remain solvent.
First, the Budget does not include funding for the Supporting
Effective Instruction State Grants authorized in Title II-A of the
ESEA, saving $2.1 billion compared to the fiscal year 2019
appropriation. States and local districts have primarily used these
funds for teacher professional development and class-size reduction.
The Administration believes such activities are better funded through
State and local resources, and they could be funded through other
Federal grants, including Title I of the ESEA. There is no evidence
that the Federal taxpayer investments in existing professional
development programs or class-size reduction have meaningfully improved
student outcomes. In fact, students may be better served by being in
larger classes, if by hiring fewer teachers, a district or State can
better compensate those who have demonstrated high ability and
outstanding results.
Second, the Budget does not include funding for Title IV-A's
Student Support and Academic Enrichment Grants, saving $1.2 billion
compared to the fiscal year 2019 appropriation. These flexible funds
are typically used by States and districts to enrich student academic
programs, improve school environments, and deploy education technology.
Title IV-A is neither well-structured nor sufficiently targeted,
leading to most districts receiving less than $30,000, too little money
to have an impact. Title IV-A activities should be, and largely are,
funded through State and local resources, as well as other Federal
programs, including Title I grants.
Third, the Budget does not include funding for 21st Century
Community Learning Centers, saving $1.2 billion compared to the fiscal
year 2019 appropriation. Although before- and after-school programs can
improve student outcomes, 21st Century Community Learning Center
programs do not generate consistent student attendance or yield
consistently improved academic outcomes. The Administration believes it
would be more effective to have local, State, and private resources
support activities that are designed to meet the unique needs of each
community, as well as the needs of its students and parents.
career pathways and postsecondary education
The fiscal year 2020 Budget supports students in continuing their
lifelong learning journeys by investing in career and technical
education, promoting multiple pathways to successful careers, and
streamlining and improving Federal student aid programs. The Budget
also continues support for Federal programs that help prepare low-
income and minority students for postsecondary education and strengthen
postsecondary institutions serving large proportions of minority
students. These proposals support recent congressional efforts to
modernize and reauthorize the Higher Education Act to be responsive to
the needs of both students and employers.
The Budget includes $1.3 billion for Career and Technical Education
State grants, which help ensure that students have access to CTE
opportunities in high school as well as a wide array of postsecondary
options including certificate programs, applied associate degree
programs, and apprenticeships. The Budget also includes $20 million for
CTE National activities to help students enter careers in STEM and
information technology-related programs, such as advanced
manufacturing, biotechnology, engineering technology, allied health,
and mechanics. Additionally, the Budget proposes to double the American
Competitiveness and Workforce Improvement Act fee for the H-1B program
and direct 15 percent of the revenues to the CTE State Grants. The
Budget includes $60 million under Adult Education National Leadership
Activities to support State efforts to create pre-apprenticeship
programs that increase the number of adults who are able to meet the
basic entrance requirements of apprenticeship programs. We have heard
from too many employers that they want to provide apprenticeship
opportunities, but cannot find interested participants who have the
underlying math, science, and reading skills they need to succeed.
There are many paths to successful careers, and Federal student aid
programs should be flexible enough to support students on the path of
their choice. The Budget would expand Pell Grant eligibility to include
high-quality short-term programs, helping more Americans access
education programs that can prepare them for well-paying jobs in high-
demand fields more quickly than traditional degree programs. We should
give students access to a credential that saves them money and gets
them into the workforce more quickly, so they can enjoy the many
rewards associated with performing meaningful work and making a valued
contribution.
The 2020 Budget would also reform campus-based aid programs by
focusing limited resources on bolstering effective workforce
development opportunities for students with the most need. The Budget
proposes to reform the Federal Work-Study program to support workforce
and career-oriented education opportunities for low-income
undergraduate students, rather than subsidizing on-campus employment,
so that low-income students are engaged in work experiences while in
school that will lead to higher-paying jobs when they graduate. Our
proposal also ends the system that diverts the largest portion of
campus-based aid to the institutions that need it least and serve the
fewest high-risk, high-need students. Our proposal would focus scarce
funds on institutions enrolling high numbers of Pell Grant recipients,
rather than their historical participation in the program. We can no
longer tolerate a system that allows advantaged students to enjoy the
prized summer internships while low-income students are limited to
retail, grounds keeping, office, or food service jobs on campus that
likely won't improve their longer term employability.
The 2020 Budget would also save $840 million in fiscal year 2020 by
eliminating the Federal Supplemental Education Opportunity Grant (SEOG)
program, which currently allows institutions to provide grant aid to
students that do not always have the greatest need for assistance and
that provides disproportionate benefits to students already advantaged
by attending more selective institutions.
Importantly, the Budget proposes to improve student loan repayment
by consolidating multiple Income-Driven Repayment (IDR) plans into a
single plan. The numerous IDR options currently offered to borrowers
overly complicate choosing and enrolling in the right repayment plan,
and provide disproportionate benefit to students who complete expensive
graduate education, but are more likely to enjoy higher earning
potential over their lifetime. The proposed single IDR plan would cap a
borrower's monthly payment at 12.5 percent of discretionary income. For
undergraduate borrowers, any balance remaining after 15 years of
repayment would be forgiven. For borrowers with graduate debt, any
balance remaining after 30 years of repayment would be forgiven. The
Budget also proposes auto-enrollment for severely delinquent borrowers
and institutes a process for borrowers to consent to share income data
for multiple years to reduce the burden on an individual borrower to
submit forms and proof of earnings. To facilitate these improvements
and to reduce improper payments, the Budget proposes to streamline the
Department's ability to verify applicants' income data held by the
Internal Revenue Service. This improvement would also make it easier
for students to complete their FAFSA application and would reduce the
added burden to institutions when they are asked to provide additional
verification of student eligibility.
To further simplify the student loan program and take the
Government out of picking winners and losers among students who may
have the same debt and earn the same salary-- simply because their
employers have a different tax status or their parents had different
earnings--the fiscal year 2020 Budget proposes eliminating Public
Service Loan Forgiveness (PSLF) and Subsidized Stafford Loans for new
borrowers. The PSLF program is not only complicated for borrowers to
navigate, partly because of how the program was designed when it began
in 2007, but it also uses Government resources to encourage students to
take jobs based on the tax-status of their employer, rather than on a
student's unique talents or local workforce needs.
The Budget also discontinues the subsidized loan program, as it
provides an after-the-fact benefit that doesn't help students complete
their programs and does not take into account borrower earnings in
their chosen professions. It sends the wrong message to suggest to
students that just because their parents were low-income, they will be
too. The President's Budget proposes to support all borrowers pursuing
any career by streamlining multiple IDR plans into a single IDR plan
which will allow borrowers to make affordable monthly payments based on
their income.
In order to effectively implement the student aid programs, we are
pursuing an innovative strategy to deliver Federal student aid services
and information to our customers, and the Budget includes strong
support for this initiative. Next Gen FSA, will create an improved,
world-class customer experience for FSA's millions of customers, while
creating a more agile, flexible model that will streamline FSA's
existing operations. The key to the Next Gen FSA transformation will be
a comprehensive, FSA-branded customer engagement layer that will create
an environment where the Department's customers will receive clear,
consistent information and readily accessible self-service options at
every stage of the student aid lifecycle, something I think we can all
agree is worth supporting.
The Budget proposes to restructure and streamline college
preparation programs by transitioning a number of the Federal TRIO
Programs into a $950 million State formula grant program and
eliminating GEAR UP, which currently supports activities that could be
supported under the proposed TRIO State formula grant program. These
grants would support evidence- based postsecondary preparation programs
designed to help low-income students progress through the pipeline from
middle school through postsecondary education, and give more
flexibility to States to design activities that meet the unique needs
of their students. It also reduces wasteful spending by institutions on
writing elaborate proposals and by the Department on hosting large
proposal review panels--money that would be better spent on students
than review panels.
The Budget also supports important investments in improving the
academic quality, institutional management and capacity, infrastructure
and student support services of Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs)
and Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). Specifically,
the Budget proposes to create efficiencies and reduce the cost of
applying for grants by consolidating six MSI programs into a $148
million formula grant program, which will provide funds the
institutions can rely on for longer-term investments and to implement
best practices proven effective by others. In recognition of the
extraordinary historic contribution provided by HBCUs, the Budget
includes $626 million for programs that provide funding to help these
institutions strengthen their capacity to provide the highest quality
education.
Finally, the Budget eliminates funding for many discretionary
programs that do not address national needs, duplicate other programs,
are ineffective, or are more appropriately supported with State, local,
or private funds--saving the taxpayer $6.7 billion.
The Budget reflects our commitment to spending taxpayer dollars
wisely and efficiently while supporting our Nation's students of all
ages. Because that's who budgets are for--students. If this country is
to remain secure, strong, prosperous, and free, we need students who
are prepared to pursue successful careers and lead meaningful lives.
The Government must resist the urge to pick winners and losers among
students, institutions, and occupations. Instead, we must encourage and
enable every student to be their best self and live their best life.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify. I will be happy to
respond to any questions you may have.
Senator Blunt. Well, thank you Secretary.
WORKFORCE TRAINING
Let's talk a little about workforce training first. Clearly
this is in most places around the country, a very highly
employed workforce, in terms of percentage of Americans
employed. I think in our State--my State of Missouri, the
number is 3.2 percent. The mayor of Springfield, my hometown,
was in the other day, and he said the number is 2 percent
unemployed. People are at work and more and more of the recent
trips I am taking home people are talking about the people they
have gone ahead and hired, but who really are not ready yet for
the jobs they already have and they are--a new term I had not
heard before used two or three times, was incumbent training.
You know, training the workforce they already have.
Constantly the idea comes up of what we can do to give
people more information and better choices earlier. All of our
funding programs have very much focused on traditional higher
education, 2-year, 4-year college degrees.
What can we do to make it more possible for people to get
into 15-week certifiable programs? Is there some way we could
restructure the Pell Grant so that some of them could be used
for certification programs, and if we did that, who would be
the more logical gatekeeper in that kind of world?
Secretary DeVos. Senator, great, great questions and this
is an issue for all of us to grapple with and to find ways to
help individuals to really move on to their next opportunities.
We know that there are over 7 million jobs going unfilled
today, and one of the proposals the budget makes is around
short-term Pell Grants to allow for high-quality certification,
or certificate programs to access, and that is part of the
proposal.
Another part, I think, is really wrapped into this notion
of education freedom that we believe should expand from the
youngest of ages through lifelong learning. And the proposal we
have to create a Federal tax credit that States could then opt
to take and use within their State to create programs to meet
their own unique needs, could allow for expansion of
apprenticeship programs in high school--starting in high
school, expansion of dual enrollment programs.
I happen to agree with you that students need to learn much
earlier on what some of their options are and their
opportunities for advancement, and so these are just a couple
of the ways that States could address these things with a new
and creative approach.
APPRENTICESHIPS
Senator Blunt. Secretary Acosta and I went to the
Carpenter's Union training facility in St. Louis earlier this
year, and they were talking about the lost decade that most
people in that program have. That 10 years after someone gets
out of high school, when they are sort of searching for
something to do, and usually do that in very low skill, low-
compensated jobs, and then back in a program.
Another thing, by the way, we learned at that program that
we have been working on in our State is, what does it take to
walk at the same time with the trade union certificate and an
associate degree. And the answer at this program was 15 hours,
and all of our potential journeyman know that from day one,
what those 15 hours need to look like, and how, over the 2 or 3
years of this program while they are working, they can get it.
The other kinds of apprenticeship programs that are not
necessarily the trade union programs, how do we certify whether
they qualify for a 15-week certificate or the access to Pell
Grants that you mentioned in this report?
Secretary DeVos. Well, I think these are very important
questions and we would look forward to working with Congress to
put the appropriate guardrails around such a program and
suggest that this is a really important time for employers for
business and industry to be working closely with educators to
help create those programs.
The Swiss model actually has a lot to be learned and gained
from, and I would recommend that we look more closely at how
they approach apprenticeships. Three quarters, almost three
quarters of high school students are in an earn-and-learn
situation and in a wide variety of paths, of avenues. I think
those are great opportunities for us to really look at and
embrace but would look forward to working with you.
EDUCATION FREEDOM SCHOLARSHIPS
Senator Blunt. All right, very good.
Let me ask one more question. You have mentioned, now
again, about the Education Freedom Scholarships. You are not
asking for anything in this appropriation for that. That is
purely Finance Committee jurisdiction.
Secretary DeVos. It is part of the Department of Treasury's
budget.
Senator Blunt. Not that our members should not have
questions about it, but there is nothing we are asking for
here.
Secretary DeVos. It does not create a new program, just
creates a new opportunity.
Senator Blunt. And the funding would come through a Finance
Committee decision.
Secretary DeVos. Yes.
Senator Blunt. All right, thank you.
Senator Murray.
FOR PROFIT COLLEGES AND BORROWER DEFENSE
Senator Murray. Secretary DeVos, since you assumed office,
Federal student loan borrowers who have been cheated by their
colleges, and overwhelmingly by predatory for-profit colleges,
have been blocked from getting the relief that they do deserve.
You tried to reduce the amount of debt relief students can
receive and you unsuccessfully tried to block new rules put in
place by the Obama administration to streamline the borrower
defense process and put in additional protections for our
students. And according to the information that you provided to
this Committee, roughly, 140,000 borrower defense claims are
pending review by your Department, and this number seems to
increase by hundreds every day.
When was the last time the Department approved a borrower
defense claim?
Secretary DeVos. Senator, thanks for your question, but
before--I will be happy to answer that, but before I do, I just
want to address one thing that you said in your opening
statement, because I want to ensure--you attacked and
questioned my personal motives, and my priorities, and I just
want to be clear where my heart is. My heart is with all
students and for their futures. I want every single student to
have opportunity.
Senator Murray. I appreciate that. I only have three and a
half minutes left so, if you could answer my question--
Secretary DeVos. I understand. I wanted to address that
because----
Senator Murray. I appreciate that. Can you answer the
question? When was the last time the Department approved a
borrower defense claim?
Secretary DeVos. The Department is reviewing and approving
the ones for closed loan discharge regularly. As you know, the
borrower defense rule, the judge has requested that be put into
effect. We are in the process of doing so.
Senator Murray. So, has any----
Secretary DeVos. But, let me just remind you that when I
came into office, we were greeted with tens of thousands of
claims for borrower defense, and we did not agree with the
Obama administration's approach to this. That is why----
Senator Murray. I understand that, but a court order has
now told you to--my question is simple. Has the Department
approved even one borrower defense claim since that court
order?
Secretary DeVos. I believe so. We are reviewing them
regularly and----
Senator Murray. How many?
Secretary DeVos. I do not have the specific number, I would
be----
Senator Murray. Does any of your staff know how many?
Secretary DeVos. I would be happy if you would like to
submit a question for the record, I will be happy to get back.
Senator Murray. No. I would like to know if any of your
staff members behind you have an idea of when that--how many
have been approved?
Oh, okay apparently not. There is nothing stopping you from
providing full relief to struggling borrowers today. Surely,
there must be some of those borrowers who you feel deserve a
full discharge, and I do not understand why the Department
cannot fully discharge the loan today for tens of thousands who
were defrauded years ago by Corinthian Colleges, including more
than 2,000 from my home State are waiting.
Secretary DeVos. The Corinthian College students' claims
are being processed and dealt with forthwith and will continue
to be. And we are continuing to review the appropriate steps
based on the judge's request that this 2016 regulation be
implemented, while at the same time we are continuing to work
on revising the regulation.
Senator Murray. That was 6 months ago, and those students
are still waiting--that the court ordered this to move forward.
So, these students are waiting, and I want to know, if you can
get back to me, how many have been approved, because it appears
to me that we have not moved forward at all on this and that is
not fair to those students or their families or their future.
Secretary DeVos. I will be happy to do so.
OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL
Senator Murray. Let me move on. Earlier this year your
Department attempted to replace the Acting Inspector General
with a department employee after your Deputy Secretary
inappropriately, and perhaps illegally, requested that the OIG
(Office of Inspector General) ``Reconsider any plan that it
might have to review the department's 2018 decision and 2018
recommendation,'' to re-recognize the Accrediting Council for
Independent Colleges and Schools.
This so-called accrediting agency looked the other way
while students were being cheated and being defrauded by
predatory for-profit colleges, including that now defunct
Corinthian College, ITT Technical Institutes, and Education
Corporation of American Colleges.
A number of my colleagues in the House and the Senate have
asked for information multiple times to understand what exactly
happened, and the response that we have received so far from
the Department has really been inadequate.
Will you commit to us to provide substantive answers to our
questions on this?
Secretary DeVos. Senator, I will be happy to if you can
clarify what exactly you are asking. Are you asking regarding
the IG or ACICS (Accrediting Council for Independent Colleges
and Schools)?
Senator Murray. Well, I--we have been very clear on both,
and we have that written in to you. We got back a very
inadequate response, mostly blanked out, and we deserve to have
an answer on this.
And Mr. Chairman, this whole episode really leaves me
concerned about the independence and objectivity of the
Department of Education's Acting Inspector General. I think we
have to act to really establish the same kind of protections
for this department's OIG that several other subcommittees have
done, to provide their inspector generals the ability to be
independent and objective, and I would like to work with you on
that.
Senator Blunt. I am glad to work with you further on that
and thank you for----
Secretary DeVos. Mr. Chairman, could I just respond to the
IG issue just a moment, before you move on?
Senator Blunt. Yes.
Secretary DeVos. I want to clarify the fact that when our
Inspector General retired, a process was put into place to name
an Acting Inspector General, Phil Rosenfelt, a 48-year employee
of the Education Department, who is--his integrity and
capabilities are unassailable and impeccable. That process was
begun in October. When the Acting was named, it was later
changed, and the Acting that assumed the role after Kathy
retired was put back into place, and we considered the matter
closed, but to suggest that anything nefarious was unfolding
there is absolutely wrong, and I want to go very clearly on the
record.
Senator Murray. If you would--well, put that all in writing
to us because you did not do that. But I will say that you
completely left out the part here, where the Deputy Secretary
inappropriately and again, perhaps illegally, requested that
they reconsider a plan that they have to do because of their
independence.
I think there are numerous questions about this, if you
will respond to us as we requested, in writing, fully, then we
can have a conversation about whether it was appropriate or
not.
I, meanwhile, again Mr. Chairman, think it is important for
us to preserve the integrity and independence of an inspector
general at this department, as other departments have.
Senator Blunt. Seems reasonable that we could get that
response within the same time of the window for the other
questions that will come in writing, and we will consider that
a question for the record, and I will be glad to follow up with
you on this.
Senator Alexander.
COLLEGE ACCOUNTABILITY
Senator Alexander. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Welcome Madam
Secretary.
Mr. Chairman, I want to go back to your earlier comments,
and it is not a subject for education, but it is an important
subject for the Subcommittee.
I want to thank you and Senator Murray, Senator Durbin,
other members of the Subcommittee for your leadership in
setting priorities over the last 4 years on the National
Institutes of Health. It is--you have made significant
increases in medical lifesaving research and you have done that
the hard way by setting priorities. That is real legislative
leadership, and I thank you both for that.
Second, I agree with you about needing a number. I think
both Democrats and Republicans would like for us to have a
number to which we could begin to measure our appropriations,
and the sooner the better. And, I hope that will happen.
Madam Secretary, I want to just mention a couple of things
before I ask you a question. One, I appreciated the President's
Executive Order about colleges having skin in the game when it
comes to loaning money to students to go to college.
Senator Murray and I, as she said, are working together to
try to reauthorize the Higher Education Act. We hope to do
that, in the next few months have something before our
Committee, and accountability and colleges having more
participation and a, sort of skin in the game, is an important
part of that discussion, and the Administration's position, in
my view, is helpful.
FREE APPLICATION FOR FEDERAL STUDENT AID
Secondly, I want to thank you for putting the FAFSA (Free
Application for Federal Student Aid) on a mobile device. Twenty
million families fill out the Federal application form for Pell
Grants and student loans every year, it is 108 questions long.
Again, Senator Murray and I are working to simplify that. We
cosponsored legislation up to take 22 questions off the FAFSA
and keep families from having to give the same information
twice to the Government by allowing them to just one-click-
import from the Treasury Department the information they have
already given to the application for student aid. You have
supported that, and you have made it easier for students to
fill this out. I watched the students in Sevier County,
Tennessee work through even the 108 questions, a lot more
rapidly than I would have thought. So, that is a big help.
CHARTER SCHOOLS
The other thing I wanted to say, is I want to commend you
for your support for charter schools, and I keep wondering what
the opposition to charter schools is when--they were invented
by the Democratic Farmer Labor Party in Minnesota, 12 of them,
in the early 90s. They have grown to 7,000, their goal is to
give--they are all public schools. The goal is to give teachers
more freedom and children more freedom. They have been
supported by every Education Secretary we have had since then
and by every President, including President Obama, President
Clinton, and the last Democratic Secretary of Education was an
operator of charter schools.
So, I admire your support for charter schools. If you have
got some extra money in one account, I would like for it to be
put in another account so we can encourage giving teachers more
freedom and students more choices of public schools.
TEACHER PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT VOUCHERS
Now here is one thing you have that is new, and I just have
a minute and a half left, but I am intrigued by your idea of
giving stipends to teachers. I always thought--I know Secretary
Duncan, President Obama's Secretary expressed this thought,
Senator Harkin said the same thing, that the Title II funding
was probably the worst spent money in the education, Federal
education program. It is supposed to be for professional
development, but it is split up between reducing class size by
most States and check-the-box programs that most teachers do
not find useful.
Your proposal, as I understand it, is to begin a
demonstration project to give teachers, actually stipends, so
they could spend it at programs that they choose. I think back
of the Governors School for Teachers of Writing that we had at
the University of Tennessee when I was governor. Teachers loved
it. They went for 2 weeks, learned about writing, went back
reinvigorated to their schools. It only cost a few hundred
dollars each. Purdue University offers STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering & Mathematics) programs, there are many
programs across the country that could be accredited.
What is your thinking about stipends for teachers to use
their development money to choose their own professional
development?
Secretary DeVos. Thanks Senator for that question. It is
part of our budget proposal to really empower teachers directly
to advance their own careers, to develop themselves through a
teacher voucher. The concept is such that teachers would--we
would have a pilot program and demonstrate through the program
the effectiveness of giving teachers the empowerment over
development dollars for them.
So, early-stage career teachers may choose one type of
training, a mid-career teacher may choose something around
developing their own subject area or matter further, and then
later stage career teachers may be involved with learning how
to become mentors and guides for the newer teachers. A very
wide range of opportunities and possibilities, and the thought
is to have a pilot-targeted program to test this out, but with
meaningful funds behind it to give teachers the opportunity to
make some meaningful decisions for their own development.
Senator Alexander. Thank you very much, Madam Secretary. I
think if we called it a stipend instead of a voucher, you would
have fewer heart attacks on the other side of the aisle.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Senator Alexander.
Senator Durbin.
SPECIAL OLYMPICS
Senator Durbin. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, there has been some press reports about
your testimony yesterday related to the Special Olympics and I
hope we can get that clarified here. Did you personally approve
the elimination of the $18 million from your budget to help the
Special Olympics?
Secretary DeVos. Senator as you know, the budget process
within the Administration is a collaborative one, and it has
been my responsibility to present the budget here on behalf of
the Administration, the President's Budget. As I said then, and
I will say again, this--we had to make tough choices and
decisions around the budget priorities, and we elected to hold
harmless Title I and IDEA funding and funding for English
language learners, knowing that that is going to really reach
the greatest number of students. And let me just be very
clear----
Senator Durbin. Can I ask you, did you personally approve
this--just, I think a yes or no will do, the $18 million cut of
the funding for Special Olympics?
Secretary DeVos. No, I did not personally get involved in
that.
Senator Durbin. Well, I want to tell you, whoever came up
with that idea at OMB gets a Special Olympic gold medal for
insensitivity to think that we cannot spend $18 million to
support this dramatically successful venture, which
incidentally started in Chicago, Illinois, and now reaches
countries all across the world, millions of young people with
disabilities.
Let me tell you an area where I think you can save some
money for Special Olympics and other worthy causes. We know
that 9 percent of post-secondary students go to for-profit
colleges and universities. Do you know what percentage of
student loan defaults, total student loan defaults in the
United States, involves students from for-profit colleges and
universities?
Secretary DeVos. Senator, let me just comment on Special
Olympics, and you know I love Special Olympics myself. I have
given a portion of my salary to Special Olympics. I hope all of
this debate encourages lots of private contributions to Special
Olympics. So, let's not use disabled children in a twisted way
for your political narrative. It is--that is just disgusting,
and it is shameful, and I think you should be----
Senator Durbin. Well Madam Secretary, let me tell you what,
eliminating $18 million out of an $80--$70 or $80 billion
budget, I think is shameful too. I am not twisting it. I asked
you to answer yes or no, and you said that you did not
personally approve this.
Secretary DeVos. It is not a yes or no answer.
Senator Durbin. Well, it certainly is as far as I am
concerned. Someone has to accept responsibility for a bad
decision.
FOR PROFIT COLLEGES AND BORROWER DEFENSE
Back to the for-profit schools. Do you know what percentage
of the student loan defaults in the United States are students
from for-profit schools?
Secretary DeVos. 34 percent.
Senator Durbin. 34 percent. Nine percent of the students
coming out of post-secondary schools go to for-profit schools,
but 34 percent of all student loan defaults are the students
from these schools. They are being asked to pay too much for
worthless training and education. They drop out heavily in debt
with nothing to show for it, or end up completing the course,
and again, cannot find a job to pay off their loans.
So, let me ask you again, as Senator Murray has, do you not
have a heart when it comes to 140,000 of these victim students
who are trying, through the borrower defense rule, to get
relief from the fraud that was perpetrated on them by these
schools? Why is it taking so long for your department to give
these students a break?
Secretary DeVos. Senator, no student should be defrauded,
and if fraud is involved there are consequences and there will
be consequences, but we should not be judging institutions by
their tax status. And let's be very honest here, there are bad
actors on both sides of the equation. Bad actors should not----
Senator Durbin. I beg your pardon, but 34 percent of the
student loan defaults come from this one branch of tax status
for-profit colleges and universities.
Secretary DeVos. And we should not be judging by tax
status, but by results, results for students. Let's talk about
the ones that are doing a great job for students, such as
Monroe College in New York, Strayer and----
Senator Durbin. What are the results if 34 percent are
defaulting, 6,000 students, and 6,000 students at Monroe. I
read the Wall----
Secretary DeVos. Let's also talk about the nonprofits that
are doing a bad job.
Senator Durbin. They should be held accountable, as well.
Secretary DeVos. That are subject to bribes that are
changing--that are lying in order to improve their U.S. News &
World Report statistics.
Senator Durbin. Monroe College has 6,000 students. There
are 140,000 victim students waiting for your Department to give
them relief so they can get on with their lives. You have a
court order now saying do not delay it, and Senator Murray has
said, why are you waiting? Why do you not help these students?
They need some help right now from this borrower defense rule.
TEACHER SHORTAGE
Let me ask you one last question. Do you know the teacher
shortage across this country and the damage it is causing in
school districts?
Secretary DeVos. I know that teachers need to be honored,
and respected, and elevated and----
Senator Durbin. Are you aware of the shortage?
Secretary DeVos. And that is why our proposal does just
that.
Senator Durbin. I hope you are aware of the shortage.
Secretary DeVos. Gives them opportunities to advance their
career and gives them opportunities to develop themselves.
Senator Durbin. I will just tell you that there is a
shortage. I have seen it in my own State last week in Decatur,
Illinois and Zion, Illinois. I asked the principals, what is
the problem, and they said, ``We cannot pay them enough money
to keep them, and they are burdened with student debt.''
PUBLIC SERVICE LOAN FORGIVENESS
Your unwillingness in your department to deal with the
Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program is destroying an
incentive. And now you want to eliminate the program. That is a
program and incentive for those to go on and become teachers
with the prospect that after 10 years their student loans will
be forgiven. You would not help these students, you have not
approved any of their applications, and now you want to
eliminate that program. How did that help us?
Secretary DeVos. Sir, every single student that has
qualified for that program is being dealt with accordingly.
Senator Durbin. How many would that be?
Secretary DeVos. Remember it is a 10-year program.
Senator Durbin. How many would that be?
Secretary DeVos. The students that have applied have not
yet qualified. We are----
Senator Durbin. How about those who have applied? How many
have been approved?
Secretary Devos. We are very much honoring the--both the
spirit and the requirements of that program and continue----
Senator Durbin. And now you want to eliminate the program.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Senator Durbin.
Senator Lankford.
EDUCATION FREEDOM SCHOLARSHIPS
Senator Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, thanks for being here. Thanks for the
work. You put in a lot of work in a lot of areas and have
identified some areas of high need and are paying attention to
some things.
Let me ask you, what the Chairman had mentioned before on
the Education Freedom Scholarships and Opportunity Act, I know
that it does not come through this committee, but it certainly
affects education, and it is something that my State is
currently dealing with right now in ongoing debate.
We have had a program for a while where individuals are
able to give money toward public schools and their foundations,
or towards a private, or charter, what it may be, and have a
tax credit based on this. Describe this to me and how this
would work.
Secretary DeVos. Thanks for the question, Senator. I will
be happy to. The proposal for Education Freedom Scholarships is
to establish a Federal tax credit that individuals and
corporations could voluntarily contribute to, a $5 billion
annual program--or annual fund, that States could then elect to
participate in, or not. The States that did, the proposal is
for it to be distributed similarly to Title II-A, so, based on
both population and poverty levels.
And then States would have great latitude in using those
funds to develop more choices and more opportunities for the
student, the K-12 students in their State. It would allow for a
State to use something like or to advance something like an
apprenticeship program, and opportunity to increase dual
enrollment opportunities, to expand career and technical
opportunities, in addition to the more traditional ways that we
think about choices and adding choices.
And so, it really is a wide open and very great
opportunity, we think, for States to be able to meet the needs
of students without taking anything away from the public school
classrooms or public school students that are being served
today.
Senator Lankford. Now these are individuals committing
their own dollars to be able to sink into and be able to invest
into it.
Secretary DeVos. That is correct.
Senator Lankford. Again, this is something that has been a
successful program in my State that there is currently debate
in my State legislature about doubling a program like that
within my own State.
The current technical education in Oklahoma is ranked
number one in the country for what they are doing in career
tech and the innovation that they continue to do. It is a long-
standing program, but we could always certainly use the help.
Though we are number one in the country on it, we would like to
be able to stay that way and continue to be able to advance
those types of programs.
So, I appreciate your engagement on that, and I will look
forward to getting a chance to work on that. I serve in the
Finance Committee as well and look forward to the ongoing
dialogue about that in the days ahead.
COLLEGE ACCREDITATION
There is an ongoing question about accreditation, if there
is an issue with accreditation and accreditors. As Senator
Durbin brought up before on some questions on accreditation,
there seems to only be a heavy hand, basically, the nuclear
option of taking them out entirely. That does not just affect
one institution that affects every institution that they have
been around.
As you examine the accreditation process, are there
specific areas that you are trying to evaluate on how to be
able to work with the accreditors that are there?
Secretary DeVos. Thanks for that question. As you probably
know we are in the middle of a negotiated rulemaking session
around accreditation and around innovation in higher education.
There has been some very good dialogue, very good debate, very
good discussions. I am very hopeful that the negotiators are
going to come to consensus and that very soon we are going to
be able to put forward some recommended changes to make
accreditation more relevant to the 21st century, and more
relevant to higher ed institutions today. I am very optimistic
about that.
Senator Lankford. Good. Well, we will look forward to that
and hopefully that negotiated agreement comes to pass. We could
use some clarity in that.
One quick comment, and then another question, as well. Your
department stepped up in the area of religious liberty and
contracting and followed the Supreme Court decision. You took
the several months that it took to be able to evaluate that
decision, to be able to put it in place, and to say that the
Department is not going to discriminate on any faith of any
background, or any entity based on contracting simply because
they have any faith.
Thank you, for engaging in that. That has been an ongoing
conversation for quite a while, and that just because an
institution is Jewish, or Muslim, or Christian or Sikh, or
whatever it may be, does not mean that they also cannot
contribute services to our schools and to the Department of
Education. I appreciate your engagement in that area and for
completing that.
PARENT PLUS LOANS
One of the areas of loans that I have been very concerned
about that I am concerned about for families long-term, is the
Parent PLUS Loan Program. Schools have very little visibility
in that. They see where the student loans are, but they cannot
see on the Parent PLUS Loans. Many parents want their kids to
be able to get into grad schools and to be able to be sustained
and not carry debt. They carry debt; those Parent PLUS Loans
will then garnish their Social Security in the days ahead, and
everything else. It is a ticking time bomb for those parents as
they approach retirement in the days ahead if it is not
fulfilled.
Any conversation on the Parent PLUS Loan field?
Secretary DeVos. I think this is a very real issue and one
that I hope that Congress deals with in a meaningful way. We
know that 70 percent of the increase in student loan debt
total, comes from additional loans to current students. So, it
is 30 percent that are coming in as new students. And the fact
that we are at $1.5 trillion of student loan debt and growing,
is indeed a ticking time bomb.
This--the Administration has some proposals around
simplifying student loan repayment, but we also are working on,
in a more upfront process or information, that will provide
students with a lot more information going into school
programs. They will be able to compare earnings level--program
level data around earnings potential between institutions and
among programs.
We think that will be a very important tool and a very
important step, but I think the question about unlimited Parent
PLUS Loans and unlimited graduate school loans is a very real
one to be dealt with.
Senator Lankford. Yes, thank you.
Senator Blunt. Senator Shaheen.
TRIO AND GEAR UP
Senator Shaheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary DeVos, as I am sure you are aware, first
generation college students and those who come from lower
income families face unique challenges when they get to
college. First, in trying to get there, and then in succeeding
when they get there.
Two of the programs that have really--have good data to
show how successful they have been are the TRIO Program and
GEAR UP. So, I am very concerned about your proposal to
eliminate funding, all funding for GEAR UP next year, and to
make significant cuts to the TRIO Program, including
eliminating the very successful Student Support Services.
Yesterday, I had a group of TRIO folks in my office.
Students who had gone through the program, and one young woman
I met yesterday, a woman named Ashly Dukus, who is from
Rochester, New Hampshire, credits TRIO educational talent
search program as the reason that she was able to go to
college. She is the first generation in her family to graduate.
She said, ``I never even thought college was an option until I
was engaged with the TRIO Program.''
She went to the University of New Hampshire. She has
graduated. She said that Student Support Services helped her to
succeed there. She has begun to participate in Trio's McNair
Program, it allowed her to go to graduate school to study
psychology. She is now out beginning her career as a
psychologist and is counseling 9/11 first responders, and she
says without TRIO she never would have been able to achieve any
of this success.
So, do you believe--No, I would like for you to explain, if
you would, the proposal to cut so much of TRIO's funding, and I
would also ask if you believe that at the Federal level we
should provide any help to low-income or first-generation
students to help them succeed in higher ed?
Secretary DeVos. Senator, thanks for the question and let
me just begin by saying, I believe that we do in many ways
support first-generation students and I am totally with you on
the need to ensure that they have opportunities.
If I could just comment to your specific question around
GEAR UP and TRIO. GEAR UP, we have proposed that GEAR UP be
folded into TRIO essentially. They are very similar activities,
similar programs and that the program be consolidated into a
State formula-funded program rather than the current
competitive grant program that we have, because we have 90 to
95 percent of those grants that go to the same institutions
time after time, and in fact, are not necessarily targeted at
helping the most needy students.
So, our proposal would suggest that States that are closer
to the students they are serving would be able to better target
those resources and would save administrative costs in the
process. That is what we have put forward as the proposal.
Senator Shaheen. But you are cutting both of those programs
significantly as part of doing that, are you not?
Secretary DeVos. Well, as I said earlier, we had to make
decisions as part of this budget, we were constrained in the
total budget. We were insistent on holding some of the most
broad and largest programs harmless so that we could serve the
most students.
Senator Shaheen. I understood that you said that. I think,
however, those kinds of cuts ultimately undermine what the
Department is trying to achieve by helping those students,
particularly those who come from lower-income families, those
students who are first-generation in their families to go to
college, who have more difficulty succeeding.
STUDENT LOAN DEBT
I want to go onto student loan debt, because in New
Hampshire, we have the second-highest student loan debt burden
in the country. Our office heard from a woman named Valerie,
who is a teacher in Lee, New Hampshire, and she said, ``I have
been repaying my student loan since 2002 and what I have
learned is that debt begets debt. This debt has caused me to
acquire higher interest rates for loans and credit cards, and
the first 5 years of my career, I struggled to support
myself.''
She goes on to say that because of all of the challenges of
that student loan debt, and the current salaries for teachers
that she has not been able to improve her financial scenario.
And you and Senator Lankford, your exchange about the amount of
student loan debt that is currently out there, is devastating.
We are hearing from people in the real estate community, people
across New Hampshire, that the amount of student loan debt is
affecting young people's ability to marry when they want to, to
get the job they want to, to have kids when they want to, to
buy a home when they want to.
So, given all of that, I do not understand how the
elimination of key college affordability programs is going to
help us address the student loan debt burden.
Secretary DeVos. Good questions, and a concern that we
share. We want students that most need to be able to access
higher ed, to be able to do so. I am really enthused about some
of the efforts we have underway through Federal student aid to
bring the whole framework and experience around Federal student
aid into the 21st century, and to give students many more tools
in being able to research and consider their path, their
opportunities; to be able to know what they are likely to be
able to earn through a specific program at a specific
institution; to make comparisons to give them a lot more tools
to be financially literate about the debt that they are taking
on; and what those implications are for the longer-term.
That is one way that we can begin to help them become
better consumers, and then in the process to have an experience
with FAFSA with Federal Student Aid that is much more consumer
friendly, and much more world-class in its orientation.
Senator Shaheen. Well, thank you. I think what my
constituents need is help with that debt burden, not more
options.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Blunt. Thank you Senator Shaheen.
Senator Rubio.
STUDENT LOAN DEBT AND REPAYMENT
Senator Rubio. Thank you. Thank you for being here, Madam
Secretary, and thank you for holding this hearing, to the
Chairman and the Ranking Member.
I am glad to see student loans have become such a prominent
topic of conversation. I have often talked about the student
loan burden that I, myself faced, after going to school and law
school, and I know the significant burden it placed on us for
many years. I know people are impacted; the numbers speak for
themselves.
So here shortly, we are going to be introducing legislation
that tries to tackle this in a different way. It would
eliminate interest in the direct Federal loan, and it would
replace it with a one-time fee that would not increase, not
accrue interest, it would be paid over the life of the loan. It
would basically establish a one-time fee that would account for
the cost of servicing the loan and so forth, but at least the
student is not facing the compounding effect.
Another thing this bill that we are going to file will do
is, it is going to automatically place borrowers in a repayment
plan that reflects their income. So we can guarantee that they
are not into default, because once, as we all know, these are
loans that can never be discharged not even in bankruptcy and
in many cases, and once you get into default you are locked out
of home ownership and it has a sort of a, scale effect on the
rest of your life.
I know this is sort of a new idea. I think we have shared
it with your staff a little bit. We have not filed it yet, but
what is your sense of what the Department's position would be
on that, or at least their willingness to work with us on it.
Secretary DeVos. Well, I think we share a lot of your
concerns and a lot of your goals, and I look forward to more
closely reviewing your proposal and working with you on that.
Student loan debt is a crushing burden on way too many in this
country, and it is soon to be a crushing burden on our country
as a whole.
Senator Rubio. Again, I think what we are trying to really
focus on is the impact that the accrued interest has, and also
the disconnect that exists between how much someone is paying
or borrowing. Which leads to another bill that we have, which I
think is consistent with what the Department has recently
announced as a priority.
INFORMED BORROWING
And that is, providing students information before they
seek a particular path, and the right to know before you go,
which would provide them with baseline information, this is how
much people make when they graduate from here with that degree.
We are not banning any degrees, we are not prohibiting people
from even borrowing to pay for those degrees, but we do think
there is a massive disconnect between how much people are
borrowing and assuming as a liability and a real understanding
of what they can expect to earn at the back end of that
process.
So, the combination of those two things, dealing with the
compounding effect of interest and more information on the
front end, we think could help, from this point forward allow
students and families to make more informed decisions.
That second provision about more information, that is
consistent with some of what the Department is directing,
correct?
LOAN SERVICING
Secretary DeVos. Yes, absolutely.
Senator Rubio. Related to student loans on a separate
topic, and I have gotten a number of emails and inquiries about
the way that the contracts are being handled and the servicing
of the existing loans. And again, what--the emails I have
gotten from a couple of folks. And I was just curious to see
what is going on here with this, is that, it really deals with
some report language that was included in last year's bill
about not awarding new contracts to the Next Generation
Program. Apparently, at least according to those who are
contacting us, they are saying that the intent of that language
has not been followed by the Department, and I guess now it is
entangled in lawsuits and so forth.
Could you give some insight or explanation as to the status
of all--what is happening there with all of that?
Secretary DeVos. Sure, so the move to the Next Gen
framework requires a lot of new contracting because providers
are going to be doing different pieces of the behind-the-scenes
loan servicing support for the whole Federal Student Aid
program.
Heretofore, it has been a real patchwork, and it has been
sort of layered upon, year after year, after year. So, in the
process of moving to that new framework, some change is going
to have to take place for some of those who have provided
services before, and all of the various contractors have every
opportunity to bid for work under the new framework. We are in
the middle of that process now, and predictably, there are
challenges to, and lawsuits about, the change, the changes that
are being made, because we know change is hard.
Senator Rubio. But has the Department been meeting or
talking to some of these incumbent providers or others that
have bid in the past?
Secretary DeVos. Yes, and regular contact and regular
dialogue, and making sure that they are aware of and clear on
their opportunities for bidding on pieces of the business. So
yes, we are being very diligent along the way in ensuring all
of those processes are followed.
Senator Blunt. Thank you Senator Rubio.
Senator Reed.
LOAN DISCHARGE FOR DISABLED VETERANS
Senator Reed. Thank you very much Mr. Chairman and thank
you, Madam Secretary.
Let me begin with an issue of totally disabled veterans who
have student loans. I am pleased the Department now has a data
matching program for easing the process for student loan
discharge to the veterans who are totally and permanently
disabled.
We have been urging you, along with some of my colleagues,
to have an automatic discharge for these individuals. One
holdup was prior to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of--recent Act,
that there was some income tax liability. That has been
eliminated.
So, does the Department plan to automatically discharge
these loans, and if not, why not?
Secretary DeVos. Senator, I believe that is the case, but I
will be happy to clarify that for you and check with the folks
that are responsible for that to assure that.
CAMPUS FINANCIAL SERVICES AND PROTECTING STUDENTS
Senator Reed. Thank you very much, Madam Secretary.
Another issue that came up late last year through a Freedom
of Information Act request, a CFPB (Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau) report was made public, which did an
analysis of those college campuses that had a financial
relationship with the bank, and the benefits or costs
associated with that to the students. And they found out that
these relationships usually result in students paying much
higher fees than otherwise.
The most egregious example was Wells Fargo students at
campuses with--that had an arrangement with Wells Fargo, paid
an average of nearly $47 in fees compared to less than $12 at
other campuses, without these exclusive type deals.
What steps are you taking to carry out your mandate, which
is to ensure that the schools act in the best financial
interest of their students?
Secretary DeVos. Sir, we take that responsibility seriously
and are working, continuing to work with the servicers through
this period and into the Next Generation framework, which will
be a different construct for servicing the student loans.
Senator Reed. These are not student loans, Madam. These are
the relationships where the school has a contract with the bank
providing debit cards to students, providing other services, in
fact, insisting sometimes the student must use this debit card.
And it turns out that the fees are quite a bit more steep
than----
Secretary DeVos. Sorry, I misunderstood, sir. Actually, as
part of the Next Gen initiative we have launched a pilot
program that will include a debit card for students very
clearly delineating the fact that fees cannot be added to by
the banks that are providing the services and ensuring that
protection for students.
We are very keen about this issue and are aware that we
need to be ensuring that students are not taken advantage of in
that way.
Senator Reed. Will you continue to ask CFPB to monitor this
issue?
Secretary DeVos. Well, we are monitoring it directly with
Federal Student Aid.
SCHOOL FACILITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Senator Reed. Okay. Let me turn to another issue. There has
been a lot of discussion of emergency, but one emergency, I
believe at least, is the crumbling schools throughout the
country, elementary and secondary schools. I am very pleased
that Senator Tim Scott, my colleague from-- Chairman, excuse
me, Chairman Bobby Scott, my colleague from the House of
Representatives has joined me in a Rebuild American Schools
Act, to invest we hope, $100 billion in school infrastructure.
I do not think there is anyone in this committee that has not
visited a school in their State that it needs significant
repairs, and also updating, because of the technology that is
available now to teach young people, and also the savings that
can be accomplished through better heating systems and better
cooling systems.
I would hope you would support this effort. I think it is
important, and I would just get your reaction to helping out in
this school infrastructure issue.
Secretary DeVos. Well, I think it is an interesting
proposal, a very costly one at that. I think what I would
actually advocate for is giving more students and more parents
more freedom and choices to find the right fit for their
child's education. I think we are going to have--we are going
to make more progress and have more gains in student
achievement, if students are able to find schools and education
environments that work specifically for them.
Senator Reed. Well that is an interesting concept, but we
still have an obligation to provide public schools in every
community, and many of those schools just are, absolutely
unsatisfactory, in fact, sometimes pose a danger to the health
of the student. And the reality too, is that choice is not
infinite for some families and very limited because of
transportation, because of many factors. But our fundamental
commitment to public schools, which I hope we honor, would I
hope, encourage us to invest in their reconstruction.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Senator Reed.
Senator Hyde-Smith.
SUPPORT FOR RURAL SCHOOLS
Senator Hyde-Smith. Thank you Mr. Chairman. And Madam
Secretary, thank you so much for the phone call last week. I
have found you to be so responsive and you are just making me
really proud of the job that you are doing.
And as we discussed in that phone call, and I have gotten
some more information, I just believe it is imperative that the
Department support research grants to address specific
challenges, especially those of rural schools and rural school
districts such as we have in Mississippi. And I understand that
the Department has a grant program Education Innovation and
Research, dedicated to funding ideas that will fill educational
needs and to improve student achievement.
How are you working to ensure that these grants address the
challenges that are most pressing in rural communities, such as
literacy achievement, and teacher recruitment, which we are
really having a tough time with in I think, the entire
Southeast.
Secretary DeVos. Thanks Senator for that, for your
encouragement, and also for the question about the challenges
that rural schools face.
We have a number of initiatives that I think really get
after the challenges that rural students and rural educators
are facing, and one of them is one that will really help
advance teachers in their own development and in their
professional life and their career paths. It is through the EIR
Program and it would allow for teachers to be able to continue
to develop with a stipend or a voucher that would allow them to
do professional development in ways that are going to work for
them, to control that rather than having the district or the
State mandate whatever it is.
And then secondly, to create a program around mentorship of
new teachers or ones that really need to have a little extra
help early in their career and that would allow really
seasoned, excellent teachers a career path to pursue, aside
from feeling like they have to go out of the classroom into an
administrative role. That coupled with a focus on enabling
rural schools and rural communities to have more flexibility
with the students they are serving and how they do things.
I think about a school that I visited in Mississippi that
did not have an AP physics teacher. They partnered with a
private organization to provide distance learning for their AP
physics students, and it was a win-win for everyone involved.
Being able to work flexibly and creatively in that way, I
think, are some of the ways in which we can help rural
communities meet the needs of their students.
Senator Hyde-Smith. Wonderful. Just a follow-up to that.
How are you ensuring geographic and institutional, diversity
for these grant programs and other education grant programs
that are being implemented?
Secretary DeVos. Well, we work with you on a framework for
each of these programs and then carry out the grant programs in
accordance with that. We know that there is a need in rural
communities, and so, we will continue to work with you to be
focused, specifically in that area.
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT AND CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION
Senator Hyde-Smith. Okay, I have a little time left.
Congress has continued to show support of the workforce
development, which is something very near to me, most recently
with the reauthorization of career and technical education
legislation. And as we have talked before, there are many of
these well-paying jobs within Mississippi and across the
Nation, which we are waiting to be filled by students with
special technical skills. It is important that we work together
to remove any remaining stigmas associated with career and
technical jobs.
What can the department, and actually Congress as well, do
to help support and expand access to career and technical
education programs in our K-12 system and the community
colleges?
Secretary DeVos. Great questions. Part of the answer to
that is to implement the Education Freedom Scholarships plan,
which would allow States to create programs specifically around
these needs, or whatever needs they have in their State and in
their local communities. And part of it is related to proposal
for $60 million to create pre-apprenticeship programs in high
schools that will allow students to explore and pursue some of
these great opportunities and tracks.
I said earlier that I think we need to be helping students
learn as early as early middle school, what some of these
alternatives are. Waiting until they are in 11th or 12th grade
is almost too late. We know that there are so many good
opportunities out there, and at the same time it is a really
important time for business and industry to come close to, and
partner with educators to create the programs that are going to
meet those needs and that are going to give students the
opportunity to pursue those jobs.
Beyond that, the short-term Pell program, our proposal, I
think, helps to get after that as well to allow students to
pursue certification and certificate programs that are shorter
in nature, but that is obviously post-high school.
Senator Hyde-Smith. To your point on that, what do we do to
really encourage industry to invest in workforce training, even
at a high school level that we could do to attract industry to
invest their actual dollars in those programs?
Senator Blunt. Secretary, you need a pretty quick answer on
that.
Secretary DeVos. I think it is happening in multiple
communities; it needs to happen more, but it really happens by
region and by community.
Senator Blunt. Thank you Senator Hyde-Smith.
Senator Murphy.
TAX CUTS, DEFICITS AND DOMESTIC SPENDING
Senator Murphy. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome Madam Secretary, thank you for being back here
again. I do appreciate the way that this Committee and the
Subcommittee has worked together in the past to reject these
very hurtful cuts that have been proposed by the
Administration, and I agree that we will likely come to a
bipartisan consensus on how to at least hold the line on
education spending.
But I just will say to my committee members that it is a
little hard to stomach a lecture from this Administration on
the danger of deficits. In February of this year we had a $234
billion deficit, which is a record for this country. Never
before have we had that big of a deficit in any 1 month. That
is the result of a tax cut that was passed, 80 percent of the
benefit going to the richest 1 percent of Americans, which now
commands us to cut money from schools. And that is the choice
we are being asked to make, we need to tighten our belts when
it comes to funding for kids because we have chosen to give a
massive tax cut, mainly to folks in this country who do not
really need it.
So, I think it is important to lay the foundation for why
we are being asked to pass along these big, big cuts to our
kids. It is to finance a tax cut that by and large, when it is
fully implemented, will not help those kids in those lower
performing or middle-class schools.
TITLE IV, SCHOOL SAFETY AND MENTAL HEALTH
Towards that end, Secretary DeVos, I wanted to ask you
about the effect of your proposal to completely eliminate Title
IV. And I say that in the context of a conversation that we are
having in this country right now about suicides. Suicide rates
amongst children ages 10 to 17 has increased 70 percent between
2006 and 2016. It has obviously been in the news tragically,
over the past several weeks.
And Title IV provides over $1 billion, for a variety of
activities to improve school climate and to address trauma in
schools; it funds suicide prevention programs throughout the
country.
So, I want to ask you what the rationale could be for
cutting the Federal funding that helps schools build these
suicide prevention programs, they are just not going to be
replaced magically by private dollars, when we have a national
epidemic that we have to get our head and hands wrapped around.
Secretary DeVos. Senator, thanks for the question. The
budget proposal does include Title IV funding elimination
because we believe that that particular fund has been very
thinly spread, it has not been specifically used for just
school safety activities. Our budget does propose collectively,
administration-wide, $700 million specifically for issues or
for programs related to school safety, and the Department of
Education's budget includes $200 million, $100 million of which
is designated for mental health, and health and social
emotional well-being of students, specifically. Specifically
targeted to really getting at school climate and helping
schools to better, to better deal with these issues, these
heartbreaking issues, at the school level.
Senator Murphy. It comes nowhere close to making up for the
cuts in this bill and a lot of that money is spread out over a
whole bunch of different kinds of programming, other than the
mental health and suicide prevention funds that are used by
schools in Title IV.
SIGNIFICANT DISPROPORTIONALITY
I wanted to turn to one more issue and that is the issue of
what has become known as the significant disproportionality
rule. This--you and I, I thought, had very good conversation
before your hearings about the concern that disabled students
and students of color are disproportionately identified for
special education, and also disproportionately subject to
overly harsh discipline.
You attempted to push off a rule that would get us more
information on how these vulnerable communities of students are
being treated, and the courts actually intervened and said that
you could not delay that rule commanding States to give us data
on how those communities of color and disabled communities are
being treated, requiring you to implement that rule.
So, I was hoping that you could give us confirmation that
you are indeed requiring States to comply with the significant
disproportionality rule in accordance with the court order.
Secretary DeVos. Well Senator, thanks for that question,
and let me just reiterate that every student should receive the
services they need. I am concerned about both over and under
identification of students in need of special education
services. We are committed to treating students as individuals
and not more broadly as statistics.
The Department is reviewing the court's decision and
discussing our options, and we will certainly move forward from
there.
Senator Murphy. But the court's decision is that you cannot
delay the--rule that you have to implement it. So, what is
there to review about it?
Secretary DeVos. Well, it is a lengthy decision and we are
still in the process of reviewing it.
Senator Murphy. So, you are not implementing the rule as of
today. You are not requiring States to provide that data?
Secretary DeVos. We are reviewing our options.
Senator Murphy. I think it is worth the Committee's
attention to this. There is a court order telling the
Administration that they must implement this rule, and there is
no reason for additional review. It would be worthwhile
following up.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Blunt. Thank you Senator Murphy.
Senator Baldwin.
STUDENT SUPPORT AND ACADEMIC ENRICHMENT GRANTS
Senator Baldwin. Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Secretary DeVos, once again, in your budget it proposes
eliminating the Student Support and Academic Enrichment Grant
program under Title IV-A, of the Every Student Succeeds Act.
This grant, which Congress funded in fiscal year 2019 at
$1.17 billion supports programs that provide for a well-rounded
education, safe and healthy schools, and the effective use of
technology.
In your testimony before our House counterparts on Tuesday,
you suggested that this program is thinly spread and not shown
to be effective.
I have heard quite the opposite from school districts
across the country, including in my home State of Wisconsin.
For example, the school district of Janesville has used its
Title IV-A funds to provide robust professional development and
training for teachers that enhance the way they use technology
in the classroom. And in Milton, Wisconsin they have used their
Title IV-A dollars for afterschool programs that teach coding,
STEM and E-sports, providing students with exposures to key
skills, and even helping them compete for scholarships for
college in these very areas.
So, given what I have heard around the State of Wisconsin,
Secretary, I am surprised by the conclusion that you have drawn
about this program, and I am really curious about how you came
to that. Was your decision based on data collected by the
Department of Education from school districts on how they are
using Title IV-A funds? And what have the results been?
Secretary DeVos. Senator thanks for that question. And I
will again reiterate our contention that again, in the context
of finding areas to reduce in the budget, this particular
program was deemed to be very thinly spread and not
particularly effective for any specific activity----
Senator Baldwin. And was that----
Secretary DeVos. And let me just say that allocations of
less than $30,000 are going to an estimated two thirds of local
education agencies, and of less than 10,000 for another one
third. So, pretty thinly spread.
Senator Baldwin. Was that--you said it is deemed to be
spread too thin and ineffective. Was that decision based on
data, evidence collected by the Department of Education from
student districts--from school districts on how they are using
the funds, or is that just sort of, a gut level assessment that
a school district cannot do anything useful with $30,000?
Secretary DeVos. Well since the program was reoriented in
2017, there is not enough new data to be able to collect to do
a specific research project, but we know that $30,000 is going
to two thirds of the LEAs and less than $10,000 to another one
third.
Senator Baldwin. Well, again, this does not seem to be an
assessment based on evidence, on study, and I am getting very
powerful information from school districts across the State of
Wisconsin that these are vital. Think about the use of $30,000
to train teachers in using and teaching with current and modern
technology. That can go a long way, a long way. You get them
all up to the latest skills, and I worked on that provision of
the ESSA (Every Student Succeeds Act) with Senator Orrin Hatch.
So, I really want to call into question how you can decide
to eliminate funding for the Title IV-A program without any
sort of thorough review of how the dollars are being spent. And
I want to point out at the same time that one of the purposes
of Title IV-A is to enhance school safety and address student
health concerns.
SCHOOL SAFETY GRANTS
So, alongside the elimination of the Title IV-A program,
your budget proposes a new $100 million School Safety State
Grant that would, according to your testimony, help build State
and local capacity to identify and address the wide range of
school safety and student health concerns authorized under
Title IV-A.
This proposal is perplexing to me for so many reasons.
First, Congress has already provided dedicated funding for
school safety under the Stop School Violence Act at $100
million in fiscal year 2019.
Second, if the $1.17 billion under Title IV-A program is,
in your words, too thinly spread, I fail to see how a much
smaller amount could possibly replace it and provide meaningful
support to school districts for the broad range of student
health and safety needs.
Third, Title IV-A intentionally supports a broad range of
programs, gives school districts the ability to make targeted
decisions based on their own needs. Any school district could
choose to direct their Title IV-A funds to focus on student
health and safety, if that is what makes sense to them. So,
your proposal would force them to make the choice--that choice.
So, Secretary DeVos, I agree that student safety is a
paramount, paramount importance, but why does your budget make
that choice for school districts, and simultaneously give them
drastically fewer resources to implement it?
Secretary DeVos. Well Senator, like I said earlier, we had
to make some difficult decisions with the budget proposal, and
in order to meet the target of a 10 percent reduction in
overall spending, and I will just remind every one of the
contexts of that, $7.1 billion represents less than 1 percent
of education spending nationally. So, it is in the scheme of
things, a pretty minimal reduction amount. But we have
suggested the elimination of Title IV-A just because it has
been a very thinly spread, and not particularly effective
program for any specific purpose.
Senator Blunt. Thank you Senator Baldwin.
Senator Merkley.
PUBLIC SERVICE LOAN FORGIVENESS
Senator Merkley. Thank you very much. Madam Secretary,
thank you for coming to talk to us.
I am very concerned about the Public Service Loan
Forgiveness Program. We have a teacher in Oregon, Jed Schaefer,
who automatically made his payments every month and then
continued to make those payments even after he completed his 10
years. And eventually the Department said yes, you have paid it
all and they sent refund checks. Great, all is on track. Except
that the servicer then proceeded to completely wreck his
credit. So, he was not able to take the money he now had
available because he was not making student loan payments and
invest in other things he had planned to.
And this is just one small story on this massive situation
in which 99 percent of those who apply for this program are
being rejected by your department and the loan servicers that
you employ. Every report on it shows that it is a confusing
quagmire; that the servicers are poorly informed. They work for
you. What are you doing about it?
Secretary DeVos. Senator thanks for that question. The
department is providing loan forgiveness to those students who
qualify under the Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program. It
takes 10 years to qualify, and Congress made it particularly
difficult for students to qualify for it, the rules that you
set up, the legislation you passed, make it difficult. So,
within that context, we are forgiving as many student loans--
under the Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program as are
qualified for it.
Senator Merkley. So, Madam Secretary every single study of
this says otherwise. It says that tons of people qualify, but
the servicers are poorly informed, they are poorly trained,
they often give extremely misleading information. And those
studies provide recommendations on how to make all of this work
better; how to make the rules from your department work better;
how to make the servicing through the subcontractors.
Why not champion this effort to make this program work
rather than blaming the law, which had a flexibility on it
handed down to your department?
Secretary DeVos. Well sir, it actually did not have a lot
of flexibility, Congress made it apparently, very difficult to
qualify. So, we are going to continue to honor those that
qualify for the Public Service Loan Forgiveness, but perhaps,
perhaps it would be good to look at some of the things that are
making it difficult.
DEPARTMENT FAILURES IMPLEMENTING PSLF
Senator Merkley. It is an unsatisfactory response, because
you have responsibility here. Tens of thousands of public
servants were told they would qualify. They started to become
eligible in August 2017 in large numbers. And you are the point
person, so you should be up here saying, hey, here is what I
can do, here is what the servicers can do, but here is what
you, Congress, have to do, if indeed, you feel that the law
needs to be changed, because this is a massive disservice to
those who have served. They were told in very simple terms, 10
years teaching, nursing, policing, 120 payments the Government
will forgive what is left as a thank you. Well, they are not
getting thank yous, they are getting rejection notices. 99
percent are getting rejection notices.
FEDERAL PRE-EMPTION AND LOAN SERVICING OVERSIGHT
And I am very disturbed that your team has put forward a
unique legal argument that because the servicers work for the
Federal Government, they cannot be held accountable for their
failures. Should you not be holding those servicers
accountable?
Secretary DeVos. We are sir.
Senator Merkley. But you are not. Every report shows you
are not. Where is your plan? I would like to see it submitted
here on behalf of these students. It appears that what is going
on is that you are working in partnership with these for-profit
servicers rather than fighting for these public servants who
were promised forgiveness.
I was very struck by the letter that was written by Seth
Frotman when he was resigning from the CFPB. He said, ``Mr.
Mulvaney, unfortunately, under your leadership the bureau has
abandoned the very consumers it is tasked by Congress with
protecting. Instead, you have used the bureau to serve the
wishes of the most powerful financial companies in America. Are
you serving the public servants you are tasked with, or to
protect and assist, or are you serving the powerful financial
companies profiting off of this malfeasance and incompetence?''
Secretary DeVos. Senator, the Department is forgiving all
of the loans that qualify under the Public Service Loan
Forgiveness Program, and we will continue to do so.
Senator Merkley. And so, you say, but every study shows
otherwise. I would love to see you championing these wonderful
nurses, these wonderful healthcare workers, the teachers, the
police officers who were made promises that your department is
responsible for honoring.
Please champion them.
OPIOID PREVENTION AND MENTAL HEALTH
Senator Blunt. Thank you Senator Merkley.
Let's go to a second round of questions.
Madame Secretary, the Congress voted on the Support Act
which was the opioids act passed last October. In that we
authorized a new $50 million grant program to improve trauma
support services and mental health care in schools related to
addiction of students or others that students deal with. The
budget request did not include any funding for that.
Are you open to more feedback on this proposal and working
with us to see what might be available to put that October
support act, the portion that was designed to be in effect for
students, in effect?
Secretary DeVos. Certainly are Senator, and I am just going
to reference here, we did run a couple of new grant
competitions in fiscal year 2018, and we are running one this
year. In 2018, we made 14 new awards and we expect to make 80
awards this year to local districts for programs targeted on
opioid prevention in their communities.
Senator Blunt. What program are you doing that under?
Secretary DeVos. School Climate Transformation Grants.
Senator Blunt. And what was the total of those awards?
Secretary DeVos. I do not have that information right here,
but I would be happy to get back with you on that.
[The information follows:]
school climate transformation grants
In fiscal year 2018 the Department made 96 School Climate
Transformation Grant awards totaling $52,261,948 consisting of: 14 new
awards to State educational agencies ($9,005,206); 12 continuation
awards to State educational agencies ($7,578,012); and 70 continuation
awards to local educational agencies ($35,678,730).
Senator Blunt. All right. Well, the view of the Congress
last October was that something in the $50 million category
when you look at all of the opioid money being spent now, could
well be spent directly with students.
So, let's talk about that. It is a new piece of
legislation. I know you are working with some real restrictions
here, but one of the things we may want to move forward on as
we get a better number to work with, would be what are we going
to do in this school opioid area.
On school safety, I think there was about $95 million in
the budget otherwise and you have added a $100 million State
Grant program. You said today that was part of a $700 million
overall school safety effort in the Administration. Is most of
the rest of that in Homeland Security or do you or your budget
chief, there----
Secretary DeVos. Well it is actually spread between
Homeland Security, DOJ (Department of Justice), and HHS
(Department of Health and Human Services), so it is collective
between all of them. I actually did just get the number for
those grants in 2019, the amount is going to be $40 million.
Senator Blunt. $40 million, okay. All right, well let's
look at that and see if they are doing what we think in the
opioid bill, if we are meeting that need, if there is a little
head room there beyond that, and let's talk about that later.
TIMING OF APPROPRIATIONS
Now, last year the Congress passed our bill and along with
the Defense Bill and got this done as I have said in my opening
statement, for the first time in 22 years, we got your budget
to you, your appropriated amounts of money on time, before the
fiscal year started.
What difference did that make to have the money on October
1, rather than when the other 25 percent of the Government got
their money or say the March 1 date that you probably got your
money in your first year you were Secretary of Education. What
difference did it make to have that money with a full 12 months
that you can plan and spend it?
Secretary DeVos. Well, it clearly makes operationally,
things much smoother and better to be able to plan ahead and to
plan the flow of work over grant competitions and the like,
over that period of time rather than waiting to find out what
is going to happen, and having to do things in a rushed manner
in a shorter period of time.
Senator Blunt. Well, I just think you can spend the money
more effectively and more wisely, and did more effectively, and
hopefully we can accomplish that again this year.
LOAN SERVICING
On this, the loan servicing issue, this issue you and I
have had some serious conversations about before. What you see
as a patchwork, I see as a competitive environment where people
are trying to outperform their competitors and in return for
superior performance, get more of the work to do in the future.
Both in fiscal year 2019 and fiscal year 2018, the bill
included language requiring the Department to ensure certain
elements are included in the Next Generation processing and
servicing environment to promote accountability, transparency,
and competition in student loan servicing.
Will you ensure that the Department will fully comply with
whatever we put in the law on this topic?
Secretary DeVos. Yes, absolutely, we have been and will
continue to do so. I totally agree and know that we need to
have a competitive environment on loan servicing, and that will
continue under the new Next Generation framework as well.
Senator Blunt. Well, we will continue to talk about that,
but we are likely to address this specifically in your
appropriating bill, and however it is signed into law is the
way I would expect it to be fulfilled. And I anticipate that
you would want to do exactly the same thing.
Secretary DeVos. I understand.
Senator Blunt. Senator Murray.
HIGHER EDUCATION ACT REAUTHORIZATION
Senator Murray. Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Secretary DeVos, as you know, I am working with Senator
Alexander to reauthorize the Higher Education Act and we are
both very hopeful that we can get a bipartisan bill passed out
of the Senate this year.
At the same time as we are working on this your department
has been considering major regulatory changes to how students
learn in higher education. Some of those proposed changes are
extremely troubling to our caucus and the Department should not
be sidestepping the will of Congress.
Given that we are having bipartisan negotiations on HEA,
will you commit that the Department will not issue proposed or
final regulations during our negotiations?
Secretary DeVos. Well Senator, first of all I am very
enthused and optimistic about the discussions that you and
Senator Alexander are having and hope that you are going to be
able to come up with some very significant legislation around
higher education and reauthorizing that Act.
As you have indicated, we are underway with a number of
different rules, and the timeline is such that I do not think
we are going to have any final rule prior to Memorial Day, but
we are going to continue with our timeline. I am doing so
according to the process.
Senator Murray. I must say I am disappointed with that
response, and I will be talking with Senator Alexander on that
because it does make it very difficult for us to continue to
move forward, in what I think is very good way and bipartisan,
which is going to have to be if we want to get this passed.
LOAN SERVICING ENFORCEMENT DISCLOSURE
Let me ask you one other question. More than 5 weeks ago
Chair DeLauro and I wrote you about the Department's lack of
responsiveness to a directive that was included in last year's
Senate Committee Report that directed, and I am going to quote
it, ``the Secretary to respond to enforcement disclosure
requests within 10 days of receipt,'' and to publicly explain
its policy about disclosures. The attorney general from my home
State of Washington and 19 other attorneys general have written
to you expressing concern about the department's recent
actions, and I must say I am really disappointed that we do not
have a response to this letter. And I want to know why you are
preventing the sharing of information that is required by your
own department's regulations that would help these States to
execute their laws protecting student loan borrowers from
abusive and deceptive practices of student loan companies.
DEPARTMENT STAFFING AND RESPONSIVENESS TO CONGRESS
Secretary DeVos. Senator, our goal has been, and it
continues to be to provide responses in a timely manner. I
would just like to cite the fact that since my confirmation in
2017, I have received--my office has received 124 letters from
you, specifically, to my office. 110 of those have been
responded to, and that does not include the numerous requests
that come directly from your staff to other members of my
staff. And since being confirmed, my office has received more
than 1,050 congressional inquiries, 979 of which have been
responded to, so, we are trying to be responsive in a timely
manner. Often----
Senator Murray. Okay, I am specifically referring to the
enforcement disclosure requests that you are required to
respond within 10 days of receipt, that you have not. This is
required of you, it is required of your agencies and these
attorneys general need you to share that information about--for
law enforcement purposes. And it just appears like you are
trying to hide something without responding. You are required
to do so within 10 days.
Secretary DeVos. And I said, our goal has been and
continues to be, to be responsive and timely, and we will
continue to do that.
Senator Murray. Well it has not been so far, and we are
expecting that and want to know from you when you are going to
respond to those States, as you are required to do.
Secretary DeVos. Thank you.
Senator Blunt. What are your confirmed positions in the
office? Are you fully staffed up at the confirmed position
level, now?
Secretary DeVos. No, still waiting for two assistant
secretaries, for OPE and Rehabilitative Services.
Senator Blunt. Well hopefully we can get that done in the
near future. I actually share Senator Murray's concern on this,
and it is not uniquely you, but there are two or three
departments that we are just not getting the responses back
from as quickly as we think we should.
So, anything that we can do to help work with you to know
how to direct that better, to specific members of the staff, or
whatever. It is very helpful to us to get the information back
quickly. It is sort of the daily oversight responsibility, and
it eliminates an area of friction that we should all want to
eliminate if we can, and the response number is not what it
should be.
I think early on not being staffed up made a big
difference, but we should be at the end of that. You did not
use that as a reason today, but it may be part of the reason
over the last several months, but we need to get you your team
in place, but your team really needs to be as quickly
responsive as you can be.
We are your funding source, we have an oversight
responsibility in addition to that, and I would hope that staff
from top to bottom would have a sense that that reporting is
not just a nuisance, but absolutely essential, and I would hope
we can continue to work on that and get that where, by this
time next year there are no complaints about--from either side,
about either too much information being requested over and over
again, or not being responsive to those requests.
Senator do you have any further comments?
BUDGETS AND EVIDENCE-BASED POLICY
Senator Murray. I just want to make a couple of comments.
Obviously, I am disappointed with the budget that has come
before us. You have heard numerous statements on our side and
on the other side, and I am confident that Senator Blunt and I
will work together to make sure we are funding our education
system adequately. And I do know we need to put a budget cap
adjustment in place, but I am disappointed in this budget and
I--we want to work to make sure that our schools and our
students across the country are getting the support they need,
and this is a critically important to them and I just do not
agree with the direction of your budget.
But I did want to say Secretary DeVos that earlier this
year the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of
2018, it is legislation that I worked with Speaker Ryan on,
became law. It is a very important law, it will make sure the
Department of Education and other Federal agencies are making
decisions based on evidence, not rhetoric, not partisanship.
And I expect your department, as well as others, but your
department to quickly and effectively implement that law and I
will be submitting questions for the record on the Department's
plans on that.
So, I just wanted to make sure you are aware of that.
Secretary DeVos. Thank you.
Senator Murray. Thank you.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Senator. Thank you Secretary
DeVos.
The record will stay open for 1 week for additional
questions.
[The following questions were not asked at the hearing, but
were submitted to the Department for response subsequent to the
hearing:]
Questions Submitted by Senator Roy Blunt
nextgen compliance with spirit and letter of fiscal year 2018 and 2019
appropriation language
Question. Both the fiscal year 2019 and fiscal year 2018 Labor/HHS
bill included language requiring the Department to ensure certain
elements are included in the Next Generation Processing and Servicing
Environment (NextGen), to promote accountability, transparency, and
competition in student loan servicing. Specifically, it requires that
NextGen include the participation of multiple servicers/vendors that
contract directly with the Department to manage a unique portfolio of
borrower accounts and the full life-cycle of loans from disbursement to
pay-off with certain limited exception, and that it allocates borrower
accounts to eligible student loan servicers/vendors based on
performance. Will you ensure that the Department will fully comply with
the letter and intent of the law, including as part of the Enhanced
Processing Solution component of NextGen, and any potential transition
periods to the full implementation of any components of NextGen?
Answer. Yes. The Department is committed to fully complying with
all statutory provisions related to Next Gen.
timelines for nextgen solicitations, awards, and account migration
Question. Please provide the current anticipated timeline of major
milestones for NextGen implementation, including when contract
solicitations for each component will open, when contracts will be
awarded under each component, and when borrower accounts will be
migrated to NextGen?
Answer. The Digital Customer Care Solution was awarded in February
2019. The Optimal Processing Solution (OPS), the Enhanced Processing
Solution (EPS) and the Business Process Operations (BPO) solicitations
were issued in January 2019. The planned award date for EPS is spring/
summer 2019. The planned award date for OPS and BPO is the fall of
2019. Borrower accounts are to begin migration shortly after the award
of EPS. All dates are tentative as all three of these solicitations are
currently under protest.
nextgen 5-year funding needs
Question. What is the current estimate of how much it will cost in
discretionary administrative funding annually over the next 5 years to
administer NextGen, compared to the activities NextGen will replace?
Please include any key assumptions behind those estimates.
Answer. While Next Gen encompasses all Federal Student Aid
activities, the largest costs involve student loan servicing. The
current estimate for discretionary loan servicing costs assuming
current pricing and contract structures is $5.1 billion in fiscal years
2020--2024. Market research indicates that once fully implemented, Next
Gen should reduce these costs by 10 to 20 percent. These savings would
be driven primarily by providing customers with a common set of easy-
to-use digital and mobile self-service options that will reduce our
current reliance on costly, large-scale call center operations,
standardizing systems and processes to eliminate duplication and
inefficiency, and shifting contract pricing from a static per-account
basis to one that pays vendors based on work performed.
contingency plans for expiring servicing contracts
Question. Current student loan servicing contracts are set to
expire later this year, what is the contingency plan if there is a
delay in awarding NextGen contracts or otherwise transitioning to
NextGen?
Answer. The Department extended the contracts of the four Title IV
Additional Servicers (TIVAS) for 6 months (until Dec. 15, 2019). We
continue to review our plans for the remaining servicing contracts. We
remain committed to Next Gen FSA's goals and objectives and are
confident in the initiative's ultimate success.
role of compliance in servicing allocation
Question. A recent OIG audit found significant instances of
servicer noncompliance with Federal requirements, and notes that FSA
did not incorporate a performance metric relevant to servicer
compliance with Federal requirements into its methodology for assigning
loans to servicers. Why hasn't the Department included such metrics
into its student loan allocation process?
Answer. The OIG audit referenced three or four isolated incidents
that, in fact, through the Department's internal servicer oversight,
were discovered before the audit; the Department was already addressing
the incidents through process improvements. It is through that servicer
oversight process that the Department monitors and tracks servicer
compliance with requirements.
The Department holds its servicing vendors accountable for
instances of non-compliance through the use of contractual provisions
and corrective action plans. Nevertheless, the Department recognizes
there is room for improvement in how student loans are serviced.
Accordingly, the Department launched the Next Gen initiative, which is
restructuring its systems, processes, and contracts to introduce even
greater accountability based on more-targeted standards, metrics,
incentives, and disincentives to drive outstanding performance.
maintaining assistance to struggling borrowers during nextgen
transition
Question. The Department has indicated that it plans to
significantly revamp the way it services delinquent and defaulted
student loans as part of NextGen. Until the Department fully
transitions to NextGen, how has it ensured that defaulted borrowers
have access to services to help them rehabilitate their loans or
otherwise get out of default? What specific metrics does the Department
use to ensure defaulted borrowers have access to such services?
Answer. The Department has determined that the existing PCAs under
contract through 2024 have sufficient capacity to provide effective
debt collection services from now until full implementation of Next Gen
FSA.
The volume of new accounts private collection agencies (PCAs)
receive is determined through a set of metrics, one of which is call
quality: the percentage of issues the PCAs correctly handle in calls
that are monitored by the Department. PCAs that improperly counsel
borrowers about the rehabilitation program incur a reduction in the
number of new accounts the Department assigns. PCAs that fail to meet a
minimum acceptable level of accuracy are excluded from receiving new
accounts for an entire quarter.
For the Default Resolution Group (DRG) servicer, there is a
performance metric for response management in which the Department
measures the accuracy of the DRG servicer's responses to borrower
inquiries, either via telephone or in written form. In any given month
during which the servicer fails to provide an acceptable level of
accuracy in responses--including responses pertaining to
rehabilitation--the DRG servicer can incur a disincentive of up to 2
percent of the amount the Department would normally pay the servicer
for operations and maintenance.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Cindy Hyde-Smith
decrease in teachers served by seed program
Question. Nonprofits in my own State of Mississippi are helping
improve teacher effectiveness in the classroom, thus improving the
academic achievement and success of hundreds of students in high-needs
school districts. This critical training for teachers and school
leaders is funded through the Supporting Effective Educator Development
(SEED) program. In previous grant cycles, the SEED program had a large
footprint serving many teachers and students nationwide. In the most
recent SEED grant awards, I notice the number of teachers and students
served have dropped significantly from previous grant cycles. It is my
understanding that in fiscal year 2015, more than 50,000 teachers were
reached, but in fiscal year 2018, only 12,000 teachers and 1,300
principals benefitted from SEED grants. Please explain this decrease of
teachers served by the SEED program.
Answer. Changes in eligible applicants following the
reauthorization of SEED by the Every Student Succeeds Act, in
particular the addition of institutions of higher education as eligible
applicants, have led to more locally based projects that involve
smaller numbers of teachers compared to awards under the previous
authority that were focused on nonprofit organizations that often
operated on a statewide basis.
equitable distribution of seed grants
Question. Last year, the Senate Labor-HHS-Education Report included
language directing the Department to ensure that SEED grants were
awarded to diverse set of eligible entities, including national
nonprofit organizations implementing evidence-based activities across a
number of sites. How will the Department ensure equity of awards
between nonprofits and universities?
Answer. The 15 grants awarded from the 2018 competition were those
judged to be of the highest quality by the external peer reviewers.
Both nonprofits and universities were reviewed against the same
criteria. Five nonprofit organizations received $19.7 million for their
first-year award; 10 universities received $22.4 million for their
first-year award. National nonprofits are winning the awards at a rate
equal to or greater than the proportion of the applicant pool they
comprise.
rural charter schools
Question. In 2017, the Mississippi Charter School Authorizer Board
received a Charter Schools Program State expansion grant. Last year,
Mississippi opened the first rural charter school in Clarksdale, and I
understand the school plans to add classrooms to meet growing demand.
In addition, there are plans to open three new charter schools in the
Jackson area next year.
What educational advantages do you see from these State expansion
grants? Does the Department take a different approach working with
States that are opening charter schools in rural areas? What do you see
as the greatest benefits and most pressing challenges facing rural area
charter schools?
Answer. Charter schools play a critical role in American public
education by increasing educational options for families and driving
innovative instructional practices that can benefit students across a
range of school settings. Research shows that charter schools--which,
in exchange for stricter accountability, are generally exempt from many
of the State and local requirements governing other public schools--can
deliver impressive results for our Nation's students, including those
living in poverty or at risk for educational failure.Charter school
developers seeking to open schools in rural areas may confront unique
challenges, including in hiring staff and acquiring facilities. The
Department provides support in various ways to help overcome these
challenges, including by providing customized technical assistance to
State entities receiving Charter Schools Program funds in making
subgrants to developers and through information dissemination on key
topics. To the latter end, for example, the National Charter School
Resource Center, funded by the Department, has engaged in a variety of
efforts to highlight charter schools serving rural areas, including by
hosting webinars focusing on how developers can successfully engage
rural communities. Additionally , the Department has adopted priorities
for applicants serving students in rural areas for CSP programs
including the CMO and Developer grant competitions.
investment in hbcu capacity
Question. Mississippi has a number of distinguished Historically
Black Colleges and Universities. HBCUs in my State are nationally
recognized for their academic programs and contributions to research.
How is the Department investing in HBCUs to strengthen their
educational capacity, including areas such as science, technology and
mathematics and graduate studies?
Answer. The Budget supports important investments in the academic
quality, institutional management and capacity, infrastructure and
student support services for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs). In recognition of the extraordinary contribution
provided by HBCUs, the Budget includes $626 million for programs that
provide funding to help these institutions strengthen their capacity to
provide the highest quality education. More specifically, the 2020
President's Budget provides $282.4 million for the Strengthening HBCUs
program, $73 million for Strengthening HBGIs, $8.7 million for Master's
Degree Programs at HBCUs, $221.8 million for Howard University, and
$40.5 for HBCU Capital Financing program.
fafsa process and complexity
Question. I have heard from constituents with concerns about the
Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) process. Students are
apprehensive about the complexity of the application process and the
requirement to provide additional verification or auditing several
weeks after the initial submission. Often the additional verification
review and auditing takes longer than expected, resulting in aid
approval after the school year begins. A significant number of
Mississippians rely Federal grants and loans, so students are placed at
a substantial disadvantage if they do not receive financial aid until
after the school year begins. One suggested solution is to allow
students to apply for the FASFA even earlier.
Do you believe this is a viable solution? What are some potential
challenges associated with an earlier application process? What can the
Department and Congress do to help streamline the application and
additional verification process?
Answer. The Department must balance the burden it places upon
students by requiring additional verification related to the FAFSA with
the risk of increasing improper payments. It has recently taken steps
to reduce the burden to students, while minimizing additional risks to
taxpayers.
In January of 2019, the Department acted to reduce the burden on
students and families that have difficulty in obtaining documentation
needed to verify their FAFSA and Institutional Student Information
Record (ISIR) information (see Note 1).\*\ Specifically, the Department
allowed students to submit signed copies of income tax returns as an
alternative to obtaining tax transcripts from the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS). The Department has also made the FAFSA available for
students to fill out on their mobile phones, through the myStudentAid
App, to ease burdens to students.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\*\ Note 1: https://ifap.ed.gov/eannouncements/
010919Chngsto1819and1920VerificationReq.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Department currently allows students to complete the FAFSA
beginning on October 1st of the year preceding the award year. For an
institution that has a traditional Fall start date, a student attending
the institution would have nearly 1 year to fill out the FASFA before
the school year begins. The Department believes this is sufficient time
for students to complete the electronic version of the form.
To further streamline the verification process and to reduce
improper payments, the Department has also sought from Congress
exemptions from certain information-sharing restrictions in statute.
The Department believes that such information sharing is in the best
interest of students, institutions, and taxpayers.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Marco Rubio
extending student loan contracts beyond april 2019
Question. In last year's appropriations bill, this committee
directed the Department to extent current student loan financing
contracts beyond April 2019 for loan services that are in good
standing. Does the department plan to extend these contract? If not,
could you please explain why?
Answer. Having no legal basis upon which to non-competitively
extend these contracts under existing laws, FSA allowed them to expire
upon the conclusion of their competitively negotiated period of
performance, while taking all the necessary steps to ensure as seamless
a transition as possible.
recalling accounts not in repayment
Question. The same act also directed the department not to recall
accounts that are not in repayment from private collection agencies and
allow them to continue services the loans to avoid disruptions to
borrowers. Did the department recall these accounts? If so, could you
please explain why the department disregarded the direction of this
committee?
Answer. The Department allowed the contracts to expire upon the
conclusion of their competitively negotiated period of performance
because there is no legal basis upon which to non-competitively extend
the contracts under existing laws. The Department is taking all
necessary steps to ensure as seamless a transition as possible for
borrowers.
servicer management of account volume
Question. How is the department keeping track of how well servicers
are managing account volume? Could you please provide information
showing the number of agencies are able to handle the volume of
borrower accounts and provide timely responses to borrowers?
Answer. Throughout the life cycle of the Small Business Private
Collection Agency (PCA) contracts, the Department has continually
assessed the capacity and capability of the 11 Small Business PCAs to
effectively collect on current and future volumes of defaulted student
loan borrower accounts. For example, in September 2018, the Department
requested all PCAs provide forecasts by month of the number of account
assignments they could accept. In addition to the September 2018
capacity assessment, the PCAs are contractually required to submit
reports each month, referred to as monthly deliverables, which contain
data related to the prior month's performance. These data include items
such as staffing levels, collections results, borrower complaints, and
quality assurance scores as calculated internally by each PCA. Since
October 2018, FSA staff has met with each PCA on a monthly basis to
review and discuss results provided via the monthly deliverables.
Results of call monitoring performed by FSA staff are also reviewed;
issues are addressed as needed.
meeting with private collection agencies regarding nextgen
Question. During your testimony, you mentioned the department
continually meets with loan servicers. In the past year, when have you
met with private collection agencies to resolve concerns with the
transition to the Next Generation system?
Answer. The government regularly meets with both loan servicers and
private collection agencies regarding their performance under their
current contracts; however, discussions regarding an active procurement
with a subset of potential offerors (e.g. such as those that currently
have contracts with the Department) without making the same opportunity
available for others would be inappropriate and contrary to law.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Patty Murray
hiring delays at the office for civil rights
Question. Despite Congress increasing appropriations for the Office
for Civil Rights (OCR) for fiscal years 2018 and 2019 and this
Committee directing OCR to increase the number of full-time equivalent
staff, OCR staffing levels have fallen from 579 in fiscal year 2017 to
510 in fiscal year 2019, according to the 1st quarter staffing report
submitted by the Department. Right now, staff at OCR handle an
unacceptably high 37 cases each, more than double the number 10 years
ago.
Why is the Department acting so slowly to hire these needed staff?
Have there been any changes to the hiring process from the one followed
prior to 2017? If so, what are they? Please provide the timeline for
posting job announcements, selecting applicants, and making offers of
employment to applicants for all approved hiring actions.
Answer. There has been no change in the Department's hiring
process, which includes six major steps: Workforce Planning,
Classification, Vacancy Development and Posting, Certificate of
Eligibles, Interview/Reference Check, and Offer/Onboarding. Each one of
the steps has variable components that directly impact the time it
takes to hire staff. The Department is devoting contract and Federal
resources from across the agency to improve the hiring process and
reduce the time it takes to on-board staff. However, even after an
offer is made and accepted, the security clearance process could take
weeks or even months before an employee is cleared to start work.
The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) hired 14 staff members since
January 2019. In addition, OCR currently has 89 positions for which
interviews are being conducted; 4 individuals that have accepted offers
with a start date in April 2019; and 2 outstanding offers. Finally, 13
Position Descriptions are in the Classification stage of hiring. Once
the classification is complete, OCR will post announcements that will
result in multiple selections nationwide for positions such as Regional
Director, Team Leaders, and new FOIA Personnel.
response rate regarding specific requests from senator murray
Question. After I raised concerns about the lack of a substantive
response to my letter to you about the dismissal of the acting
Inspector General and noting in my statement concerns about the
Department's lack of responsiveness, Secretary DeVos claimed that the
Department has responded to 110 of 124 letters I've signed. However,
those figures overstate the true response rate because many of the
responses do not provide the information I've requested. Please provide
the number of specific requests I've made in my letters to which the
Department has provided me with the requested information.
Answer. The Department has made every reasonable effort to provide
substantive and timely responses to your letters and the information
you have requested from the Department through these letters, as well
as the significant number of follow up requests for information,
briefings, and calls with your staff on matters related to your
letters. We value the relationships we have with you and your staff and
consider our regular and consistent dialog and engagement on issues
related to the Department of critical importance.
foundations for evidence-based policymaking act of 2018
Question. Earlier this year, the President signed into law (Public
Law 115-435) a bill I co-wrote with former Speaker Paul Ryan called the
``Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018.''
Accordingly, please provide the following information:
What steps is the Department of Education taking to prioritize
implementation of the bill's key provisions, including those related to
developing a multi-year learning agenda, tapping senior leaders to
fulfill the law's goals (e.g., a Chief Data Officer and Evaluation
Officer, and Statistical Officer), improving coordination of data
government at the Department, and improving accessibility of education
data?
Answer. The Department looks forward to supporting the key
provisions of the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of
2018 and to providing internal and external stakeholders with more
opportunities to use and generate evidence to improve opportunities for
students and families. The Department is working to identify qualified
senior leaders for the key designations--including a Chief Data
Officer, Evaluation Officer, and Statistical Official--that will best
position the Department for success. The Department is also exploring
new cross-office mechanisms that efficiently bolster agency-wide
prioritization, decisionmaking, and support for program offices,
especially with respect to developing a learning agenda, evaluation
plan, open data plan, and establishing enterprise solutions for
evidence and data governance.
Question. The Department did not include a request for additional
resources to support implementation; how does the Department intend to
ensure the capacity exists to implement this new law?
Answer. By the time the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking
Act of 2018 was signed into law in January 2019, the Department's
proposed budget had already been submitted to the Office of Management
and Budget. However, for the time being, the Department is currently
exploring opportunities to identify efficiencies and redirect resources
to support the new responsibilities contained in the Act.
Question. What is the Department's timeline for designating the
senior leaders?
Answer. The Department is actively exploring these designations to
identify qualified senior leaders that best position the Department for
success. The Department fully plans to designate a Chief Data Officer,
Evaluation Officer, and Statistical Official no later than July 2019,
in accordance with the statutory deadline contained in the Foundations
for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018.
special olympics budget amendment
Question. As I indicated in my hearing statement, I was
disappointed to see the President's budget proposal to eliminate $17.6
million for Special Olympics education programs. This is the third year
President Trump's budget has included such a proposal. Now that
President Trump has ``just authorized a funding of the Special
Olympics,'' when will a budget amendment be submitted to the Congress
consistent with his statement?
Answer. The President submitted a budget amendment to Congress on
May 13th that included $17.6 million for the Special Olympics program
for fiscal year 2020.
data collection on student access to arts education
Question. The Every Student Succeeds Act lists the arts alongside
reading, math, and other subjects in the Federal definition of a
``Well-Rounded Education.'' It has now been 10 years since the
Department has collected data about student access to arts education
through its Fast Response Survey System (FRSS). New information is
critical to fuel progress in providing equitable access to learning in
dance, media arts, theater, music, and visual arts. According to the
FRSS website, findings from FRSS surveys have been included in
congressional reports, testimony to congressional subcommittees, NCES
reports, and other Department of Education reports. The findings are
also often used by State and local education officials.
What plans does the Department have underway to collect and report
this data?
Answer. The Department does not currently have plans to collect
data about student access to arts education. However, it will examine
the feasibility of collecting such information, as well as information
on other subjects that contribute to a well-rounded education, such as
foreign languages, computer sciences, and digital literacy.
hbcu capital financing advisory board outreach
Question. The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2018 directed the
Department to create and execute an outreach plan to work with States
and the Capital Financing Advisory Board to improve outreach to States
and help additional public HBCUs participate in the program. It's been
almost 9 months since the Department indicated it was ``making progress
in developing such a plan.'' What is the status and timeline of the
creation and execution of that outreach plan? Please describe each of
the activities that will be undertaken under the plan.
Answer. The Department has finalized an outreach plan and has begun
to execute the plan. The execution of the plan is ongoing with no end
date. The plan is outlined in the following four points:
--1. Providing information about the program to eligible HBCU
presidents and chancellors of HBCUs that are not yet
participating in the program to remind them of the opportunity
to participate
--2. Attending conferences, if resources are available, to share
information with leaders in the HBCU community and to provide
points of contact within the Department for those institutions
that seek technical assistance on the HBCU Capital Financing
Program. Some of those conferences may include the White House
Initiative on HBCUs; the Thurgood Marshall College Fund; the
United Negro College Fund; the National Association for Equal
Opportunity in Higher Education; the National Association of
HBCU Title III Administrators, Inc.; the National Association
of College and University Business Officers; and various
accreditation conferences.
--3. Working with State universities, State systems, or both to
specifically address State-level challenges to participation
and share potential solutions to increase public HBCU
participation as resources permit and where legally feasible.
Examples include working with State Bond Commissions, Board of
Regents, and State Attorneys Generals.
--4. Asking the bonding authority of ways that it can further efforts
to increase outreach.
To date, a number of activities have been implemented in support of
this plan and information about the capital finance program has been
disseminated accordingly. The bonding authority sent a newsletter to
101 HBCUs as well as higher education authorities that have approvals
over State funding. The Executive Director met with public HBCU
presidents and chancellors at the Thurgood Marshall College Fund Winter
Convening. The Department worked with Morgan State University and the
State Attorney General office to close a loan. Additionally, it closed
a loan with Florida A&M University after working years with the State.
evidence as a priority in competitive grant programs
Question. The Department included priorities for the use of
evidence in 12 competitive grant programs in 2017 but only three in
2018. What explains this reduction? For how many competitive grant
programs does the Department plan to include an evidence priority in
fiscal year 2019 and fiscal year 2020? Please describe the specific
actions, including training of Department staff, technical assistance,
monitoring and support that the Department is taking in fiscal year
2019 and will take in fiscal year 2020 with respect to evidence
requirements in formula grant programs under ESEA.
Answer. When the Department develops evidence priorities and other
components of competitions, staff review each competition individually
and weigh the body of evidence along with other policy considerations
to determine the most appropriate approach. In addition to the three
fiscal year 2018 competitions that included a priority for moderate or
strong evidence, an approximately 25 additional competitions required
or encouraged applicants to provide evidence that meets the promising
evidence, evidence-based, or demonstrates a rationale standards. The
Department conducted a robust review of competitions for the
appropriate use of evidence in fiscal year 2019 and will do the same in
fiscal year 2020. We can share more about final decisions for fiscal
year 2019 competitions when all notices have been published.
The Department has begun to provide technical assistance on the use
of evidence in formula grant programs. For example, it convened a
community of practice focused on evidence that resulted in resources
that were published on our website. The Department is undergoing a
review of its capacity and opportunities to better support staff and
the broader education community in the use of evidence, including in
formula grant programs. The Department has reorganized in two key
offices to support this work. First, the Office of Elementary and
Secondary Education now includes the new Evidence-Based Practices Team
to inform policy and planning, evaluate program outcomes using data,
and facilitate best-practice sharing in the field. Second, the Office
of Planning, Evaluation, and Policy Development now includes a Grants
Policy Office that, among other things, is focused on supporting the
Department and the field to continuously improve performance and
results by building stronger evidence, helping offices make decisions
based on a clear understanding of the available evidence, and
disseminating evidence to decision makers. These teams will collaborate
and will partner with the Institute of Education Sciences and other
offices in the Department that focus on training and capacity-building
to advance this work. These efforts will also be aligned with the
requirements of the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of
2018.
recovery efforts in puerto rico
Question. Appropriations subcommittee staff visited Puerto Rico
last November and documented the lack of recovery of Puerto Rico's
public schools. School buildings and programs are still not available
because of hurricane damage. Power, Internet connectivity, and mental
health issues for students and school staff continue to pose challenges
to operating schools. Please describe efforts and outcomes associated
with the Department's efforts with funding available in the Bipartisan
Budget Act of 2018 to assist with the restart of Puerto Rico's schools,
including up to $3 million available for program administration. What
additional efforts, including technical assistance with procurement and
contracting, are planned? Further, what additional efforts will the
Department, working in coordination with the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, take to fully operationalize public schools in
Puerto Rico?
Answer. The Department of Education has engaged in extensive and
continuous outreach and technical assistance to Puerto Rico related to
its hurricane education recovery efforts since the hurricanes made
landfall in fall of 2017. In particular, it has worked to ensure the
effective and timely use of the Federal hurricane education recovery
funding provided in the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018. However,
recovery efforts continue to be hindered significantly by local
capacity and resource issues, including issues related to local
procurement and contracting requirements. The Department currently is
working on a range of proposals that, in cooperation with the
government of Puerto Rico, could help address these capacity issues.
The Department also has coordinated its hurricane education recovery
efforts in Puerto Rico with the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
including through the provision of guidance clarifying the
circumstances under which Puerto Rico may use hurricane education
recovery funds for authorized activities that otherwise might be
covered by FEMA. For example, Puerto Rico may use Department of
Education recovery funds to cover many of the immediate costs of
restoring the learning environment while requests to FEMA for
assistance are pending and repay or repurpose those funds once FEMA
assistance is received.
expanding performance measures for 21st century community learning
centers
Question. In April 2017, the Government Accountability Office made
a number of recommendations related to the 21st Century Learning
Centers program (GAO-17-400), including ``The Secretary of Education
should direct the Office of Academic Improvement to expand its
performance measures for the 21st Century program to address all
program objectives. Specifically, Education should establish
performance measures related to key behavioral, including student
attendance and disciplinary incidents, and socio-emotional outcomes.''
Please update the Committee on the status of your plans for
implementation of this recommendation.
Answer. In fiscal year 2018, the Department awarded a contract to
coordinate a review of the Department's performance measures for the
21st Century Community Learning Centers program to obtain stakeholder
feedback on those measures, inform options for revising existing
measures, and explore the feasibility of creating new measures in the
areas highlighted by the GAO report. Consequently, the Department
engaged with State educational agencies, local educational agencies,
and other stakeholder groups in facilitated teleconferences in early
2019. Department staff and the contractor are currently collaborating
to develop revised performance measures which the Department will then
send to the Office of Management and Budget for review.
borrower defense backlog and compliance with congressional directive
Question. Secretary DeVos testified that she believed borrower
defense claims were being reviewed as of March 28, 2019, even though
the Department had already prepared data for a report to this Committee
showing that not one borrower defense claim had been approved in the
last 6 months of 2018. In Senate Report 115-150 accompanying S. 1771,
the Committee directed the Department to report on"specific actions
taken and planned to process this workload in a timely manner.''
However, the Department has not provided such information as directed
and has taken no action to reduce the backlog of pending claims which
has now grown to 158,000. What is the Department's timeline and plan
for eliminating the backlog of pending borrower defense claims and for
coming into compliance with the Committee's directive by reporting on
actions taken to process pending borrower defense claims in a timely
manner?
Answer. The Department continues its efforts to implement the 2016
final regulations. Although ongoing litigation enjoins the Department
from using the Department's relief methodology for approving borrower
defense claims, the Department continues to adjudicate the applications
on the merits so that applications can be processed swiftly once an
alternative relief methodology is determined.
impact aid research agenda
Question. Please describe the Impact Aid research agenda identified
in the fiscal year 2020 Justifications of Appropriation Estimates to
the Congress ``to help determine the appropriate Federal share in
supporting districts impacted by the presence of Federal property.''
Answer. The Department held preliminary discussions and scheduled
additional meetings in spring 2019 to gather information and ideas to
inform an Impact Aid research agenda. Possible options include building
on analyses completed in 2007-2008, when the Department contracted for
a study that examined the financial burdens school districts faced due
to the Federal presence and how well funding formulas were targeted to
affected districts. That study focused primarily on the Basic Supports
Payment and Payments for Children with Disabilities programs and did
not look at the Payments of Federal Property program. The Department
has also looked at revenue data compared to current Payment for Federal
Property formula payments and found 89 percent of LEAs received
payments that accounted for less than 5 percent of their total revenue
in fiscal year 2017. Further analysis could help the Department
determine to what extent LEAs are still impacted by the Federal
acquisition as long as 60 years ago and inform future budget requests
for the various components of the Impact Aid program.
details on proposed grants for school choice under special programs for
indian children
Question. Within Special Programs for Indian children, the fiscal
year 2020 Justifications of Appropriation Estimates to the Congress
states that ``the Department plans to conduct Tribal consultations. . .
. Based on the feedback gathered during these consultations, the
Department will provide up to $10 million in fiscal year 2020 to
support grants that expand the ability of families to choose high-
quality educational opportunities that meet the needs of Native
youth.'' Please provide more specific information about these proposed
grants, including absolute priorities, eligible uses of funds, eligible
applicants, and plans for evaluation of the proposed grants.
Answer. In general, the Administration is focused on putting
decisionmaking power back in the hands of students, families, and
communities. We do not have specific information to share about this
proposal at this time. The Department will publish a notice of proposed
priorities, requirements, definitions, and selection criteria (NPP) in
the Federal Register for public comment prior to finalizing the details
of the fiscal year 2020 competition, and the NPP will reflect input
from Tribal consultation.
role of pre-apprenticeships in existing apprenticeship program
infrastructure
Question. The Department proposes $60 million to support State
efforts to create pre-apprenticeship programs that increase the number
of adults who are able to meet the basic entrance requirements of
apprenticeship programs. Please clarify whether the purpose of such
pre-apprenticeship programs is to enable participants to qualify for
and participate in existing registered apprenticeship programs. If not,
why does the Department choose to ignore the existing infrastructure
around such high-quality registered apprenticeship programs and instead
propose pathways into duplicative, lower quality programs?
Answer. The Administration's pre-apprenticeship proposal would help
low-skilled adults qualify for and participate in existing high-quality
apprenticeship programs identified by each State, including registered
apprenticeships. The proposal would utilize the infrastructure both of
State agencies that operate Adult Education programs as well as those
of existing apprenticeship programs.
institute of education sciences funding for research partnerships
versus alternative models
Question. The director of the Institute of Education Sciences (IES)
has publicly expressed criticism of the value of research practice
partnerships previously funded by this agency, including those funded
under the Regional Educational Laboratories program. However, this does
not align with what educators say about this model of conducting
research being vastly superior to the purely academic approach to
education research. Is there a better approach to involving educators
in setting education research agendas? If so, what is it and does IES
plan to fund this approach?
Answer. IES's main responsibility is to produce research that can
help improve the education outcomes of learners throughout the life
cycle. Our experience with Researcher-Practitioner Partnerships (RPPs)
suggests they often elevate the process of partnering between
practitioners and researchers without sufficient attention to whether
or not these partnerships produced results that improve educational
outcomes. IES is not discouraging partnerships between researchers and
practitioners. Indeed, it recognizes that these partnerships can help
translate research into practice; however, it also believes that
researchers should be free to use a variety of approaches to involving
educators in research.
public service loan forgiveness outreach and compliance with
congressional directive
Question. The Department received $2.3 million in each of fiscal
years 2018 and 2019 ``to conduct outreach to borrowers of loans made
under part D of title IV of the Higher Education'' including ``the
Secretary shall also communicate to all Direct Loan borrowers the full
requirements of section 455(m) of such Act.'' Unfortunately, the
Department has failed to comply with this requirement and has instead
pursued various information and social media campaigns that have both
failed to comply with the fiscal year 2018 and 2019 appropriations
acts. By when will the Department comply with these requirements to
contact all Direct Loan borrowers about Public Service Loan
Forgiveness? Additionally, what specific strategies will you adopt, and
when, in the remaining months of fiscal year 2019 and for fiscal year
2020 so that public servants that are eligible for the forgiveness
programs created by Congress (PSLF and TEPSLF) to receive the relief
they need and deserve?
Answer. A series of targeted email campaigns sharing specific
information about PSLF Program requirements and procedures are planned
to segments of Direct Loan borrowers. FSA currently plans to conduct
these email campaigns in July and November/December 2019. Routine
emails sent to all borrowers whose grace periods are ending already
provide information about PSLF and various repayment plan options to
every Direct Loan borrower about to enter repayment.
Additionally, on a weekly basis, FSA emails all PSLF applicants
denied that week with specific information about TEPSLF eligibility and
the application process. To date, FSA has sent approximately 20,000 of
these emails.
FSA is reviewing all PSLF borrower communications to improve
content and clarity to ensure borrowers receive sufficiently detailed
information regarding counts of qualifying payments and their repayment
history. FSA is also planning additional blog posts, webinars, and
other outreach events for the coming months to help promote PSLF and
TEPSLF to borrowers. FSA also plans to conduct organic and paid social
media outreach about PSLF, the PSLF Help Tool, and TEPSLF.
Additionally, FSA will continue to reach out to all borrowers, whose
PSLF applications were denied, with information about TEPSLF.
FSA recognizes there is substantial confusion among borrowers
regarding PSLF and intends to implement improvements that will help
clarify program eligibility and provide confidence to eligible
borrowers that they are on track for forgiveness. On a more long-term
basis, new functionality being considered as part of the Next Gen FSA
initiative is expected to provide borrowers with real-time, self-
service access to information about their eligibility for PSLF and
progress towards completion. Through the myStudentAid mobile app, for
example, customers will be able to receive information about how to
participate in the program, be reminded via push notification to submit
an Employment Certification Form (ECF) and check the number of
qualifying payments they have made. Additionally, later this year, FSA
will be integrating the PSLF Help Tool into the new Digital and
Customer Care platform. This will allow the Department to eventually
add functionality to the tool, such as a database of qualifying
employers. Next Gen FSA will also eventually give the Department the
capability to fully digitize the ECF and application process, which
will allow borrowers and employers to sign and submit their forms
electronically. We are unable to provide a precise schedule at this
time, however, as procurement activities are ongoing.
necessity of separate school safety program given essa title iv-a
flexibility
Question. The President's budget includes $100 million for an
unauthorized program related to school safety that seeks to replace the
currently funded $1.170 billion ESSA Title IV-A program that State
Education Agencies (SEAs) and Local Education Agencies (LEAs) are
familiar with, have the constructs in place to administer, and are
making great strides in implementing. States and local educational
agencies are required to use Title IV-A funds to support well-rounded
education, safe and healthy school environments, and the effective use
of technology. How would the proposed program be more efficient or
effective and reach the same number of school districts as a program
more than ten times its size? Given the inherent flexibility of ESSA
Title IV, and its strong deference to local implementation, I am hard-
pressed to believe that the proposed program allows something SEAs and
LEAs cannot already do under the existing ESSA Title IV.
Answer. The President's budget would eliminate the Title IV-A
program as part of overall efforts to streamline the Federal role in
education and promote fiscal discipline. States and local communities
retain primary responsibility for ensuring that our schools remain safe
places for students and teachers.
In addition, the Title IV-A program is poorly structured to provide
meaningful support to LEAs because it provides allocations of less than
$30,000 to an estimated two-thirds of LEAs and less than $10,000 for
one-third of LEAs. Small allocations, combined with the wide range of
allowable activities under Title IV-A, make this program an inefficient
vehicle for supporting school safety. The proposed $100 million School
Safety State Grants program would overcome these limitations by
delivering meaningful State-level grants--nearly twice the amount of
State-level funding provided by Title IV-A--targeted solely to
supporting State and local efforts to improve school climate and
safety.
reducing funding for adult education programs in context of shortage of
skilled labor
Question. I was disappointed to see that the Department's budget
proposal included a $156 million (24 percent) cut to adult education
programs, which provide education and literacy assistance to low
skilled Americans, enabling them to acquire foundational reading, math,
and English skills, as well as career readiness skills for employment
or transition to advanced postsecondary education. According to the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, we have 7.6 million open jobs, but our
workforce does not have the skills to fill many of them. Adult
Education is a central component of increasing the skills of our
workforce, as over 1.5 million Americans annually participate in adult
education to improve their literacy and work skills offered at the
local level through public schools, community colleges, libraries, and
community-based organizations. Can you tell me how cutting nearly one-
quarter of adult education funding will improve the education and
skills of our workforce, as well as meet employers' needs for skilled
workers?
Answer. The Administration's proposed decrease to Adult Education
State Grants primarily reflects the need for fiscal discipline while
supporting the President's goal of directing a greater share of
existing discretionary funding toward national security and public
safety. In addition, the effectiveness of the program as implemented
following its reauthorization by the Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act (WIOA) remains unclear, and the Administration believes
it makes sense to redirect a portion of the proposed reduction in
funding for Adult Education State Grants to support pre-apprenticeship
programs. This $60 million initiative under Adult Education National
Leadership Activities would allow States to create pre-apprenticeship
programs that increase the number of adults who are able to meet the
basic entrance requirements of apprenticeship programs. The
Department's budget also supports workforce development through $1.3
billion in Career and Technical Education funding.
request for documentation of communications regarding employee
bargaining
Question. Last September, I requested all communications since
January of 2017 between yourself, members of your senior staff and any
officials representing the Department in bargaining, and any
individuals not employed by the Department that relate to bargaining
with Department employees--and have yet to receive the requested
communications. I restate that request here and ask you to give me a
date on which I will receive all such communications.
Answer. With regard to communications with outside entities that
relate to the collective bargaining process, although there have been
communications with the FMCS and the Federal Service Impasse Panel
during the bargaining process, those communications capture sensitive
pre-decisional discussions involving internal management deliberations
and guidance connected to the ongoing dispute before the FLRA
referenced above. The Department declines to provide those
communications while the dispute is still pending before the FLRA.
data and tools to evaluate educational programs and credentials
Question. We know that students, workers, veterans, employers and
others face a very confusing and opaque marketplace of programs and
credentials. In fact, there are currently nearly 750,000 credentials
available in the U.S. alone. Your department houses and shares data on
many, but not all, those programs and credentials, and oversees laws
and programs affecting more of the market. It's important to share
information about these offerings--such as their cost, quality
controls, pathways, and outcomes--with the public. It's also important
that individuals are able to easily search across different types of
credentials--such as certificates, certifications, licenses,
apprenticeships, and degrees--make meaningful comparisons, and reach
fully informed decisions. Can I ask for your support in taking steps to
make all data about credentials both public and fully comparable, and
to work to support the development of tools and apps that put such
information in the hands of students, parents, employers, and others?
Answer. The Department strives to promote student achievement and
preparation for global competitiveness, including highlighting multiple
pathways toward competitiveness in the 21st century. However, the
Department's required data collection is currently limited to Title IV
participating programs and does not include collecting data about
certifications. In fact, IPEDS specifically instructs institutions to
NOT report information about certifications since these are not well-
defined and many are not the subject of accreditor review and approval.
In March 2019, the College Scorecard updated its homepage to include a
link to the Department of Labor's apprenticeship finder tool so that
students considering college options would also be made aware of
apprenticeship options. In addition, by the end of 2019, the Department
will also begin providing preliminary program-level loan debt and
earnings data among recipients of Title IV aid for all Title IV
participating programs at the certificate, baccalaureate, graduate and
professional degree level.
title i performance reports under essa
Question. Recently, the Department released fiscal year 2018 Title
I performance reports for six States, including Alaska, Arizona,
Illinois, Louisiana, New Mexico, and Texas. The reports cited each of
these States as needing to take immediate action to address
``significant compliance and quality concerns'' related to ESSA
implementation. These reports highlight ongoing concerns I have with
the implementation of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and States'
compliance with the myriad of requirements in the law. Each State was
given 30 days to provide evidence to the Department to resolve these
issues, and three States were required to submit amendments to their
approved ESSA plans.
Has the Department received the requested evidence from each of
these States, and were any necessary amendments and assurances to the
State plans also submitted?
Answer. The Department has received additional documentation from
each State that has received a final report and continues to work
closely with each State to resolve the outstanding issues. In some
cases, this documentation has included amendments to State plans; these
amendments are currently under Department review.
Question. What steps will the Department take to ensure these
States come into full compliance? What additional monitoring will the
Department conduct in States cited for ``significant compliance and
quality concerns'' in the coming year?
Answer. The Department will continue to work with each State until
all issues are fully resolved. This starts with the State providing a
response within 30 days of receiving the report and may include an
iterative process of reviewing State submissions and asking for
clarification or additional information as needed. The Department will
continue to communicate with each State and provide technical
assistance, as needed, until all monitoring findings are resolved. In
addition, conditions on grant awards or other actions are sometimes
used to account for long-standing issues identified in monitoring
findings. The number of conditions from recent monitoring events, the
time since the previous monitoring event, and any conditions on grant
awards are all risk factors that are included when the Department is
determining future monitoring and compliance activities.
Question. How will the Department make the amendments and
assurances to these States plans transparent to Congress and the
public?
Answer. The Department posts each approved amendment on its web
site at https://www2.ed.gov/admins/lead/account/stateplan17/
statesubmission.html. In addition, the Department posts all monitoring
reports since 2006 for Titles I, II, and III. They can be found at:
https://www2.ed.gov/admins/lead/account/performance/index.html.
Question. If the States cited in these monitoring reports do not
submit sufficient evidence, what additional steps will be taken by the
Department to ensure these States come into compliance with the law?
Answer. The Department works with States in the event that a State
does not meet the timeline established for resolving a monitoring
finding or submits insufficient or incomplete information, including
offering technical assistance if needed. The Department may take
further action as appropriate in a given situation, including increased
monitoring, placing a condition on a grant, placing a grant or an
entire entity on ``high-risk'' status, entering into a compliance
agreement, or withholding funds.
Question. Which States, if any, received Title I monitoring visits
from the Department in fiscal year 2018 in addition to Alaska, Arizona,
Illinois, Louisiana, New Mexico, and Texas, and when will their
performance reports be made publicly available?
Answer. California, Georgia, and Michigan were also monitored for
Title I, Part A in 2018. The Department will finalize these monitoring
reports in the coming weeks.
monitoring essa implementation
Question. Please detail the Department's plans for monitoring the
implementation of ESSA, including:
--a. How the Department will ensure compliance with ESSA's
requirements for the vast majority of States that did not
receive a monitoring visit in fiscal year 2018 and will not
receive a monitoring visit in the upcoming year;
--b. Whether the Department will monitor each State for compliance
with the law, including the plan and timeline for conducting at
least one monitoring visit in each State;
--c. The number of monitoring visits planned for fiscal year 2019 and
fiscal year 2020, which States, and what programs and
requirements of ESEA they will cover;
--d. How the Department is determining which States to conduct
monitoring visits in, a description of any risk assessment
protocols used to set the schedule for monitoring visits, and
whether the States are selected for earlier or more frequent
monitoring because they have greater risk for noncompliance
with ESSA's requirements;
--e. The follow up that will be done for States that the Department
finds do not comply with all of ESSA's requirements during the
monitoring visits.
Answer.
--a. The Department monitors grantee performance in a variety of
ways, including formal on-site and desk performance reviews and
formal assessment peer reviews. For example, over the past 3
years, the Department has reviewed almost all States'
assessment systems and is continuing to work with States as
they address issues identified in the peer review. The
Department also reviews annually the data that States submit to
EDFacts as part of the annual report to the Secretary required
by ESEA section 1111(h)(5). This data includes student outcome
data across ESEA programs as well as key school-level
performance metrics such as school status (e.g., comprehensive
support and improvement, additional targeted support) and
performance on accountability indicators. The Department also
reviews all proposed amendments to a State's consolidated State
plan to ensure compliance with the statute.
--b. The Department intends to monitor each State, though it has not
yet developed a specific plan and timeline for each ESEA
program for future years.
--c. In fall 2019 , the Department will conduct two on-site
monitoring visits that will include a review of Title I, Part
A; Title II, Part A; and Title III, Part A. For Title I, Part
A, the Department has been phasing in the ESEA components over
the past 3 years. Each year, the Department has piloted a
component of its protocol, made changes based on the pilot, and
finalized that component of the protocol before using it in the
subsequent year. The first phase focused on fiscal
requirements--both financial cross-cutting requirements across
ESEA programs and Title I, Part A programmatic fiscal
requirements; the second phase added in data quality, report
cards, accountability, and school improvement; and this year
the Department will pilot the remaining programmatic components
of Title I, Part A along with the programmatic requirements for
Title II, Part A and Title III, Part A. The Department has not
yet completed its monitoring plans for fiscal year 2020.
--d. The Department conducts an annual risk assessment, using a tool
developed by its Office of Grants Administration (formerly
called the Risk Management Service), and documents and closes
out instances of noncompliance through written correspondence
with grantees following on-site and desk reviews. The
assessment looks at program, entity, and grant award risk.
Program risk refers to the program design, such as whether the
program relies on self-reported child counts and how the person
responsible for such counts is impacted by the grant status.
Program risk applies across all grantees and helps the
Department prioritize which programs to monitor. The entity
risk component reviews administrative (i.e., high-risk status,
noncompliance, staff inexperience), financial (i.e., credit-
worthiness, past use of the Department's grant system G5), and
internal controls (i.e., audit findings and resolution) risks
of an SEA. Grant award risk assesses results, quality,
compliance, and financial domains for individual grant awards.
This process is used to identify potential areas of concern and
helps OESE program offices determine if (1) grantees have
ongoing issues with program implementation, (2) those ongoing
issues could result in noncompliance, and (3) new areas of
concern merit attention.
--e. The Department follows up with States on all issues identified
through monitoring that require State action. The Department
notifies the State of such issues through a monitoring exit
call, the monitoring report, regular follow-up, and, as needed,
technical assistance. If such Department support and oversight
does not lead to a State resolving the issue, the Department
may take further action as appropriate in a given situation;
such actions may include increased monitoring, placing a
condition on a grant, placing a grant or an entire entity on
``high-risk'' status, entering into a compliance agreement, or
withholding program funds.
oversight to ensure schools with underperforming subgroups are
identified for targeted support
Question. The Every Student Succeeds Act contains numerous Federal
requirements to ensure that all students have the opportunity to
receive a high quality education no matter where they live, how much
their parents make, or how they learn. Two of these core Federal
requirements require States to identify schools for comprehensive
support and improvement (CSI), targeted support and improvement (TSI),
and additional targeted supports (ATS). The law also requires States to
include subgroups in their systems of annual meaningful differentiation
(AMD). There are States complying with these requirements and States
that are not. For the States that are not in full compliance with the
law, what oversight is the Department conducting to ensure that schools
with consistently underperforming subgroups are included in States
systems of AMD and identified for targeted support as required under
the law?
Answer. The Department is not aware of any State plans that do not
use subgroup performance to identify schools that need targeted support
and improvement based on having one or more ``consistently
underperforming'' subgroups (as defined by the State) or schools that
need additional targeted support. Although the Department expects that
all States are implementing their approved State plans, in the rare
case in which a State's implementation of its accountability system
varies from an approved plan, the Department will take appropriate
enforcement action.
bureau of indian education negotiated rulemaking and title i funding
Question. Section 8204(c)(1) of the Elementary Student Succeeds Act
(ESSA) requires the Secretary of the Interior to undertake a negotiated
rulemaking to develop and implement a new standards, assessments, and
accountability system consistent with Section 1111 of ESSA Title I,
Part A for the Bureau of Indian Education (BIE) funded schools no later
than school year (SY) 2017-2018. According to information contained in
both a flier obtained by Politico advertising a ``Tribal consultation''
on April 22, 2018 (April flyer) and a November 22, 2018, letter from
the Department to BIE (November letter), the Department granted the
Department of the Interior (DOI) a 1 year extension to complete the
negotiated rulemaking process before the start of SY2018-2019. The
April flyer notes that DOI failed to meet this new deadline associated
with the SY2018-2019 extension and, as a result, your Department
withheld approximately $1.6 million in ESSA Title I funding from the
BIE. On August 2, 2018, DOI published a notice in the Federal Registrar
announcing the establishment of the BIE Standards, Assessments, and
Accountability System Negotiated Rulemaking Committee (NRM Committee).
The BIE NRM Committee met four times between September 25, 2018, and
March 14, 2019.The November 2018 letter does not offer any information
on the final determination of the Department regarding the use of the
withheld Title I funding. Additionally, it notes the Department granted
DOI an additional ESSA Section 8204(c)(1) compliance extension to
SY2019-2020 but expressed concerns that DOI will be unable to implement
a final regulation before this new deadline. The November letter
subsequently sets out a number of required actions related to ESSA
Section 8204(c)(1) progress reporting that DOI had to submit by January
7, 2019--a date that fell within the partial Federal Government
shutdown that resulted in the furlough of the majority of DOI
employees.
Under what legal authority did the Department grant DOI the SY2018-
2019 and SY2019-2020 extensions of ESSA's Sec. 8204 requirements
referenced in the April flyer and November letter?
Answer. Section 8204(c)(1) of the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act, as amended (ESEA), requires BIE to use a negotiated
rulemaking (NRM) process to develop regulations to define the
standards, assessment, and an accountability system consistent with
section 1111 of the ESEA for the schools funded by the BIE for
implementation no later than the 2017-2018 school year (SY). Using the
Department's orderly transition authority in Section 4(b) of the Every
Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and using the authority in section
8204(a)(2) for the two agencies to enter an agreement on the
distribution and use of ESEA funds that the Department provides to BIE,
the Department extended the preexisting Memorandum of Agreement (MOA)
between the two agencies. The MOA extension, which was agreed to and
signed by both agencies on July 7, 2017, granted BIE an extension of
the negotiated rulemaking timeline, requiring BIE to complete NRM in
time for new regulations to be effective for SY 2018-2019. Further, the
Department's expectation was that the additional year would be a
sufficient amount of time to allow BIE to finish NRM, establish final
rules governing its system, and operationalize its system by the
beginning of SY 2018-2019. Because BIE did not comply with that
timeline, BIE remains out of compliance with the statutory requirements
and has violated the terms of the MOA. In our November 2018 letter sent
to BIE, the Department made it clear that BIE failed to implement its
ESSA compliant system in SY 2018-2019 and required specific actions
towards implementation with additional deadlines to show progress.
Question. Has the Department used that same authority (or an
alternate authority) to grant additional ESSA Sec. 8204 compliance
extensions or exceptions to DOI?
Answer. No. The Department has not granted any further extensions
to BIE. Since BIE failed to establish its new system within the
timeframe stipulated in the July 2017 MOA, BIE remains out of
compliance with the statutory requirements. As noted above, the
November 2018 letter imposes additional action steps.
Question. What did the Department do with the $1.6 million in Title
I administrative funding withheld from BIE for failure to meet the
deadlines associated with the SY2018-2019 extension?
Answer. In April 2018 the Department engaged in Tribal consultation
on how to direct the use of the withheld funds; it received testimony
and written comments from Tribes and other stakeholders, which it
considered before it made a determination to restore 50 percent of the
withheld funds to BIE. In addition to comments asking to restore the
withheld funds, numerous comments supported directing BIE to use these
funds to complete the NRM in a timely manner. Subsequently, in a letter
to DOI on July 3, 2018, the Department notified DOI of its intent to
restore 50 percent of BIE's State administrative portion of Title I,
Part A funds that were previously withheld so that BIE could continue
its NRM work. To receive the remaining portion of the withheld funds,
BIE was required to complete four items: (1) provide the Department an
updated timeline of the negotiated rulemaking process, including the
date by when the final regulations will be in place to ensure they will
be implemented by the beginning of the 2019-20 SY; (2) publish the
dates for the negotiated rulemaking sessions in the Federal register;
(3) provide the Department with copies of the white papers supporting
the negotiated rulemaking process that had already been completed for
BIE; and, (4) meet with the Department to provide an update regarding
BIE's plans for conducting the rulemaking process. BIE subsequently
satisfied all four conditions and on August 28, 2018, the Department
restored the remaining withheld funds to BIE. BIE completed its NRM in
March 2019 (later than previously scheduled) and has not yet published
its notice of proposed rulemaking. As a result, BIE will not meet its
obligation to establish rules for standards, assessments, and
accountability in SY 2018-2019, as previously agreed upon.
Question. Has the Department opted to withhold any additional Title
I funding from the BIE due to failure to comply with ESSA?
Answer. At this point, the Department has not initiated any further
withholding of BIE's State administrative portion of Title I, Part A
funds.
Question. Did the Department participate in or offer technical
assistance at the BIE NRM Committee's meetings?
Answer. Yes. Department staff from Department program and legal
offices provided extensive technical assistance to BIE and DOI staff
leading up to each of the four NRM committee meetings held in 2018 and
2019. In addition, Department staff attended BIE's four NRM committee
meetings and provided technical assistance to BIE and the committee
upon request. Further, BIE accessed Department-funded technical
assistance from the Comprehensive Centers throughout this process.
Question. Did the Department receive responses from DOI to the
required action items with a January, 7, 2019, deadline contained in
the November letter? If not, did the Department provide DOI with an
extension on these items as a result of DOI's inclusion in the partial
government shutdown?
Answer. No. The Department did not receive any of the items
identified in the November 28, 2018 letter by the established deadline
of January 7, 2019, as requested; nor did it receive the items that had
a February 1, 2019 deadline. On January 15, 2019, DOI's Assistant
Secretary, Tara Sweeney, issued a letter to the Department's Assistant
Secretary, Frank Brogan, stating that BIE would provide a plan and
timeline for its implementation of its ESSA compliant system once the
negotiated rulemaking timeline was complete and consultation had
concluded. During the regular bi-monthly meeting on February 26, 2019,
BIE provided a timeline addressing the negotiated rulemaking process
only, showing that consultation was scheduled to be completed in May
2019, an NPRM would be published early June 2019, and the final rule in
early September 2019. This, however, did not address the implementation
timeline required by the January 7, 2019 deadline. During the same
February meeting, BIE also requested additional time until after it
concluded its fourth and final NRM session in March 2019 to provide the
Department with an implementation timeline. Note that the NRM was
originally supposed to have only three sessions and conclude in
December 2018, but BIE added a fourth session, which was then impacted
by the government shutdown, and did not occur until March 2019. The
January 15, 2019 DOI letter also stated that BIE would work towards
providing the other items ``to the extent possible pending
implementation of its accountability system and will notify ED in
advance if it needed additional time or support be needed.'' The
Department has not yet received any of the requested information.
Question. Has the Department communicated with DOI about this
matter since the conclusion of the final BIE NRM Committee meeting on
March 14, 2019? If so, please provide a summary of those
interdepartmental communications.
Answer. Yes. The Department followed up with the BIE Director, Tony
Dearman, and DOI's Deputy Assistant Secretary, Mark Cruz, on April 4,
2019, to inquire when BIE could reasonably provide the timeline that it
indicated it would provide following the conclusion of its fourth NRM
session in March 2019. BIE responded that it would be providing this
information along with the additional deliverables in the near future
but did not provide a specific date it would make this information
available to the Department. In addition, on April 29, 2019, the two
agencies held a meeting at which BIE indicated that it will need until
May 31, 2019 to provide the timeline that was due to the agency on
January 7, 2019. BIE also provided general updates on its progress
towards completing other action items that were previously due by
January 7 and February 1, 2019, and the Department indicated that a
follow-up meeting between the two agencies should occur to discuss the
items in detail.
education freedom scholarships and resource allocation for private
versus private schools
Question. You have stated that your proposed Education Freedom
Scholarship program ``won't take a single cent from local public school
teachers or public school students.'' Yet, this proposed program would
create a $5 billion annual Federal tax credit. These are dollars that
could be spent on increase resources to our public school students
through Title I or IDEA, for example.
How is your proposal not a shift of resources from public schools
to private schools?
Answer. The Education Freedom Scholarship proposal would create a
$5 billion annual Federal tax credit, encouraging voluntary donations
to scholarships for elementary and secondary students. Those
scholarships can be used to support students in a variety of public and
private settings, as determined by States. The voluntary donations do
not shift Federal resources from public schools or teachers.
education freedom scholarships and federal civil rights laws
Question. Does the Department of Education intend for participating
private schools under the proposed Education Freedom Scholarship
program to adhere to Federal civil rights laws that protect all
students, and if not, which laws or regulations (including
nondiscrimination statutes) does the Department of Education intend to
waive for private schools that could participate in this proposed
program?
Answer. States, not the Federal Government, will determine which
education providers can receive scholarships under the Education
Freedom Scholarship proposal. States may include private schools in
their local programs, but they are not obliged to. The Department will
continue to enforce all applicable civil rights laws for all private
and public schools. If the Education Freedom Scholarship program is
enacted, the Department will not--and cannot--waive any existing civil
rights laws.
stakeholders involved in federal commission on school safety final
report
Question. What individuals and organizations consulted in the
development of the recommendations included in the Final Report of the
Federal Commission on School Safety, published on December 18, 2018?
Please provide a complete list.
Answer. Students, teachers, parents, administrators, school safety
personnel, mental health professionals, and others with an interest in
school safety provided vital input into the Commission's work including
various school safety recommendations. Transcripts and other documents
showing the names of individuals, organizations, and their
recommendations (to the extent they so-included any), may be found at
the Commission's web page at https://www.ed.gov/school-safety.
Personnel from the Departments of Education, Justice, Health and
Human Services, and Homeland Security assisted the Commission in the
development of the recommendations included in the Final Report.
Officers and staff from the Department of Education who assisted in the
development of the recommendations included: Secretary Betsy DeVos,
Deputy Secretary Mick Zais, Assistant Secretary of Elementary and
Secondary Education Frank Brogan, Kent Talbert, Meredith Miller, Ashley
Briggs, Nate Bailey, Josh Venable, Jessika Ramakis, Victoria Hammer,
Erica Lee, Paul Kesner, Rita Foy Moss, Jean Morrow, Chris Rinkus, Bill
Cordes, Larry Cohen, Vanessa Tesoriero, Michael Hawes, Dennis Koeppel,
Maureen Dowling, Brian Thompson, Thomas Wheeler, Venitia Richardson,
William Trachman, and Joe Conaty.
You may wish to contact the other departments for their personnel.
rescission of disclipline guidance, recommendation to arm personnel,
and efforts to promote positive school environment
Question. In December 2018, the Department of Education rescinded a
2014 guidance regarding how States and local educational agencies
should comply with Federal civil rights laws in regards to school
discipline. At the same time, the Federal Commission of School Safety
issued a report which recommended school districts arm ``some specially
selected and trained school personnel'' and increase police presence on
school grounds. Reports and research often shows that arming school
personnel and increasing police presence on campus disproportionately
and negatively impacts students of color and students with
disabilities. What actions will the Department take to help States and
school districts create positive school environments for these students
and prevent these negative impacts from the rescission of the 2014
guidance?
Answer. On April 10, 2019, the Department announced the release of
the ``Parent and Educator Guide to School Climate Resources'' (Guide).
This action fulfilled one of the recommendations of the Federal
Commission on School Safety. The Guide, produced jointly by the
Department's Office of Elementary and Secondary Education and Office
for Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, provides best
practices and includes resources that school leaders and teachers can
use as they work to achieve a positive school climate, lower
disciplinary issues and enhance school safety.
Arranged in a Question and Answer format and available on the
Department's website, https://www2.ed.gov/policy/elsec/leg/essa/
essaguidetoschoolclimate041019
.pdf, the Guide provides parents and educators with useful
decisionmaking frameworks and implementation tools, as well as best
practices that school leaders can consider as they work to foster
positive and inclusive learning environments. Examples from schools
across the country are included to illustrate the various interventions
communities are employing to enhance student behavior and achievement.
With recent research highlighting the importance of evaluating school
climate through a range of indicators, the Guide provides diagnostic
tools whereby educators may collect and use data to drive their climate
improvement strategies.
Additionally, the Parent and Educator Guide to School Climate
Resources provides information to teachers and school leaders on how
they can receive support from the Department's two key technical
assistance centers dedicated to promoting safe and supportive schools.
These centers are the National Center of Safe and Supportive Learning
Environments (https://safesupportivelearning.ed.gov), and the Technical
Assistance Center on Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports
(www.pbis.org). The Guide includes an appendix of additional resources.
basis for requesting increased funds for charter schools and plans to
address challenges
Question. The Department of Education requests an increase for the
Charter School Program, following media reports that the Department has
been unable to disburse all appropriated funding in fiscal year 2019
due to lack of applicants. Why did the Department request such a
sizeable increase in the program when it has not been able to spend
down the funds in this program and how does the Department intend to
run any future competitions to address longstanding challenges in the
charter sector, including in serving students of color and students
with disabilities?
Answer. The challenge faced by the Department in awarding the full
fiscal year 2019 appropriation for the Charter Schools Program (CSP) is
largely due to a couple of large States delaying their applications for
State Entity grants while constraints in the appropriations language
currently prevent the Department from reallocating funds for State
Entity grants to areas within the CSP with greater demand. If Congress
provides the requested flexibility to redistribute fiscal year 2019
funds to other CSP authorities, including the CSP facilities programs,
the Department will be able to award all fiscal year 2019 CSP
appropriations. In fiscal year 2020, the Department anticipates that
demand for State Entity grants will return to prior-year levels, but it
is important to recognize that the Administration's request includes
the needed flexibility to direct CSP funds to areas of growing demand,
such as facilities grants, thus helping to ensure that the Department
will be able to award the full $500 million proposed in the request.
Finally, in conducting CSP competitions, the Department will continue
to ensure that funds support only schools that comply with the IDEA and
Federal civil rights laws, consistent with the program statute's
definition of ``charter school.'' Additionally, the Parent and Educator
Guide to School Climate Resources provides information to teachers and
school leaders on how they can receive support from the Department's
two key technical assistance centers dedicated to promoting safe and
supportive schools. These centers are the National Center of Safe and
Supportive Learning Environments (https://
safesupportivelearning.ed.gov), and the Technical Assistance Center on
Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (www.pbis.org). The
Guide includes an appendix of additional resources.
resources required to address borrower defense backlog
Question. Has the Department conducted any analysis of the
resources, including staff full-time equivalencies and any contract
funding necessary to clear the backlog of pending borrower defense
claims, now totaling at least 158,000 from the end of quarter 4 of
2018? If so, please describe how such analysis was conducted and the
principal findings of such analysis, including staffing or contracting
resources that could be utilized or necessary.
Answer. Yes. The Department recently completed a preliminary
estimate of the full-time and contractor resources needed to eliminate
or substantially reduce the number of pending borrower defense
applications. The process included a review of adjudication work flows,
as well as platform capabilities and required updates. Additionally,
the Department considered potential efficiencies that could be
incorporated into the process to reduce the time that borrower defense
applications remain pending. Among the principal findings was the
conclusion that existing staff and contractors are insufficient to
address the existing applications and, therefore, the Department is in
the process of adding full-time and contractor resources. The
Department also found that various technology updates are needed to
adjudicate applications efficiently. Those updates will be implemented
over the next year. Even as staffing adjustments are made, however, the
backlog will continue due to our inability to move forward with making
determinations of damages since the methodology developed by the
Department to conduct this analysis is the subject of a court appeal.
effect of partial relief methodology on previously approved borrower
defense applications
Question. How many borrower defense applications have previously
been designated approved, but have not yet been formally discharged due
to the partial relief methodology announced December 21, 2017?
Answer. Approximately 23,900.
resources required to issue partial versus full discharge for
previously approved borrower defense applications
Question. What resources, including staff full-time equivalencies
and any contract funding, does the Department estimate are necessary to
provide partial relief to borrowers who attended Corinthian Colleges,
Inc. who would otherwise have been eligible for full relief prior the
partial relief or discharge formula announced December 21, 2017?
Answer. The Department is considering alternative relief
methodologies, and when one is selected, the Department will be able to
fully assess the data and personnel needed to implement that
methodology.
borrower defense claims by category and state
Question. How many borrower defense claims on or after January 20,
2017 has the Department has received, approved, and are pending,
disaggregated by each status and by State.
Answer. Please see the attached three tables providing the number
of pending (Table A), received (Table B), and approved (Table C)
borrower defense claims disaggregated by State.
borrower defense approvals by quarter
Question. How many borrower defense claims were approved:
--a. In the first quarter of 2017
--b. In the second quarter of 2017
--c. In the third quarter of 2017
--d. In the fourth quarter of 2017
--e. In the first quarter of 2018
--f. In the second quarter of 2018
Answer. Borrower defense claim approval numbers by quarter:
--15,900 borrower defense claims were approved in the first quarter
of 2017.
--No borrower defense claims approved in the second and third
quarters of 2017.
--410 borrower defense claims were approved in the fourth quarter of
2017.
--5,345 borrower defense claims were approved in the first quarter of
2018.
--10,401 borrower defense claims were approved in the second quarter
of 2018.
full versus partial relief borrower defense approvals and discharges
Question. How many unique borrowers with borrower defense claims:
--a. were identified for partial relief or discharge formula
(announced December 21, 2017) who have received such partial
relief or discharge
--b. were identified for partial relief or discharge formula
(announced December 21, 2017) who have not yet received such
partial relief or discharge
--c. were identified for partial relief or discharge formula
(announced December 21, 2017) who had previously been
identified for full relief prior to January 20, 2017
--d. identified for full relief or discharge who have received such
discharge since January 20, 2017
--e. were identified for full relief or discharge who have not yet
received such discharge since January 20, 2017
Answer.
--a. Of the 16,151 total applications that have been identified for
borrower defense relief under the tiered relief methodology,
15,026 applications received less than 100-percent discharge
under the tiered relief methodology.
--b. All 15,026 applications that received less than 100-percent
discharge under the tiered relief methodology have received
relief.
--c. There are no applications that were identified for full relief
that received tiered relief.
--d. Of the 16,151 total applications that have been identified for
borrower defense relief under the tiered relief methodology,
1,125 applications received 100-percent discharge under the
tiered relief methodology after January 20, 2017.
--e. All 1,125 applications identified for 100-percent discharge
under the tiered relief methodology after January 20, 2017 have
received relief.
claims from institutions with high volumes of pending borrower defense
claims
Question. How many unique borrowers have filed claims from
institutions which currently have 1,000 or 500 or more pending claims,
respectively, including the total number of pending claims for each
institution?
Answer. Attached is a validated spreadsheet containing a table of
institutions that currently have 500 or more pending applications
including the total number of pending applications for each
institution.
school groups with most borrower defense claims
Question. Please provide a list of the 20 school groups (such as a
parent company or controlling institution) that have received the most
borrower defense claims, including the total number of claims received,
the total number of claims pending, the total number of claims
approved, and the percentage of all pending borrower defense claims for
each school group.
Answer. Attached is a validated spreadsheet containing a table of
borrower defense applications by school group with data as of December
31, 2018, which also aligns with the timeframe from the most recently
available Borrower Defense report. The table shows the number of
applications approved by school group, the number of applications
received by school group, and the percentage of applications received
that are still pending by school group. The number of pending
applications by school group cannot be provided because small cell
sizes carry the risk of privacy disclosure.
recent activity on borrower defense approvals, denials, and findings
Question. As of March 28, 2019, when was the last time the
Department:
--a. approved a borrower defense claim?
--b. denied a borrower defense claim?
--c. developed any findings related to borrower defense claims?
Answer.
--a. The last time a borrower defense application was approved was
June 12, 2018.
--b. The last time a borrower defense application was denied was May
24, 2018. However, the Department has decided to move forward
with processing denials while awaiting the court's decisions
regarding the methodology to be used for partial relief. Once
the Department determines an alternate relief methodology,
approved applications processing will begin immediately.
Additionally, the Department is completing updates to the new
customer engagement platform, which will bring the platform
fully into compliance with the 2016 borrower defense
regulations and allow the Department to resume processing
application denials.
--c. The Department has identified no facts relevant to the review of
Corinthian Colleges claims, other than the admissions made by
Heald College regarding placement rate falsifications, and has
instead relied on the allegations of the California Attorney
General and other AGs to adjudicate claims. The Department has
similarly made no findings of fraud regarding ITT Tech, which
is why from the start the Department recommended to ITT Tech
students that they pursue closed school loan forgiveness rather
than borrower defense to repayment relief. However, as claims
are reviewed they may contain information that leads to new
findings.
staff allocated to borrower defense activity
Question. How many full-time equivalent positions with the primary
job function or responsibility of reviewing, or providing analysis of,
borrower clams, including attorneys or advisors:
--Were filled with active employees as of January 19, 2017
--Have become vacant since January 20, 2017
--Have been listed with a vacancy announcement by the Department
since January 20, 2017
--Have been hired by the Department since January 20, 2017
--Are employed as of the date of the response to this inquiry
Answer. As of January 19, 2017, there were 11 employees in the
Borrower Defense Group. Since January 20, 2017, four of those employees
voluntarily separated from the Department. As of March 31, 2019, seven
employees remain in the Borrower Defense Group, which includes six
full-time employees and one part-time employee. Since January 20, 2017,
no additional employees have been hired in the Borrower Defense Group.
The Department currently is preparing announcements to fill the vacant
positions.
department relationship with consumer financial protection bureau
Question. Has there been any change in the Department's
relationship with any Federal agencies, including the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), since January 20, 2017 regarding
the review of borrower defense claims or development of evidence to
support the processing of claims? If so, please describe the nature of
the change(s) in the relationship(s).
Answer. In August of 2017, the Department terminated the memorandum
of understanding (MOU) with the CFPB because the CFPB had not been
abiding by the terms set forth in the MOU. The CFPB has not formally
attempted to reestablish an MOU with the Department, under 12 U.S.C.
5535, since the previous MOU was terminated.
extent of autonomy afforded to borrower defense unit
Question. Is the Borrower Defense unit at Federal Student Aid
empowered to make decisions about whether a borrower qualifies for
borrower defense without authorization from senior political
appointees? If not, please describe the specific approvals from the
rest of Federal Student Aid or the Department that are required.
Answer. The Borrower Defense group, under the leadership of a
Department Official, determines whether a borrower's application is
approved and, therefore, whether the borrower is eligible for relief.
The amount of relief to be provided is also determined by the
Department Official based on the methodology developed by the
Department and approved by the Department Official. Senior Department
officials may be consulted regarding relief approaches and decisions
for approved applications.
automatic closed school discharges since november 2013
Question. How many borrowers, disaggregated by institution and
year, have received automatic closed school discharges after attending
an institution that closed on or after November 1, 2013. Where
information at the 8-digit OPEID level would result in fewer than 10
borrowers, please roll up such numbers into the 6-digit OPEID level.
Please do not disaggregate by institution those institutions with fewer
than 10 borrowers with discharged loans at either OPEID level to avoid
inadvertent disclosure of personally identifiable information (PII).
Answer. See the attached spreadsheet with data as of April 29,
2019.
borrowers and outstanding loan volume eligible for closed school
discharge
Question. Please provide, disaggregated for each of the following
school groups, the number of borrowers and the total estimated balance
of outstanding loans whom the Department estimates are eligible for the
applicable closed school discharge window (either 120 days or as
extended due to extenuating circumstances) and the number of borrowers
and the total amount that has already been discharged through closed
school discharge applications:
--a. ITT Educational Services, Inc.
--b. Charlotte School of Law
--c. Education Corporation of America
--d. Vatterott Colleges
--e. Dream Center Education Holdings
Answer. As of May 16, 2019.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total
estimated
Number of
balance of
borrowers that
outstanding
Number of
Total amount
the Department
loans that the
borrowers that
already
INSTITUTION
estimates are
Department
received a
discharged
eligible for
estimates are
CSLD
through CSLD
the applicable
eligible for
CSLD window
the applicable
CSLD window
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ITT Educational Services........................
52,211
$832,862,264
17,982
$254,364,233
Charlotte School of Law.........................
139
$10,698,705
65
$5,031,154
Education Corporation of America................
20,750
$185,735,350
3,364
$22,621,331
Vatterott Colleges..............................
2,312
$32,892,819
435
$5,111,043
Dream Center Education Holdings.................
14,652
$600,328,700
417
$10,586,895
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
determining appropriate extension of closed school discharge window
Question. What steps is the Department taking to determine the
appropriate extensions of the 120-day window for closed school
discharges for students who attended Education Corporation of America,
Vatterott Colleges, or Dream Center Education Holdings owned schools,
respectively, given the reported financial difficulties and
accreditation challenges that faced these colleges well in advance of
their closures?
Answer. The Secretary has not issued a decision on whether to
extend the date for determining eligibility for a closed school loan
discharge under 34 C.F.R. Sec. 685.214(c)(l)(i)(B) due to exceptional
circumstances. If the Secretary does not exercise her authority to
extend the eligibility window, an institution's last full day of
educational instruction is the date utilized to determine potential
eligibility for closed school loan discharges.
program review and school oversight changes required to implement 2016
borrower defense regulations
Question. How will the program review process, and any other FSA
school oversight functions, be modified to implement the 2016 borrower
defense regulations?
Answer. The Department issued an Electronic Announcement on March
15, 2019 that provided information to institutions about how they must
comply with the 2016 borrower defense regulations. The Department is
also working to publish a final, revised borrower defense regulation.
timeline to finalize changes required to implement 2016 borrower
defense regulations
Question. What is the Department's expected timeline to finalize
any changes to FSA's oversight functions to implement the 2016 borrower
defense regulations?
Answer. The Department is working diligently to implement the 2016
borrower defense regulations and issued an Electronic Announcement on
March 15, 2019 to provide additional information to institutions on how
to comply with the regulation. The Department is currently using manual
data extraction techniques to identify borrowers who are eligible for
Automatic Closed School Loan Discharge and is working to develop an
automated system to identify eligible borrowers in the future.
financial triggering events and repayment rate disclosures for 2016
borrower defense regulations
Question. Please provide the following information regarding
financial triggering events and repayment rate disclosures under the
2016 borrower defense regulations:
--a. What steps has the Department taken to recalculate financial
responsibility composite scores for institutions that have
reported triggering events?
--b. What actions will the Department take to integrate financial
responsibility triggering events, or the subsequent
recalculation of the composite score, if institutions do not
report the events to the Department?
--c. How does the Department plan to address instances when reporting
is not conducted, and does the Department plan to announce any
policy or procedure to address non-reporting?
--d. Are institutions able to submit alternative forms of surety, in
place of a letter of credit, and does the Department plan to
announce any policy or procedure for alternative surety?
--e. What is the Department's expected timeline to select a vendor to
conduct consumer testing for repayment rate disclosures and
financial responsibility triggering events, and to begin and
complete such consumer testing?
--f. What is the Department's timeline to publish in the Federal
Register the required trigger events and the format by which
repayment rates must be disclosed?
--g. Has the Department set aside any resources to pursue further
investigation, enforcement action, or review of Program
Participation Agreements when it is notified of triggering
events such as borrower defense-related lawsuits and
accrediting agency actions against an institution?
Answer.
--a. On March 15, 2019, the Department published an Electronic
Announcement at ifap.ed.gov/eannouncements/
030719GuidConcernProv2016BorrowerDefenseto
RypmtRegs.html that provides information for institutions about
how to report financial triggering events. While no composite
scores have been recalculated to date, the Department is
prepared to do so if or when the need arises.
--b. When an institution fails to report information that it is
required to report under the revised financial responsibility
regulations, the Department will, as part of its oversight
responsibilities, take action to bring the school back into
compliance with those regulations, recalculate the composite
score (as appropriate), and request a letter of credit, if
needed. In addition, the Department will determine whether any
fine or other similar action is appropriate.
--c. If a school fails to report a financial triggering event, the
Department will determine whether any fine or other similar
action is appropriate. The Department does not comment on
deliberative, preliminary, or ongoing investigative work,
including the enforcement of the Title IV regulations.
--d. As of May 6, 2019, the Department has not announced whether
institutions are able to submit alternative forms of surety in
place of a letter of credit. If the Department chooses to
accept alternative forms of surety in place of a letter of
credit, the Department would need to publish that decision in a
Federal Register notice. The Department would provide the
appropriate policy or procedure for alternative surety in an
Electronic Announcement or another appropriate communication
posted on the Information for Financial Aid Professional (IFAP)
online portal.
--e. The Department is in the final stages of selecting a vendor to
conduct consumer testing and anticipates being able to conduct
user testing for repayment rate disclosures and financial
responsibility triggering events in the summer of 2019.
--f. The Department anticipates publishing a Federal Register notice
detailing the required triggering events and the format by
which repayment rates must be disclosed by the end of Calendar
Year 2019.
--g. It is Department policy to not comment on any deliberative,
preliminary, or ongoing investigative work, including
disclosing departmental resources to enforce the Title IV
regulations.
omitted discussion of accounting standards in electronic announcement
Question. The Department's electronic announcement did not address
the updates to accounting standards 2016-14 and 2016-02.
With respect to accounting standards update 2016-14, when does the
Department expect the eZ-Audit System to be updated to include the new
classes of net assets?
Answer. The Department is currently modifying the eZ-Audit System
to reflect the changes noted in the Accounting Standards Update (ASU)
2016--14. The system modifications will include the new classes of net
assets.
Question. With respect to accounting standards update 2016-02, when
does the Department expect to complete and publish the Business Impact
Analysis detailing the Department's implementation requirements for the
part of the ASU 2016-02 update that becomes effective for fiscal years
after December 15, 2018?
Answer. The Department is working on internal guidance regarding
the ASU 2016--02 update and currently does not have a timeline for when
it expects to complete the Business Impact Analysis detailing the
Department's implementation of the ASU 2016--02 requirements.
discharges under total and permanent disability
Question. Please provide the most recent data available on the
total number of borrowers discharged under total and permanent
disability (TPD). Within this update please include:
--a. Number of SSA (SSI/SSDI) matched borrowers and total amount
discharged;
--b. Number of Veterans Affairs matched borrowers and total amount
discharged;
--c. Number of borrowers who matched either SSA or VA databases who
are subject to types of forced collections, disaggregated by
type (i.e. Tax Refund Offset, Treasury Offset Program,
Administrative Wage Garnishment, etc.), and including the
number of borrowers who are subject to multiple types of forced
collections;
--d. Number of borrowers have had judgments entered against them
(including those entered prior to TPD eligibility). Of those
judgments, if any, the number of those still in effect;
--e. The number of borrowers in each State who have received a match
notification and received discharge, separately, for SSA TPD
borrowers;
--f. The number of borrowers in each State who have received a match
notification and received discharge, separately, for VA TPD
borrowers.
Answer. Please see the enclosed spreadsheet.
institutions and number of automatic closed school loan discharges
under 2016 borrower defense regulations
Question. Please provide a list of institutions that have generated
automatic closed school discharge per the 2016 borrower defense
regulations (34 CFR 685.214(c) (Direct Loan Program), 34 CFR
682.402(d)(8)(ii) (FFEL Program), and 34 CFR 674.33(g)(ii) (Perkins
Loan Program)), the number of automatic closed school discharges at
each institution granted to date, and the number of students that were
in attendance at each institution at the time of closure. Where
information at the 8-digit OPEID level would result in fewer than 10
borrowers, please roll up such numbers into the 6-digit OPEID level.
Answer. A list of institutions that have generated automatic closed
school discharge per the 2016 borrower defense regulations (34 CFR
685.214(c) (Direct Loan Program), 34 CFR 682.402(d)(8)(ii) (FFEL
Program), and 34 CFR 674.33(g)(ii) (Perkins Loan Program)) and the
number of automatic closed school discharges at each institution
granted as of April 30, 2019, are provided in the attached spreadsheet.
There is one summary line for ``All Others'' at the bottom of the
spreadsheet documenting the total count for all schools with fewer than
10 borrowers that received discharges.
The number of students attending each institution at the time of
closure is provided in the attached spreadsheet. The schools with less
than 10 borrowers that received discharges are displayed in the list
with the indication ``<10.''
* Student count only includes students who have at some point
received Title IV
aid, they did not need to receive that aid at the listed school.
number of applications received for traditional closed school discharge
Question. How many individual applications has the Department
received for traditional (not automatic) closed school discharge on or
after January 20, 2017, disaggregated by State and by claim status
(i.e. received, pending, and approved).
Answer. Please see the attached spreadsheet.
state-by-state breakdown of public service loan forgiveness employment
certification
Question. Please provide a State-by-State breakdown of PSLF
Employment Certification Forms (ECFs), including the unique number of
borrowers who have any approved, have any denied ECF, and the
cumulative number who have submitted any ECF.
Answer. Please find the requested data enclosed.
state-by-state breakdown of public service loan forgiveness
applications for forgiveness
Question. Please provide a State-by-State breakdown of the number
of PSLF Applications for Forgiveness received, approved and denied.
Please provide this information for both the number of unique borrowers
as well as the total number of applications.
Answer. Please find the requested data attached.
state-by-state breakdown of temporary expanded public service loan
forgiveness applications
Question. Please provide a State-by-State breakdown of the number
of TEPSLF applications (via emails sent to [emailprotected])
received, approved and denied. Please provide this information for both
the number of unique borrowers as well as the total number of
applications.
Answer. Please find the requested data attached.
paperwork on file for borrowers rejected for temporary expanded public
service loan forgiveness
Question. In its March 25, 2019 response to Senator Kaine, the
Department indicated that 28,640 of the 38,460 requests (74.4 percent)
to the TEPSLF email address were from borrowers without a PSLF
Application for Forgiveness on file. As a result, these applicants were
not processed for further review. How many of these individuals without
a PSLF Application for Forgiveness had at least one Employment
Certification on File? Please provide the current information and as of
March 25, 2019 (for the 28,640 individuals specified).
Answer. These data currently are not available. Borrowers submit
TEPSLF requests via email and are required to include their name and
date of birth as identifiers. To reduce the risk of disclosure of
personally identifiable information, borrowers are asked not to provide
a Social Security number. The name and date of birth identifiers do not
allow FSA to reliably identify the full population of borrowers who
previously have submitted one or more Employment Certification Form. We
expect the Next Gen FSA initiative to greatly improve our TEPSLF and
PSLF reporting capabilities.
acics outcomes data for accredited colleges
Question. Please provide an updated ACICS outcomes data file as of
April 5, 2019 that shows for all ACICS-accredited colleges:
--a. the date of a school's site visit, if any;
--b. the date that a school's application to a prospective accreditor
was denied, if applicable;
--c. the date that a school's application to a prospective accreditor
was withdrawn, if applicable;
--d. the compliance status of each institution with the terms of the
Program Participation Agreement (PPA) in control as of April 5,
2019;
--e. the status of any colleges deemed non-compliant with their PPA
terms, including provisions are they non-compliant with and
corresponding consequences;
--f. for any closed or announced to be closed institutions,
information on the schools' plan for closing and teach-out
agreements;
--g. a summary of any revisions to the PPA made for each school after
June 2018.
Answer. Unfortunately, the Department cannot provide the
information requested in the first three points above. Because
accreditors are not required to provide information on schools that may
be in the accreditation process--only those that are accredited--the
Department does not have data for schools that have not yet been
accredited. Already accredited schools must typically seek permission
from the Department to change institutional accreditors, and in these
cases, the Department would have related data available. However, the
Department requires no such permission for institutions if their
existing accreditor's recognition is withdrawn because the Department
presumes affected schools will seek accreditation elsewhere. As such,
the Department would not have the requested information for ACICS
schools.
Please see the enclosed spreadsheet for information responsive to
the last four bullet points. The Department provided the spreadsheet to
the Committee.
The first tab titled ``ACICS Schools as of Apr. 2019'' identifies
the 49 institutions or OPEIDs that identified ACICS as their primary
institutional accreditor in the U.S. Department of Education's
Postsecondary Education Participants System (PEPS) as of April 5, 2019.
Please note that while there are 49 institutions that continue to
identify ACICS as their primary accreditor, the eight institutions
shaded in pink have a pending Application for Approval to Participate
in Federal Student Financial Aid Programs (eApp) in process, which
would update their primary accreditor in PEPS. The prospective new
institutional accreditor is identified in Column Q titled ``Name of New
Accreditor Obtained (per School eApp).''
The compliance status of each institution is listed in the first
tab under column N titled ``Non-Compliant with Sanctions.'' As noted in
this column, all 49 institutions are deemed compliant with the terms
and conditions of their Program Participation Agreement (PPA) in effect
as of April 5, 2019.
For the 49 institutions noted in the first tab, ``ACICS Schools as
of April 2019'', 21 had a new or revised PPA rendered after June 2018
as noted under column J titled ``Revision to PPA After June 2018.'' The
certification status for each institution is noted in column K titled
``Certification Status.'' Additionally, the date in which the revised
PPA was executed (as applicable) by the Department is identified in
column L titled ``PPA Execution Date.'' Lastly, a summary of any
provisional certification conditions for institutions whose PPA had
been revised after June 2018 and were in effect as of April 2019 are
listed under column M titled ``Provisional Certification Conditions.''
Since the closures of the main locations of Education Corporation
of America owned institutions in December 2018, there have not been
further known closures of ACICS accredited institutions.
When an institution announces a planned closure, they are required
to submit a teach-out plan to their respective accrediting agency.
These teach-out plans are not required to be submitted to the
Department for approval. 34 CFR Sec. 602.3 defines teach-out plans,
teach-out agreements, and the requirements accrediting agencies must
enforce under the Higher Education Act (HEA).
ACICS was the accrediting agency for nearly all ECA institutions.
ACICS notified the Department that ECA had submitted the required
teach-out plans. Attached is a summary of teach-out plan information
that ECA submitted to ACICS in November 27, 2018, in response to
ACICS's show-cause notice. The Department subsequently requested that
ECA also share this summary with ED. The Department provided this
information to the Committee. Columns A through C indicate the ECA-
brand campus, program, and degree level. The remaining columns provide
information regarding similar programs that were identified at other
nearby institutions. Specifically, Columns D through G identify ground-
based campuses, while Columns H and I identify institutions offering a
comparable program and degree level online.
However, for copies of teach-out plans and fully executed teach-out
agreements (where applicable and consummated), please direct this
request to ACICS. Under the HEA, the accreditor is the legal entity for
receipt and approval of such documents.
planned follow-up on senior department official recommendations for
acics
Question. In the Senior Department Official's October 2018 response
regarding the recognition of ACICS, the SDO recommended the Secretary
give ACICS 12 months to submit a compliance report regarding the two
areas the SDO found ACICS to have not demonstrated full compliance
(conflicts of interest and competency of representatives), including
how ACICS has made progress to ensure its Ethics Review Board will
allow it to be in compliance with those two criteria. In particular,
the SDO also recommended that ACICS be required to provide evidence
that it requires its IRC members to sign conflicts of interest
attestations. The SDO also recommended that ACICS provide additional
evidence responding to whether existing evaluators have received the
additional training and answer questions regarding the qualifications
of the Data Integrity Reviewer. Please provide a detailed explanation
regarding when exactly ACICS is expected to submit those reports, who
at the Department will review the report, the 12-month date upon which
ACICS will be reviewed to see if it demonstrates compliance with all
accreditation criteria, and the actions available to the Secretary on
that 12-month date.
Answer. The Secretary's decision included two areas of
noncompliance--602.15(a)(2) and 602.15(a)(6)--that require a compliance
report within 12 months. The Accreditation Group (AG), within the
Office of Postsecondary Education, will process that compliance report
per 602.32. The compliance report will be due November 21, 2019, and
will be presented at the summer 2020 NACIQI meeting. The monitoring
report addressing the issues below will also be due at the same time as
the compliance report, but it will be separate and independent of the
compliance report. The monitoring report will be reviewed by AG staff.
Monitoring areas:
--602.15(a)(1)--Audited financial records and a staffing report
(Note: the audited financial records are required to be
submitted annually for 3 years.)
--602.16(a)(1)(i)--An annual report on the function and effectiveness
of ACICS' Placement Verification Program (PVP).
--602.16(a)(1)(vii)--An annual report on the work of ACICS' At Risk
Institutions Group (ARIG) and actions taken by the agency, if
any.
--602.19(b)--An annual report on the work of ACICS' At Risk
Institutions Group (ARIG) and actions taken by the agency, if
any.
data on closed school groups
Question. For Education Corporation of America, Vatterott Colleges,
and Dream Center Education Holdings, respectively, please provide the
following information disaggregated by each school group:
--a. How many students were enrolled in colleges owned by each school
group at the time their colleges closed?
--b. How many students who attended colleges owned by each school
group have applied for closed school discharge?
--i. How many of those applications have been granted?
--ii. What is the total outstanding debt of the students that have
submitted applications and how much of it has been
discharged?
--c. How many students attending colleges owned by each school group
have applied for borrower defense?
--i. How many of those applications have been granted?
--ii. What is the total outstanding debt of the students that have
submitted applications?
--d. When was the last date that any colleges owned by each school
group recorded admitting students?
--e. How many of the students enrolled at colleges owned by each
school group have since transferred to new schools?
--i. Of these, how many students transferred to another for-profit
college?
--f. Did the Department hold any financial surety, such as a letter
of credit, from each school group at the time that it closed?
--i. If yes, what was the amount held at the time that closed?
--ii. Did the Department release any funds from surety back to the
company within 1 year prior to closure? If yes, please
provide a detailed timeline of when the Department released
the funds, how much, to whom, and under what conditions.
Answer.
--a. Please refer to the following table.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of
Actively
School Group
Enrolled
Students at the
Time of Closure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dream Center Education Holdings.......................
9,609
Education Corporation of America......................
20,585
Vatterott Acquisition Co..............................
2,149
------------------------------------------------------------------------
--b. See the attached spreadsheet with data as of May 6, 2019.
--c. Enclosed is a validated spreadsheet containing the number of
borrower defense applications, approvals, and outstanding
student debt for Education Corporation of America, Vatterott
Colleges, and Dream Center Education Holdings.
--d. The Department's systems do not capture such enrollment
information, and because the schools are now closed, the
information cannot be obtained from the institutions.
--e. Please refer to the below table.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of
Student
School Group
Transfers
Since
Closure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dream Center Education Holdings.......................
92
Education Corporation of America......................
1,149
Vatterott Acquisition Co..............................
67
------------------------------------------------------------------------
--f. At the time of the respective school group closures, the
Department held financial surety for Dream Center Education
Holdings (DCEH) and Vatterott Acquisition Co. schools.
The Department held no financial surety when most of the Education
Corporation of America (ECA) schools closed in December 2018.
The Department placed all ECA institutions on the Heightened
Cash Monitoring 2 Method of Payment on November 8, 2018, and
requested surety on November 14, 2018. ECA was required to
remit a letter of credit (LOC) to the Department in the minimum
amount of $63,940,069. ECA closed most of its locations before
providing the required surety amount. However, on March 26,
2019, the Department received an LOC of $1,036,521 for New
England College of Business and Finance--the only remaining
operational Title IV participating institution owned by ECA--
which it continues to hold.
--f. i. On March 8, 2019, the Department held--and it continues to
hold--more than $24.5 million in surety funds for DCEH
institutions.
The Education Principle Foundation (EPF) acquired some Art
Institutes and South University from DCEH on January 7, 2019.
The Department reallocated $28,500,000 of the available DCEH
surety funds into different holding accounts to cover financial
risks for the EPF institutions on February 11, 2019.
On Dec. 17, 2018, 14 Vatterott locations closed precipitously. At
the time of these closures, the Department held--and it
continues to hold--nearly $13 million in surety funds from
Vatterott.
--f. ii. Yes, in the case of DCEH schools. During the period from
August 28, 2018 through December 31, 2018, the Department made
seven disbursements totaling $39,586,990 from the LOC proceeds
to DCEH. See the response directly above for the conditions
justifying the release of funds to DCEH.
Disbursements of LOC proceeds were made to DCEH as follows:
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Disbursement
Disbursement Date (MM/DD/CCYY)
Amount
------------------------------------------------------------------------
08/28/2018............................................
$10,000,000
09/21/2018............................................
$4,361,704
10/12/2018............................................
$4,000,000
10/23/2018............................................
$4,000,000
11/28/2018............................................
$4,000,000
12/18/2018............................................
$9,225,286
12/31/2018............................................
$4,000,000
Total...............................................
$39,586,990
------------------------------------------------------------------------
service level accountability mechanisms under nextgen
Question. What specific mechanisms will be included in the NextGen
servicing system to hold vendors or contractors accountable to a
specific level of service?
Answer. Section C.3.2 of the Next Gen FSA Business Process
Operations (BPO) solicitation, enclosed, requires that successful
offerors include performance management mechanisms in their proposed
solutions to enable improved and ongoing achievement of metrics.
Pursuant to the solicitation, BPO vendors will be measured monthly to
determine their level of performance. `Green' vendors will keep their
assigned customers and will also be assigned an equitable share of new
customers. `Yellow' vendors will keep their assigned customers but will
not receive new customers. If a vendor remains Yellow for more than 6
months, their contract may be terminated. If a vendor is `Red' for two
consecutive months, a portion of their assigned customers will be
reallocated to other vendors. If a vendor is Red for three consecutive
months, their contract may be terminated. https://beta.sam.gov/opp/
7ba2975c522413b564f21f854e0d94f1/view.
planned compliance measures for nextgen
Question. Please provide an explanation of the specific steps the
Department will take to ensure NextGen offerors' compliance with
requirements, including, for each component of NextGen:
--a. a detailed description of how the Department will assess
offerors' history of compliance with consumer protection laws,
regulations, agency guidelines, and court mandates prior to
awarding Federal contracts;
--b. a detailed description of how the Department intends to monitor
offeror compliance with consumer protection laws, regulations,
and agency guidelines; and
--c. a detailed description of how the Department intends to enforce
offeror compliance with consumer protection laws, regulations,
and agency guidelines including in what circumstances the
Department will withhold access to contract payments, or use
other sanctions, in instances of noncompliance.
Answer.
--a. Next Gen FSA offerors are required to submit their record of
adhering to consumer protection laws and regulations by
detailing relevant legal proceedings and other matters as part
of their past performance submission. The submitted information
will be evaluated by FSA. Additionally, the Contracting Officer
will consider information obtained from any other sources, in
accordance with Federal Acquisitions Regulation (FAR) Subpart
15.305(a)(2).
--b. Once each Next Gen FSA vendor receives an award, FSA intends to
compile a list of all requirements (including applicable laws,
regulations, and guidelines) each vendor will be required to
meet. A contract monitoring plan will be established, which
will detail how each of these requirements will be monitored
for compliance, how frequently each item will be reviewed, and
the evidence that will be required to substantiate the vendor's
compliance. FSA will review all evidence and will track and
report on the results of each vendor's performance in
accordance with the monitoring plan. Any vendor not performing
adequately based on the results of the contract monitoring plan
will be subject to penalties as defined in the contractual
agreement between FSA and the vendor.
--c. Section C.3.2 of the Next Gen FSA Business Process Operations
(BPO) solicitation, enclosed, requires that successful offerors
include performance management mechanisms in their proposed
solutions to enable improved and ongoing achievement of
metrics. Pursuant to the solicitation, BPO vendors will be
measured monthly to determine their level of performance.
`Green' vendors will keep their assigned customers and will
also be assigned an equitable share of new customers. `Yellow'
vendors will keep their assigned customers but will not receive
new customers. If a vendor remains Yellow for more than 6
months, their contract may be terminated. If a vendor is `Red'
for two consecutive months, a portion of their assigned
customers will be reallocated to other vendors. If a vendor is
Red for three consecutive months, their contract may be
terminated. https://beta.sam.gov/opp/
7ba2975c522413b564f21f854e0d94f1/view.
federal student aid bonuses or special compensation and connection to
borrower outcomes
Question. Please explain, in detail, how FSA executives or senior
managers earn bonuses or special compensation, and how the level of
bonus connects to agency goals around improving borrower outcomes?
Provide the names, duties, position descriptions, bonus amounts, etc.
for the past three fiscal years for all FSA employees who received such
bonuses or special compensation.
Answer. Federal Student Aid's (FSA) authority under the
Performance-Based Organization legislation allows eligible senior
managers to receive a bonus up to 25 percent of their annual salary
based on an evaluation of their performance in relation to the goals in
their performance agreement. Each employee's performance agreement--
including senior managers--is linked to FSA's 5-year Strategic Plan for
fiscal years 2015--2019, which is aligned to the Department's strategic
objectives. Senior managers with performance ratings of High Results
Achieved or Exceptional Results Achieved are eligible for performance-
based awards. The FSA chief operating officer determines the bonus for
each senior manager. In accordance with Department policy, awards
exceeding $10,000 require approval from the Secretary of Education. The
attached report includes bonus information for FSA executives and
senior managers for fiscal years 2016--2018.
memorandum of understanding between ombudsman offices at federal
student aid and consumer financial protection bureau
Question. Does the Department maintain a memorandum of
understanding (MOU) between its own ombudsman and the student loan
ombudsman at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, as required by
12 U.S. Code Sec. 5535 ``to ensure coordination in providing assistance
to and serving borrowers seeking to resolve complaints related to their
private education or Federal student loans''? If not, why not, and when
will the Department reestablish this MOU?
Answer. In August of 2017, the Department terminated the memorandum
of understanding (MOU) with the CFPB because the agency had not been
abiding by the terms set forth in the MOU. The CFPB has not formally
attempted to reestablish an MOU with the Department, under 12 U.S.C.
5535, since the previous MOU was terminated.
securities and exchange commission jurisdiction over federal student
loans
Question. Do you acknowledge that the Securities and Exchange
Commission has some jurisdiction and oversight authority over Federal
student loans?
Answer. The Department of Education does not generally opine on the
jurisdiction or oversight authority of other Federal agencies.
federal deposit insurance corporation jurisdiction over federal student
loans
Question. Do you acknowledge that the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation has some jurisdiction and oversight authority over Federal
student loans?
Answer. The Department of Education does not generally opine on the
jurisdiction or oversight authority of other Federal agencies.
department of justice jurisdiction over federal student loans
Question. Do you acknowledge that the U.S. Department of Justice
has some jurisdiction and oversight authority over Federal student
loans?
Answer. The Department of Education does not generally opine on the
jurisdiction or oversight authority of other Federal agencies.
consumer financial protection bureau jurisdiction over federal student
loans
Question. Do you acknowledge that the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau has some jurisdiction and oversight authority over Federal
student loans?
Answer. The Department of Education does not generally opine on the
jurisdiction or oversight authority of other Federal agencies.
incorporating nextgen oversight in federal student aid annual
performance report and personnel evaluations
Question. How will elements of oversight incorporated into the Next
Generation Financial Services Environment, including but not limited to
compliance, be incorporated into individual FSA employee personnel
evaluations and in the FSA's annual performance report?
Answer. Vendor and partner performance standards and accountability
measures--such as publicly available metrics around service quality
with corresponding disincentives up to and including termination--will
be built into Next Gen FSA contracts to ensure our customers receive
world-class service while protecting taxpayer dollars. Additionally,
the Department's new borrower interface will request feedback from
borrowers--for example, via surveys after phone, mobile, and online
experiences and as part of focus groups--throughout the servicing
process. FSA's performance plan will include metrics specifically tied
to Next Gen objectives, such as improved customer service and better
outcomes for borrowers and taxpayers. Employee performance plans will
continue to include elements and goals that are set to achieving
organizational objectives.
consumer financial protection bureau complaints and servicer oversight
Question. How does the Department incorporate complaints submitted
to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau into its oversight of its
contracted student loan servicers, and how has this process changed
over time?
Answer. In the Department's Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) with
the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), the CFPB agreed to
direct to the Department all complaints related to Federal student
loans within 10 days of receipt. The CFPB ceased sending these
complaints to the Department, which was a primary reason the Department
terminated its two MOUs with the CFPB in August 2017.
department response to servicer engagement in unfair, deceptive acts or
practices
Question. What actions does the Department take if and when it
learns a student loan servicer is violating Federal unfair, deceptive,
acts, or practices (UDAP) provisions of the Dodd--Frank Wall Street
Reform and Consumer Protection Act?
Answer. If the Department determines a vendor is in violation of
UDAP, the Department may exercise a combination of actions, including
but not limited to: making the customer whole, imposing financial
penalties for improper servicing, reducing or eliminating customer
allocations, or terminating the contract.
per-borrower cost of private collections
Question. What is the per-borrower cost of using private collection
agencies, including collection costs paid by borrowers, and how does
that compare to the per-borrower cost of the Federal student loan
servicing companies?
Answer. The model used to compensate private collection agencies
(PCAs) contracted with the Department is different than the model used
to compensate contracted Federal student loan servicers. While
servicers are paid a flat, monthly fee per borrower regardless of that
borrower's activities, PCAs--by contrast--earn a commission on payments
received and a flat fee for other types of account resolution, chiefly
loan rehabilitation.
While an account is assigned to a PCA for collection activity, the
Department pays the default servicer a monthly fee for maintaining that
account on the Debt Management and Collections System (DMCS), the
system of record for the default portfolio. In fiscal year 2018, the
Department paid the default servicer $0.97 per month per borrower to
service defaulted borrower accounts, for a total payment of $83.7
million. Unlike the default servicer, a PCA only earns fees on assigned
accounts when a borrower makes payments or otherwise resolves the
account. In fiscal year 2018, the Department paid contracted PCAs a
total of $793 million in fees.
Not all borrowers in default are placed with a PCA. Borrowers have
65 days to enter into a repayment arrangement after being assigned to
DMCS; if borrowers do so and continue making payments, the borrowers'
account is not assigned to a PCA, and the borrowers are never charged
collection costs.
per-borrower cost of collections for borrowers in default
Question. What is the average amount of collection costs paid by
borrowers in default? Please express this amount both in dollars and as
a percentage of the principal balance of a loan.
Answer. Collection costs are charged as follows:
--Only defaulted borrowers assigned to a PCA are charged collection
costs when they make a voluntary or administrative wage
garnishment (AWG) payment. If a borrower's account is not with
a PCA, no collection costs are charged when voluntary or AWG
payments are made.
--Borrowers who consolidate their defaulted loans with the assistance
of a PCA are charged collection costs that are capitalized into
the new principal balance of the consolidation loan.
--There are no collection costs charged on Treasury Offset Program
(TOP) payments. However, the Department does charge the
borrower a fee equal to the servicing fee that Treasury charges
the Department to process the offset payment ($17.25 for most
offsets in fiscal year 2018).
In fiscal year 2018, the Department assessed approximately $264
million in collection costs against borrowers making voluntary or AWG
payments while being serviced by a PCA. The total number of borrowers
in the default portfolio at the end of fiscal year 2018 was 7.4
million, and the average defaulted borrower paid $36 in collection
costs in fiscal year 2018. The total principal balance of the default
portfolio at the end of fiscal year 2018 was $111.8 billion, and the
average defaulted borrower paid collection costs equal to 0.24 percent
of their principal balance.
cost of collections versus cost of income-driven repayment
Question. How does the typical amount paid in collections compare
to what that same borrower would have paid on an income-driven
repayment plan?
Answer. Below is a breakout of the average annual amount paid in
collections for Non-IDR borrowers vs. IDR borrowers.
Non-IDR Borrowers
Population: Student borrowers having open, defaulted Direct Loans
in fiscal year 2018.
Source: CEAD STAB, which is a 4 percent sample of the National
Student Loan Data System (NSLDS) used for modeling and analysis.
Amount: Fiscal year 2018 recoveries (including principal, interest,
fees, and Treasury offsets) collected on the loans described above.
Statistics: There were an estimated 5.3 million borrowers in the
population having defaulted loans in fiscal year 2018. Approximately 67
percent of borrowers had no recoveries on their defaulted loans in
fiscal year 2018. Of the 33 percent who had recoveries in fiscal year
2018, the median amount recovered in fiscal year 2018 was $798. The
average annual amount recovered across all borrowers with defaulted
loans (including those with no recoveries) is $559.
IDR Borrowers
Population: Because various IDR plans apply to different types of
loans, for comparability purposes, the population assessed includes
those in the REPAYE plan, which limits the sample to borrowers with
Direct Loans only. Population includes REPAYE borrowers whose most
recent record shows a scheduled payment date within fiscal year 2018.
Source: NSLDS LOAN--RPMT--PLAN table.
Amount: Annual total of scheduled monthly payments by borrower.
Statistics: Total borrowers in this population equal 2.48 million.
Approximately 54 percent of borrowers have $0 scheduled payment. Of the
46 percent of borrowers who do not have $0 scheduled payment, the
median payment is $1,596. The average annual payments across all
borrowers is $1,092.
handbook for private collection agencies
Question. Can you please provide a full copy of the handbook for
private collection agencies, including the compensation terms?
Answer. A redacted version of the PCA Procedures Manual for Private
Collection Agencies Contracted by Federal Student Aid is enclosed. The
redacted information in this version of the manual includes information
drafted under the guidance of Department attorneys pertaining to
litigation procedures and is, therefore, classified as Attorney-Work
Product. PCA employee names have also been redacted.
The Committee has received the PCA Procedures Manual as requested.
PCA compensation varies depending on the type of collection.
Vendors receive:
--A fixed fee of $1,741 for each borrower who completes a loan
rehabilitation (note, however, that this fee is capped at the
balance being rehabilitated;
--A fixed fee of $150 for completing administrative activities, such
as certifying that a borrower is deceased, incarcerated, or
eligible to have their loans discharged due to total and
permanent disability;
--2.75 percent of the final pay-off value of loans consolidated out
of default, if the borrower establishes satisfactory repayment,
or a fixed $150 administrative fee for borrowers who opt to
repay the new consolidation loan under an income-driven
repayment plan; and
--15.2 percent of amounts collected through administrative wage
garnishment or voluntary payments.
median and average collection rates for borrowers
Question. What is the median and average collection rate paid by
borrowers? Please break this amount down by the sector attended and
outstanding loan balance, as well as borrower characteristics including
Pell Grant receipt and dependency status.
Answer. The following table provides median collection rates, net
of Contract Collection Costs (CCC), by risk category from the Student
Loan Model. These rates represent the lifetime estimated collection
percentage for loans in default including principal, interest, and
fees. This is the current breakdown of the data based on the
assumptions used to develop the President's Budget for fiscal year
2020.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
President's Budget Fiscal Year
2020
Net Present Value
Recovery Rates
(net of CCC)
--------------------------------
2018
2019
2020
cohort
cohort
cohort
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Subsidized Stafford Loans
Four-Year Program, Freshman/
82.42%
82.12%
80.27%
Sophomore.........................
Four-Year Program, Junior/Senior...
82.41%
82.35%
80.18%
Two-Year Program, Non-profit.......
82.84%
82.45%
80.53%
Proprietary........................
83.24%
82.85%
80.68%
Unsubsidized Stafford Loans
Four-Year Program, Freshman/
82.36%
82.33%
80.18%
Sophomore.........................
Four-Year Program, Junior/Senior...
82.38%
83.01%
79.99%
Graduate Program...................
79.45%
82.67%
77.11%
Two-Year Program, Non-profit.......
82.77%
82.59%
80.45%
Proprietary........................
83.25%
83.02%
80.70%
PLUS Loans
Four-Year Program, Freshman/
77.29%
76.95%
75.24%
Sophomore.........................
Four-Year Program, Junior/Senior...
74.60%
75.07%
72.44%
Graduate Program...................
80.26%
86.09%
78.17%
Two-Year Program, Non-profit.......
77.00%
77.20%
74.60%
Proprietary........................
78.47%
77.77%
76.09%
Note: 2020 Cohort does not include
policy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
time required to assign and transfer borrowers to debt collectors
Question. On average, how long does it take for a borrower to be
assigned to a debt collector, and how many times is a borrower
transferred between debt collectors?
Answer. At 270 days delinquent, a borrower enters technical
default. At 360 days delinquent, the borrower is transferred from their
servicer to the Debt Management Collections System (DMCS) for
collections. Once the borrower is assigned to DMCS, they are not
assigned to a PCA for at least 72 days. During this period, the
borrower is sent a due process notice and provided an opportunity to
enter voluntary repayment or prove the debt should not be in
collections.
Once a borrower is placed with a PCA, that borrower will typically
remain with that PCA for a minimum of 1 year. A borrower generally
remains with the PCA so long as the borrower enters into repayment or
is otherwise working with the PCA toward resolution, or if the PCA
initiates wage garnishment against the borrower.
dollar and borrower volume of initiated loan rehabilitations
Question. Please provide the total volume of initiated loan
rehabilitations (rehabs) (in dollars and unique number of borrowers),
including:
--a. Total volume of initiated rehabs using income-driven rehab
formula (15 percent of discretionary income)
--i. Total volume of initiated IDR rehabs with payment of $5
--ii. Total volume of initiated IDR rehabs with payment greater
than $5
--b. Total volume of initiated rehabs using 'reasonable and
affordable' formula
--i. Total volume of initiated R&A rehabs with payment of $5
--ii. Total volume of initiated R&A rehabs with payment greater
than $5
Answer. We are unable to provide data on loan rehabilitations that
were initiated but not completed. Please see the Department's response
to the next question for completed rehabilitation information.
dollar and borrower volume of completed loan rehabilitations
Question. Please provide the total volume of completed rehabs (in
dollars and unique number of borrowers), including:
--a. Total volume of completed rehabs using income-driven rehab
formula (15 percent of discretionary income)
--i. Total volume of completed IDR rehabs with payment of $5
--ii. Total volume of completed IDR rehabs with payment greater
than $5
--b. Please provide the total volume of completed rehabs using
'reasonable and affordable' formula, including:
--i. Total volume of completed R&A rehabs with payment of $5
--ii. Total volume of completed R&A rehabs with payment greater
than $5
Answer. Detailed data on loan rehabilitation payment formulas is
available at the individual borrower level but is not maintained in a
format that allows for aggregated analysis. As a result, we are unable
to provide the requested information. As an alternative, we do know
that for the 349,000 borrowers who completed rehabilitation during
fiscal year 2017, approximately 276,000 (79 percent), representing $5.5
billion (72 percent) of volume rehabilitated, had a payment schedule
with a required monthly amount of $5. We should note that some
borrowers required to pay $5 per month actually make larger payments;
the counts provided are based on the required payment amount.
time required to take loans from initiation to completion of
rehabilitation
Question. Please provide the average number of months from rehab
initiation to rehab completion.
Answer. For Federal Family Education Loan (FFEL) and William D.
Ford Federal Direct Loan (Direct Loan) program loans, the borrower must
make nine payments in a 10-month period. For Federal Perkins Loan
(Perkins Loan) Program loans, the borrower must make nine consecutive
monthly payments. Most borrowers make their first payment immediately
once counseled about the benefits of rehabilitation. Therefore, the
most common scenario is that borrowers complete the requirements for
rehabilitation approximately 8 months after they receive counseling
about the program. Once the ninth payment is received, FFEL and Direct
Loan program loans are typically transferred to a non-default servicer
within one week. Perkins Loans are transferred to a non-default
servicer within 1 month.
federal expenditures on loan collection activities
Question. How much Federal funding has been spent on Federal
student loan collections activities in each of the last three fiscal
years?
Answer. Below is the Federal funding that has been spent on Federal
student loan collections in each of the last three fiscal years:
--Default Management Collections System
--Fiscal Year 2018 $86,421,766.87
--Fiscal Year 2017 $80,971,072.14
--Fiscal Year 2016 $87,038,982.08
--Private Collection Agencies
--Fiscal Year 2018 $793,005,185.68
--Fiscal Year 2017 $749,818,353.74
--Fiscal Year 2016 $750,164,808.62
collection volumes for closed school groups
Question. Disaggregated by each school group, please provide the
number of former Corinthian Colleges, Inc.; ITT Educational Services,
Inc.; Charlotte School of Law; and Educational Corporation of America
students in some form of debt collection (Treasury offset, wage
garnishment, assigned to PCAs) and the total outstanding loan balance
of borrowers in each school group.
Answer. See chart below with data as of May 22, 2019.
discharges under total and permanent disability
Question. Please provide the most recent data available on the
total number of borrowers discharged under total and permanent
disability (TPD). Within this update please include:
--Number of SSA (SSI/SSDI) matched borrowers and total amount
discharged;
--Number of Veterans Affairs matched borrowers and total amount
discharged;
--Number of borrowers who matched either SSA or VA databases who are
subject to types of forced collections, disaggregated by type
(i.e. Tax Refund Offset, Treasury Offset Program,
Administrative Wage Garnishment, etc.), and including the
number of borrowers who are subject to multiple types of forced
collections;
--Number of borrowers have had judgments entered against them
(including those entered prior to TPD eligibility). Of those
judgments, if any, the number of those still in effect;
--The number of borrowers in each State who have received a match
notification and received discharge, separately, for SSA TPD
borrowers;
--The number of borrowers in each State who have received a match
notification and received discharge, separately, for VA TPD
borrowers.
Answer. Please see the enclosed spreadsheet, which includes data as
of a certain time period for each answer.
rehabilitated loans with subsequent income-driven repayment enrollment
Question. Please provide the volume of completed rehabs where a
borrower has subsequently enrolled in IDR and made at least 1 monthly
income-driven payment within 12 months of rehab (in dollars and unique
number of borrowers), including:
--a. the total volume of completed rehabs using income-driven rehab
formula (15 percent of discretionary income) where a borrower
has subsequently enrolled in IDR and made at least 1 monthly
income-driven payment within 12 months of rehab
--i. Above, where IDR rehab payment was $5
--ii. Above, where IDR rehab payment was greater than $5
--b. the total volume of completed rehabs using 'reasonable and
affordable' formula (15 percent of discretionary income) where
a borrower has subsequently enrolled in IDR and made at least 1
monthly income-driven payment within 12 months of rehab
--i. Above, where R&A rehab payment was $5
--ii. Above, where R&A rehab payment was greater than $5
Answer. Detailed data about loan rehabilitation payment formulas
are available at the individual borrower level but are not maintained
in a format that allows for aggregated analysis. As a result, the
Department is unable to provide the requested information. As an
alternative, the Department has provided the requested information by
those who rehabilitated their federally managed loans under a payment
schedule with a required payment amount of $5 and those who
rehabilitated their loans under a payment schedule with a required
payment amount greater than $5. Note that some borrowers required to
pay $5 per month actually make larger payments; the information below
was provided by the Title IV servicers and is based on the required
rehabilitation payment amount.
Approximately 48,000 borrowers, who rehabilitated $1.2 billion in
defaulted loans in fiscal year 2017 by making nine monthly on-time
payments with a required rehabilitation payment amount of $5 per month,
successfully made an IDR payment within 12 months of their
rehabilitation date. More than 10,000 borrowers, who rehabilitated $450
million in defaulted loans in fiscal year 2017 with a required payment
greater than $5 per month successfully made an IDR payment within 12
months of their rehabilitation date. A successful payment includes a $0
payment if the borrower's scheduled payment amount is $0.
Please note that not all borrowers enter an IDR plan after
rehabilitation.
time required to from rehabilitation completion to successful first
payment under income-driven repayment
Question. Please provide the average number of months from rehab
completion to first successful IDR monthly payment.
Answer. It took approximately 8.2 months for borrowers who
completed rehabilitation in fiscal year 2017 with scheduled rehab
payments of $5 to make an IDR payment, while it took approximately 8.1
months for borrowers who completed rehabilitation in fiscal year 2017
with scheduled rehab payments greater than $5 to make an IDR payment. A
successful payment includes a $0 payment if the borrower's scheduled
payment amount is $0.
enforcement actions against title iv participants
Question. Please provide a list of all recertification denials,
emergency actions, fine actions, suspension actions, termination
actions, or limitation actions taken, released, or initiated by ED
between June 2018 and April 5, 2019 relating to any participant in the
Title IV, HEA programs (including, without limitation, institutions of
higher education, loan servicers, and other third-party servicers).
Answer. Please see attachment ``Enforcement Actions.''
pell grant lifetime eligibility used restoration data
Question. Please provide an update on Pell Grant Lifetime
Eligibility Used (LEU) restored due to school closure, according to the
Department's April 3, 2017 notice, Guidance on COD Processing of Pell
Grant Restoration for Students who Attended Closed Schools, including
total number of unduplicated students receiving restoration of Pell
LEU, total number of institutions which those students attended, and
total number of semesters restored.
Answer. Federal Pell Grant Lifetime Eligibility Used (LEU) has been
restored for 323,666 students attending 1,072 institutions. This
equates to approximately 653,000 semesters worth of Pell Grant
eligibility restored.
data on programs outsourcing up to 25 percent of program to ineligible
institution or organization
Question. Regulations currently require institutions to report to
the Department any written arrangements with an ineligible institution
or organization up to 25 percent of an institution's program. Please
provide a list of the institutions with a written arrangement with an
ineligible institution or organization up to 25 percent of the program,
the name of the program, and any other information the Department has
regarding the arrangement.
Answer. Currently, the Department's regulations require
institutions to report written arrangements to their accreditor when 25
percent or more of a program is provided by an ineligible provider.
Institutions are required to seek accreditor approval when a written
arrangement allows an ineligible organization to deliver between 25 and
50 percent of the program. Our current regulations do not require
institutions to report written arrangements with an ineligible
institution or organization (contractual agreements) up to 25 percent
of an institution's educational program to the Department. Therefore,
the Department is unable to provide the requested information.
data on programs outsourcing between 25 and 50 percent of program to
ineligible institution or organization
Question. Regulations currently require institutions to receive
accreditor approval and report to the Department any written
arrangements with an ineligible institution or organization between 25
and 50 percent of an institution's program. Please provide a list of
the institutions with a written arrangement with an ineligible
institution or organization between 25 and 50 percent of the
institution's program, the name of the program, the name of the
accreditor, and any other information the Department has regarding the
arrangement.
Answer. Currently, the Department lacks the regulatory authority to
require institutions to report written arrangements with an ineligible
institution or organization (contractual agreements) more than 25
percent, but less than 50 percent of an institution's educational
program. Although the Department currently lacks this authority, the
Department has limited information available about institutions'
contractual agreements with an ineligible institution or organization
between 25 and 50 percent of the institution's program.
Due to the significant burden involved with the collection of the
information, review, and possible redaction of any information about
written arrangements, the Department respectfully requests that the
requestor's staff requests data for specific institutions. Because the
information is limited, the Department cautions that inferences may not
be drawn from the data. General information about written arrangements
with contractual agreements may be found in Volume2, Chapter 2 of the
2018-2019 Federal Student Aid Handbook.
commitment to refrain from interfering with office of inspector general
investigations and reviews
Question. Can you commit that neither you nor anyone else in the
Department will attempt to stop, alter, or delay any investigation or
review undertaken by the Department's Office of the Inspector General?
Answer. The Department will comply with the Inspector General Act
of 1978, 5 U.S.C. App. 1 et seq., as applicable.
commitment to refrain from removing or transferring acting inspector
general prior to confirmation of new inspector general
Question. Can you commit that neither you nor anyone else in the
Department will take further steps to remove or transfer Acting
Inspector General Sandra Bruce until a new Inspector General is
confirmed?
Answer. The Department will comply with the Inspector General Act
of 1978, 5 U.S.C. App. 1 et seq., the Federal Vacancies Reform Act, 5
U.S.C. 3345, and other relevant Federal statutes governing personnel
matters, as appropriate.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Richard J. Durbin
dream center education holdings (dceh)
Question. On November 16, 2017, the Higher Learning Commission
(HLC) withdrew accreditation from the Illinois Institute of Art and Art
Institute of Colorado campuses of Dream Center Education Holdings
(DCEH)--transitioning them to ``candidates for accreditation''--
effective January 20, 2018. DCEH continued to represent these campuses
as accredited by HLC to students. On August 2, 2018, David Halperin of
the Republic Report published a report that at a meeting at Department
headquarters a group of Department staff, led by Diane Auer Jones, told
a delegation from DCEH, including CEO Brent Richardson, to publicly
represent that the Illinois Institute of Art and Art Institute of
Colorado continued to be accredited.
On August 30, 2018, I led a group of Senators in writing to you
about these allegations. The Department responded on December 4, 2018
in a letter signed by Assistant Secretary for Legislation and
Congressional Affairs Peter Oppenheim. In its response, the Department
stated that, prior to the August 2 report, ``only two meetings between
Department personnel and DCEH representatives occurred in regard to
DCEH and the impending closures of many of its campuses''--one on June
14, 2018 and the other on July 18, 2018.
Answer. On November 16, 2017, the Higher Learning Commission (HLC)
decided to put the Illinois Institute of Art and Art Institute of
Colorado campuses of Dream Center Education Holdings (DCEH) on Change
of Control Candidacy Status'' (``CCC-Status'') effective on January 20,
2018. According to HLC's standards and policies, as well as the letter
that HLC sent to the Department in November 2017, the agency views CCC-
Status as the equivalent of preaccredited status. Institutions that are
in preaccredited status are eligible to participate in Federal student
aid programs. HLC knew that the institutions were participating in
Federal student aid programs and did not notify the Department that
they had taken an adverse action against the institutions, which would
have disqualified these institutions from participating in Federal
student aid programs. It was only in the case of the Illinois Institute
of Art and Art Institute of Colorado that HLC used a novel
interpretation of preaccreditation as a non-accredited status, but this
interpretation is in violation of HLC's own policies and Department
regulations. Therefore, the Department must emphasize that is not true
that the campuses were not accredited during this period.
Nevertheless, the confusion about the Art Institutes' accreditation
status caused the Department to closely review HLC's policies and
procedures about its CCC-Status. During the course of this review, the
Department also watched a video of a meeting with HLC site visitors,
faculty and students at the Chicago campus. In that video the HLC site
visitors referred to CCC-Status as some sort of technical interim phase
as a result of the change of ownership, similar to a probation or show
cause. Having reviewed HLC's policies and procedures, its
communications with the Art Institutes and the site visit video, the
Department is concerned that HLC's CCC-Status is in violation of HLC's
own policies as well as the Department's recognition criteria because
HLC has used the status to convert two accredited schools to non-
accredited status solely as a result of a change in ownership without
putting them on probation or show cause, or otherwise affording them
the due process protections of an actual adverse action.
While HLC has every right to revoke accreditation, the agency did
not follow the appropriate procedures to do so for the Illinois
Institute of Art and Art Institute of Colorado. There is no provision
in the Department's regulations for an adverse action that would revoke
accreditation and at the same time award candidacy status. Indeed, the
letter advising the Art Institutes of their CCC-Status refers to the
status as a ``preaccreditation status.'' However, there is no adverse
action that would automatically transition an accredited institution to
a preaccredited institution rather than a non-accredited institution.
Question. Was the topic of DCEH's HLC accreditation status
discussed at either the June 14, 2018, or July 18, 2018, meetings? If
so, please describe the nature of those discussions and any requests
made by DCEH participants of the Department related to its HLC
accreditation status, including any request for guidance or Department
intervention with HLC.
Answer. During the June 14, 2018 meeting, DCEH asked a question
about the effective date of full accreditation if HLC made a positive
decision following the upcoming site visit. Ms. Jones explained that
HLC would determine the effective date, and that DCEH should review the
agency's policies regarding retroactive accreditation to determine what
that date might be. The Department also instructed DCEH to notify HLC
immediately that they had decided to teach-out a number of campuses.
Although a question about the institutions' current accreditation
status was not asked during the June 14th meeting, the Department
believed that the campuses were in an accredited status at that time,
or the Department would not have allowed the institutions to
participate in title IV programs. In the November 2017 letter from HLC
to the Department, CCC-status was described as a preaccredited status.
According to the Department's regulations, preaccreditation is an
accredited status. The Department believed then, and continues to
believe, that these campuses were in accredited status until their date
of closure.
Following the June 14th meeting, Ms. Jones expressed to Department
staff her concern about DCEH's ability to manage a teach-out of this
magnitude and complexity and volunteered to contact each of the
involved accreditors, except ACICS, to discuss the teach-out and to see
if the accreditors would be willing to work together to review the
teach-out plan and share regular updates with the Department about that
status of the teach-outs. Ms. Jones did not reach out to ACICS because
during this time she was involved in the review of ACICS's Part II
submission and did not believe that she should be in communication with
ACICS. The other involved accreditors (WASC, Middle States, SACSOC, HLC
and Northwest Commission) agreed that it would be best to work together
to review and approve a ``master'' teach-out plan that was satisfactory
to everyone. Ms. Jones then notified DCEH that the accreditors would be
working together to review teach-out plans and provide guidance as a
group. Once the teach-out began, Ms. Jones held bi-weekly calls with
the accreditors (excluding ACICS) to share information and hold DCEH
accountable for providing information or taking actions requested by
accreditors. These calls were not to intervene on DCEH's behalf.
Instead, they were to make sure that DCEH was meeting accreditor
requirements and to reiterate to DCEH that they needed to follow
accreditor instructions.
On July 10, 2017, Ms. Jones became aware of the notification that
HLC had posted on its website regarding the accreditation status of
these institutions. This was the first time Ms. Jones had seen any
reference to CCC-Status being a non-accredited status; however, in its
web notification, HLC referred to CCC-status as being ``recognized''
status and indicated that the institution has met the requirements for
candidacy. Candidacy status, also called preaccreditation, is an
accredited status under Department regulations. There is no such thing
as a non-accredited, recognized status.
On July 17, 2017, during a call with accreditors, HLC notified Ms.
Jones that these institutions had misrepresented their accreditation
status on their websites. Several accreditors on that call provided
information to Ms. Jones about other issues that DCEH had to address.
Ms. Jones typed up that list of action items for DCEH, which included
the directive to accurately reflect the accreditation status of the
institutions.
On July 18, 2018, during the meeting with DCEH, Ms. Jones told DCEH
employees that they needed to update their websites to accurately
reflect their accreditation status using the language provided by HLC.
Ms. Jones also provided DCEH with a written copy of the list she made
based on the accreditor call the previous day. She asked DCEH to
provide a response within one week to prove that they had taken
corrective action for each item on the list. When Ms. Jones followed up
with DCEH to see if they had taken corrective action, DCEH said that
the list she had provided was not the bulleted list discussed at the
meeting on July 18, 2018. Ms. Jones then forwarded DCEH an electronic
copy of the bulleted list. Subsequently, Ms. Jones followed up with HLC
to be sure that DCEH had corrected their website to HLC's satisfaction.
HLC confirmed that the correction had been made.
dates, purpose, and attendance of department meetings with dceh
Question. The Department's qualification that these meetings were
related to the ``impending closures'' of DCEH campuses, raises
additional questions.
Please provide the date of all meetings between the Department and
DCEH officials which occurred between November 16, 2017 and August 2,
2018. Please provide the stated purpose of any meetings and a list of
individuals present.
Answer. Due to ongoing investigation into this subject matter, the
Department is unable to provide the requested information for inclusion
in the hearing record.
Question. Please provide the date of all meetings between the
Department and DCEH officials which occurred between November 16, 2017
and August 2, 2018 at which DCEH's HLC accreditation status was
discussed. Please provide a list of individuals present. Please
describe the nature of those discussions and any requests made by DCEH
participants of the Department related to its HLC accreditation status,
including any request for guidance or Department intervention with HLC.
Answer. As stated above, on July 18, 2018 the Department met with
DCEH officials to continue ongoing discussions about closing the
institutions and to provide instructions to DCEH. Diane Jones also
notified DCEH in this meeting that they would be required to change
their website to represent their accreditation status to students, as
required by HLC. DCEH did not request that the Department intervene on
their behalf to HLC in the meeting.
The following individuals attended the meeting:
--Diane Jones (OUS)
--A. Wayne Johnson (FSA)
--Justin Riemer (OGC)
--Brent Richardson (DCEH)
--Shelly Murphy (DCEH)
communications and documentation regarding dceh
Question. Please provide all documents and communications between
DCEH and any Department staff or official, including Ms. Jones, related
to the November 16, 2017, HLC decision or DCEH's HLC accreditation
status.
Answer. Due to ongoing investigation into this subject matter, the
Department is unable to provide the requested information for inclusion
in the hearing record.
higher learning commission actions and dceh characterization of
accreditation status
Question. In the Department's response to Question 1 of the August
letter, it states that ``it was not until a July 17, 2018, conversation
with [the Higher Learning Commission (HLC)] that Ms. Jones learned that
DCEH had incorrectly described its accreditation status to students.''
On June 26, 2018, I sent a letter to HLC President Barbara Gellman-
Danley about media reports that DCEH was misrepresenting the
accreditation status of its Illinois Institute of Art and Art Institute
of Colorado campuses after the schools lost HLC accreditation on
January 20, 2018. I sent a copy of that letter to Julian Schmoke, then
the Department's Chief Enforcement Officer, through the Office of
Legislation and Congressional Affairs (OLCA). Ms. Jones was at the
Department at that time.
Did OLCA provide a copy of that letter to Mr. Schmoke? If so,
please provide the date on which it was provided to Mr. Schmoke.
Answer. The letter was forwarded by email by a staff member in OLCA
to Julian Schmoke on June 26, 2018.
Question. Did OLCA provide a copy of that letter to any other
office or Department official, including the Office of the Secretary or
Ms. Jones? If so, please provide a list of individuals and the dates on
which it was provided.
Answer. The letter was received by a staff member in OLCA and was
forwarded to the following individuals on June 26, 2018 by email:
--Lynn Mahaffie
--Kathleen Smith
--Chris Greene
--Herman Bounds
--Christine Isett
--Todd May
--Peter Oppenheim
--Jenny Prescott
--Molly Peterson
--Diane Jones did not receive a copy of the letter.
Question. Was Ms. Jones aware of HLC's decision, effective January
20, 2018, to remove the accreditation of the Illinois Institute of Art
and Art Institute of Colorado campuses prior to July 17, 2018? If so,
when and through what method did Ms. Jones learn of HLC's action?
Answer. As stated above, the Illinois Institute of Art and the Art
Institute of Colorado were in the equivalent of a preaccredited status
between January 20, 2019 and the date of closure of the campuses. HLC's
CCC-Status is the equivalent of a preaccredited status under the
Department's regulations, which is an accredited status.
On July 10, 2017, Shelly Murphy of DCEH sent Ms. Jones an email
that included information HLC had posted about the two institutions on
the HLC's website. That was the first time Ms. Jones understood that
HLC was treating CCC-Status as a non-accredited status rather than as a
preaccredited status. Ms. Jones had no knowledge that HLC considered
CCC-Status to be a non-accredited status until July 10, 2018, although
even then HLC's explanation of CCC-Status was unclear. During a call
with accreditors on July 17, 2018, Ms. Jones learned for the first time
that the institution's websites inaccurately described their
accreditation status. Ms. Jones notified DCEH in a meeting on July 18th
that they must correct their website to reflect HLC's language about
the institution's accreditation.
Question. Were other Department officials aware of HLC's decision,
effective January 20, 2018, to remove the accreditation of the Illinois
Institute of Art and Art Institute of Colorado campuses prior to July
17, 2018? If so, please provide a list of individuals and their
positions? When and through what method did these individuals learn of
HLC's action?
Answer. Due to ongoing investigation into this subject matter, the
Department is unable to provide the requested information for inclusion
in the hearing record.
department direction to dceh to accurately represent accreditation
status
Question. The Department's response to Question 1 further states
that on July 18, 2018, Ms. Jones ``advised representatives of DCEH (at
the meeting and in writing) that they must provide students with
accurate information about their institution's accreditation status . .
. ''
Please provide a copy of the written direction from Ms. Jones to
DCEH to which the Department is referring.
Answer. Enclosed in this response is an email, with an attachment
of the list, sent from Diane Jones to Shelly Murphy of DCEH via email
on August 2, 2018. Ms. Jones handed a printed copy of the list to Ms.
Murphy on July 18, 2018, and later when Ms. Murphy said that she had
been given the wrong document, Ms. Jones emailed a copy to her.
settlement administrator finding of misrepresentation by dceh
Question. Regardless of what role, if any, the Department may have
played in the misrepresentation, it has failed to meet its legal
responsibility to provide the borrower defense discharges to which
Illinois Institute of Art and Colorado Art Institute students are
entitled under the Higher Education Act based on DCEH's
misrepresentation. In its December 4 response, the Department reported
that it has not opened an investigation into the misrepresentation
despite acknowledging that it occurred. As apparent justification, the
Department noted that a review of online videos from July informational
meetings held for students at the closing Illinois Institute of Art
campus ``clearly show that the students had, at some point prior to the
meetings, learned that the school was not in accredited status.'' In
other words, because a video shows that some small number of students
eventually learned the truth about their school's accreditation, the
Department believes no action against DCEH or relief for students is
necessary based on the misrepresentation. By clinging to this
outrageous and legally dubious position, the Department is failing to
uphold its responsibility to enforce Federal Title IV laws and
regulations and ignoring the harm done to students by DCEH's
misrepresentations.
HLC recognized the harm to students of not knowing that their
campuses were no longer accredited. In its public disclosure announcing
that its removal of accreditation had taken effect, HLC noted that
students should know that ``their courses or degrees are not accredited
by HLC and it is possible that they will not be accepted in transfer to
other colleges and universities or recognized by prospective
employers.'' In other words, students could be taking on debt to attend
worthless courses or get a worthless degree.
A 2015 settlement between Education Management Corporation and 39
State attorneys general and the District of Columbia established a
Settlement Administrator to enforce the terms of the settlement--which
became binding on DCEH as part of its acquisition of EDMC schools. In
February, Settlement Administrator Thomas Perrelli released his Third
Annual Report which found that DCEH violated the settlement as a result
of its ``failure to advise students that certain schools had lost their
accreditation.'' Mr. Perrelli found that ``DCEH did not inform Illinois
Institute of Art or Art Institute of Colorado students or prospective
students that it had lost accreditation'' despite being ``obligated''
by HLC to do so. Instead, Mr. Perrelli found that DCEH ``revised the
accreditation statement on its website to expressly claim that the
schools ``remain accredited as a candidate school'' which was
``inaccurate and misleading.''
During the time DCEH failed to disclose its loss of accreditation
status to students and made express misrepresentations, ``students
stayed in the unaccredited schools'' and ``registered for additional
terms and incurred additional debts, for credits that were
significantly less likely to transfer to other schools and towards a
degree that was to have limited value.'' Mr. Perrelli found that these
problems were ``exacerbated dramatically when DCEH announced in July
that it would be closing those schools, leaving many of those students
dependent on the transferability of their credits to further their
education.'' He concludes that DCEH's eventual correction of its
misleading statements ``did not resolve'' the harm students had
experienced.
Please respond to Mr. Perrelli's findings related to DCEH's
misrepresentation of its accreditation status and failure to disclose
its loss of accreditation to students.
Answer. As stated above, the Illinois Institute of Art and the Art
Institute of Colorado were in the equivalent of a preaccredited status
between January 20, 2019 and the date of closure of the campuses. HLC's
CCC-Status is the equivalent of a preaccredited status under the
Department's regulations.
Question. In the aftermath of Mr. Perrelli's findings and the
subsequent misconduct by DCEH related to missing student stipends and
the precipitous closure of Argosy and its other institutions, will the
Department open an investigation into the accreditation
misrepresentation at Illinois Institute of Art and Art Institute of
Colorado?
Answer. The Department has asked HLC to review its standards since
the Department believes that HLC's standards do not support a
determination that theses campuses were in non-accredited status. The
Department believes HLC was out of compliance with Department
regulations in attempting to move an accredited institution to
preaccredited status, and then making an accreditation decision based
on a focused site visit. Moreover, HLC's policies require that an
institution which loses accreditation to sit out for 5 years.
Therefore, it is not possible that CCC-Status is a nonaccredited
status.
borrower defense and closed school discharges and amounts recouped
Question. Since the 2014 collapse and 2015 bankruptcy of Corinthian
Colleges, Inc., many for-profit colleges have followed suit--closing
their doors as part of a planned teach-out or shuttering precipitously.
In these cases, students are eligible for Federal closed school
discharges. Many are also eligible for Federal student loan discharges
through the Higher Education Act's borrower defense provision as a
result of their institution's fraud and misconduct. We cannot let
students be left holding the bag. At the same time, the Department's
enforcement failures, failures to hold accreditors accountable,
attempts to roll back the Gainful Employment and Borrower Defense
rules--including provisions allowing students to hold institutions
directly accountable in court for misconduct--mean that taxpayers are
ultimately on the hook.
Please provide the cumulative cost of approved closed school and
borrower defense discharges (including automatic closed school
discharges under the 2016 Borrower Defense rule) associated with for-
profit colleges since 2014.
Answer. The cumulative cost of approved closed school and borrower
defense discharges associated with for-profit institutions is
approximately $1.3 billion; $530 million in borrower defense discharges
and $750 million in closed school discharges, including automatic
closed school discharges.
Question. Please provide the cumulative amount that the Department
has recouped from institutions for closed school discharge costs
associated with for-profit colleges since 2014.
Answer. The Department's recoupment of loan discharge liabilities
is a trailing process which follows the Department's quantification of
actual discharged loan amounts and assertion of liabilities. In
general, when an institution closes, it is required to submit a
``Close-Out Audit'' report to the Department. When FSA resolves a
close-out audit, it quantifies closed school loan discharges and
asserts liabilities in the final audit determination for the close-out
audit report. FSA may also pursue additional recovery of liabilities
arising after the close-out audit is resolved. In all cases, the
Department must provide institutions with appeal rights to challenge
asserted liabilities and the Department does not pursue collections
while an appeal is pending. In addition, the circumstances of some
school closures may require the Department to pursue recoveries through
protracted bankruptcy proceedings. To that end, the Department has
recouped $581,079.80 from institutions for closed discharge costs
associated with for-profit colleges since 2014.
Question. Please provide the cumulative amount that the Department
has recouped from institutions for automatic closed school discharge
costs associated with for-profit colleges under the 2016 Borrower
Defense rule.
Answer. The cumulative amount that the Department has recouped for
automatic closed school discharge (ACSD) costs associated with for-
profit colleges under the 2016 Borrower Defense rule is $0. The
Department is still designing and implementing the processes to assess
liabilities to the new discharge type, ACSD, created in the new
regulations. However, note that institutions associated with ACSD costs
closed more than 3 years ago; while the Department intends to assess
liabilities, the Department may not successfully recoup funds from the
closed institutions.
Question. Please provide the cumulative amount that the Department
has recouped from institutions for borrower defense discharge costs
associated with for-profit colleges since 2014.
Answer. The Department has not recouped any costs associated with
borrower defense loan discharges from institutions. The Department has
only approved borrower defense applications associated with the conduct
of three institutions: Corinthian Colleges, Inc. (CCI), American Career
Institute (ACI), and ITT Educational Services, Inc. (ITT). The
Department was unable to recover the cost of discharges associated with
CCI and ACI, as those institutions closed with no assets available for
recoupment. The Department filed a proof of claim in connection with
ITT's bankruptcy proceedings. However, as of April 25, 2019, the
Department has not received any recovery from ITT.
letters of credit or surety for closed schools
Question. Please provide the amounts of any letters of credit or
surety held by the Department from Corinthian Colleges, ITT Tech,
Education Corporation of America, Vatterott, and Dream Center Education
Holdings--or any institutions owned or operated by these companies--at
the time of their precipitous closure and a full accounting of the
Department's use of such funds in each case.
Answer.
Dream Center Education Holdings
Various Dream Center Education Holdings (DCEH) schools and
locations closed at different times. On March 8, 2019, many DCEH
schools, including Argosy University and several Art Institutes,
precipitously closed months after entering Federal receivership.
The Department initially held $92,624,330 in letter of credit (LOC)
proceeds for DCEH schools. These surety funds, held in a Federal
holding account, were proceeds of LOCs provided by Education Management
Corporation (EDMC). The Department called the LOCs in May 2018.
In June 2018, DCEH notified the Department of the need to teach out
27 campuses and asked to access some of the funds held as proceeds of a
LOC to support certain teach-out costs. The terms of the LOCs allowed
their use for teach-out costs, closed school loan discharges, fines,
and other trailing liabilities. At that time, the Department allowed
limited use of the proceeds, through an audited reimbursement
methodology, to avoid a precipitous closure of all DCEH schools. The
Department required DCEH to submit expense reimbursement requests that
were certified by an outside auditor and then verified by the
Department. In total, DCEH submitted approximately $39 million worth of
expense statements that were eligible for reimbursement. During the
period from August 28, 2018 through December 31, 2018, the Department
made seven disbursements totaling $39,586,990 from the LOC proceeds to
DCEH.
The Education Principle Foundation (EPF) acquired some Art
Institutes and South University from DCEH on January 7, 2019. The
Department reallocated $28,500,000 of the available DCEH surety funds
into different holding accounts to cover financial risks for the EPF
institutions on February 11, 2019.
On March 8, 2019, the Department held--and it continues to hold as
of this date--$24,537,340 in surety funds for DCEH institutions.
ITT Educational Services
ITT Technical Institutes (ITT Tech) (OPEIDs 007329 and 030718)
closed September 3, 2016, and Daniel Webster College (DWC) (OPEID
004731) closed September 14, 2016. Southern New Hampshire University
provided an approved teach out on a temporary basis for former DWC
students at the DWC campus until August 2017. At the time of these
closures, the Department held--and it continues to hold as of this
date--$94,353,980 in surety funds. The Department's retention of these
funds is currently the subject of litigation in Federal bankruptcy
court.
Education Corporation of America (ECA)
Education Corporation of American (ECA) operated 23 main
institutions operating under the names Brightwood College/Brightwood
Career Institute, Virginia College (including EcoTech Institute and
Golf Academy of America), and New England College of Business and
Finance. ECA schools, except New England College of Business and
Finance, closed between December 7, 2018 and December 21, 2018. New
England College of Business and Finance continues to operate, is in the
process of being sold through the receivership process, and is seeking
the regulatory approvals needed for such a sale.
The Department held no surety when most of the ECA schools closed
on December 7, 2018 or soon after. The Department requested surety on
November 14, 2018, and it placed the institutions on the Heightened
Cash Monitoring 2 Method of Payment on November 8, 2018. ECA was
required to provide a LOC to the Department in the minimum amount of
$63,940,069. ECA closed most of its locations before providing the
required surety amount. On March 26, 2019, the Department received a
LOC of $1,036,521 for New England College of Business and Finance,
which it continues to hold; the LOC expires March 20, 2020.
Vatterott College
Various institutions owned by Vatterott have closed at different
times. On December 17, 2018, 14 Vatterott locations, including its
L'Ecole Culinaire and Ex'treme Institute brands, closed precipitously.
At the time of these closures, the Department held--and it continues to
hold as of May 6, 2019--$12,882,632 in surety funds.
Corinthian Colleges
The Department had no surety on file when Corinthian Colleges
closed.
process to assess liabilities for closed school and borrower defense
discharges
Question. Please provide information and relevant documents
sufficient to show the Department's process in assessing liabilities
for closed school and borrower defense discharges (including automatic
closed school discharges under the 2016 Borrower Defense rule), the
formula used in determining the liability amount, the method of
recoupment (e.g. offset from Title IV, invoice, penalty, etc.), the
entity or person to be assessed (e.g. the president, receiver, or
bankruptcy trustee; the timeline by which liabilities will be assessed
and recouped for approved closed school and borrower defense discharges
and for future closed school and borrower defense discharges (including
automatic closed school discharges under the 2016 Borrower Defense
rule).
Answer. The Department is reviewing the processes and is
considering changes to accommodate the 2016 regulations. For automatic
closed school discharges (ACSD) and borrower defense discharges, the
Department is developing new procedures to assess institutional
liabilities to conform to the 2016 regulations. The entity or person to
be assessed is dependent on the status of the institution (e.g., open,
closed, bankruptcy, and receivership). The timeline by which
liabilities will be assessed and recouped for approved closed school
and borrower defense discharges will not be determined until discharges
are completed. The final liabilities will be subject to an appeal
process. The processes related to borrower defense discharges under the
2016 regulations are currently being developed by the Department. That
said, the Department plans to finalize the new ACSD processes to assess
liabilities within the next 60-100 days, including publication of an
Electronic Announcement on the Information for Financial Aid
Professional online portal to notify the financial aid community of the
new processes.
plans to assess liabilities and seek recoupment for discharges for
closed schools and borrower defense
Question. Will the Department assess liabilities and seek
recoupment for closed school or borrower defense discharges (including
automatic closed school discharges under the 2016 Borrower Defense
rule) from each institution that generates such discharge, or does the
Department assert discretion on a case-by-case basis?
If the Department asserts discretion, please provide documentation
sufficient to show the Department's process for making these
determinations.
Answer. For borrower defense, the Department continues to review
processes--including whether or how it will use its discretion--and may
consider changes to accommodate the 2016 regulations. The 2016 rule
requires recoupment in some instances and permits it in others. The
Department is drafting policies and procedures within the next 60 to
100 days to address instances for which we have discretion.
The Automatic Closed School Discharge (ACSD) procedures will follow
the closed school discharge processes; all liabilities will be
assessed, even if there is little chance of payment on such liabilities
because the institution has closed. At the same time, the Department is
considering changes to make processes more efficient. For example,
liabilities typically have been assessed through a final audit or final
program review determination by the specific team conducting the work;
however, due to the increased volume in liabilities, the Department is
evaluating the feasibility of centralizing and automating the
assessment of liabilities. The Department expects to finalize these
processes within the next 60 to 100 days.
borrower defense claim backlog
Question. During your hearing I asked you why it is taking so long
to process the tens of thousands of borrower defense claims pending at
the Department. This week, the Department revealed that it is now
sitting on 158,110 pending claims and has not approved a single claim
between June 30, 2018 and December 31, 2018. Please provide:
--a. The average length of time the 158,110 claims have been pending;
--b. The percentage of pending claims related to for-profit
institutions, public institutions, and private not-for-profit
institutions respectively;
--c. A breakdown of the 158,110 pending claims by institution; and
--d. A list of all group discharge applications the Department has
received from State attorneys general including the date
submitted, by whom, the school/programs, and the number of
covered borrowers.
--e. How many of the applications referenced in (d) are pending? How
many have been granted? How many have been denied? Please
provide a list of each.
--f. For each of the years 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019 how many
borrowers covered by a group discharge application are in
default on their Federal student loans?
--g. For each of the years 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019, how many loans
of the borrowers covered by a group discharge application have
been certified by the Department of Education for Treasury
offset?
--h. For each of the years 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019, how many
borrowers covered by a group discharge application have been
subject to an administrative wage garnishment order put in
place by the Department?
--i. For each of the years 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019, what are the
total dollar amounts of Federal student loans (interest and
principal) covered by each group discharge application from a
State attorney general?
--j. For each of the years 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019, what are the
total dollar amounts collected through the Treasury Offset
Program on defaulted student loans covered by each group
discharge application from a State attorney general?
Answer.
--a. As of December 31, 2018, the 158,110 claims have been pending an
average of 882 days.
--b. The percentages of pending claims related to for-profit, public,
and private not-for-profit institutions are 76.5 percent, 3.5
percent and 20 percent, respectively.
--c. Attached is a validated spreadsheet containing the institutional
breakdown of the 158,110 pending applications as of December
31, 2018. The Department provided the attachment to the
Committee.
--d. Enclosed table ``Durbin Question 6.4 (Updated 8.6.2019)''
provides a list of all attorneys general submissions related to
groups of borrowers for which the attorneys general seek a
borrower defense discharge as of August 6, 2019. The table
includes the submission date, the attorneys general, the
school, and the diploma program, if applicable. If a diploma
program is not provided for a submission, the submission was
not limited to a specific program. It is within the Secretary's
discretion to decide whether a group discharge process will be
applied to a group of borrowers, and policies and procedures
that will apply to the group discharge process are under
development. The Department cannot provide the number of
borrowers that will be included in a certain group unless and
until a group is established and defined by the Secretary.
However, individual applications submitted by attorneys general
have been and will continue to be considered under the
individual application review process.
--e. Enclosed is the Department's Borrower Defense Quarterly Report
for the quarter ending December 31, 2018. It provides a
breakdown of all applications by received, pending, approved,
denied, and closed.
At this time, the Department cannot narrow its reporting to
applications submitted by attorneys general. Policies, procedures, and
platform functionality that will apply to the group discharge process
are under development. The platform currently does not track which
applications are submitted by attorneys general. When all systems and
processes are updated, the platform will track which applications are
included in a group discharge process for the groups to be defined by
the Secretary.
--f. The Department has not yet defined the group(s) that may be
considered in a group discharge process and, therefore, cannot
identify the borrowers at issue. Further, at this time, the
Department cannot narrow its reporting to applications
submitted by attorneys general. Policies, procedures, and
platform functionality that will apply to the group discharge
process are under development.
--g. Please see the Department's response to item (f) above.
--h. Please see the Department's response to item (f) above.
--i. Please see the Department's response to item (f) above.
--j. Please see the Department's response to item (f) above.
ban on mandatory pre-dispute arbitration and class action provisions
Question. In March, the Department released long-delayed guidance
for schools to comply with the ban on mandatory pre-dispute arbitration
and class action provisions of the 2016 Borrower Defense rule which is
now in effect after the Department's illegal delay.
Please provide an update on the Department's implementation of
these provisions.
Answer. On March 15, 2019, the Department published an Electronic
Announcement that required institutions to comply with the new
regulations regarding class action bans and pre-dispute arbitration
agreements within 60 days. The Electronic Announcement also requires
institutions to submit qualifying arbitral and judicial records within
90 days.
Question. What is the Department doing to ensure that institutions
comply with the requirement that schools end enforcement of any
existing mandatory pre-dispute arbitration clauses and class action
restrictions in enrollment agreements.
Answer. The Department does not comment on deliberative,
preliminary, or ongoing investigative work, including the enforcement
of the Title IV regulations. That said, through its program review
authority, the Department will monitor compliance with the requirement
that schools end enforcement of any existing mandatory pre-dispute
arbitration clauses and class action restrictions in enrollment
agreements.
Question. What is the Department doing to ensure that institutions
amend their enrollment agreements or provide notice to students that
the provisions are no longer enforceable?
Answer. The Department does not comment on deliberative,
preliminary, or ongoing investigative work, including the enforcement
of the Title IV regulations. That said, through its program review
authority, the Department will monitor institutions' compliance with
the requirement that their enrollment agreements comply with the
guidance in the March 15, 2019 Electronic Announcement published at
ifap.ed.gov/eannouncements/
030719GuidConcernProv2016BorrosswerDefensetoRypmtRegs.html.
plans for rewrite of borrower defense rule
Question. While it illegally delayed the 2016 Borrower Defense
rule, the Department pursued a new negotiated rulemaking process to
rewrite the rule. In August 2018, the Department issued an NPRM, but
has not published a final rule.
When does the Department expect to publish a final rule?
Answer. The Department plans to publish a final rule on Borrower
Defense in 2019.
Question. Does the Department expect to issue a final rule in
fiscal year 2019?
Answer. As stated above, the Department plans to publish a final
rule on Borrower Defense in 2019.
gainful employment rescission and career education program
accountability
Question. The Higher Education Act requires that career education
programs prepare students for gainful employment in a recognized
occupation, not merely that they disclose whether or how well they do
so.
How does the Department's Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) that
would rescind the Gainful Employment rule (GE) enforce the
accountability requirement that Congress wrote into the law?
Answer. Congress never defined the term gainful employment as an
accountability standard. The accountability standards in law include
financial responsibility metrics, cohort default rate, and student
outcomes that do not include a specific debt to earnings metric.
costs and benefits of gainful employment repeal
Question. The Department estimated that repealing GE would cost
$4.7 billion over 10 years.
Please provide a detailed explanation of how this additional
spending will lead to quality educational or workplace outcomes.
Answer. The Department estimates that the notice of proposed
rulemaking to rescind the gainful employment regulation will result in
costs in the form of transfers as a result of more students being able
to enroll in a postsecondary program and more educational program
choices for students where they can use title IV aid. The Department is
taking steps to help students make decisions about the postsecondary
options that are best for them through information on the College
Scorecard on cost and outcomes.
rollback of gainful employment disclosure requirements
Question. In the NPRM, the Department relied on the availability of
consumer information, particularly with regard to student debt and
earnings, as a justification for repealing the Title IV eligibility
enforcement mechanism of GE. Yet, just a few months later, the
Department further scaled back the information required in the GE
disclosure template, and its most recent proposal does not include an
earnings measure.
Please provide a detailed explanation of how the Department will
reconcile the stated reliance on consumer information given that just
three of the ten original consumer disclosure elements are currently
still required?
What was the Department's basis for eliminating elements from the
GE disclosure template?
Did the Department conduct consumer testing to inform its changes
to the GE disclosure template? If not, please provide a detailed
explanation of why no additional consumer testing was performed with
regard to the determination to eliminate elements from the GE consumer
disclosure template?
Answer. Because the Department is currently drafting a final rule
in response to comments submitted during the public comment period for
our NPRM regarding GE, it would be inappropriate for the Department to
comment on issues related to the areas covered by the GE rulemaking at
this time.
debt-to-earnings rates
Question. On October 18, 2018, I wrote to you about the
Department's delay in developing the second round of debt-to-earnings
(D/E) rates under GE. On May 24, 2018, the Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) between the Department and the Social Security Administration
(SSA)--allowing for the sharing of data to calculate D/E rates--
expired. According to the timeline for calculating and publishing the
first round of D/E rates, the Department should have published the
second round of rates prior to the expiration of the MOU. It was the
Department's unreasonable delay that allowed the MOU to expire before
it carried out its legal responsibilities to implement and enforce GE.
Almost 1 year after the MOU's expiration, it has not been renewed and
the Department still has not obtained data to calculate a second round
of D/E rates from SSA.
Please provide an official response to my October 18, 2018, letter.
Answer. The Department sent a response to this letter on April 26,
2019.
Question. Has the Department's improper use of GE data to calculate
and award partial relief for borrower defense discharges played a role
in the Department's inability to renew its MOU with SSA and get data to
calculate the second round of D/E rates under GE? Please answer yes or
no.
Answer. The Department does not believe it improperly used GE data
to calculate and award partial debt relief. However, as pointed out by
Congress and the courts, SSA data may be used only to administer the
Social Security programs.
Question. Has the IRS and/or SSA expressed the view either formally
or informally that use of the data for this purpose was outside the
scope of permissible use and/or inappropriate?
Answer. The Department does not believe it improperly used GE data
to calculate and award partial debt relief.
Question. What are your plans to uphold your legal responsibility
to enforce GE to ensure that ineligible programs are not receiving
Title IV aid?
Answer. The Department will continue to enforce the GE rule to the
extent it can without earnings data.
department of treasury earnings data and gainful employment
Question. A March 2019 Executive Order, ``Improving Free Inquiry,
Transparency, and Accountability at Colleges and Universities,''
directs the Secretary of the Treasury to provide program-level data,
including median earnings and debt data for borrowers attending Title
IV-eligible postsecondary institutions, ``in a timely manner'' upon the
request of the Secretary of Education for the purposes of expanding the
College Scorecard.
Has the Department sought this same degree of cooperation when it
comes to obtaining earnings data for purposes of implementing and
enforcing GE?
Answer. Yes, it has.
Question. Will the Department commit that earnings information
obtained from the Department of the Treasury pursuant to the Executive
Order will not be used to calculate partial relief for borrower defense
discharges?
Answer. The Department has not finalized a data sharing agreement
with the Department of Treasury, so it is unable to provide details on
the scope of what the data may or may not be used for.
letter of credit submissions
Question. It is my understanding that on April 20, 2018, the
Department provided to the Office of Senator Elizabeth Warren a list of
institutions that submitted a letter of credit to the Department
between January 1, 2016 and November 30, 2017.
Please provide that list.
Answer. Please see the attachment for the requested information.
The Department provided the attachment to the Committee.
Question. Please also provide an updated list of institutions of
higher education for which the Department currently holds a letter of
credit or other surety and the amount of such letter of credit or other
surety.
Answer. Please find attached an Excel spreadsheet containing data
on the Letters of Credit (LOC) received from institutions during the
period of December 01, 2017 through April 01, 2019. To satisfy the
request in a timely manner, we have provided a list of any LOC received
between December 01, 2017--April 01, 2019, but we have not identified
whether it was an increase from a previous LOC. We also interpreted the
request to mean the submission of an LOC from any school, not just a
school submitting an LOC for the first time. Throughout that period,
the Department received 525 LOCs from 433 institutions or main OPEIDs
totaling nearly $716.7 million in financial securities.
The Department provided the attachment to the Committee.
heightened cash monitoring
Question. Please provide a list of all institutions that are
currently on Heightened Cash Monitoring (HCM) 1 or Heightened Cash
Monitoring 2. Please provide copies of the audited financial statements
of all schools on HCM1 status related to financial responsibility and
the copies of the audited financial statements of all schools on HCM2
status.
Answer. Enclosed is the validated spreadsheet containing the 483
Title IV institutions that were operating under the Heightened Cash
Monitoring (HCM) method of payment as of March 1, 2019. Of these, 422
institutions were operating under HCM1, and 61 institutions were
operating under HCM2. This disclosure, as well as additional
information about HCM, can be found at: studentAid.gov/sa/about/data-
center/school/hcm. Due to the significant time and burden involved with
the collection, review, and redaction of any requisite information on
the 341 financial statements representing those institutions operating
on HCM2 or on HCM1 due to ``financial responsibility,'' the Department
respectfully requests that the member's staff review the list and
request of the Department the remission of only those financial
statements which may be of particular interest.
The Department provided the validated spreadsheet to the Committee.
institutions failing to meet financial responsibility standards
Question. The Department's records indicate that 2,421 institutions
had composite scores lower than ``1'' in the last-reported fiscal year,
indicating that these institutions were not meeting financial
responsibility standards during that time.
Please provide a list of institutions that have had a composite
score lower than ``1'' at any point since January 2017.
Answer. Section 498(c) of Higher Education Act requires for-profit
and non-profit institutions to annually submit audited financial
statements to the Department to demonstrate they are maintaining the
standards of financial responsibility necessary to participate in the
Title IV programs. From these statements, the Department calculates and
publicly posts institution-specific Financial Responsibility Composite
Scores.
Question. What steps is the Department taking to review the
participation of or to pursue limitation, suspension, or termination of
institutions not meeting financial responsibility standards with
composite scores lower than ``1.''
Composite scores are calculated annually and publicly disclosed via
the FSA Data Center at StudentAid.gov/sa/about/data-center/school/
composite-scores. The most recent composite scores available are for
Award Year (AY 2016--2017) and include scores for 3,590 private, non-
profit and proprietary institutions with fiscal years ending between
July 1, 2016 and June 30, 2017.
Of the 3,590 institutions whose scores were included in the
AY2016--2017 disclosure, 269 registered a failing score below a ``1''
(-1.0 to .9). A listing of those 269 institutions may be obtained by
sorting the values (-1.0 to .9) in Column J of the spreadsheet posted
on the FSA Data Center.
Answer. Consistent with the regulatory authority afforded the
Department under 34 CFR 668.175, institutions that register a financial
responsibility composite score below ``1'' and are deemed not
financially responsible may be offered the opportunity to continue
participating in the Title IV programs for up to three consecutive
years through the Provisional Certification Alternative. If the
Department permits an institution to participate under provisional
certification, the Department also requires the institution to remit a
letter of credit to the Department of at least 10 percent of the
Federal student aid program funds received by the institution during
its most recent fiscal year, demonstrate that the institution has met
all of its financial obligations, and demonstrate that the institution
was current on debt payments for its two most recent fiscal years.
Additionally, the institution must comply with the requirements under
the Zone Alternative that it provide timely information regarding
certain oversight and financial events and be placed on the heightened
cash monitoring method of payment. If an institution is still not
financially responsible at the end of a period of provisional
certification, the Department may again permit provisional
certification.
In the event an institution with a composite score less than 1.5
posts a letter of credit equal to 50 percent or more of the Title IV
aid the institution received, that institution is considered
financially responsible. As a result, the institution may be free of
cash monitoring and other participatory requirements if there are no
other substantive problems related to its Title IV participation.
More information about the provisional certification requirements
for proprietary and non-profit schools failing to meet the financial
responsibility standards can be found in the 18-19 FSA Handbook on page
2-98 at https://ifap.ed.gov/fsahandbook/attachments/
1819FSAHbkVol2Ch4.pdf.
program compliance reviews for fiscal years 2017 through 2019
Question. Please provide the number of program reviews that have
examined institutional compliance with the requirements of incentive
compensation in fiscal year 2017, fiscal year 2018, and fiscal year
2019 and how many of those reviews have found noncompliance.
Answer. The Department does not comment on deliberative,
preliminary, or ongoing investigative work, including disclosing a
detailed list of program reviews that have examined compliance with the
requirements of incentive compensation, as these program reviews may
not have been finalized. However, through its program review authority,
through March 31, 2019, the Department conducted or is conducting 53
program reviews for fiscal years 2017--2019. These program reviews
examined or are examining institutional compliance with incentive
compensation requirements.
for-profit to not-for-profit conversions
Question. In recent years, several for-profit colleges have
attempted to convert to not-for-profit status in an effort to avoid the
stigma associated with the predatory for-profit college industry and to
avoid regulations meant to protect students and taxpayers. Dream Center
Education Holdings, which recently collapsed leaving thousands of
students stranded and whose conversion received preliminary Department
approval, is just one example. Please provide a list of all for-profit
conversions in the last 10 years including those pending (with current
status), previously approved, and denied or withdrawn.
Answer. Within the last 10 years, the Department has received 64
applications for a for-profit to not-for-profit conversion. Of those 64
applications, the Department has made final decisions on 38 conversion
requests. Of those 38 decisions, 37 were approved,\*\ while one--for
Argosy University--was denied. Additionally, 12 applications were
closed due to a voluntary withdrawal or school closure. There are 14
outstanding conversion requests.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\*\ In August 2016, the four main locations operated under by the
Center for Excellence in Higher Education, which previously had their
conversion requests denied, were approved as part of a settlement.
Additionally, one approved conversion involving Kaplan University and
Purdue University resulted in a conversion to a public benefit
corporation, rather than a not-for-profit institution.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Department provided an attachment with the requested
information to the Committee.
argosy university ownership change and effort to convert to no-for-
profit status
Question. In 2017, Argosy University applied to the Department for
approval of a change in ownership to Dream Center Education Holdings
(DCEH) and to convert to non-profit status. Despite widespread concerns
raised by myself and others, the Department provided preliminary
approval without proper protections for students and taxpayers on
October 17, 2017. Within months, Argosy and other DCEH schools began to
collapse. On February 27, 2019, the Department rejected Argosy's
original change in ownership and conversion application citing Argosy's
failure to meet the Department's fiduciary standards of conduct,
standards of financial responsibility, and standards of administrative
capability.
What did the Department do to inform students and the public that
Argosy schools--and others owned by DCEH--had not received a final
determination approving the sale and conversion to non-profit status?
Answer. When the Department conducts acquisition reviews,
institutions are typically put on a temporary program participation
agreement, until such time when the Department has fully reviewed an
application. Being placed in this temporary status is not necessarily
an indication of poor academic quality. Rather, it is an indication
that the Department is still actively reviewing the institution's
application. For that reason, the Department does not conduct outreach
to students to inform them of this temporary status.
Question. Between its preliminary approval and its February 2019
denial, what was the Department doing to ensure that the change in
ownership and conversion met requisite standards for a sale and a
conversion to non-profit status?
Answer. During that time, the Department was still reviewing
DCEH's application.
Question. What is the Department doing to ensure that the other
schools that were part of the original change in ownership and
conversion application are meeting the Department's fiduciary standards
of conduct, standards of financial responsibility, and standards of
administrative capability?
Answer. The Department monitors all such institutions to ensure
compliance with the terms and conditions of the temporary program
participation agreements.
extension of closed school discharge eligibility for dceh students
Question. On August 3, 2018, several of my colleagues and I wrote
urging you to take immediate action to assist students harmed by the
announced closures of nearly 30 DCEH campuses--including Art
Institutes, Argosy, and South University campuses. Specifically, we
asked you to use your authority under 34 C.F.R.
Sec. 685.214(c)(l)(i)(B) to extend the closed school discharge
eligibility period beyond 120 days under ``exceptional circumstances.''
The chaotic nature of the closures, and DCEH's failure to provide clear
information to students about their potential eligibility for closed
school discharges, clearly constituted exceptional circumstances that
put students at risk of a significant disruption to their education or
being stuck with loan debt and credits of little value.
For the Art Institute of Colorado and Illinois Institute of Art
(including the Novi, Michigan branch campus), we urged you to extend
closed school discharge eligibility back to January 20, 2018--the date
these institutions lost accreditation from the Higher Learning
Commission (HLC). At that time, HLC warned that ``courses or degrees
[from these unaccredited institutions] . . . may not be accepted in
transfer to other colleges and universities or recognized by
prospective employers.'' Given DCEH's misrepresentation of its
accreditation status to students and failure to provide them with the
``proper advisement and accommodations'' after the loss of
accreditation, as required by HLC, students enrolled at these campuses
should be entitled retroactive relief. For all the other closing DCEH
campuses at that time, we asked you to extend closed school discharge
eligibility to students going back to July 2, 2018--the date on which
the planned closures were announced internally.
Please provide an official response to our August 3, 2018, letter.
Will you extend the closed school discharge eligibility window for
these students?
Answer. The Department is currently reviewing the facts regarding
the closure of DCEH institutions and, based on the findings of that
review, will determine whether or not the look back period for closed
school loan discharge eligibility should be extended beyond the current
120 day period. However, among those students who were enrolled at a
DCEH school at the time it announced its teach-out, and who opted to
take a closed school loan discharge, we will extend the closed school
discharge eligibility look-back period to ensure that they are not
precluded from receiving a closed school loan discharge simply because
the teach-out was longer than 120 days. We believe that a student who
chooses a closed school loan discharge rather than participation in a
teach-out agreement should remain eligible for that closed school loan
discharge even if the institution closes more than 120 days after the
teach-out is announced. We are carefully reviewing the circumstances
regarding the accreditation of the Art Institute of Colorado and
Illinois Institute of Art to determine when, in fact, accreditation was
lost. Based on our review of HLC's standards and the Department's
regulations, It remains the Department's position that those
institutions were accredited until their closure in December 2018. The
Department, therefore, has not yet determined whether or not the closed
school loan discharge eligibility period should be extended beyond the
normal 120 period for students enrolled at those institutions. We
understand the importance of this review and decision.
extension of closed school discharge eligibility for argosy university
students
Question. On March 8, 2019, several of my colleagues and I sent you
a letter urging that you take immediate action to assist students in
the aftermath of the Department's decision to terminate Argosy's
eligibility for Federal Title IV financial aid and reports of Argosy's
imminent closure. Argosy University's closed later that day.
Specifically, we asked you to use your authority under 34 C.F.R.
Sec. 685.214(c)(l)(i)(B) to extend the closed school discharge
eligibility period beyond 120 days under ``exceptional circumstances''
to any Argosy student who withdrew on or after October 17, 2017--the
date the Department provided its preliminary approval of Argosy's
change in ownership and conversion to non-profit status. Almost
immediately after DCEH's announcement of its intention to acquire EDMC
schools, concerns began to be raised publicly about the transaction's
potential negative consequences for students. The Department had an
opportunity to condition its October 17, 2017, preliminary approval on
protections for students and taxpayers, but failed to do so. Following
that decision, DCEH's predatory practices, mismanagement, and financial
troubles led to voluminous public reporting in the media. Therefore,
any student who withdrew on or after October 17, 2017, could have
reasonably believed their school to be a sinking ship. The Department
should not penalize these students for taking the reasonable step of
abandoning a sinking ship by denying them Federal closed school
discharge eligibility.
Please provide an official response to our March 8, 2019, letter.
Will you extend the closed school discharge eligibility window to
October 17, 2017, for Argosy students.
Answer. The Department has cancelled all Federal student loans
taken by Argosy students and/or their parents for or during the Spring
2018 semester. In addition, any student who was enrolled at Argosy, or
who left Argosy at any time during the Spring semester would be
eligible for closed school loan discharge under the current 120 day
look-back period.
90/10 data including funds from gi bill and defense tuition assistance
Question. On December 10, 2018, Chairman Takano, Senator Carper,
Representative Cohen, Ranking Member Murray, Chairwoman DeLauro,
Ranking Member Reed, Chairman Adam Smith, Senator Blumenthal,
Representative Susan Davis, and I wrote to you asking that you release
Federal 90/10 data which counts accurately as Federal revenue all
revenue received by for-profit colleges from Federal taxpayer-funded
educational assistance programs. This would include Department of
Veterans Affairs GI Bill and Department of Defense Tuition Assistance
funding. The Department released this data in December 2016. Please
provide the data requested in our December letter--to which you still
have yet to respond.
Answer. The Department sent a response to your letter on March 28,
2019. As stated in the letter, the December 2016 report that you are
referencing did not accurately state the percentage of institutional
revenue derived from Federal sources, including from title IV,
Department of Defense (DoD) Tuition Assistance, and Veterans Affairs
(VA) educational assistance funds. In order to accurately calculate
institutional revenue under a modified 90/10 rule that includes such
Federal funds, institutions would need to report which amounts of
education assistance are credited for tuition and fees. The HEA does
not require such reporting; therefore, the Department is not able to
accurately provide such data.
restoration of recognition for accrediting council of independent
colleges and universities (acics)
Question. On November 21, 2018, you restored Federal recognition to
deadbeat for-profit college accreditor, the Accrediting Council of
Independent Colleges and Universities (ACICS). ACICS accredited
Corinthian and ITT Tech to the day they went bankrupt.
What steps has the Department taken since your decision to ensure
that ACICS is in compliance with all standards for Federal recognition?
Answer. The Secretary's decision included two areas of
noncompliance--602.15(a)(2) and 602.15(a)(6)--that require a compliance
report within 12 months. The Accreditation Group (AG), within the
Office of Postsecondary Education, will process that compliance report
per 602.32. The compliance report will be due November 21, 2019, and
will be presented at the summer 2020 NACIQI meeting.
The monitoring report addressing the issues below will also be due
at the same time as the compliance report, but it will be a separate
and independent of the compliance report. The monitoring report will be
reviewed by AG staff.
Monitoring areas:
--602.15(a)(1)--Audited financial records and a staffing report
(Note: the audited financial records are required to be
submitted annually for 3 years.)
--602.16(a)(1)(i)--An annual report on the function and effectiveness
of ACICS' Placement Verification Program (PVP).
--602.16(a)(1)(vii)--An annual report on the work of ACICS' At Risk
Institutions Group (ARIG) and actions taken by the agency, if
any.
--602.19(b)--An annual report on the work of ACICS' At Risk
Institutions Group (ARIG) and actions taken by the agency, if
any.
Question. Please provide the authority on which you relied upon to
reinstate ACICS while the agency was not in compliance with standards
for Federal recognition.
Answer. 34 CFR Sec. 602.36
open textbooks pilot and compliance with congressional directive
Question. Over the last two fiscal years, this Subcommittee--with
the support of Chairman Blunt and Ranking Member Murray--has provided
$10 million to an Open Textbooks Pilot to expand the use of open
textbooks on college campuses to achieve savings for students. While
this program may be small, it has energized students and faculty across
the country who see open textbooks--free, high-quality alternatives to
costly traditional textbooks--as key to reducing student debt and
improving learning outcomes. Many students don't purchase required
course materials because they are too costly. It puts them at an
academic disadvantage and hits low-income, first-generation, and
students of color hardest. So, on a bipartisan basis, Congress created
this program. In fiscal year 2019, we included clear direction to the
Department to award funds through a new grant competition and to fund
at least 20 projects in order to engage additional institutions to help
keep the momentum going. The Department ignored Congress--funding just
two projects in fiscal year 2019 from the fiscal year 2018 slate of
applications. On February 25, Ranking Member Murray and I sent you a
letter expressing our extreme disappointment with the Department's
decision to ignore clear Congressional directives. The Department's
March 26 response failed to provide the full slate of unfunded
applications from the Open Textbooks Pilot program competition
conducted in fiscal year 2018 and all communications both within the
Department and externally related to the Open Textbooks Pilot program.
Please provide the information requested in #1 and #2 of our
February 25 letter.
Answer. While the Department declines to share all of the
information described in #2 of your letter, as much of this information
is deliberative, it previously explained in response to a Question for
the Record from the Senate Appropriations hearing on the fiscal year
2019 budget that it consulted a wide range of experts regarding the
implementation of the pilot, including representatives of publishing
companies, college book stores, the Task Force on Apprenticeship
Expansion, the American Council of Community College Trustees, American
Association of Community Colleges, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce
Foundation, and other institutions of higher education that
participated in conferences or meetings where Department staff were in
attendance. With regard to the information described in #1 of your
letter, the Department will follow up separately with a list of
unfunded applicants.
Question. If the fiscal year 2020 bill provides additional funds
for the Open Textbooks Pilot, do you commit to holding a new grant
competition to award those funds?
Answer. If Congress provides funding again in fiscal year 2020 for
the Open Textbook Pilot, the Department would conduct a new grant
competition to award the funding that remains after first allocating
the $900,575 needed to fully fund a grantee first awarded in fiscal
year 2019.
Question. Do you commit to funding multiple projects with those
funds?
Answer. In the event that the Department conducts an Open Textbook
Pilot competition in fiscal year 2020, the Department would be required
to first publish a Notice of Proposed Priorities for public comment,
followed by a Notice of Final Priorities. Through this process, the
Department would seek feedback from the field on the structure of the
grant competition, including on the range of award sizes that can most
effectively accomplish the objectives of this program. These public
comments would inform the Department's approach to establishing the
award size parameters in the competition.
proposed reduction to child care access means parents in schools
Question. Completing college is challenging under ordinary
circumstances, but can be especially difficult for undergraduate
parents. Ensuring undergraduate parents have access to high quality
childcare can have a significant impact on college completion rates,
which is why I'm concerned about the Administration's proposal to
reduce funding for the Child Care Access Means Parents in Schools
(CCAMPIS) program by 70 percent.
What was the basis for the Administration's decision to seek this
cut?
Answer. The Administration remains committed to investing in child
care, and the 2020 Budget focuses its increased investment in a new,
one-time $1 billion investment through the Department of Health and
Human Services to build the supply of child care and stimulate employer
investment in child care. The 2020 Budget returns the Child Care Access
Means Parents in School program (CCAMPIS) to its funding level before
the increases enabled by the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018. Despite
this reduction, non-competing continuation grants to previous awardees
would continue to be funded under the CCAMPIS program.
Question. How many fewer undergraduate families would receive
services at the funding level proposed by the President's Budget?
Answer. The effect on the number of families to be affected by this
reduction is unclear. Given the proposed reduction, some grantees may
absorb the reduction to their non-competing continuation award by
reducing participants while others may absorb the reduction by reducing
the amount of the subsidies and/or services currently provided.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Jack Reed
discharge of loans for veterans with total permanent disability
Question. During the hearing, you indicated that you believed that
the Department was taking steps to automatically discharge student
loans for veterans with total and permanent disability under the data-
matching agreement you have with the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Please provide the current timeline and actions taken to provide
automatic discharges.
Answer. The Department is assessing the feasibility of granting
automatic Total and Permanent Disability (TPD) discharges based on a
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) data match for future
implementation. If the Department determines that automatic discharges
can happen upon receipt of the data from the VA, the Department will
establish a timeline for implementation.
The Department's current data matching agreement with the VA is
aligned with the current process of sending TPD application materials
to the identified veterans.
Question. Also, please provide the following information about the
implementation of the data-matching agreement. The number of veterans
identified, and of those identified:
--i. The number who have returned paperwork and have had discharges
granted;
--ii. The number who have returned paperwork and have been denied;
--iii. The number who have not returned paperwork;
--iv. The number who are severely delinquent; and
--v. The number who are in default
Answer. As of December 2018, our match with the VA has identified
more than 40,000 eligible veterans to whom we have sent TPD application
materials. Of those identified:
--i. 16,293 returned paperwork and had discharges granted;
--ii. None have returned paperwork and been denied;
--iii. 23,930 did not return paperwork;
--iv. 20,511 serviced by the Department's Federal loan servicers were
30-269 days delinquent; and
--v. 15,454 were in default
Question. How many borrowers have matched two out of three data
elements (out of SSN, name, and DOB) but not all three?
Answer. Our current matching process with the VA matches on full
Social Security number and name. If the match fails for either data
element, it is not validated. Therefore, we do not capture the
requested data
Question. Has FSA contacted any borrowers who fail an SSN match to
notify them of potential eligibility?
Answer. The current match with the VA validates on a full Social
Security number and name. The match fails if either data element is not
validated. Currently, the Department does not review the matches that
fail because non-matches may not be retained per the current Memorandum
of Understanding with the VA. Note: The Department processes TPD
requests from veterans who were not validated through the match, but
who contact the Department on their own.
Question. How many unique SSA TPD borrowers and VA borrowers,
separately listed, have had their loans discharged as a result of
receiving a letter (alternatively, number of discharges via each method
since the beginning of the match program)? Please indicate total number
of borrowers discharged, total number of loans discharged, and total
dollar amount discharged.
Answer. There are 193,603 Social Security Administration (SSA)-
discharged borrowers and 614,258 SSA loans discharged for a total
amount of $5,433,603,853.
There are 16,293 Veterans Administration (VA)-discharged borrowers
and 68,274 loans discharged for a total amount of $455,656,664.
enforcement of department cash management regulations.
Question. In December of last year, I sent you a letter along with
several colleagues asking for additional information about actions the
Department was taking to enforce its cash management regulations in
light of the CFPB analysis of campus financial service product
agreements. We have not received a response and ask that you provide
answers to the questions from the letter for the record. The questions
are as follows:
1. Has the Department reviewed any of the Tier 1 and Tier 2
financial agreements between institutions of higher education and
financial service providers identified in the CFPB's analysis as having
higher than average fees, including but not limited to Wells Fargo, for
violating the requirement that they be ``not inconsistent with the best
financial interests of students?''
2. Has the Department identified any current institution's cash
management agreements as deficient in meeting the standard of the
``best financial interests of students?'' If so, please provide a list
of deficient agreements and rationale for their deficient
identification.
3. What actions has the Department taken to ensure that
institutions correct any deficiencies?
4. Please provide the criteria the Department uses to determine
that the agreements meet the requirement of the ``best financial
interests of students.''
5. Have any institutions of higher education, that have agreements
with Wells Fargo, provided the Department with evidence demonstrating
that they are meeting the requirement that institutions conduct ``due
diligence reviews at least every 2 years, to ascertain whether the fees
imposed under the accounts are, considered as a whole, consistent with
or lower than prevailing market rates; and all contracts for the
marketing or offering of the accounts to the institution's students
provide for termination of the arrangement at the discretion of the
institution based on complaints received from students or a
determination by the institution that the fees assessed under the
account are not consistent with or are above prevailing market rates''?
6. How do the Department's reviews of the financial agreements
ensure that there are sufficient safeguards in any revenue sharing or
incentive structures to guard against conflicts of interest and
excessive fees for student account holders?
7. What steps has the Department taken to verify that all
institutions are reporting the required information?
8. What resources does the Department provide to institutions of
higher education to help them identify financial institutions that have
entered into consent orders or settlements with Federal regulators
related to consumer practices, or have established patterns of behavior
that could put students at risk of financial harm? Please provide
copies of said resources or guidance.
Answer:
1. The Department has taken important steps in monitoring
compliance under its cash management regulations. Between December 2013
and December 2015, the Department conducted five program reviews of
financial services companies that contracted with institutions of
higher education. Following these program reviews, the Department
assessed liabilities exceeding $6.4 million based on findings
identified at Higher One, Inc., and Wells Fargo Bank. Additionally, in
2019, the Department issued a cease and desist letter to BankMobile (a
subsidiary of Customers Bank, which owns the entity previously known as
Higher One, Inc.) for noncompliance with the cash management
regulations related to improper fees and violation of the student
choice provisions. The Department required BankMobile to reimburse any
student who had been charged improper fees, and BankMobile complied
with the Department's instructions.
The Department will begin evaluating institutional compliance with
the due diligence review requirement as part of its program review
procedures on October 1, 2019. They were not performed earlier due to
the relationship between the due diligence requirement and the
disclosure of mean/median fees requirement, which requires the
institution to calculate and disclose the mean and median costs of
contracts with financial services companies. The disclosure of mean/
median fees requirement became effective September 1, 2017.
Institutions rely on this information to conduct adequate due diligence
reviews, which are required every 2 years. Thus, the Department
determined that October 1, 2019, the start of the first review cycle
that follows a full 2-year period after September 1, 2017, was the most
appropriate time to begin incorporating institutional compliance with
the due diligence review requirement as part of program reviews.
2. The Department will begin evaluating institutional compliance
with the due diligence review requirement as part of program review
procedures beginning October 1, 2019.
3. Please see the Department's response to Question 2 above.
4. In order to meet the requirements under these new regulatory
provisions regarding the best financial interests of the students, an
institution must conduct due diligence reviews at least every 2 years
to determine whether the fees imposed under an institution's
arrangement with a financial services company are consistent with or
below prevailing market rates. The institution must also enact
contracts that allow the institution to terminate the arrangement based
on complaints from students or an institution's determination that the
fees charged are not consistent with market rates.
5. Please see the Department's response to Question 2 above.
6. Please see the Department's response to Question 2 above.
7. In 2016, the Department published two electronic announcements
explaining that institutions are required to post on their website
copies of any agreements they have with a financial services company
that provides students with Title IV credit balance funds. The
electronic announcements also reminded institutions that they must
provide the Department with the URL for the institutionally posted
agreements for inclusion in the Department's publicly available
centralized database. The database is available at StudentAid.gov/sa/
about/data-center/school/cash-management-contracts.
In addition, the Department includes information about the
institutional disclosure and reporting requirements in the Federal
Student Aid Handbook and conducts institutional training presentations
to provide information about the disclosure and reporting requirements
for Tier 1 or Tier 2 arrangements. The Office of Inspector General's
Guide for Audits of Proprietary Schools and For Compliance Attestation
Engagements of Third Party Servicers Administering Title IV Programs
(OIG Audit Guide) addressed requirements for disclosure and reporting
of contract information for the first time in September 2016.
Separately, as part of its program review procedures, the Department
will also review an institution's contractual agreements with financial
services companies, which will include a review of the disclosure and
reporting requirements. The Department will begin evaluating
institutional compliance with the due diligence review requirement as
part of program review procedures in October 1, 2019.
8. As described above, the cash management regulations require
institutions to conduct due diligence reviews to determine whether the
terms of financial accounts offered pursuant to a Tier 1 or Tier 2
arrangement are not inconsistent with the best financial interests of
their students. The Department believes that institutions, which
independently contract with financial services providers for Tier 1 or
Tier 2 services, have the expertise to make appropriate determinations
regarding market rates and their students' best interests.
The Department does not believe it is in the best position to
provide institutions information regarding particular types of consumer
practices at financial services providers. However, institutions and
Tier 1 financial services providers are subject to the Department's
enforcement actions associated with cash management regulatory
noncompliance.
teacher and principal preparation and professional development and
intent of education innovation and research program
Question. The Administration's budget request would provide no
funding for the teacher and principal preparation and professional
development programs under Title II of the Higher Education Act and
Title II of the Every Student Succeeds Act and instead proposes to
establish a $200 million voucher program for teachers.
Please explain how this proposal complies with the intent of the
Education Innovation and Research program and its evidentiary
standards. What is the rationale for allocating two-thirds of the
requested funding for Education Innovation and Research to a proposal
that is not backed by evidence?
Answer. The Education Innovation and Research program is primarily
designed to build evidence for effective educational interventions
rather than merely fund proven activities. Consequently, the program
specifically authorizes early-phase start-up funding to test promising
innovations that are willing to undergo rigorous evaluation. The
Administration believes that empowering teachers to select the
professional development activities that will help them meet the unique
needs of the students in their classrooms holds significant promise for
improving the effectiveness of the multi-billion investment in teacher
professional development made annually by States and school districts.
effect of replacing title ii programs with eir professional development
vouchers
Question. Please provide an analysis of how many teachers and
principals are currently participating in these Title II programs
compared to how many would receive vouchers under your proposal.
What are the evaluation plans for measuring the effectiveness of
these vouchers?
How does the administration propose to address the preparation and
professional development needs of principals?
How will a voucher for individual teachers enable schools to
provide professional development to meet instructional goals?
Answer. The Department does not have data on the number of teachers
and principals currently participating in Title II-funded programs;
rather, it has data on the use of Title II-A funds showing that in
school year 2015-2016, the latest year for which information is
available, 66 percent of districts used funds for professional
development for teachers and paraprofessionals and 35 percent used
funds for class size reduction (52 percent and 25 percent,
respectively, of funds). School districts also report that, using funds
from Federal, State, and local sources, they provide a range of
professional development activities to as many as 2.5 million teachers
annually.
However, research consistently shows that current professional
development practices do not yield improved student achievement,
leading the Department's Institute of Education Sciences to conclude in
a 2016 evaluation brief that ``the field does not yet fully understand
how to ensure that teacher PD leads to measurable improvements in
student learning.'' The EIR voucher proposal is intended to help
address this lack of understanding.
Grantees under the EIR program must conduct rigorous evaluations of
their projects, and the Department provides both funding and technical
assistance to ensure that the results of these evaluations meet the
standards of the What Works Clearinghouse.
Grantees would have discretion to include principals and other
school leaders in their voucher projects, and also could target
vouchers to support certain instructional goals, such as improving
achievement in STEM subjects or support school improvement efforts.
adult education
Question. Please provide additional information about your proposal
to create a State formula grant program for pre-apprenticeship programs
in the national activities account for adult education.
How is the Department plan to define pre-apprenticeship?
Answer. A pre-apprenticeship is a program designed to prepare
individuals with the reading, mathematics, and employability skills
needed to enter and succeed in an apprenticeship program with which it
has a documented partnership.
Question. How much would each State receive under this proposal?
Answer. Please see below for a table estimating the allocation for
each State.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Estimated
State
Allocation
(whole dollars)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alabama...............................................
925,429
Alaska................................................
390,580
Arizona...............................................
1,374,634
Arkansas..............................................
643,701
California............................................
6,706,750
Colorado..............................................
872,027
Connecticut...........................................
781,079
Delaware..............................................
381,254
District of Columbia..................................
386,031
Florida...............................................
3,093,534
Georgia...............................................
1,771,821
Hawaii................................................
363,551
Idaho.................................................
427,810
Illinois..............................................
2,145,405
Indiana...............................................
1,087,174
Iowa..................................................
562,846
Kansas................................................
587,183
Kentucky..............................................
911,774
Louisiana.............................................
1,007,703
Maine.................................................
395,252
Maryland..............................................
1,128,962
Massachusetts.........................................
1,131,276
Michigan..............................................
1,620,096
Minnesota.............................................
844,878
Mississippi...........................................
718,852
Missouri..............................................
997,207
Montana...............................................
376,728
Nebraska..............................................
450,159
Nevada................................................
743,931
New Hampshire.........................................
383,304
New Jersey............................................
1,541,242
New Mexico............................................
595,544
New York..............................................
3,352,624
North Carolina........................................
1,728,865
North Dakota..........................................
322,759
Ohio..................................................
1,939,071
Oklahoma..............................................
771,884
Oregon................................................
805,248
Pennsylvania..........................................
2,083,228
Puerto Rico...........................................
1,080,934
Rhode Island..........................................
412,050
South Carolina........................................
930,258
South Dakota..........................................
348,516
Tennessee.............................................
1,116,448
Texas.................................................
4,571,668
Utah..................................................
568,820
Vermont...............................................
315,699
Virginia..............................................
1,246,048
Washington............................................
1,324,471
West Virginia.........................................
543,399
Wisconsin.............................................
870,293
Wyoming...............................................
320,000
-----------------
Total...............................................
60,000,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question. Why did the Department decide to take a formula grant
approach rather than request additional national activity funds for a
State-level competitive grant for this purpose?
Answer. As labor and job markets vary from State to State, the
Administration believes it is appropriate for each State to have the
opportunity to explore approaches to pre-apprenticeships.
Question. How does the Department address concerns that the
proposed, drastic cuts to the regular State grant program will
undermine States' capacity to implement successful pre-apprenticeship
programs?
Answer. As Adult Education State Grants are primarily spent on the
local level by eligible providers rather than State-level activities,
the Administration does not believe the proposed reduction in that
program would cause a significant impediment to State administration
and oversight of successful pre-apprenticeship programs.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Jeanne Shaheen
effect of nextgen transition on borrowers and defaults
Question. The Department is in the process of restructuring its
contracts with student loan servicers through its Next Generation
Processing and Servicing, or ``NextGen'' plan. Your current proposal
suggests you plan to transfer the servicing of all borrowers and all
loans in a very short window of time and then potentially move those
borrowers once again in the future.
How has the Department prepared for the impact of these changes on
borrowers?
Answer. Borrowers will be contacted throughout the transition
period to ensure they are informed of what is happening and when. The
new interface the borrowers will use will be in place to provide real-
time responses to borrower inquiries prior to and after the move to the
updated servicing platform. Customer service representatives will be
thoroughly trained and ready to understand and assist with questions
from borrowers during the transition period.
Question. How will you ensure that the process does not increase
defaults?
Answer. Special attention will be paid to borrowers who are
delinquent and/or nearing early stages of defaulting during the
transition period. Expanded outreach to these borrowers--providing
solutions to resolve delinquency--will be provided to borrowers via an
easy-to-use and understand interface.
extension of existing servicing contracts
Question. The nine current contracts with loan servicers end in
June and September of this year. Yet, the Department seems no closer to
finalizing new contracts in light of repeated cancelations and
modifications in the procurement process.
Do you plan to extend the current contracts to avoid disruption for
tens of millions of student loan borrowers?
Answer. The Department extended the contracts of the four Title IV
Additional Servicers (TIVAS) for 6 months (until Dec. 15, 2019). We
continue to review our plans for the remaining servicing contracts. We
remain committed to Next Gen FSA's goals and objectives and are
confident in the initiative's ultimate success.
Question. For how long will the current contracts be extended?
Answer. See answer to a, above.
timeline for phases and components of nextgen contracts
Question. When do you plan to award each phase and component of the
new NextGen contracts?
Answer. The Digital Customer Care Solution was awarded in February
2019. The Optimal Processing Solution (OPS), the Enhanced Processing
Solution (EPS) and the Business Process Operations (BPO) solicitations
were issued in January 2019. The planned award date for EPS is spring/
summer 2019. The planned award date for OPS and BPO is the fall of
2019. Borrower accounts were to begin migration shortly after the award
of EPS. All dates are tentative as all three of these solicitations are
currently under protest.
nextgen and promoting competition among servicers
Question. Congress has repeatedly included appropriations bill
language requiring competition among servicers at all stages of the
student loan servicing process and allocation of loans to servicers
based on their performance. How does your NextGen proposal promote
competition among student loan servicers to drive better performance
for borrowers and increase servicer accountability?
Answer. Consistent with the language in the Appropriations Act, the
Department plans to award multiple contracts for business process
operations providers. These contracts will contain explicit performance
metrics and related standards; vendors will compete based on their
performance against these metrics, which will be used to assign new
borrower accounts to each vendor. In addition, FSA will include
explicit disincentives for failure to meet or exceed performance
standards, up to and including contract termination for consistent
failure to perform.
teach grant conversions to loans and reconversions to grants
Question. Please provide information on the TEACH Grant recipients
who had their grants converted to loans who have had those loans fully
reconverted back to grants according to the Department's ``TEACH Grant
Reconsideration Process'' announced on December 10, 2018 and January
31, 2019.
What is the total number of unique recipients and total amount of
loans reconverted?
Answer. As of April 21, 2019, 2,327 TEACH Grant recipients have
been approved for reconsideration. Of these 2,327 recipients, 939
recipients with 1,982 grants totaling $5,831,851.57 have been
reinstated.
Question. What is the total amount of any payments returned?
Answer. As of April 30, 2019, FedLoan Servicing has issued refunds
in the amount of approximately $320,000 to TEACH Grant recipients whose
loans were reinstated back to grants. Additionally, FedLoan Servicing
has re-applied funds in the amount of approximately $663,000 to other
Direct Loans held by TEACH Grant recipients.
Question. How many unique recipients received a correction of
negative credit reporting?
Answer. The Department does not have the requested data. For TEACH
Grant recipients--who failed to meet the program requirements, but were
offered the opportunity to request consideration to have their Direct
Unsubsidized Loan reconverted to a TEACH Grant--the Department provides
updated information to credit reporting agencies once the loan has been
reconverted to a grant.
Question. Please provide any analysis, findings, or research from
the Department on the primary reasons why TEACH Grant recipients'
grants have been converted to loans, including conversions that
occurred either due to (a) student loan servicer error, or (b) a
recipient's failure to comply with the program's recertification
requirements.
Answer. A 2015 report by the Government Accountability Office
(GAO) found that large numbers of TEACH Grant recipients were not
meeting program requirements, such as teaching in a qualifying school
and submitting the required annual certification form. The report also
identified several issues with the program, including a lack of
awareness about the program generally, confusion about program
requirements, and the need for improved program management. Most
significantly, the report found that 2,252 TEACH Grant recipients
previously had their grants erroneously converted to loans by the
previous TEACH servicer, potentially as a result of servicer error.
Additionally, the Department asked FedLoan to perform a review of
all TEACH grants that were converted to loans since the program's
inception to identify any others that may have been improperly
converted by the previous servicer. This review identified 10,776
recipients that may have been converted in error. Beginning in 2015,
FedLoan reached out to these recipients directly by letter and e-mail
to give them the opportunity to have their loans reinstated to grants,
which resulted in 1,671 recipients being successfully reinstated. The
majority of the remainder of the recipients did not respond to
FedLoan's outreach.
Furthermore, Department data shows that top three reasons for TEACH
Grant conversions from 2013 to 2018 were: no response from the TEACH
Grant recipient to certification requests, voluntary request for
conversion from the TEACH Grant recipient, and late response from the
TEACH Grant recipient to certification requests.
As of April 9, 2019, approximately 17,210 TEACH Grants were
converted due to voluntary request for conversion from the TEACH Grant
recipient and approximately 114,750 TEACH Grants were converted due to
a recipient's failure to meet program requirements. This includes
failing to meet the program's certification requirements and failing to
meet the minimum number of years of teaching within the period allowed
by the authorizing statute. These two cohorts are not mutually
exclusive as a TEACH Grant may be counted in more than one category.
For example, a TEACH Grant may convert to a loan more than once and a
TEACH Grant may convert for more than one reason.
Question. Please provide information on the repayment status of
TEACH Grant recipients who have experienced a grant-to-loan conversion,
including the number who are current, delinquent, or in default, and
disaggregated by State.
Answer. See attached for the status of TEACH grant recipients who
have active loans resulting from TEACH Grant conversion.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Jeff Merkley
borrower defense claim review platform
Question. Regarding the new borrower defense claim review platform
described in the Department's 2018 fourth quarter report:
--a. What is the status of implementation of the change to the
platform or software used to review borrower defense claims
since January 20, 2017?
--b. What are the specific benefits provided by the new platform?
--c. How much funding has been allocated through contracts or other
means to the new review platform?
Answer.
--a. In summer 2018, the Department began accepting new borrower
defense applications claims through the new customer engagement
platform. On February 25, 2019, the Department completed the
last migration of data from its legacy system to the new
platform. The new platform is now operational and allows the
Department to more efficiently process--in one secure
location--borrower defense documents and evidence. The platform
requires new enhancements to comply with the 2016 regulations,
which the Department is working diligently to implement. Future
enhancements may be required as a result of new regulations, to
improve the borrower experience, or because of routine
maintenance.
--b. The new customer engagement platform allows the Department to
enhance the borrower experience, improve application
processing, and increase efficiency of operations.
Specific platform benefits classified by these three major
improvement areas include:
--Enhance the borrower experience
--Added online features for borrowers, such as the ability to use an
FSA ID to submit applications, upload digital documents, save a
`draft' of an application, view submitted application
materials, and track the status of an application
--Simplified the online application process that more clearly
indicates which forms are required based on a borrower's
specific circumstances
--Improved data validation rules for online forms to assist the
borrower in submitting a ``complete'' application
--Enabled bilingual capabilities
--Improve application processing
--Improved ability to identify duplicate borrower defense
applications and applicants
--Created ability to merge the borrower's correspondence, documents,
and application in a single platform
--Improved process to more quickly identify and contact borrowers
with incomplete applications
--Increase efficiency of operations
--Streamlined intake process to more quickly place borrowers into
forbearance or stopped collection activity status, if requested
by the borrower
--Enabled future capabilities to support regulatory and operational
changes.
--c. The Department is contractually obligated through September 30,
2019, to spend approximately $4 million to establish the new
borrower defense customer engagement platform, migrate the
existing applications from the legacy system to the new
platform, purchase new licenses to support users, and establish
a new engagement model that provides customer support. As of
April 23, 2019, the Department has spent approximately $1.7
million of the $4 million obligated.
relationship and communication with state attorneys general on borrower
defense
Question. Please provide the following information regarding the
Department's relationship and communication with State attorneys
general regarding borrower defense:
Has there been any formal or informal directive, memorandum,
guidance, or policy issued since January 20, 2017 regarding a change in
the Department's historical relationship with State attorneys general
(including but not limited to limiting contact or collaboration) for
reviewing or analyzing borrower defense claims or the underlying
evidence of such claims? If so, please provide documentation of the
change in policy.
Answer. The Department does not have a formal relationship with
States' attorneys general regarding the enforcement of Borrower Defense
regulations. On November 1, 2016, the Department of Education published
a final Rule concerning borrower defense to repayment and other related
matters in the Federal Register (81 Fed. Reg. 75,926). The original
effective date (July 1, 2017) of the Rule was delayed by the
Department, but by order of the U.S. District Court for the District of
Columbia in the case Bauer v. DeVos, No.17-cv-1330 (D.D.C. Jul. 6,
2017), the 2016 Rule was required to take effect retroactively. In
bringing a borrower defense claim under the regulations before the 2016
Rule, students are able to provide any relevant evidence, including
evidence that may been collected by a State attorney general. Under the
group process, which was created as part of the 2016 Rule, the
Department considers all relevant evidence to a group claim, including
evidence that may be collected by a State attorney general.
evaluating state attorneys general and regulator referrals with respect
to 685.222(f)
Question. The Department stated that group process under 685.222(f)
is not applicable to most claims submitted by State attorneys general.
Yet, State attorneys general have referred cases affecting groups of
borrowers for which they have evidence of misrepresentations that give
rise to causes of action under State law. Please provide details for
each State attorney general or regulator referral, including: the
reason the Department believes the referral should not be handled by
the group procedures laid out in the 2016 final borrower defense rule
in Sec. 685.222(f) through Sec. 685.222(h); the number of borrowers
impacted by each referral; and the State of origin for each referral.
Answer. The Borrower Defense to Repayment Regulations promulgated
in 2016 will impact the adjudication of loans made after July 1, 2017.
Under this regulation, the Secretary has the authority to initiate a
group borrower defense to repayment claim based on the proven findings
of State AGs--not simply allegations or claims, but allegations that
result in an admission or a judgment on the merits--and will do so when
appropriate. However, the Secretary must still adjudicate each claim
separately because she must determine whether or not the borrower
relied on the misrepresentation in making a decision and if the
borrower was harmed.
Enclosed table ``Durbin Question 6.4 (Updated 8.6.2019)'' provides
a list of all attorneys general submissions related to groups of
borrowers for which the attorneys general seek a borrower defense
discharge as of August 6, 2019. The table includes the submission date,
the attorneys general, the school, and the diploma program, if
applicable. If a diploma program is not provided for a submission, the
submission was not limited to a specific program. It is within the
Secretary's discretion to decide whether a group discharge process will
be applied to a group of borrowers, and policies and procedures that
will apply to the group discharge process are under development. The
Department cannot provide the number of borrowers that will be included
in a certain group unless and until a group is established and defined
by the Secretary. However, individual applications submitted by
attorneys general have been and will continue to be considered under
the individual application review process.
At this time, the Department cannot narrow its reporting to
applications submitted by attorneys general. Policies, procedures, and
platform functionality that will apply to the group discharge process
are under development. The platform currently does not track which
applications are submitted by attorneys general. When all systems and
processes are updated, the platform will track which applications are
included in a group discharge process for the groups to be defined by
the Secretary.
review of state attorneys general submissions and referrals for
borrower defense
Question. Has the Department reviewed all submissions or referrals
from State attorneys general that have been received as of at least 6
months ago?
Answer. No. Due to the influx of applications associated with the
conduct of Corinthian Colleges, Inc. and limited resources focusing on
applications from borrowers who attended Corinthian Colleges, the
Department has not yet reviewed all submissions of evidence of borrower
defense-related conduct from State attorneys general that have been
received as of at least 6 months ago.
denials of borrower defense claims including evidence provided by state
attorneys general
Question. Has the Department denied any borrower defense claim(s)
that contained evidence or information provided by State attorneys
general or State regulators? If yes, please describe the situation(s).
Answer. No, the Department has made no such denials.
temporary expanded public service loan forgiveness (tepslf) and
servicer communication
Question. Please provide a copy of the Change Request made to
FedLoan Servicing to implement the Temporary Expanded Public Service
Loan Forgiveness (TEPSLF), including all communications between Federal
Student Aid and Pennsylvania Higher Education Assistance Agency (PHEAA)
related to the terms of such a change request, the specific services
performed under this change request, and the compensation provided to
FedLoan Servicing to perform these services.
Answer. Copies of the five change requests submitted to FedLoan to
support implementation of TEPSLF are enclosed. Employee names and email
addresses have been redacted.
oversight of fedloan implementation of tepslf
Question. Please describe the process put in place to ensure
adequate oversight over FedLoan Servicing's implementation of this
contract, including documentation of any on-site reviews, call reviews,
or other monitoring performed by Federal Student Aid related to TEPSLF.
Answer. Throughout the implementation process, FSA required FedLoan
to provide a variety of documentation to ensure they were meeting FSA's
requirements as specified in change requests 4639, 4640, 4696, 4748,
and 4875. Additionally, FSA conducts the following on an ongoing basis:
--FSA reviews a sample of denied TEPSLF requests to ensure accuracy.
FSA also reviews all loans determined by FedLoan to be eligible
for TEPSLF.
--FSA regularly monitors FedLoan's reporting activity to ensure
discharged loans are reported to National Student Loan Data
System (NSLDS) and the Financial Management System (FMS)
correctly.
--FSA requires FedLoan to provide regular TEPSLF reporting, which
allows FSA to create weekly and monthly summary reports that
are shared internally with FSA management and related staff.
--FSA conducts periodic meetings with FedLoan to discuss program
status, issues, and needed improvements, and communicates with
FedLoan via email/phone on an ongoing basis as needed.
--FSA conducts TEPSLF call monitoring in association with PSLF call
monitoring (the programs share the same phone number for
borrower support). Any issues found during this monitoring
process are escalated for resolution as needed.
--FSA also regularly monitors the overall cost of the TEPSLF program,
including implementation costs, ongoing monthly costs, and
overall discharge amounts in relation the $700 million funding
limit.
contract changes to ensure fedloan publicizing of tepslf
Question. Please describe the specific changes made to FedLoan
Servicing's contract to publicize the availability of TEPSLF, including
steps to ensure adequate outreach to borrowers who applied for and were
denied PSLF.
Answer. FedLoan's website was updated to include a link to
information about the TEPSLF opportunity. FedLoan representatives were
also educated about the opportunity and given guidance on how to
respond to inquiries about it, including directing borrowers to FSA's
StudentAid.gov website, the primary location for information about
TEPSLF, where applicable. FedLoan personnel were also provided
information and training about the PSLF Help Tool to further support
borrowers with questions about PSLF and TEPSLF.
As noted above, a change request was made requiring FedLoan to
submit a weekly report to FSA of borrowers who had previously been
denied PSLF. This allows FSA to conduct targeted outreach to this
specific group of borrowers who may be eligible for TEPSLF. FedLoan
also conducts direct outreach to borrowers who were previously denied
TEPSLF but have since submitted additional employment information.
These borrowers are encouraged to resubmit their TEPSLF request if they
believe they now qualify as a result of providing the additional
employment information.
number of borrowers receiving loan forgiveness under income-driven
repayment
Question. How many borrowers enrolled in any income-driven
repayment plans have reached the overall cap on their student loan
payments (i.e. 20 or 25 years) and have received loan forgiveness, in
aggregate and disaggregated by State?
Answer. As of April 16, 2019, 16 borrowers enrolled in any income-
driven repayment plan have reached the overall cap on their student
loan payments with a total discharged amount of $453,525. Due to
privacy restrictions, this number cannot be disaggregated by State.
median amount of forgiveness provided under income-driven repayment
Question. What is the median amount of loan forgiveness provided to
borrowers in IDR plans who have reached the overall cap on their
student loan payments (i.e. 20 or 25 years), in aggregate and
disaggregated by specific repayment plan?
Answer. The median amount of loan forgiveness provided to borrowers
in IDR plans who have reached the overall cap on their student loan
payments (i.e., 20 or 25 years) is $14,495. All 16 borrowers were in
the REPAYE plan at the time of IDR forgiveness.
resources allocated to valuing student loan portfolio
Question. What resources, including staffing, are being applied to
any activity associated with valuing of the Federal student loan
portfolio?
Answer. Resources applied to this activity are provided in the
Student Aid Administration (SAA) account. The Office of Finance and
Operations, Office of Budget Service, Cost Estimation and Analysis
Division is responsible for developing full-cost estimates for the
Federal Family Education Loan (FFEL) and Ford Direct Student Loan
(FDSL) programs. The staffing level for this division as of March 30,
2019 was 16. Pages Y-30 through Y-32 of the fiscal year 2020 SAA
Congressional Justification provide detail on the non-pay resources
used to value the Federal student loan portfolio. This justification
can be found online at https://www2.ed.gov/about/overview/budget/
budget20/justifications/y-saa.pdf.
student loan servicing non-compliance tracking database
Question. In response to a recent OIG report on student loan
servicing, the Department claimed ``all instances of non-compliance are
tracked in an internal tracking database'' for Federal student loan
servicers and this tracking mechanism has been in place for ``several
years.''
Please provide:
--i. the name of the database;
--ii. the date the database was implemented and the dates and
descriptions of any subsequent modifications, including any
changes to add instances of noncompliance regardless of
resolution classification;
--iii. a list of the indicators or metrics of noncompliance the
database currently tracks; and
--iv. a copy of the database.
Answer. FSA captures all known instances of noncompliance in an
internal issues tracking database known as the SQL Server Database.
Servicers are now required to submit issue tracking items for all
observations found during monitoring events--even those resolved during
the event with no further action required by either the servicer or
FSA. These items remain in the tracking database to be used for
reference and other analytical purposes.
The original database was implemented in December 2011. A
significant modification was made in September 2013 to expand the scope
of items tracked in the database. Another significant modification was
made in May 2018 to allow the database to generate Call Monitoring
Reports, which assist FSA with its monitoring of individual servicers'
call volume and quality. FSA conducts routine maintenance and makes
minor changes to the database on an ongoing basis as needed. Although
we are unable to provide a full copy of the database because it
contains personally identifiable and other sensitive information,
enclosed are screenshots that show the various indicators and metrics
currently tracked in the database.
Question. Please provide copies of Department policies and
procedures that explain how the Department incorporates information
from the tracking database to ensure servicer compliance with Federal
requirements.
Answer. All known instances of noncompliance are tracked and remain
open in the issues tracking database until resolution. A copy of the
Department's issue tracker procedures is enclosed.
Question. The OIG report notes the Department's database on
compliance did not record instances of noncompliance when a servicer
implemented an acceptable remedy during the review period. For the
review period of the OIG's report, in how many instances was
noncompliance found but not recorded in the database for each servicer,
and what would the rate of noncompliance have been for each servicer,
if these instances had been recorded?
Answer. The data requested is not readily available in aggregate
form because, as you note, the particular instances of noncompliance in
question were not recorded in the issues tracking database because they
were resolved during the monitoring event. Therefore, we are unable to
calculate the requested noncompliance rate. Based on OIG's
recommendation, and as noted above, FSA now requires that issue
tracking items be submitted for all observations found during
monitoring events, even those that were resolved during the event.
trend analysis of servicer non-compliance
Question. The Department claims it is already using data on
noncompliance to analyze trends and assess servicer performance. Which
specific trends related to compliance does the Department track for
trend analysis, and how long has the Department tracked each trend?
Please provide any trend analyses the Department has conducted.
Answer. FSA uses the database to track a variety of issues,
including instances of noncompliance that generally stem from
regulatory or contractual infractions. In the event of such an
infraction, remediation of the issue is monitored and tracked to
completion in the database. In addition to the issues tracking
database, FSA uses several other sources of information to ensure
servicer compliance and inform trend analysis, including various
reports from servicers and the National Student Loan Data System
(NSLDS). Attached are two examples of trend analysis conducted by FSA
to date.
referrals of servicer non-compliance to enforcement bodies
Question. Please provide a list of all referrals of noncompliance
the Department has made following compliance reviews of servicers to
Federal, State, local, Tribal, or foreign agency or other public
authority responsible for enforcing, investigating, or prosecuting
violations of administrative, civil, criminal law, or regulation.
Answer. The Department has made no such referrals.
risk tolerance for servicer non-compliance and threshold for
enforcement action
Question. Please provide the Department's current risk tolerance in
servicing, defined as the threshold of noncompliance that would compel
the Department to take enforcement action, calculated both:
--including all instances of noncompliance, including those for which
the servicer has implemented an acceptable remedy; and
--including only the instances of noncompliance for which the
servicer has not implemented an acceptable remedy.
Answer. The Department does not use a particular risk tolerance
calculation in deciding whether to assess penalties against servicers
for instances of noncompliance. FSA uses Corrective Action Plans (CAPs)
to address remediation of servicing issues. Such issues are typically
discovered through a monitoring event, on-site visit, or report by a
servicer. CAPs are issued by FSA's Acquisitions Office, communicated in
writing, and include a series of required steps to bring the servicer
into compliance. A timeline is established for servicers to complete
the necessary steps. Failure to comply may result in various penalties,
including loss of loan volume, fines, and in extreme cases, termination
of the servicer's contract with FSA. A variety of factors are taken
into account when determining what penalty is appropriate, including
the severity of the instance of noncompliance and/or whether it
reflects a pattern of behavior over time. Next Gen FSA will greatly
improve upon the current servicing model by explicitly tying vendor
performance to clear and robust standards and metrics.
improvements to oversight since oig review period of servicer
compliance
Question. The Department asserts it has made ``significant ongoing
improvements'' to its ``oversight and monitoring policies and
procedures'' since the review period of the OIG's report. What are the
significant improvements to oversight and monitoring that have been
implemented from October 1, 2017 to the present?
Answer. The Department is continually enhancing its servicer
monitoring system and has implemented several improvements to its
oversight processes:
--The servicer liaison team, which serves as the primary contact with
servicers overseeing day to day operations and identifying,
tracking and resolving issues that impact borrowers, has been
restructured to assign team members to specific areas, such as
repayment plans or delinquency and default, instead of to a
single servicer. This allows the Department to better utilize
its subject matter experts to ensure more focused monitoring
and oversight activities.
--The Department has corrected programming errors with its Call
Monitoring Reports to ensure these reports provide thorough
performance metrics for use by the call monitoring team. The
servicer call monitoring team listens to samples of incoming
and outgoing calls and compares customer service representative
performance against a detailed checklist to ensure accuracy and
completeness.
--Quality control measures have been added to the call monitoring
team's activities described above.
Additionally, in late April, the Department began issuing letters
to vendors regarding the failure of their call centers to promptly and
effectively serve customers. The letters inform vendors that the
Department expects the companies to consistently deliver high-quality
service and that the Department will closely monitor their work. To
date, four vendors have received letters and the Department anticipates
issuing letters to the remaining vendors in early May. The Department
held conference calls with three vendors in late April regarding their
performance. Each vendor was notified that the FSA chief operating
officer will visit during the month of May and was informed that,
before the end of May, their `get well' plans must be implemented with
demonstrated results; failure to do so will result in accounts being
transferred to vendors who are successfully meeting established service
levels.
Finally, through the Next Gen FSA contracting process, FSA will
further improve oversight by implementing clear performance standards
for vendors and aggressive accountability measures.
servicer feedback in reviews and audits
Question. What policies or procedures does the Department employ to
incorporate servicer feedback into the process for finalizing a review
or audit, such as permitting servicers to see initial findings, and
what steps are necessary to finalize a review?
Answer. FSA shares information on noncompliance with servicers to
aid them in improving customer service. Findings by FSA's servicer
liaisons, service monitors, and servicer call monitoring teams are
shared with servicers in meetings and/or by a written report so
servicers can make the required corrections. Additionally, after FSA's
Financial Institution Oversight Service Group conducts their review of
a servicer's operational effectiveness, internal controls, and
compliance, the results are shared with the servicer. FSA then tracks
all noncompliance issues to ensure they are resolved. Copies of the
Department's reporting and call monitoring procedures are enclosed.
oversight and accountability under nextgen
Question. How do you plan to ensure that oversight and
accountability are included in your plan to modernize student aid and
student loan servicing? Please provide concrete examples of when and
how the Department will act to protect students from subpar student
loan servicing practices under the Next Generation Financial Services
Environment (NextGen).
Answer. Vendor and partner performance standards and accountability
measures-- such as publicly available metrics around service quality
with corresponding disincentives up to and including termination--will
be built into Next Gen FSA contracts to ensure customers receive world-
class service while protecting taxpayer dollars. For example, section
C.3.2 of the Next Gen FSA Business Process Operations (BPO)
solicitation requires that successful offerors include performance
management mechanisms in their proposed solutions to enable improved
and ongoing achievement of metrics. Pursuant to the solicitation, BPO
vendors will be measured monthly to determine their level of
performance. `Green' vendors will keep their assigned customers and
will also be assigned an equitable share of new customers. `Yellow'
vendors will keep their assigned customers but will not receive new
customers. If a vendor remains Yellow for more than 6 months, their
contract may be terminated. If a vendor is `Red' for two consecutive
months, a portion of their assigned customers will be reallocated to
other vendors. If a vendor is Red for three consecutive months, their
contract may be terminated.
maintaining service standards in transition to nextgen
Question. How will the Department ensure that servicers that
ultimately do not get contracts under NextGen continue to provide a
high standard of service to borrowers, as they will no longer have a
financial incentive to serve those borrowers well?
Answer. Throughout the Next Gen transition, the Department will
monitor all vendors closely to ensure requirements are met and
customers receive high-quality service. We will impose financial and
other penalties as appropriate pursuant to the contracts to ensure
service levels are maintained and, if necessary, will prioritize the
transfer of accounts from any servicers that fail to perform.
contractor performance measurement under nextgen
Question. How will the Department measure servicer and contractor
performance under NextGen?
Answer. Section C.3.2 of the Next Gen FSA Business Process
Operations (BPO) solicitation, enclosed, requires that successful
offerors include performance management mechanisms in their proposed
solutions to enable improved and ongoing achievement of metrics.
Pursuant to the solicitation, BPO vendors will be measured monthly to
determine their level of performance. `Green' vendors will keep their
assigned customers and will also be assigned an equitable share of new
customers. `Yellow' vendors will keep their assigned customers but will
not receive new customers. If a vendor remains Yellow for more than 6
months, their contract may be terminated. If a vendor is `Red' for two
consecutive months, a portion of their assigned customers will be
reallocated to other vendors. If a vendor is Red for three consecutive
months, their contract may be terminated. https://beta.sam.gov/opp/
7ba2975c522413b564f21f854e0d94f1/view.
consumer engagement and nextgen
Question. How does the Department plan to give consumers a voice in
their repayment experiences under NextGen?
Answer. The new borrower interface will request feedback from
borrowers throughout the servicing process. Borrowers will be presented
surveys after phone, mobile, and online experiences. The Department
will hold focus groups and feedback sessions will be held with
borrowers and other partners to gather information about what works and
what does not. The Department will conduct extensive analysis to
analyze feedback, complaints, and compliments to help determine future
enhancements and improvements to all aspects of the servicing solution.
course for borrowers to take corrective actions under nextgen
Question. How will borrowers be able to take corrective actions
under NextGen, given they will no longer know who their servicer is?
Answer. Customers will be able to submit complaints through the
Federal Student Aid Feedback System. While all future customer
interactions will be under the FSA brand, FSA will have the information
to quickly identify the vendor responsible for each customer
interaction, as well as a process to address and resolve complaints.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Brian Schatz
state investment and bipartisan efforts to address college
affordability
Question. College debt now exceeds $1.5 trillion dollars and is the
highest category of consumer debt behind mortgages. You have stated
that: ``Student loan debt is a tremendous problem for students and
parents, with potentially catastrophic consequences on the Federal
budget and the national deficit,'' and that ``the Federal Government
has an important role to play in addressing student debt.'' You also
stated that: ``The Department also encourages States to invest in
public higher education.''
Do you commit to working with both Democrats and Republicans to
find solutions to college affordability and student loan debt?
Answer. The Department stands ready to work with Members of
Congress, on both sides of the aisle, to find solutions to college
affordability and student loan debt challenges. The Department has
undertaken several initiatives over the past several years to address
student debt and is currently working to improve college transparency
by publishing program-level student outcomes on the College Scorecard.
We are also changing our vocabulary to no long refer to loans as
``aid'' or ``awards'' and we have renamed the College Shopping Sheet to
be the College Financing Plan to more clearly communicate to students
that by taking loans, they have a repayment obligation.
Question. What specific steps will you take to help increase State
investment in public higher education?
Answer. As you know, States play an integral role in improving
access to higher education for students. However, States control the
level of investment in public higher education institutions, and the
Department does not have the authority to intervene.
access to and financial aid for education for prisoners
Question. The White House's principles for Higher Education Act
reauthorization include a recommendation that: ``Congress should
provide targeted Federal financial aid to prisoners eligible for
release to improve employment outcomes and reduce recidivism.'' There
are a number of quality prison education programs, including one run by
your alma mater, Calvin College. Additionally, the Department continues
to fund the Second Chance Pell pilot program.What is the Department
doing to support these programs and increase access to education in
prisons?
Answer. Currently, individuals who are non-Federal prisoners who
are incarcerated in State or local prisons do have access to Pell
grants to support their continuing education while in prison. However,
under our Second Chance Pell experiment, colleges and universities that
are participants in the experiment may offer educational programs and
opportunities to individuals incarcerated in Federal prisons who will
have access to Pell grants to pay their tuition and fees. The
Department has met with institutions that participate in the Second
Change Pell experiment, including at the FSA Conference in November and
in a subsequent meeting convened by the Vera Institute to learn about
the additional challenges associated with providing educational
opportunities to incarcerated individuals. As a result of those
meetings, we are having discussions about what the Department could do
to solve some of the challenges institutions told us about, including
with regard to Pell Grant eligibility verification as well as the
determination of student outcomes once they return to their
communities.
We have recently announced that we will fund a new cohort of Second
Chance Pell Experimental Sites participants. Over the past three award
years (AY 2016-2017 through AY 2018-2019 as of the end of March) we
have approximately $54 million in Pell expenditures on Second Chance
Pell.
international education and foreign language studies domestic and
overseas programs
Question. International Education and Foreign Language Studies
Domestic and Overseas programs are the foundation for ensuring a steady
supply of graduates with expertise on world languages and cultures,
international markets, and global issues. You justify cutting all
funding for these programs by stating that they ``are better advanced
by other agencies whose primary mission is national security.''
Language programs run by other Federal agencies, such as the DoD
Language Flagship Programs and the U.S Army's Foreign Area Officer
program, depend on Department of Education language programs for
resources, knowledge and faculty.
Do you believe that improving national security is the only reason
students should learn world languages?
Answer. Improving national security is not the only reason students
should learn world languages. Increasing global and cultural
competencies for all students, learning from and with other countries
to strengthen U.S. education, and engaging in education diplomacy are
also important for an interconnected and competitive world.
Question. How will you ensure quality language education if you cut
funding to the Education programs that currently lead this charge?
Answer. The Department will continue to work with other Federal
agencies that offer similar and potentially duplicative programs to the
Title VI Domestic and Fulbright-Hays Overseas programs. These include
programs at the Department of State for undergraduate and graduate
student study abroad in areas less commonly visited by U.S. students as
well as undergraduate language flagship programs enabling students from
all majors to work towards professional-level proficiency in foreign
languages.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Tammy Baldwin
timeline for program-level data in college scorecard
Question. The Department has indicated that program-level data will
soon be coming to the College Scorecard. Please provide a timeline by
which the Department expects this to occur.
Answer. The Department plans on providing program-level overall
cumulative loan debt and earnings data by the end of calendar year
2019. By the end of calendar year 2020, the Department plans on
providing program-level cumulative loan debt data related to specific
loan programs (i.e. parent PLUS and grad PLUS) and initial program-
level loan repayment and default rates.
number of federal student aid applicants selected for verification
Question. Please provide the number of Federal student aid
applicants selected in each verification group.
Answer. Please see the table below.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Verification Tracking Group
Applicant Count
------------------------------------------------------------------------
V1................................................
5,784,641
V4................................................
119,184
V5................................................
356,233
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Please note the Verification Tracking Groups are based on the last
non-rejected or signature reject transaction. Applications are from
Award Year (AY) 2018.
percent of pell-eligible federal student aid applicants selected for
verification
Question. Please provide the percent of Pell-eligible applicants
that are selected for verification.
Answer. The percent of Federal Pell Grant Program-eligible
applicants selected for verification from AY 2018 is 52.5 percent.
Please note that Pell Grant eligibility is based on the last aided
transaction if the applicant received aid. Otherwise, it is based on
the last transaction with an Expect Family Contribution (EFC) or
signature reject EFC. If the last transaction was a signature reject
EFC, the applicant is not considered Pell Grant eligible. Verification
Tracking Groups are based on the last non-rejected or signature reject
transaction.
number of federal student aid applicants selected for verification
groups v4 and v5
Question. Please provide the number of Federal student aid
applicants selected for verification in the V4 and V5 tracking groups,
disaggregated by Identity Verification Results codes reported by
institutions.
Answer. The applicant counts include applicants selected for either
the V4 or V5 tracking groups. Verification Result Code 6 was not
available to be reported for AY 2017. If no institution reported a
verification result for an applicant, the applicant is reported under
the 'No Reporting for Applicant' group.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Applicant Counts
Verification Result Code
-------------------------------------
AY 2017
AY 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.................................
130,499
123,735
2.................................
40,946
47,980
3.................................
13,768
13,747
4.................................
3,673
2,079
5.................................
122,516
126,057
6.................................
Not Available
2,165
No Reporting for Applicant........
182,745
159,690
------------------------------------------------------------------------
percent of federal student aid applications whose verification changes
expected family contribution and pell eligibility
Question. Please provide the percentage of applications for Federal
student aid that, upon completion of verification, result in a change
in EFC and Pell eligibility.
Answer. Of those AY 2018 applicants that completed verification,
31.1 percent had a change in the scheduled Federal Pell Grant award.
The percentage excludes applicants selected for verification based on a
transaction that was rejected due to missing signatures or where the
aided transaction was rejected due to missing signatures. The
percentage also only includes applicants selected for V1 or V5 tracking
groups. Applicants were determined to have completed verification based
on whether they received a Federal Pell Grant or a subsidized Direct
Loan.
federal student aid applicants selected for verification and subsequent
grant or loan disbursement
Question. Please provide the percentage of applicants selected for
verification of Federal student aid, in total and disaggregated by EFC
and by Verification Tracking Group, that received a grant or loan
disbursement within the award year they were selected.
Answer. Please see the table below. The applicant's assigned EFC
group is based on the last aided transaction if the applicant received
aid. Otherwise, it is based on the last transaction with an EFC or
signature reject EFC. Verification Tracking Groups are based on the
last non-rejected or signature reject transaction. A value of ``NA''
was noted for small cell sizes because of privacy concerns.
PERCENTAGE OF APPLICANTS AIDED (GRANT OR LOAN)
AY 2018
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Verification Tracking Groups
------------------------------------------------------
EFC Group
Not
V1
V4
V5
Selected
Total
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
01- =0...................................................
51.5%
50.0%
37.2%
74.1%
64.3%
02- 1 to 1K..............................................
68.6%
56.9%
49.7%
79.6%
74.3%
03- 1K to 2K.............................................
70.2%
51.7%
50.0%
75.6%
72.1%
04- 2K to 3K.............................................
69.8%
50.6%
49.9%
75.0%
71.6%
05- 3K to 4K.............................................
68.0%
48.4%
46.8%
74.0%
70.0%
06- 4K to 5K.............................................
64.4%
47.0%
43.0%
71.9%
67.0%
07- 5K to 6K.............................................
56.5%
40.5%
41.3%
54.1%
54.6%
08- 6K to 7K.............................................
54.9%
46.7%
51.1%
53.6%
53.7%
09- 7K to 8K.............................................
54.0%
NA
48.8%
54.8%
54.7%
10- 8K to 9K.............................................
55.1%
NA
55.0%
55.7%
55.6%
11- 9K to 10K............................................
55.3%
NA
51.9%
56.7%
56.6%
12- 10K to 20K...........................................
55.9%
70.6%
54.1%
59.3%
59.1%
13- 20K to 30K...........................................
57.2%
NA
54.3%
59.3%
59.2%
14- 30K to 40K...........................................
54.6%
NA
55.1%
56.5%
56.4%
15- 40K to 50K...........................................
51.4%
NA
53.0%
52.7%
52.7%
16- 50K to 60K...........................................
47.8%
NA
60.0%
49.3%
49.2%
17- 60K+.................................................
36.4%
NA
38.3%
37.2%
37.2%
Signature Reject EFC.....................................
0.2%
0.1%
0.2%
0.6%
0.4%
Total..................................................
56.0%
48.5%
38.2%
64.8%
61.5%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2017-2018 and 2018-2019 verification data and tax return filing
Question. Please provide verification data from 2017-18 and 2018-
19, when families were reporting actual prior-prior year vs. estimated
prior-year tax filing status data, to ascertain the percentage of self-
reported non-filers who had, in fact, filed tax returns.
Answer. Each year, the Department works with the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) to conduct annual statistical studies to determine the
tax filing status of applicants to make informed decisions regarding
how to detect and reduce the misreporting of income data on the FAFSA.
The report generated by these studies, known as the IRS Statistical
Study, uses a statistically valid sampling of confirmed applicant and
parental income data as reported to the IRS. The sampled data and its
findings are then extrapolated to the total applicant population. The
2017-2018 IRS Statistical Study is the most current IRS Statistical
Study available at this time.
In the 2017-2018 study, higher conflicting results between reported
filing status and actual filing status occurred for two groups who
indicated not filing a return: (1) unmarried parents of dependent
applicants who lived together; and (2) independent applicants reporting
a marital status of separated.
Of the first group, the parents of dependent applicants who
reported they would not file a return, 16.67 percent were confirmed to
have filed a return. Of the second group, the independent applicants
who reported they would not file a return, 23.81 percent were confirmed
to have filed a return. Additionally, the study showed a very high
percentage of conflicting matching results for applicants who indicated
filing Foreign or Trust Territory returns when responding to the type
of tax return question.
effect of corrected filing status and income on federal student aid
eligibility for misreported non-filers
Question. Please provide information on the impact on Federal
student aid eligibility for misreported non-filers when their correct
filing status and income is reported.
Answer. Please see the response to the previous question. FSA is
currently reviewing the data from the 2017-2018 IRS Statistical Study
to determine impacts to eligibility for misreported non-filers.
continuous improvement of verification model
Question. Is the verification selection model modified to be more
effective and less burdensome on a regular basis? If yes, how and, if
not, why not?
Answer. A new machine learning model for selecting applicants for
verification was implemented for the 2019-2020 award year. The model is
retrained every year based on the previous year's data. Each year, the
model becomes more efficient in identifying risk for improper under-
and overpayments, thereby minimizing burden to students and families.
irs data retrieval tool mobile optimization
Question. Is there currently a plan in place to optimize the IRS
Data Retrieval Tool webpage for mobile devices and, if so, when will
this optimization occur?
Answer. Currently, in order to access their income information
through the IRS Data Retrieval Tool (DRT), the applicant must leave the
FAFSA website and authenticate on the IRS DRT website. FSA cannot
address whether the IRS has current plans to optimize the DRT webpage
for mobile devices.
changes to fafsa fields transferred via data retrieval tool versus tax
schedules
Question. Which FAFSA fields formerly transferred through the DRT
solely from IRS Form 1040 are now, or are planned to be, transferred
from tax schedules? When will this transfer become effective?
Answer. On Oct. 1, 2019, when the 2020--21 FAFSA form launches, the
Department will receive the same data elements on the FAFSA form via
the IRS DRT that it receives today. There is not a 1040A/EZ indicator
in the IRS DRT now, and there will not be a Schedule 1 indicator in the
IRS DRT for the 2020-2021 FAFSA processing cycle.
The Department replaced the question on the FAFSA form that asks
about being eligible to complete a 1040A or 1040EZ with a question that
will ask about a Schedule 1. It is a one-for-one replacement. The
public comment period is still open, so final text of the question is
yet to be determined. The Schedule 1 question on the 2020-2021 FAFSA
form that releases Oct. 1, 2019, will serve the same purpose as the
1040A/EZ question does today.
internal revenue service tax transcripts and third parties
Question. Will the Department request IRS to allow tax transcripts
be sent to authorized third parties, including institutions of higher
education and college access programs?
Answer. The Department has asked the IRS to consider allowing tax
transcripts, at the request of the tax filer, to continue to be sent
directly to institutions of higher education as an exception to the IRS
decision to no longer allow tax transcripts to be sent directly to
third parties. The IRS has declined to make an exception in this
regard.
efforts to streamline fafsa verification process
Question. Please describe any past, current, or planned efforts by
the U.S. Department of Education to explore secure data sharing options
with the IRS or other Federal agencies that have the potential to
expedite the verification process.
Answer. The Department continues discussions with Congressional
Members and Staff regarding proposals to provide an exemption to
Section 6103 of the IRS tax code, which would allow the IRS to disclose
taxpayer information for FAFSA, Income-Driven Repayment (IDR) and Total
and Permanent Disability (TPD) applications. During the 115th Congress,
legislation passed the Senate and was introduced in the House to amend
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to authorize such disclosures, but
the legislation was not enacted. In the new 116th Congress, in January
2019, Congressmen Doggett (D-TX) and Buchanan (R-FL) introduced H.R.
640, which is a modified version of the prior bills. The bill has been
referred to the House Ways and Means Committee as well as the House
Committee on Education and Labor.
review of systemic reasons for erroneous teach grant conversion
Question. Please provide Federal Student Aid's review of erroneous
grant-to-loan conversions that found four systemic reasons for
erroneous conversions from the previous TEACH Grant servicer, and the
instructions provided to FedLoan Servicing to prevent further erroneous
conversions, referenced by the Department in response to recommendation
#3 in the GAO's 2015 report.
Answer. Attached find the instructions provided to FedLoan
Servicing in the scope statement for the TEACH Grant Clean Up Project.
The scope statement provides the project's background, objectives,
deliverables, and milestones.
In 2014, the Department detected anomalies in conversion rates that
it later determined could be incorrect conversions. While the
Department discovered the conversions after FedLoan Servicing (FedLoan)
was the designated TEACH Grant servicer, the errors occurred prior to
its involvement in the program. The Department's actions included
contractual changes requiring FedLoan to perform outreach to recipients
whose TEACH Grants may have been incorrectly converted to a loan and to
offer the option of TEACH Grant reinstatements. In general, the
reinstatement of a TEACH Grant requires the following:
--Written communication to recipients explaining the TEACH Grant(s)
reinstatement.
--Application of previous loan payments to Department-held loans
serviced at FedLoan Servicing. If no other Department-held
loans are serviced by FedLoan, payments are refunded
automatically to the recipient.
--Update information to any credit reporting agencies.
In February 2015, FedLoan began reaching out to recipients that may
have had their TEACH Grants erroneously converted by the previous
servicer ACS, to give them an opportunity to have their loans
reconverted to grants. FedLoan reached out to 10,776 recipients
directly by letter and e-mail to give them the opportunity to have
their loans reconverted to grants, which resulted in 1,671 recipients
being successfully reconverted. Most of the remaining recipients did
not respond to FedLoan's outreach. Based on historical conversion
rates, some recipients may not have responded because they were no
longer meeting program requirements or did not intend to pursue the
service requirement. Only those who responded, choosing to have their
Direct Unsubsidized Loans converted back to TEACH Grants, had their
collection activity ceased during the conversion process.
In February 2019, FSA began sending direct communications to TEACH
Grant recipients who may be eligible for reconsideration, including
those who may have been previously converted in error by the former
servicer ACS, but who did not respond to the outreach effort to this
population in 2015. This communication directs recipients to the
program requirements on StudentAid.gov. As a result of the 2019
reconsideration effort, more than 2,300 recipients have been approved
for reinstatement as of April 28, 2019. This population of recipients
includes those who may have been converted in error and also recipients
who were meeting the service obligation but may have missed an
administrative requirement (submission of annual certifications). TEACH
Grant recipients who have been reinstated have either received a refund
or credits have been applied to other Direct Loans on their account.
Additionally, the servicer has sent updated information to the credit
reporting agencies. ED continues oversight of the program which
includes a continued review of FedLoan's procedures and processing.
clarification provided to fedloan regarding re-conversion of teach
grants
Question. Please provide the Department's clarifications to the
servicer about the TEACH Grant conversion dispute process including the
``specific set of criteria under which FedLoan Servicing is authorized
to convert loans back to grants'' referenced in response to
recommendation #4 in the GAO's 2015 report.
Answer. The authority provided to FedLoan did not expand the
reasons for approving reconversions. At the time, Federal Student Aid
(FSA) only considered reconversion of loans back to grants due to
servicing errors; as such, FSA provided clarification to the servicer
on what constitutes a servicing error. FSA granted FedLoan the
authority to review and determine the approval or denial of conversion
requests under the mentioned criteria without additional FSA review.
Implementation of this change provided for quicker resolution of
disputes--one review instead of two--to benefit recipients. FedLoan
refers any questionable disputes to FSA for careful review, including
those escalated or received through FSA's Ombudsman or official
correspondence.
current fedloan guidance on teach grant-to-loan conversion appeals
Question. Please provide any direction, guidance, policies, or
instructions currently provided to FedLoan Servicing regarding the
TEACH Grant application process and the process to appeal a grant-to-
loan conversion.
Answer. 34 C.F.R. Sec. 686.43(d) provides that, once a TEACH Grant
is converted to a Direct Unsubsidized Loan, it cannot be reconverted to
a grant; however, this does not preclude the Department from
reinstating TEACH Grants when it has been determined that a TEACH Grant
was converted to a loan due to a servicing error.
The Department has taken steps to define what constitutes a
servicing error and has formalized these steps in contractual servicing
requirements for FedLoan Servicing (FedLoan). Recipients who contend
that a servicer converted their TEACH Grant(s) in error may appeal to
the Department. Moreover, the Department's 2019 reconsideration efforts
streamline TEACH Grant reinstatements. Under criteria established by
the Department, if a recipient can demonstrate that he or she has met
or is meeting program requirements, the Department has authorized
FedLoan to reinstate a TEACH Grant without the recipient needing to
``appeal'' or further review by Federal Student Aid (FSA). Under this
same change, the Department instructed FedLoan that where a conversion
to a loan occurred as a result of a servicing error on the part of the
servicer, the recipient does not need to ask for ``reconsideration.''
FedLoan shall continue to reinstate those grants under existing
requirements. FSA oversees this process through its oversight and
monitoring efforts and reviews any disputes associated with this
process.
fedloan corrective actions for erroneous teach grant-to-loan
conversions
Question. Please provide a list of any actions FedLoan Servicing
has taken to correct its own or the previous servicer's grant-to-loan
conversions that were or are suspected to have been made in error,
including details on whether loans were reconverted into grants,
whether any payments were returned to teachers, and any communication
to consumer credit bureaus.
Answer. In 2014, the Department detected anomalies in conversion
rates that it later determined could be incorrect conversions. Although
discovered while FedLoan Servicing (FedLoan) was the designated TEACH
Grant servicer, the errors occurred prior to its involvement in the
program. The Department's actions included contractual changes
requiring FedLoan to perform outreach to recipients whose TEACH Grants
may have been incorrectly converted to a loan and the option of TEACH
Grant reinstatements. In general, the reinstatement of a TEACH Grant
includes the following actions:
--The servicer sends written communication to recipients explaining
the TEACH Grant(s) reinstatement.
--The servicer applies previous loan payments to ED-held loans
serviced at FedLoan. If no other ED-held loans are serviced by
FedLoan, payments are refunded automatically to the recipient.
--The servicer provides updated information to credit reporting
agencies.
In February 2015, FedLoan began reaching out to TEACH Grant
recipients that may have had their grants erroneously converted by the
previous servicer, ACS, to give the recipients an opportunity to have
their loans reconverted to grants. FedLoan sent letters and email to
10,776 recipients; from this effort, 1,671 recipients' loans
successfully were reconverted to grants. Most of the remaining
recipients did not respond to FedLoan's outreach. Based on historical
conversion rates, some recipients may not have responded because they
were no longer meeting program requirements or did not intend to pursue
the service requirement. The Department ceased collection activity
during the conversion process for individuals who responded to the
servicer's outreach and elected to have their Direct Unsubsidized Loans
converted back to TEACH Grants.
In February 2019, the Department began sending direct
communications to TEACH Grant recipients who may be eligible to have
their grant-to-loan conversion reconsidered. This outreach includes
individuals--who may have been previously converted in error by the
former servicer, ACS--but who did not respond to the outreach effort in
2015. This communication directs recipients to the program requirements
on StudentAid.gov. As a result of the 2019 reconsideration effort, more
than 2,300 recipients have been approved to have their loans
reconverted to grants as of April 28, 2019. This population of
recipients includes those who may have been converted in error and also
recipients who were meeting the service obligation, but may have missed
an administrative requirement (e.g. submission of annual
certifications). TEACH Grant recipients who have been reinstated have
either received a refund or credits have been applied to other Direct
Loans on their account. Additionally, the servicer has sent updated
information to the credit reporting agencies.
The Department continues oversight of the program, which includes a
continued review of FedLoan's procedures and processing.
fedloan standards for reviewing and communicating teach grant errors
Question. Does FedLoan Servicing have clear timeframes for
reviewing TEACH Grant paperwork for errors and communicating those
errors to recipients? If so, what are those timeframes?
Answer. The Department receives and reviews TEACH Grant servicing
metrics on a weekly basis to ensure effective and efficient processing
of TEACH certification documentation. Such metrics include:
--Call center statistics;
--TEACH Grant certification statistics (e.g. data about approvals,
denials, and certifications outstanding; and
--Denials disaggregated by reason for denial.
As part of the Department's top-to-bottom review of all aspects of
the program, the Department intends to address servicing level
agreements and/or processing to ensure programmatic efficiency.
per-unit payment for borrowers in repayment versus borrowers in teach
grant status
Question. Under the 2014 servicing contract, FedLoan Servicing is
paid $1.05 per unit for ``Borrowers in TEACH Grant Status'' and paid
$2.85 per unit for borrowers ``In Repayment.''
If a TEACH Grant is converted into a loan that then enters
repayment, is FedLoan Servicing paid $2.85 per unit? If so, is the
Department concerned about a perverse incentive for the servicer to
allow or not combat grant-to-loan conversions for TEACH Grant
recipients?
Answer. Yes. If a TEACH Grant is converted to a Direct Unsubsidized
Loan, FedLoan Servicing would be paid the per unit rate for a borrower
in repayment. There is no evidence to suggest improper motivation on
the part of the current TEACH Grant servicer; however, we continue our
ongoing monitoring of the servicer's contractual compliance. In
addition, Corrective Action Plans, which include penalties and fees
associated with non-compliance, serve as a deterrent to perverse
incentive.
collections and disputes resulting from teach conversions
Question. Please provide the following information on TEACH grant-
to-loan conversions:
--a. How many TEACH Grant recipients are or have been the subject of
involuntary collection proceedings for repayment of TEACH
Grants converted to loans?
--b. How many TEACH Grant recipients have disputed the conversion of
their grants to loans?
--i. In how many cases of dispute did ED staff review the disputes?
--ii. In what share of the cases were the loans reconverted to
grants?
Answer:
--a. As of February 28, 2019, there have been 3,196 TEACH Grant
recipients--with loans resulting from TEACH Grant conversions--
who are or have been in default and subject to Administrative
Wage Garnishment (AWG) or Treasury Offset Program (TOP)
collections.
--b. As of April 23, 2019, approximately 12,200 TEACH Grant
recipients have disputed the conversion of their grants to
loans.
--i. As of April 23, 2019, the Department has reviewed
approximately 3,500 TEACH Grant disputes. Please note that
a recipient may dispute a TEACH Grant conversion more than
once. If a recipient had more than one dispute, the
provided data only captures the most recent dispute's
outcome. Additionally, many of the recipients with disputes
have an opportunity to have their grants reinstated through
the reconsideration process which began in February 2019
and is ongoing.
--ii. As of April 23, 2019, approximately 2,300 of the 3,500 TEACH
Grant disputes reviewed by the Department have been
approved. Please note that a recipient may dispute a TEACH
Grant conversion more than once. If a recipient had more
than one dispute, the provided data only captures the most
recent dispute's outcome. Additionally, many of the
recipients with disputes have an opportunity to have their
grants reinstated through the reconsideration process which
began in February 2019 and is ongoing.
automatic teach re-conversions to grants
Question. Have all of the Department's previously announced
automatic reconversions of loans back to grants for TEACH recipients
who were subject to servicer error been completed? If not, when will
these automatic reconversions be completed?
Answer. As of April 24, 2019, 808 of the 823 recipients who were
identified as eligible for automatic reconversion have had their loans
reinstated as grants. The remaining 15 are in process, and the
Department anticipates completing the reinstatement process soon.
guidance to fedloan on responding to recipients whose teach grants
converted to loans
Question. What specific policies, procedures, or guidelines has the
Department provided FedLoan to respond to grant recipients who have
experienced a grant-to-loan conversion?
Answer. The Department has established contractual requirements
outlining communications, procedures, and standards for responding to
requests for reconsideration of TEACH Grant conversions.
criteria for fedloan to convert teach loans back to grants
Question. What specific criteria are in place for FedLoan to make a
determination that loans should be reconverted back to grants?
Answer. The Department has established contractual requirements
that outline the exact criteria to be considered when determining
whether loans should be converted back to TEACH Grants. The criteria
require a review of the remainder of the available service window, the
remainder of the legally allowed 8 years, and qualifying teaching that
has already been documented or needs to be credited. Moreover, when
examining the recipient's available service window, FedLoan Servicing
(FedLoan) is to consider periods of suspension for which the recipient
would have otherwise been qualified. Where it is clear--based on the
available information and documentation-- that the recipient has met or
can meet the required 4 years within the legally allowed time
established by the authorizing statute, FedLoan is to reinstate the
TEACH Grant(s).
timeframe for fedloan to respond upon initial teach recipient contact
Question. What is the timeframe for FedLoan to provide an initial
response, upon being contacted by a grant recipient?
Answer. FedLoan Servicing (FedLoan) is to respond to recipients who
submit documentation to request reconsideration (i.e. Certification of
Teaching Service) within 10 business days of receiving the request.
Moreover, within five business days of determining that a recipient is
eligible for reconsideration, FedLoan is to notify the recipient of the
outcome of the review.
timeline and safeguards for fedloan to teach re-conversions
Question. If a grant recipient is determined to be eligible to have
their loans converted back to grants, what is the timeframe for FedLoan
to finish this process?
Answer. The Department did not establish a required processing
timeframe within which loans need to be converted back to TEACH Grants.
Each reinstatement is unique, as some may require assignment from
another servicer, recall from default, and/or reapplication of
payments. The Department has established service levels for processing
documentation and determinations related to reconsideration requests.
Additionally, the Department has requirements that allow for expedited
processing of individuals who clearly meet program requirements and has
utilized this authority to assist more than 800 recipients in gaining
reinstatement.
Question. What specific policies and procedures are in place for
addressing potential damages caused to a grant recipient's credit
history?
Answer. When a TEACH Grant is reinstated, the former loan
associated with the grant is written off and a credit trade-line
deletion is reported to all applicable Credit Reporting Agencies
(CRAs). Once processed by CRAs, this action removes the credit history
related to the loan.
Question. What specific policies and procedures are in place to
refund any money paid toward those loans? And are there guarantees in
place to assure refunds will not be redistributed to other loan
accounts, unless by the express request of the recipient?
Answer. The Department applies a standard approach to the treatment
of payments. In most cases, TEACH Grant recipients, whose grants were
converted to Direct Unsubsidized Loans, also have other Direct Loans.
TEACH Grant recipients typically make a single monthly payment to repay
all their Direct Loans, including the Direct Unsubsidized Loans that
were converted from TEACH Grants. Thus, any payments made on loans that
are reconverted to TEACH Grants are applied to the outstanding balance
on the borrower's other Direct Loans or, if the individual has no other
Direct Loans, returned to the person who made the payments.
This standard approach is also the most appropriate method for
TEACH Grant recipients making payments under an income-driven repayment
plan (e.g., Income-Based Repayment, Pay As You Earn, or Revised Pay As
You Earn.) Because the monthly payment amount under these plans is
generally based on the borrower's income rather than the amount of the
borrower's Direct Loan debt, the monthly payment would be the same
before and after any TEACH Grants were reconverted. In addition, the
standard approach ensures that the borrower continues to meet minimum
payment requirements for Public Service Loan Forgiveness (PSLF) and
reduces outstanding Direct Loan debt.
dispute resolution in teach grant-to-loan conversion
Question. In the event that a grant recipient is found to be
ineligible to have their loans converted back to grants, what policies,
procedures, or guidelines has the Department put into place to address
potential disputes?
Answer. Individuals who disagree with the initial determination may
contact the TEACH Grant Servicer to ask for another review. Such
requests will be handled via the Department's existing appeal process,
which entails a final, full review by a Department employee. The option
to discuss determinations is communicated to recipients/borrowers in
decision notices. The Department monitors the TEACH Grant Servicer for
compliance in this area. In addition, borrowers can also contact the
FSA Ombudsman if they still dispute the Department's determination.
teach grant recipient data
Question. Please provide the number of TEACH Grant recipients to
date, disaggregated by:
--a. Those that are still enrolled in an eligible program of study,
by State
--b.Those that have withdrawn from an eligible program of study,
including:
--i. The number who subsequently reenrolled in an eligible program
of study
--ii. The number who did not complete an eligible program of study
and subsequently had their grant converted to a loan
--c. Those that have completed an eligible program of study,
including:
--i. The number who have completed the service requirement
--ii. The number who are making progress toward the service
requirement and have not experienced a grant-to-loan
conversion
--iii. The number who experienced grant-to-loan conversions
Answer:
--a. Please see the attached file.
--b. Unfortunately, the Department lacks sufficient data to provide
these figures.
--c. i. Approximately 21,000 recipients have completed their teaching
obligation.
--ii. In addition, there are 70,000 TEACH Grant recipients who have
not yet satisfied the program requirements.
--iii. As of February 8, 2019, there have been 94,000 TEACH Grant
recipients, with a combined total of 163,000 TEACH Grants,
that have been converted to loans. Approximately two-thirds
of these borrowers still have active loans.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Christopher Murphy
magnet schools
Question. The Magnet Schools Assistance Program (MSAP) is the only
Federal education grant designed specifically to promote educational
equity, diversity, academic achievement, and innovation in the
classroom, and enjoys strong bipartisan support. You have stated that
magnet schools are part of your school choice agenda. While the
President's Budget Request requests large investments in school choice
generally, it asks for level funding for the Magnet Schools Assistance
Program. Magnet schools are unique compared with some of the other
school choice options discussed by the administration because they are
held accountable by the State and the local school board, promote
school equity through integration, and offer specialized instruction to
low-income students. Why hasn't the Administration made magnet schools
a more central part of their choice agenda given their strong outcomes
and focus on equity?
Answer. Magnet schools are an important component of the
Administration's strategy to provide students and families with as many
high-quality educational options as possible. Since fiscal year 2015,
Congress has increased the appropriation for this program by more than
$15 million. At the fiscal year 2020 request level of $107 million,
which matches the amount Congress appropriated for the program in
fiscal year 2019, we would be able to continue to support 36 current
grantees working to expand the choices available for students and
families in their communities. The President's Budget for fiscal year
2020 is about prioritizing limited resources; the Department did not
request additional funding for MSAP because it already considers the
program a key lever for expanding educational options for students and
families.
essa oversight and ensuring support for historically underserved
students
Question. The Department approved Every Student Succeeds Act State
plans with accountability systems that do not take into account the
performance of historically underserved students as required under the
Every Student Succeeds Act. Many States are now issuing school letter
grades based on these systems and I am concerned that these letter
grades may provide misleading information. For example, in one State,
25 percent of schools that received an A are identified for targeted
support due to the performance of historically underserved students. In
that same State, 71 percent of schools that receive a B are identified
for targeted support.
It makes little sense for a school to receive an A or a B if its
students of color or other subgroups consistently underperform. What
oversight is the Department conducting to ensure the performance of
historically underserved students isn't masked in State accountability
systems?
Answer. The Department carefully evaluated each approved State
accountability system to ensure it meets all statutory requirements,
including those for subgroup accountability. It believes that those
statutory requirements ensure strong subgroup accountability by
requiring State systems to be based on indicators that are capable of
disaggregation by subgroup and that take subgroup performance into
account in the identification of schools for comprehensive or targeted
support and improvement. States have discretion under the ESEA to
create and use summative ratings as part of their approved statewide
accountability systems, and they are responsible for ensuring that such
ratings operate as intended, providing clear and understandable
information to the public and adhering to the requirement that the
accountability system meaningfully differentiates schools. The
Department stands ready to provide assistance, including through its
State Support Network and in collaboration with the Council of Chief
State School Officers, to any State that seeks assistance in evaluating
the effectiveness and transparency of its approved ESEA accountability
system.
state-level policy changes and continued essa oversight
Question. I am concerned that the Department is insufficiently
overseeing the implementation of State ESSA plans. For example,
Michigan committed to identifying schools for additional targeted
support every 3 years in its approved ESSA plan. However, the Michigan
Department of Education has apparently changed its policy and now plans
to identify these schools every 6 years. This not only violates the
State's own plan, but it also violates ESSA because the law requires
these schools to be identified no less frequently than once every 3
years. How is a State like Michigan compliant with ESSA if its schools
now only need to be identified for additional targeted support once
every 6 years?
Answer. While the ESEA requires States to identify schools for
comprehensive support and improvement at least once every three school
years, the statute is silent on the frequency with which a State must
identify schools for additional targeted support. Consequently, States
have flexibility to establish the frequency of identification of
schools for additional targeted support and improvement.
student aid enforcement unit
Question. I understand that you have recently decided to open an
investigation into the admissions scandal known as Varsity Blues. The
investigation is being led by the Student Aid Enforcement Unit at the
Department. I am absolutely in favor of stopping abuses of power, but
your Department is actively dismantling the Student Aid Enforcement
Unit whose very job is to protect students and taxpayers from illegal
actions by higher education institutions.
Please provide a table showing the following information
disaggregated by each of the Enforcement Unit's four staff groups:
--i. Current funding level
--ii. Current number of unduplicated, non-managerial staff
--iii. Current number of unduplicated, managerial staff
Answer. For fiscal year 2019, the total approved budget for the
Enforcement Office, excluding personnel compensation and benefits, is
$8 million. The total amount spent in fiscal year 2019, as of March 31,
2019, on personnel compensation and benefits is $3 million. Staffing
numbers, as of March 31, 2019, are below.
TABLE--ENFORCEMENT OFFICE STAFFING NUMBERS, AS OF MARCH 31, 2019
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of
Non-
Number of
Group
Managerial
Managerial
Totals
Employees
Employees
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Administrative Actions & Appeals Service........................
9
1
10
Borrower Defense................................................
5.5
1
6.5
Clery...........................................................
17
1
18
Investigations..................................................
2
0
2
Front Office....................................................
2
0
2
-----------------------------------------------
Total employees = 38.5*
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*This count includes all Enforcement Office staff, but excludes the Chief Enforcement Officer.
Question. Please provide a table showing the following information
disaggregated by each of the Enforcement Unit's four staff groups as of
January 19, 2017:
--i. Funding level
--ii. Number of unduplicated, non-managerial staff
--iii. Number of unduplicated, managerial staff
Answer. In fiscal year 2017, the total expenditures for the
Enforcement Office, including personnel compensation and benefits, was
$7.9 million. Staffing numbers, as of January 19, 2017, are below.
TABLE--ENFORCEMENT OFFICE STAFFING NUMBERS, AS OF JANUARY 19, 2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of
Non-
Number of
Group
Managerial
Managerial
Totals
Employees
Employees
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Administrative Actions & Appeals Service........................
11
1
12
Borrower Defense................................................
10
1
11
Clery...........................................................
20
1
21
Investigations..................................................
8
1
9
Front Office....................................................
1
1
2
-----------------------------------------------
Total employees = 55*
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*This count includes all Enforcement Office staff, but excludes the Chief Enforcement Officer.
administration record on student aid enforcement actions
Question. Please a list and description of enforcement actions
taken by the Student Aid Enforcement Unit since January 20, 2017,
including school name, summary of each violation, enforcement action
taken, and total number of enforcement actions taken overall.
Answer. The Department provided an attachment with the requested
information to the Committee.
investigations opened by student aid enforcement unit
Question. How many investigations were opened by the Student Aid
Enforcement Unit within the following time periods:
--a. January 20, 2017 until December 31, 2017
--b. January 1, 2018 until December 31, 2018
--c. January 1, 2019 to date.
Answer:
--a. From January 20, 2017 until December 31, 2017, eight
investigations were opened by the Investigations Group with the
Department's office of Federal Student Aid.
--b. From January 1, 2018 until December 31, 2018, one investigation
was opened by the Investigations Group with the Department's
office of Federal Student Aid.
--c. From January 1, 2019 to April 23, 2019, eight investigations
were opened by the Investigations Group with the Department's
office of Federal Student Aid.
steps to ensure compliance with 2016 borrower defense regulations
Question. Please state what steps the Department has taken with
regard to Education Corporation of America and Vatterott Colleges to
ensure that the companies comply with the guidance issued on March 15,
2019, ``Guidance Concerning Some Provisions of the 2016 Borrower
Defense to Repayment Regulations'' given that the 2016 borrower defense
regulations were in effect at the time of closure. Specifically, how
does the Department intend to ensure that the companies indicate if and
when either of them removed equity from the schools prior to the campus
closures in November and December of 2018?
Answer. Because the Vatterott Colleges and most of the ECA campuses
closed in December 2018, the institutions are not required to comply
with the March 15, 2019 borrower defense guidance. While the March 15,
2019 guidance requires retroactive reporting back to July 1, 2017, the
Department cannot compel closed institutions to comply with such
reporting requirements.
The New England College of Business (NECB), the only ECA campus
that remains open, is required to comply with the 2016 borrower defense
regulations and the Department's March 15, 2019 guidance. The
Department will take similar steps as it does with other Title IV-
eligible institutions to ensure that NECB complies with such
regulations. The March 15, 2019 guidance requires institutions with a
composite score less than 1.5 to report any withdrawal of an owner's
equity from the institution, unless the transfer is to an entity
included in the affiliated entity group on whose basis the
institution's composite score was calculated. NECB is required to
report withdrawals of an owner's equity--and, as of May 3, 2019, has
not done so--and other triggering events within 60 days of March 15,
2019. NECB also posted a letter of credit for 15 percent of its prior-
year Title IV funding and is currently on the HCM2 Method of Payment.
In addition, NECB is required to report biweekly cash balances, monthly
actual and projected cash flows, and monthly student rosters.
surety measures for institutions deemed not financially responsible
under borrower defense
Question. What steps has the Department taken to ensure that it is
able to obtain sufficient financial surety from institutions that are
determined to be ``not financially responsible'' upon either a routine
calculation of composite scores or upon recalculation of composite
scores that are triggered by certain automatic and discretionary events
defined in the Borrower Defense regulations (34 CFR 668.171)?
Answer. The regulations at 34 CFR part 668, subpart L and Section
498(c) of the Higher Education Act govern the steps the Department
takes to ensure that the Secretary obtains sufficient financial
surety--as well as the amounts of those financial sureties--from
institutions determined to be ``not financially responsible'' under a
routine calculation of a composite score. The regulations at 34 CFR
668.171 provide the steps the Department takes to ensure that the
Secretary is able to obtain sufficient financial sureties upon
recalculation of composite scores that are triggered by certain
automatic and discretionary events defined in the borrower defense
regulations. The Department does not comment on deliberative,
preliminary, or ongoing investigative work, including disclosing the
specific steps the Department takes to obtain a financial surety from
institutions that are ``not financially responsible.''
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Joe Manchin, III
substance abuse treatment and counseling in schools
Question. As you know, the bipartisan Every Student Succeeds Act
included a program called Title IV--the Student Support and Academic
Enrichment Grants program. This block grant is designed to provide
States and school districts the flexibility to provide a wide range of
services that support a well-rounded education. Importantly for my
State, which is battling a devastating opioid epidemic, this block
grant can be used to provide mental health services and counseling to
students who are either dealing with addicted parents or facing
addiction themselves. Congress authorized more than $1.6 billion in
funding for this program and $1.17 billion in fiscal year 2019. Despite
the local control and flexibility this program offers to districts, for
the third year in a row, the President's budget has called for complete
elimination of this program. That is completely unacceptable. West
Virginia students are facing huge hurdles that make it harder for them
to get an education and my State needs every penny of help to bring
those students the mental health and counseling services that they need
to overcome those obstacles.
How can the Department strip funding from a block grant that can be
used to help a State like mine that is being devastated by opioid
addiction?
Answer. The Administration has not requested funding for Student
Support and Academic Enrichment Grants because the formula grant
structure of the program, even at the fiscal year 2019 funding level of
$1.17 billion, results in allocations of less than $30,000 for an
estimated two-thirds of LEAs, more than half of which receive only the
minimum subgrant of $10,000. The Administration believes that limited
Federal education resources should not be invested in a program under
which most local awards would be too small to have a meaningful impact.
A variety of other Federal funds, however, are available to support
opioid abuse prevention and provide mental health services, especially
in-school counseling, to students. For example, among Department of
Education funds, school districts may use a portion of the funds under
the $15.9 billion Title I Grants to LEAs program to provide counseling
for students, and the $200 million request for School Safety National
Activities also supports multiple programs that can support improved
access to school-based mental health services, including School Climate
Transformation Grants, which includes a priority for applicants that
propose to include opioid abuse prevention and mitigation strategies as
part of their projects. For the Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS), the President's 2020 budget request includes $102 million for
Project Advancing Wellness and Resilience Education (AWARE), which
promotes and connects youth to mental health services; and $31 million
for Healthy Transitions, which improves support services for
adolescents and young adults with, or who are at risk of developing, a
serious mental health condition. The largest Federal source of funding
to pay for mental health services is Medicaid, which requires States to
provide Medicaid-eligible children with all necessary medical services,
including mental health services.
21st century community learning centers
Question. I have always strongly supported funding for the 21st
Century Community Learning Centers and afterschool programs. In fact,
this was one of the few programs that was not consolidated into the
larger block grant when the Congress passed the Every Student Succeeds
Act, reauthorizing No Child Left Behind. Congressional support for this
program comes from the fact that we recognize the critical need for
safe and secure places for students to learn and be before and after
school and during the summer months. That is why I was so disappointed
to see that the President's budget completely eliminated funding for
this program--a $1.2 billion cut to Federal funding for afterschool and
summer programs. I've seen firsthand how effective this program is in
West Virginia. Nila Cobb with the West Virginia Afterschool Network
recently shared with me one of the impacts that this program is having
in Barbour County, WV at KidReach through World Vision. There are two
students that were adopted by a single relative due to the death of one
parent and the incarceration of the other. KidReach enables the new
adoptive parent to keep her job and have the peace of mind knowing that
her children are safe, receiving a nutritious meal, and getting the
academic support that they need. Too many students do not have a safe
place to go afterschool or during the summer and do not have the
academic resources or assistance at home. And in States like West
Virginia, the State budget cannot replace the Federal funding needed to
run these programs.
If this program is cut, where will the 7,353 West Virginia students
go? How will they get the additional academic assistance that they
need?
Answer. While we understand that many parents appreciate the 21st
Century Community Learners Centers program (21st CCLC) as a safe
environment for their children during non-school hours, the intent of
the program is to provide academic enrichment, exposure to subjects and
experiences students may not otherwise have during the school day, and
opportunities for family engagement. The primary purpose is not
afterschool care, which the Administration views as a State and local
responsibility. At the same time, local educational agencies can use
funding under the Department's Title I Grants to Local Educational
Agencies for many of the activities authorized under 21st CCLC.
handle with care
Question. As you may know, there is a program in West Virginia
called Handle with Care that works in collaboration between the West
Virginia State Police and local West Virginia schools. This program
connects children who interact with law enforcement at traumatic
events, including domestic violence situations, drug raids, overdoses,
and more, to school resources that are designed to provide the child
with trauma-informed care. The alert enables the school to exercise its
trauma-informed training that Handle With Care provides participating
schools to ensure that the student is provided with the support they
need to help handle the traumatic event. The goal of the program is to
promote safe homes, schools, and communities, while ensuring that every
child is able to thrive in school. In October, Congress passed the
SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act (SUPPORT) to address the
opioid epidemic. Section 7134 of SUPPORT authorizes grants to improve
trauma support services and mental healthcare for children and youth in
educational settings.
When will the Department begin solicitation of grant applications
for programs authorized in Section 7134 of the SUPPORT for Patients and
Communities Act?
Answer. While Congress has authorized grants to improve trauma
support services and mental healthcare for children and youth in
educational settings under section 7134 of the SUPPORT Act, it has not
yet appropriated funds for this new program, and thus the Department is
unable to solicit grant applications.
supporting effective instruction state grants
Question. Like many States, West Virginia is facing a shortage of
teachers. One program that is critical for retaining and recruiting
more teachers is the Title II--Supporting Effective Instruction State
Grant. This is a $2 billion program that the President's budget
proposes for elimination. 95 percent of funds appropriated to Title II
are pushed into the local school districts. Last year, West Virginia
received about $16 million that enabled teachers and principals to
receive support and training necessary for their schools. The purpose
of the program is to increase academic achievement by improving teacher
and principal quality. This program is carried out by: increasing the
number of highly qualified teachers in classrooms; increasing the
number of highly qualified principals and assistant principals in
schools; and increasing the effectiveness of teachers and principals by
holding LEAs and schools accountable for improvements in student
academic achievement. Further, many local school districts used these
funds to train their staff on mental health issues and how to identify
and respond to students that may be living in a home that is exposed to
substance use disorder.
Given how critical these funds are to retaining and recruiting
qualified teachers in West Virginia, how can the Department justify
cutting this program outright?
Answer. The Supporting Effective Instruction (SEI) State Grants
program duplicates activities that may be supported with other Federal,
State, and local funds; has not demonstrated success in contributing to
improved teacher effectiveness or student outcomes; and makes formula-
based allocations to LEAs that often are too small to have a meaningful
impact on student outcomes.
Question. If these programs are duplicative, can you please
identify which funds are specifically dedicated to teacher and
principal professional development?
Answer. The SEI State Grants program authorizes a wide range of
activities, including professional development for teachers and
paraprofessionals. In school year 2015-2016, the latest year for which
information is available, 66 percent of districts used funds for
professional development for teachers and paraprofessionals and 35
percent used funds for class size reduction (52 percent and 25 percent,
respectively, of funds). An LEA that identifies either activity as a
strategy for responding to a comprehensive needs assessment may use
Title I, Part A funds for the same purpose. The Title I, Part A
program, funded at nearly $15.9 billion annually, also supports locally
determined efforts to recruit and retain effective teachers.
trio student support services
Question. In West Virginia, we have a lot of students who are first
time college students, many of whom come from low-income families that
don't have the resources or experience to help their children navigate
things like AP classes, SAT tests, college applications, financial aid,
and finally college itself. That is why programs like TRIO are so
important. TRIO programs provide the support that first time college
students need to thrive in higher education. Without them, we'd see too
many students who wouldn't know what opportunities are available or who
wouldn't have the emotional and academic support to succeed. Congress
has continually invested in this program because the data shows it is
working for students across the country. In West Virginia, more than
4,900 students benefit from one of the TRIO programs. In fiscal year
2019, Congress provided TRIO programs with an increase of $50 million
bringing the total funding to $1.06 billion. The next grant competition
for the TRIO Student Support Services competition is scheduled to take
place during fiscal year 2020.
Please describe the timeline for the commencement of the Student
Support Services competition, any proposed priorities that the
Secretary plans to institute, and what steps the Secretary will take to
assure applicants will not be ensnared by past challenges relating to
page limits, line spacing and other formatting issues.
Answer. The Department has not yet determined the priorities, nor
has it established a timeline, for the fiscal year 2020 Student Support
Services competition. However, it is committed to giving applicants as
much time as possible to develop high-quality applications and to
awarding grants to successful applicants as early as possible.
Consistent with the Secretary's policy memorandum prohibiting mandatory
page limit and formatting requirements, applications will not be ruled
ineligible for page limit, formatting, or minor budget errors.
gear up (gaining early awareness and readiness for undergraduate
programs)
Question. GEAR UP is a comprehensive grant program, authorized by
Title IV of the Higher Education Act, and is currently providing
635,000 students across 46 States with the necessary support to ensure
that they are ready for college and career. In fiscal year 2019 was
funded at $360 million in the fiscal year 2019. The President's budget
proposes to completely eliminate this program. The Department's budget
justification for the GEAR UP program estimates that there will be
upwards of $28.3 million available for new awards this year, but that
new awards will be made only to State grant applicants. Until recently,
ED's interpretation of 20 U.S. Code Sec. 1070a--22(a) ensured that a
minimum of 33 percent of new funds would be awarded to State grant
applicants, a minimum of 33 percent to Partnership grant applicants,
and the remaining 33 percent to either State or Partnership applicants.
The Department broke from this long-standing policy last year by
severely underfunding State applicants and appears to be ready to
depart from the spirit of the statute again this year. Congress
believes the statute's emphasis on ``awarding grants'' clearly means
the making of new grant awards, which would exclude ``non-competing
continuation awards'' from the funding rule calculation. Please provide
a detailed explanation on how and why ED has arrived at a policy
decision that forgoes the minimum distribution requirements specified
in statute. Additionally, the GEAR UP statute [20 U.S. Code
Sec. 1070a--27(c)] provides the Department with a portion of each
fiscal year's appropriation ``to evaluate and improve the impact of the
activities assisted under'' GEAR UP.
Answer. The Department has long interpreted and operationalized the
funding rules outlined in Section 404B(a) of the HEA as applying to the
total appropriation in a fiscal year, not the amount available for new
awards. In fact, the Department has described this requirement as
applying to the total appropriation in the ``Program Description''
section of the congressional justification for GEAR UP for several
years. This legal interpretation is based on two key elements of the
stem of Section 404B(a). The first states, ``In awarding grants from
the amount appropriated under section 404H for a fiscal year, the
Secretary shall make available . . . '' The Department considers all
grants, whether new awards or non-competitive continuation awards, to
be ``awards'', which therefore count toward fulfilling this
requirement. For example, a GEAR UP grantee receives a new Grant Award
Notification in each year of its 6 or 7-year grant. Second, Section
404B(a) states, ``the amount appropriated under section 404H'' is, in
fact, the total appropriation Congress provides in a particular fiscal
year, not the portion of the funding remaining after making
continuation awards. Therefore, taken together, the Department
interprets this language as directing the Department to ensure that
State and Partnership grants each receive at least 33 percent of the
total appropriation.
Question. For each fiscal year between 2014 and 2019, please
provide the following information:
How much did the Department set aside for this purpose in each
fiscal year?
What is the purpose and duration of each of the grants, contracts,
or cooperative agreements made for this purpose?
Answer. The Department's Institute of Education Sciences (IES) is
conducting a rigorous study of a low-cost communication strategy
designed to improve GEAR UP students' rates of FAFSA renewal, college
enrollment, persistence and completion. The Department used $2.2
million in fiscal year 2014 funding and $3.3 million in fiscal year
2015 funding to support this study. No funding from fiscal years 2016
to 2019 was obligated for this study. The Department expects to publish
a report by fall 2019 assessing the intervention's impact on rates of
college enrollment, FAFSA renewal, and college persistence through the
second year.
In addition, over the 6-year period, the Department has allocated a
total of $876,000--approximately $146,000 per year--to support the
collection, aggregation and analysis of GEAR UP project performance and
student outcome data. The Department reports these data annually
through the President's Budget. Finally, the Department is planning to
allocate $1 million in fiscal year 2019 funding to support an
evaluation of State implementation of the scholarship component of the
GEAR UP program.
Question. How is the Department planning to respond to 20 U.S. Code
Sec. 1070a--27(d), which requires the Department to ``biennially report
to Congress regarding the . . . evaluations conducted pursuant to this
section''?
Answer. The Department annually reports to Congress on the
performance of the GEAR UP program through the Congressional
Justification provided as part of the President's Budget Request. In
addition to the performance information, the Department annually
updates Congress on the status of the GEAR UP evaluation efforts the
Department is pursuing.
full-service community schools
Question. McDowell County in southern West Virginia is one of the
poorest counties in the entire country. Reconnecting McDowell is a
comprehensive effort to make educational improvements to give those
students a chance to succeed despite the county's complex problems--
poverty, underperforming schools, drug and alcohol abuse, limited
medical services, and inadequate access to technology and
transportation. This program highlights the benefits and importance of
full community schools and having the school be a place that serves the
whole student. Through this program, schools don't just offer academic
education, but physical and mental healthcare, counseling, and
afterschool academic support. For the kids of McDowell County, these
supports are as necessary to their education as the academic classes
themselves. That is why, when the Senate considered the Every Student
Succeeds Act, I worked with my colleagues to push for the Full-Service
Community Schools program, which provides funding to programs like
Reconnecting McDowell. So I was so disappointed to see that the
President's budget request completely eliminates the $17.5 million in
funding for the Full-Service Community Schools program. I have seen
firsthand how a small investment like this program can make a huge
difference in the life of a child and can help rebuild a community.
Reconnecting McDowell is lucky that they are able to attract some
private funding to support these efforts, but the Federal funding is
still a critical part of what they do.
What will happen to the students in communities like McDowell
County if their schools are forced to cut back on the important health
and wellness programs that set these students up for academic success?
Answer. The 2020 request reflects the President's commitment to
spend taxpayer dollars efficiently, in part by eliminating duplicative
programs funding activities that can be supported with other Federal,
State, or local resources. For example, to the extent that the problems
that students face in McDowell County contribute to poor educational
outcomes, the County's schools may use Title I Grants to Local
Educational Agencies to address those problems as part of their
comprehensive Title I schoolwide programs.
rural schools and school choice
Question. I am very concerned about the impact that the President's
budget request would have on rural schools. It proposes to cut $7.1
billion from the Department of Education while at the same time
requesting an increase to the Charter Schools program. Additionally,
this budget would expand charter schools across the Nation that are
financed by tax-payer dollars, but usually run independently of school
district requirements. I understand that you feel very strongly about
school choice, but as we discussed several times, ``choice'' simply
doesn't make sense in rural West Virginia. We are seeing schools close
and consolidate, not seeing new schools open, and we simply don't have
enough resources to fully invest in the schools we have, much less
dividing those resources further. Now, this budget proposes to reduce
Federal funding for elementary and secondary education in my State by
$30 million--more than 20 percent.
Wouldn't your choice program simply leave holes in rural West
Virginia school budgets created by your proposed cuts?
Answer. The Education Freedom Scholarship proposal would create a
$5 billion annual Federal tax credit, encouraging voluntary donations
to scholarships for elementary and secondary students. Those
scholarships can be used to support students in a variety of public and
private settings, as determined by States. The voluntary donations do
not shift Federal resources from public schools or teachers. As for the
Charter Schools Program, the Department believes the creation and
support of high-quality charter schools that increase options for
students and parents continues to be one of the best investments the
Federal Government can make to improve the overall quality of our
education system. It also notes that there are 1 million students
across the Nation who are on waitlists for charter school slots, many
of them seeking alternatives to low-performing regular public schools.
Question. How would it ensure that rural schools are not being left
behind and left without the resources that they need to meet their
student's basic needs?
Answer. The proposed reduction to overall discretionary spending at
the Department of Education for fiscal year 2020 represents less than 1
percent of total national expenditures for elementary and secondary
education. Moreover, the request protects funding for key programs that
serve rural schools in West Virginia, including the $15.9 billion Title
I Grants to Local Educational Agencies program and the $180 million
Rural Education program. It's also important to keep in mind that State
and local communities have primary responsibility for K-12 education
under our system, including ensuring that schools have the resources
required to meet students' basic needs. By law, most Federal education
programs are intended to provide supplemental educational services
rather than basic needs.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Patrick J. Leahy
application of fund to address implementation problems with public
service loan forgiveness
Question. On September 19, 2018, the Department of Education
released the first comprehensive data for the Public Service Loan
Forgiveness (PSLF) program. The data showed that the Department had
received more than 28,000 applications for the program but had granted
relief to just 96 borrowers--resulting in an unbelievable 99.6 denial
rate. Following the Department's release of the PSLF data, the
Government Accountability Office published an audit of the Department's
implementation of PSLF, in which the Department was sharply criticized
for gross mismanagement of the program. Now, many borrowers are
understandably concerned that they may ultimately be denied loan
forgiveness.
The Department's budget request for fiscal year 2020 calls for the
elimination of the PSLF program. In each of the past two fiscal years,
Congress has appropriated $350 million to the Department to address
eligibility issues in the PSLF program related to students being
enrolled in ineligible repayment plans. The additional funding provided
in the fiscal year 2019 Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education
appropriations bill was meant to ensure that those who were rejected
for loan forgiveness because they were in the wrong repayment plan but
would otherwise qualify, could receive loan forgiveness.
Please describe how the Department has applied the $350 million
fund to fix the challenges the Department has struggled with during the
implementation phase of the PSLF program.
Answer. The $350 million in the fiscal year 2018 and 2019
appropriations laws ($700 million total) funds are available, as
defined under section 502 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, to
cover the cost of Temporary Expanded Public Service Loan Forgiveness
(TEPSLF) discharges. The TEPSLF opportunity allows borrowers to achieve
the required 120 qualifying payments in a wider variety of repayment
plans than under the original PSLF Program. In addition to this
flexibility, however, the TEPSLF opportunity created complex new
requirements for forgiveness specific to TEPSLF that require FSA to
request income information from any borrower not currently enrolled in
an income-driven repayment plan. As of March 31, 2019, 442 borrowers
have received forgiveness through TEPSLF in the amount of approximately
$17.6 million.
number of applicants under temporary expanded public service loan
forgiveness
Question. How many borrowers have applied to receive relief from
the $350 million fund after having loan forgiveness rejected through
PSLF?
Answer. As of March 29, 2019, FSA has received 13,652 TEPSLF
requests from borrowers who have previously submitted PSLF
applications.
aid to borrowers whose pslf applications have been denied
Question. Please describe what steps the Department is taking to
help the 99.6 percent of student loan borrowers whose PSLF application
was initially denied manage their student loan debt.
Answer. PSLF is a complex program with many highly specific
eligibility requirements. Furthermore, because the program was created
in 2007 and borrowers had to leave school, enter repayment, and make
120 qualifying payments before establishing eligibility to receive
forgiveness, there has simply not been enough time for large numbers of
borrowers to qualify. To this end, FSA's PSLF program data indicates
the most common reasons that applicants are not meeting the program's
requirements include not having made 120 qualifying payments (53
percent), missing information on the application (25 percent), and not
having eligible loans (16 percent).
Federal student loan borrowers have a variety of options available
to them for managing their student loan debt. The Department encourages
borrowers to contact their assigned loan servicer directly for
assistance with managing their debt. FSA's PSLF Help Tool, launched in
December 2018, is also a valuable resource for borrowers who are
interested in PSLF, including those whose applications for PSLF were
denied. In particular, the tool helps borrowers assess whether their
loans and employers qualify for PSLF and allows them to generate forms
to take to their employer for signature and submission to FedLoan. It
also uses the information FSA has about the borrowers' Federal student
loans to explain other actions they should or must take if they want to
receive PSLF, such as changing to an income-driven repayment plan or
consolidating some or all of their loans. FSA has also increased the
outreach provided to borrowers whose PSLF applications are denied and
is planning further outreach to Direct Loan borrowers in the near
future.
measures to ensure pslf participants have loans forgiven
Question. Please describe what the Department is doing to ensure
that borrowers who have been participating in the PSLF program will
ultimately be granted full loan forgiveness.
Answer. The Department is committed to implementing PSLF as
directed by Congress and will grant forgiveness to borrowers who
successfully meet the program's complex statutory requirements. FSA
provides a variety of resources and communications to borrowers
interested in PSLF, and we are in the process of enhancing those
resources and communications through Next Gen FSA to further improve
borrowers' understanding of the program's requirements.
compliance with gao recommendations regarding pslf
Question. How has the Department complied with GAO's audit
recommendations? How many of those recommendations have you met, and
with which have you not complied?
Answer. FSA has already complied or is in the process of complying
with all four of the GAO's audit recommendations:
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GAO Recommendation
FSA Action
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FSA should develop a timeline for issuing
As the policy and guidance
a comprehensive guidance and instructions
for the PSLF program are
document for PSLF servicing.
finalized, FSA will deliver
completed chapters of the
servicing manual on an
iterative basis, determined
by the priorities
identified in servicing.
FSA anticipates completing
the first chapters by July
2019.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FSA should enhance borrowers' ability to
In December 2018, FSA
determine which employers qualify for
implemented an online PSLF
PSLF.
Help Tool. The tool helps
borrower assess whether
their employers qualify for
PSLF, among other
functions. Later this year,
FSA will implement the tool
into the new Next Gen
digital and customer care
platform and begin adding
additional functionality.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FSA should standardize the information the
FSA has worked with all
PSLF servicer receives from other loan
Federal loan servicers to
servicers.
update their PSLF file
layouts to ensure standard
reporting across servicers.
These updates have been
completed by every servicer
except one, whose file
layout corrections will be
completed September 2019.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FSA should ensure that borrowers receive
FSA is reviewing all PSLF
sufficiently detailed information from
borrower communications
the PSLF servicer to be able to identify
from the PSLF servicer to
any errors in the servicer's counts of
ensure that borrowers
qualifying payments.
receive sufficiently
detailed information
regarding payment counts
and repayment history. New
functionality being
considered under the Next
Gen FSA initiative is
expected to provide
borrowers with real-time,
self-service access to
information about their
eligibility for PSLF and
progress towards
completion.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
eligible uses for proposed school safety formula grant
Question. The Department of Education's Budget Request for fiscal
year 2020 emphasizes six major priorities, with one of them being the
protection of students by promoting safe and secure schools.
Specifically, the Department's budget request dedicates $200 million
for school safety- related activities, including $100 million to create
a formula grant program to improve school safety. Among other school
safety related initiatives, the proposed grant program will provide
funds for States and school districts to offer counseling and emotional
support in schools with pervasive violence. The Department's budget
request also calls for the elimination of the $1.17 billion Title IV-A
of the Every Student Succeeds Act Student Support and Academic
Enrichment (Title IV) Grants, which supports safe and healthy students
including comprehensive school mental health counseling; drug and
violence prevention; and training on trauma-informed practices.
Please describe if any of these requested funds for school safety-
related activities could be used towards arming teachers.
Answer. States would have the same flexibility around the use of
the proposed School Safety State Grants regarding activities to improve
school climate and safety as they currently have under Title IV-A
Student Support and Academic Enrichment grants.
offsetting elimination of title iv funding
Question. Please describe how the $200 million for school safety
related activities that will partially go towards helping schools offer
counseling and emotional support in schools with pervasive violence
will offset the elimination of $1.17 billion in Title IV grants that
can be used already to hire such support staff.
Answer. The $200 million proposed in the budget for School Safety
National Activities will not offset the Title IV funds dollar-for-
dollar, but importantly, the activities authorized under the Title IV-A
Student Support and Academic Enrichment Grants program generally can be
supported with funds from other Federal, State, local, and private
sources, including similarly flexible funds provided under the $15.9
billion Title I Grants to LEAs program. In addition, while Title IV-A
funds can be and are used for approximately 30 authorized activities
related to providing a well-rounded education, improving student health
and school safety, and supporting educational technology, our $200
million request for School Safety National Activities is targeted
solely on helping States and school districts improve school safety,
including through the expansion of counseling and other efforts to
provide social and emotional support to students.
definition of pervasive violence
Question. Please describe the Department's method of determination
for what constitutes ``pervasive violence'' in school will be under the
proposed grant formula.
Answer. The Project Prevent program, which supports local efforts
to address the negative effects of pervasive violence on students in
elementary and secondary schools, provides flexibility to applicants to
identify the schools to be served by project activities and describe
how pervasive violence in the community is specifically affecting
students in those schools. Funds are awarded competitively, and amounts
are based on the proposed scope and size of the project, not a funding
formula.
timing of provision of emotional support and counseling to address
school violence
Question. Considering the Department's requested funds for school
safety-related activities, there is clearly a believed need for
increased emotional support and mental health staff in schools across
the country. Please describe why the Department believes providing
emotional support to schools that have already experienced pervasive
violence will be more effective in reducing the number of violence
incidents in schools than providing mental health counseling to all
schools regardless of past violent incidents.
Answer. The $200 million budget request for School Safety National
Activities would fund multiple programs that can support efforts to
improve mental health services in all schools and not only those that
have experienced violence, including School Climate Transformation
Grants, Mental Health Demonstration Grants, and School Safety State
Grants.
budget amendment for reversal on special olympics
Question. The Department of Education's budget request for fiscal
year 2020 eliminates 29 programs within the Department. One of those
programs, Special Olympics, helps expand the availability of Special
Olympics education programs and supports full integration of these
programs in classroom settings. This is now the third year the Trump
administration has requested eliminating this program and Congress has
rejected this elimination the past 2 years. In fact, Congress provided
the program a $2.5 million increase in fiscal year 2019.
President Trump stated on March 28, 2019, that he intends to fund
Special Olympics, reversing your recommendation to eliminate the
program.
Does the Department of Education plan to submit an amended budget
request to fund Special Olympics programs? When do you expect the
Committee to receive such a request? Will the amended budget request
also contain a budget amendment to offset the additional funds for
Special Olympics programs?
Answer. The President submitted a budget amendment to Congress on
May 13th that included $17.6 million for the Special Olympics program
for fiscal year 2020. Taken together with other proposals in the
transmittal, the fiscal year 2020 net budget authority totals are not
affected by this amendment.
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
Senator Blunt. The subcommittee will stand in recess.
[Whereupon, at 11:57 a.m., Thursday, March 28, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene subject to the call of
the Chair.]