- DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ENTERPRISE-WIDE CYBERSECURITY POLICIES AND ARCHITECTURE
[Senate Hearing 116-265]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-265
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ENTERPRISE-WIDE CYBERSECURITY POLICIES AND
ARCHITECTURE
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY
of the
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
JANUARY 29, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Armed Services
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
41-330 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma,
Chairman
ROGER F. WICKER, Mississippi
JACK REED, Rhode Island
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
JEANNE SHAHEEN, New Hampshire
TOM COTTON, Arkansas
KIRSTEN E. GILLIBRAND, New York
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
JONI ERNST, Iowa
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
THOM TILLIS, North Carolina
TIM KAINE, Virginia
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
ANGUS S. KING, Jr., Maine
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
RICK SCOTT, Florida
JOE MANCHIN, West Virginia
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri
DOUG JONES, Alabama
John Bonsell, Staff Director
Elizabeth L. King, Minority Staff
Director
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota,
Chairman
ROGER F. WICKER, Mississippi
JOE MANCHIN, West Virginia
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
KIRSTEN E. GILLIBRAND, New York
RICK SCOTT, Florida
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
January 29, 2019
Page
Department of Defense Enterprise-Wide Cybersecurity Policies and
1
Architecture.
Deasy, The Honorable Dana, Department of Defense Chief
4
Information Officer.
Norton, Vice Admiral Nancy A., USN, Director, Defense Information
10
Systems Agency, and Commander, Joint Force Headquarters--
Department of Defense Information Network.
Crall, Brigadier General Dennis A., USMC, Principal Deputy Cyber
11
Advisor and Senior Military Advisor for Cyber Policy.
Questions for the Record.........................................
32
(iii)
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ENTERPRISE-
WIDE CYBERSECURITY POLICIES AND ARCHITECTURE
----------
TUESDAY, JANUARY 29, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:29 p.m. in
Room SR-222, Russell Senate Office Building, Senator Mike
Rounds (presiding) chairman of the subcommittee.
Members present: Senators Rounds, Wicker, Scott, Blackburn,
Manchin, Gillibrand, and Blumenthal.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR MIKE ROUNDS
Senator Rounds. The Cybersecurity Subcommittee meets this
afternoon for our first hearing of the 116th Congress.
Before we begin, I want to welcome our new Ranking Member,
Senator Joe Manchin. I'd also like to welcome all of our former
members back to the subcommittee and extend a special welcome
to the new members joining us. On the Majority side, we are
joined by Senator Wicker, Senator Scott, Senator Blackburn. On
the Minority side, we are joined by Senator Heinrich.
Two years ago, this subcommittee was formed to address the
most pressing national cybersecurity matters, with a focus on
Department of Defense (DOD)-related legislation and oversight.
I look forward to legislation that builds on the hard work we
have done over the past 2 years, and continuing our important
oversight of the plans, programs, and policies related to
cyberforces and capabilities within the Department of Defense.
Today, we will receive testimony on the Department of
Defense enterprise-wide cybersecurity policies and architecture
form: Mr. Dana Deasy, the Department of Defense Chief
Information Officer (CIO); Vice Admiral Nancy Norton, the
Director of the Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA), and
Commander of the Joint Force Headquarters-Department of Defense
Information Network (JFHQ-DODIN); and Brigadier General Dennis
Crall, the Deputy Principal Cyber Advisor (PLA) and Senior
Military Advisor for Cyber Policy. We welcome you.
We have a lot of information to cover, so I will be brief.
At the conclusion of Ranking Member Manchin's comments, our
witnesses will make their opening remarks. I would appreciate
the witnesses limiting their remarks to about 5 minutes, with
the option of providing a longer statement for the record.
After they finish their remarks, we will have a round of
questions and answers.
One of the Department's main cyberspace objectives
articulated in the 2018 Department of Defense Cyber Strategy is
securing DOD information and systems against malicious cyber
activity. Unfortunately, in recent years, we have seen
relentless and sophisticated cyberattacks on the DOD
enterprise, other government agencies, and the private sector,
while the capabilities of our adversaries continue to increase.
Simply continuing to defend our networks as we have in the past
is not adequate to counter the growing threats that we face.
At a hearing with private-sector witnesses last fall, we
heard about the advances that industry has made in developing
new tools and techniques for defending large enterprise
networks. While there are many unique challenges because of the
complexity and scope of the Department of Defense Information
Network, also known as the DODIN, it is important that, where
possible, we leverage the best practices from industry to
defend our networks. In addition, it is equally imperative that
the acquisition process of DOD is not precluding it from
organically developing and producing state-of-the-art
cybersecurity capabilities. In this context, we look forward
today to learning more about JFHQ-DODIN and, in particular, how
the organization can achieve a complete, realtime picture of
the entire DOD network.
The Department's cybersecurity tools are not the only
factor important to robust defense of the DODIN. It is also
critical that the Department formulate and implement
appropriate cybersecurity policies and stand up a robust
cybersecurity workforce. Specifically, we are looking forward
to learning how the Department is implementing their 2018 Cyber
Strategy in these areas of cybersecurity.
Across the cybersecurity spectrum, it is vital that we are
consistent in our approach as we further centralize,
standardize, and integrate the complexities of DOD's cyber
enterprise. We cannot afford to waste time or resources with
the duplication of effort across the services, combatant
commands, and support agencies. In that context, the witnesses
here today are charged with these important tasks toward
further streamlining and modernizing the Department's cyber
defensive posture. We look forward to hearing how you are
accomplishing this challenging task.
Today's discussion builds on many of the themes that were
discussed in our cybersecurity hearings with the private sector
this past fall. While most of our subcommittee hearings are
closed because they include classified information, I chose to
hold an open hearing today so that private industry would have
further insight into the Department's plans and future
cybersecurity needs. I encourage DOD and private industry to
continue a robust dialogue so that you can help each other to
achieve overlapping goals and prepare for our upcoming
cybersecurity hearings this year. Any questions that would
require a classified answer can be submitted for the record,
for which we would appreciate the Department's timely
responses.
Let me close by thanking our witnesses for appearing today,
and for their service to our Nation.
Senator Manchin.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR JOE MANCHIN
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As you said, this is my first hearing as the Ranking Member
of Cyber Subcommittee and how it doves in well with my Ranking
on Energy, which we have oversight of cyber also, so it's
really going to be helpful.
I'm delighted to be joining you, Senator Rounds. We've
worked together as Governors together, and now we're back
together again as partners to improve the cybersecurity of the
Department of Defense and, indeed, I hope, the Nation.
I join you in welcoming our distinguished witnesses today:
Chief Information Officer Dana Deasy--is it--is--am I correct
on that? Okay. Defense Information System Agency Director,
Admiral Norton; and General Crall, who has the challenging task
of overseeing, on behalf of the Secretary of Defense, the
implementation of the Department's new Cyber Strategy. The
committee has long looked for a way to empower DOD with the
ability to adopt an effective strategy and plan of action to
deter cyberattacks and defend against them. Thankfully, based
on initial reviews of the new Cyber Strategy and the results of
the new Cyber Posture Review, there is optimism that DOD has
turned a corner, that we now have a credible strategy and a
commitment to implement it.
The specifics of the new wide-ranging strategy are quite
complicated, but I believe common sense can make this all
understandable to our constituents back home. Here are some
examples:
I'm told we have not one network in DOD, but, in fact,
thousands. Each military service, defense agency, and every
component within them have built their own networks, with
chaotic results. They can't work together effectively, and they
are hard to defend. There is now a plan to break down these
fractured networks and implement a common security
architecture. We cannot allow computers and other devices to be
connected to the network without verifying who installed them
and whether they're correctly configured and protected. We have
to be able to manage who accesses the network and what they can
see and do, according to the role they are assigned. We have to
monitor the activity that people and the computers they control
are conducting on our network to guard against insider threats,
like Snowden. We have to improve the security of the networks
of the companies that build weapons and provide services to
DOD. We cannot allow China to keep stealing our technology and
program plans to cyberattacks on the industrial base. We have
to recruit, train, and retain real experts in cyber warfare,
despite fierce competition with the private sector and the
hiring obstacles that the government faces. We have to figure
out how to apply new artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning technologies to detect cyber intrusions, as well as to
help our cyber forces operate better and faster.
These are the types of issues that the committee and DOD
have talked about fixing for a long time, but now, finally, the
Department may be prepared to take real action. We hope so.
So, I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman. And we look forward
to y'all's testimony.
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
And I would note, also, that former Governor Scott is here
with us, as well.
Senator Manchin. Yeah.
Senator Rounds. So, now you face questioning from three
different Governors from----
Senator Manchin. Things will happen now.
Senator Rounds.--as well. So, going to start things
popping.
And thanks, Joe. We look forward to working----
Senator Manchin. Yes sir.
Senator Rounds.--with you on this project, as well.
We'll do the questioning in 5-minute cycles, and we'll just
take our time and work our way through. We'll try to limit our
questions to get specifics, and then we'll ask each of our
members if we would try to limit them to 5 minutes, and we'll
move back and forth.
So, as I said earlier, you are all welcome to provide a
complete transcript or a statement for the record, but we would
appreciate it if you would also keep your opening statements to
5 minutes, as well.
Mr. Deasy, I'll turn to you first, if you'd like to begin,
and then I'll let you decide how you would like to proceed from
there.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE DANA DEASY, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER
Mr. Deasy. Okay. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, distinguished
members of the subcommittee. Thank you for this opportunity to
testify before the subcommittee today on the Department's cyber
architectures and policies.
I'm Dana Deasy, the Department of Defense Chief Information
Officer. With me today are Vice Admiral Nancy Norton, Director
of DISA and Commander, JFHQ-DODIN; and Brigadier General Dennis
Crall, Senior Military Advisor for cyber policy and Deputy
Principal Cyber Advisor to the Secretary of Defense.
Since my arrival at the Department last May, I have made
cybersecurity one of my top priorities. In September of 2018,
the Department released a top-level DOD Cyber Strategy. This
Strategy represents the Department's vision for addressing
cyber threats and implementing the cyber priorities of the
National Security Strategy (NSS) and National Defense Strategy
(NDS). The Department also released its Cyber Posture Review to
Congress, which provided a comprehensive review of the cyber
posture for the DOD and identified gaps in our strategy,
policy, and cyber capabilities. Also last year, the Secretary
and the Deputy Secretary asked me to undertake a study to
determine what the Department's cyber priorities should be.
This led to the creation of the top ten cyber priorities. Cyber
roles and responsibilities are shared across the Department.
Only by working together, as you will hear from the three of us
today, we are able to close the gaps and secure our systems.
For the first time under the authorities granted by section
909 of Fiscal Year 2018 National Defense Authorization Act
(NDAA), the DOD is reviewing, commenting on, and certifying all
of the Information Technology (IT) budgets, which includes
cyber, across the Department. Additionally, the DOD CIO now has
the authority to set and enforce IT standards across the
Department. Together, DOD CIO, DISA, and PCA work regularly to
implement the DOD Cyber Strategies, in close coordination with
the Military Departments and other DOD components. DOD CIO and
PCA co-lead a weekly meeting focused on cyber issues with the
Deputy Secretary of Defense, at which all Military Departments
and Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) principals are in
attendance.
A key element of the Department's approach to standardizing
cybersecurity across the Department is setting the standards in
the cybersecurity reference architecture, which is the tool to
providing cyber guidance for the family of architectures that
align to the DOD overall enterprise architecture. As we
aggressively leverage automation, new endpoint security
technologies, and standard architectures to achieve military
advantage through information, having strong assurances of who
is accessing the data and how they are accessing the data is
critical. We have been actively deploying a DOD identity
credential and access management strategy that recognizes the
changing environment and addresses the increasing dependence on
digital identities to share information rapidly and more
securely.
Turning to cyber workforce. As my Deputy, Ms. Essye Miller,
testified before you last September, DOD recognizes the
importance of growing and maintaining the cyber workforce. It's
an imperative that DOD attract the next generation to view the
Department as an employer with unique and challenging
opportunities within the cybersecurity career field. Recent
authorities provided by Congress have allowed the Department to
adjust existing policies and to implement new policies that
account for this dynamic need in an increasing important
mission area. One of these key authorities has been the
establishment of a Cyber Excepted Service.
In closing, the close working relationship among DOD CIO,
DISA, and PCA is critical to our ability to address
cybersecurity vulnerabilities. The importance of connection
between policy, standard architectures, and remediation cannot
be overstated. The Department has clearly defined cybersecurity
problems to be solved, has a well-thought-out remediation
approach; the right mechanisms are in place to monitor and
report on our progress on the top ten cyber priorities.
I want to emphasize the importance of our partnership with
Congress in all areas, but with particular focus on
cybersecurity. Continued support for a flexible approach to
cyber resourcing, budgeting, acquisition, and personnel will
help enable success against an ever-changing, dynamic cyber
threat.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I look
forward to your questions.
With that, over to Admiral Norton.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Deasy follows:]
Prepared Statement by The Honorable Dana Deasy on Behalf of the
Department of Defense
introduction
Good afternoon Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and distinguished
Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for this opportunity to testify
before the Subcommittee today on the Department's cybersecurity
architecture and policies. I am Dana Deasy, the Department of Defense
(DOD) Chief Information Officer (CIO). I am the principal advisor to
the Secretary of Defense for information management, IT, cybersecurity,
communications, positioning, navigation, and timing (PNT), spectrum
management, senior leadership communications, and nuclear command,
control, and communications (NC3) matters. These latter
responsibilities are clearly unique to the DOD, and my imperative as
the CIO in managing this broad and diverse set of functions, is to
ensure that the Department has the information and communications
technology capabilities needed to support the broad set of Department
missions. This includes supporting our deployed forces, cyber mission
forces, as well as those providing mission and business support
functions.
With me today are Vice Admiral Nancy Norton, Director, Defense
Information Systems Agency (DISA)/Commander, Joint Force Headquarters-
Department of Defense Information Network (JFHQ-DODIN) and Brigadier
General Dennis Crall, Senior Military Advisor for Cyber Policy and
Deputy Principal Cyber Advisor (PCA) to the Secretary of Defense (OSD).
Since my arrival at the Department last May, I have made
cybersecurity one of my top priorities, along with cloud computing,
artificial intelligence, and command, control, and communications. In
September 2018, the Department released its top-level DOD Cyber
Strategy. The Strategy represents the Department's vision for
addressing cyber threats and implementing the cyberspace priorities of
the National Security Strategy and National Defense Strategy. The
Department also released its Cyber Posture Review to Congress, which
provided a comprehensive review of the cyber posture of the United
States and identified gaps in our strategy, policy and cyber
capabilities. These gaps are being addressed through the implementation
of the DOD Cyber Strategy Lines of Effort (LOE) managed by PCA.
About a year ago, the Deputy Secretary of Defense tasked the DOD
CIO and PCA to compile a list of the top ten cyber priorities of the
Department and, with Service input, we identified the four areas the
Department should address first. Addressing these top risks and
priorities will go a long way toward implementing cybersecurity
capabilities, addressing critical vulnerabilities, and building a Cyber
Workforce that will improve DOD's overall cyber posture to effectively
deter our adversaries.
Today, I would like to highlight five key areas. First, I will
highlight the cyber roles and responsibilities of DOD CIO, DISA, and
PCA. Then I will provide a brief overview of the Department's cyber
architecture, along with details regarding DOD's use of automation and
identity, credential and access management. Finally, I would like to
reiterate the critical importance of our cyber workforce to our success
in our cybersecurity mission.
cyber roles and responsibilities
Cyber roles and responsibilities are shared across the Department.
Only by working in partnership together, are we able to close the gaps
and secure our systems.
As stated previously, the role of the DOD CIO is a unique position
in the Federal Government. I have the traditional CIO roles associated
with information management, IT, and cybersecurity, as well as the more
complex and unique roles associated with PNT, NC3, and senior
leadership communications. Section 909 of the National Defense
Authorization Act of 2018 clarified and expanded upon my roles and
responsibilities to also include the certification of the DOD's IT
budget, to include cybersecurity, and the development and enforcement
of IT standards.
Cyber Budget Certification: For the first time, DOD CIO
is reviewing, commenting on, and certifying all of the IT budgets,
which include cyber, across the Department. The DOD CIO's
congressionally mandated responsibility to certify the Military
Departments' cybersecurity investments and efforts enables me to ensure
the Department is pursuing enterprise cybersecurity solutions that are
lethal, flexible, and resilient.
Standards: DOD CIO now has the authority to set and
enforce IT standards across the Department. Standards are not limited
to the technical standards developed by the commercial sector and
organizations like the International Standards Organization. Standards
include setting the bar for cybersecurity requirements, such as
endpoint security standards and standards for architecture, and DODIN
standards. Determining the standard for the Department is a theme
across many of our architectural and technical initiatives.
defense information systems agency
Operating under the direction of the DOD CIO, the Defense
Information Systems Agency (DISA) is a combat support agency that on
behalf of the Department builds, operates, and secures global
telecommunications and IT infrastructure in support of joint
warfighters, national-level leaders, and other mission and coalition
partners across the full spectrum of operations. The Agency delivers
enterprise services and data at the user point of need and is focused
on securing, operating, and modernizing our networks, applications, and
systems with innovative tools to counter threats, minimize risks, and
maintain a competitive advantage.
VADM Norton is dual-hatted as Commander of JFHQ-DODIN and Director
of DISA. JFHQ-DODIN's global responsibility is to direct unity of
effort for the command and control, planning, direction, coordination,
integration, and synchronization of DODIN operations and Defensive
Cyberspace Operations--Internal Defense Measures (DCO-IDM) for the
DODIN infrastructure in support of DOD, Combatant Command, Military
Service, Defense Agency and Coalition missions. JFHQ-DODIN, under
Operational Control of U.S. Cyber Command, has Directive Authority for
Cyberspace Operations over all 43 DOD Components to enable power
projection and freedom of action across all warfighting domains. DISA
is one of those Components.
DISA is an IT service provider which aligns efforts to the DOD
Cyber Strategy, Cyber Posture, Cyber Top 10 and DOD Directives. DISA
designs, deploys, sustains, operates and secures the Defense
Information Systems Network (DISN), which is the core element for all
DOD/Joint architectures, Unified Capabilities (UC), voice, video, data
and internet technology transport within the larger DODIN.
DISA serves a critical role in advancing IT and cybersecurity
capabilities across the Department. As the primary IT engineering arm
for the Department, DISA develops solutions that support implementation
of the DOD CIO-directed standardized solutions such as the Windows 10
Secure Host Baseline and JRSS. DISA prevents about one billion cyber
operations events targeting the DODIN each month, providing layered
defense across the enterprise from the internet access points (IAP) to
the end user devices.
DISA partnerships with industry and other organizations across the
Federal government are key to delivering cybersecurity related
processes and services. For example, working in close partnership with
industry, DISA develops and publishes a wide breadth of technical
security guidance enabling the secure deployment of products and
capabilities.
DISA enterprise services such as our IAP, Cloud Access Points,
Enterprise Networks (NIPRNET/SIPRNET), Email (Defense Enterprise
Email), and Data Centers (Acropolis/Big Data Platform) have established
a DOD enterprise approach to cybersecurity and network operations
resiliency. These services are enabling future data-driven
infrastructures, which is required to deploy software defined networks
(SDN) with machine-augmented workflows, cybersecurity machine learning
for increased detection and mitigation of cyber threats and future
artificial intelligence for data protection and network healing at
cyber speeds.
principal cyber advisor
As described in section 932 of the National Defense Authorization
Act for Fiscal Year 2014, the PCA is the civilian DOD official who acts
as the principal advisor to the Secretary of Defense on the
Department's military and civilian cyber forces and activities. The PCA
synchronizes, coordinates, and oversees the implementation of the
Department's Cyber Strategy and other relevant policy and planning
documents to achieve DOD's cyber missions, goals, and objectives. At
the core of the PCA is the Cross Functional Team (CFT) of detailed
personnel from key Departments, Services, and Agencies. The CFT
provides an objective and broad perspective needed to ensure outcomes
match both short and long-term approved, strategic visions.
The PCA executes the DOD Cyber Strategy, including addressing the
gaps identified in the DOD Cyber Posture Review, through the LOE
implementation process. The LOE implementation process also allows the
Department to take a system view of the environment, address disparate
approaches and eliminate friction points across the Services and the
enterprise. While the LOE end states defined in the Cyber Strategy are
enduring, the objectives are more dynamic to allow the Department to
re-evaluate and adjust as needed to the operating environment. PCA
activities are rooted in strategy, and prioritized by risk; they are
warfighter focused with the aim of increasing lethality. To that end,
we are leading a Department-wide effort to translate the Cyber Strategy
LOEs into specific objectives, tasks, and sub-tasks that are focused on
outcomes which can be monitored and measured to demonstrate return on
investment.
The DOD's ``Top 10 Cyber Priorities'' and ``First Four'' efforts,
already underway, are nested under the Cyber Strategy LOEs. LOE 3,
Transform Network and System Architecture, identifies objectives to
achieve enterprise-wide cybersecurity policies and architecture based
on priorities determined by DOD CIO. Similarly, LOE 8, ``Sustain a
Ready Cyber Workforce'', is focused on the enterprise approach to
recruit, retain, develop, and train cyber professionals. Through
implementing the ``First Four,'' the PCA is focused on outcomes to
improve perimeter, network, and endpoint defense. Additionally, the Top
10, along with the DOD Cyber Strategy implementation process, provides
the Department with the ability to prioritize investments, such as the
modernization of cybersecurity architectures and the cyber workforce.
Together, DOD CIO, DISA, and PCA work together regularly to
implement the DOD Cyber Strategy in close coordination with the
Military Department and other DOD Component CIOs. DOD CIO and PCA co-
lead weekly meetings focused on cyber issues with the Deputy Secretary
of Defense with all of the Military Departments and Office of the
Secretary of Defense (OSD) Principals present. These meetings ensure
that the Deputy Secretary of Defense is kept abreast of progress on
cyber initiatives and that all Department leaders are present to
receive direction and share challenges.
cyber architecture overview
A key element of the Department's approach to standardizing
cybersecurity across the Department is setting the standard in the
Cybersecurity Reference Architecture (CS RA) which is a tool providing
cybersecurity guidance for the family of architectures that aligned to
the DOD Information Enterprise Architecture (IEA) and establishes a
modern and adaptive approach to meet future cybersecurity requirements.
The recently developed CS RA Version 4.1 aims to baseline the
enterprise cloud security landscape for DOD components currently
migrating or planning migrations to commercial cloud and leverages
techniques such as automation, next generation network architecture,
and Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence.
The DOD Cyber Architecture features a tiered system of cyber
defenses that act in concert to provide protections from a variety of
cyber threats. The major components for these tiers include the IAP,
JRSS, and End Points. The IAPs are the gateway between the internal DOD
environment and the larger internet. They provide email security,
analysis of web traffic using intelligence-informed sensors and other
tools, and they manage the flow of information between DOD and the
internet.
JRSS is another major component of DOD's architectural approach.
They provide network security functionality for traffic flows across
DOD networks, providing traffic inspection, incident detection, and
analysis capabilities for both inbound and outbound internal and
external users or services.
Other ways DOD is transforming the cyber architecture include cloud
initiatives such as Joint Enterprise Defense Initiative (JEDI), Secure
Development Operations (DevSecOps) and DOD Cybersecurity Analysis and
Review (DODCAR).
Joint Enterprise Defense Initiative (JEDI), one of the
main elements of DOD CIO's recently-released Cloud Strategy, aims to
provide a general purpose cloud computing solution and drives the
standardization of secure commercial cloud service offerings across the
DOD enterprise alongside other efforts such as the Defense Enterprise
Office Solution (DEOS).
The Department is deploying an enterprise DevSecOps
Platform in the cloud that will establish an enduring secure software
development environment to demonstrate that Agile DevSecOps can rapidly
deliver software by fully automating the development, testing, and
cybersecurity focused pipelines.
DODCAR, a cooperative effort between NSA, DISA and DOD
CIO, is a modernized systems engineering methodology that is designed
to incorporate threat-based data into all phases of the technology
lifecycle from architecture through development and deployment. Its
techniques and tools allow architects, engineers and operations
professionals to assess how well their capabilities defend against
actual adversary threat conditions.
Next Generation Cybersecurity Architecture: DOD CIO,
working in concert with DISA, is evaluating emerging architectures to
shift the way the Department's networks are protected. This requires
rethinking how we implement protections so that our ability to conduct
operations is unimpeded but ensures that the network resists
unauthorized activity and makes it easier to detect bad actors.
using cyber automation as a defensive ``force multiplier''
In 2016, the Defense Science Board recommended DOD consider cyber
approaches to assess system resilience and leverage emerging
technologies to increase system resilience. The study detailed a set of
recommendations for the ``next dollar spent'' to maximize effects
against cyber threats. The new areas of investment include increasing
automation for cyber defense, improving endpoint security, and
heightening cyber preparedness to accelerate cyber force readiness
reporting in response to different kinds and levels of cyber-attack.
The 2018 DOD Cyber Strategy also called for the Department to leverage
automation and data analysis across the enterprise to improve
effectiveness in cyber defense and cyber capabilities.
Private industry enterprises, in comparison to DOD cyber
operations, employ highly automated IT and IT security operations (IT
SECOPS) processes to keep their networks secure and updated as quickly
as possible. Cost containment is necessary to drive down the expense of
running their enterprises.
For DOD, current IT SECOPS is a largely manual and very labor-
intensive process. Our networks are critical to our warfighting and
support missions, but they must become cheaper to operate with
increased investments in data protection. By increasing the use of
automation across the enterprise and limiting the standing privileges
that systems administrators have, we can have stronger assurances of
the security of the environment, in addition to stronger safeguards
against the insider threat. We must integrate automation in an
effective cyber flow to enable our IT workforce to focus on the most
sophisticated cyber attacks and we must automate IT SECOPS to protect
mission critical systems.
DOD has a number of automated cyber defenses currently in use.
Intelligence-informed sensors takes automated action against web-based
threats using behavioral analysis and commercially derived intelligence
resulting in 7 million automated mitigations executed per day. DISA's
Fight By Indicator system automatically scans Threat Intelligence
Reports developed by NSA, Defense Cyber Crime Center, DIA, and others
and automatically scans a PDF document to parse out the threat
indicators documented in the report. Fight By Indicator processes 300+
indicators automatically which results in 19 million blocks at the IAP
perimeter per day.
Advances in IT security devices have allowed DOD to provide more
protections on email, examine previously encrypted web traffic for
malicious content and data loss prevention, and provide more security
on public facing DOD web sites. These are in place today. There is a
significant amount of automation in DISA's Ecosystem that saves
hundreds of thousands of manual work hours. We are working to fully
extend those capabilities across the enterprise.
DOD recognizes that we must plan and architect for an increasingly
automated cyber environment to improve accuracy, timeliness, and
effectiveness of our cyber workforce. We have evaluated machine
learning systems and are working to integrate them into the Big Data
Platform and End Point Security. The LOE implementation process managed
by PCA offers the Department the ability to incorporate cyber
automation both near term, such as through the ``First Four'' Comply to
Connect initiative, and long-term through the development of next
generational technologies. The Department must be dedicated to
increasing cyber space security and cyber space defense. During last
year's budget planning cycle, DOD CIO led a strategic effort to
increase investment in cyber security management.
identity, credential, and access management
As we aggressively leverage new architectures and technologies to
achieve military advantage through information, having strong
assurances of who is accessing data and how is critical. We have been
actively developing a DOD Identity, Credential, and Access Management
(ICAM) Strategy that recognizes the changing environment and these
objectives and addresses our increasing dependence on digital
identities to share information rapidly and more securely. Like the
Cyber Strategy, the goals of the ICAM Strategy are enduring. At the
urging of the services as part of the First Four, we are investing in
foundational ICAM enterprise capabilities to meet immediate critical
needs, and provide the necessary platform for ongoing innovation and
adoption at scale going forward. Maintaining end-to-end integration of
evolving ICAM capabilities is critical to enabling modernization of
DOD's networked capabilities. ICAM provides indispensable auditable
functional and security controls that implement dynamic digital
policies. Increased use of machine-to-machine interfaces and robotic
processes requires the same level of assurance in terms of identities
and access control. The ICAM Strategy and ongoing investment in ICAM
capabilities will allow warfighters and supporting systems to rapidly
access whatever information they are authorized to access from wherever
they are on the network. Importantly, this access must be removed when
it is no longer authorized. The bottom line for ICAM is that we need to
know who or what is on our network at all times.
cybersecurity workforce
As my deputy, Ms. Essye Miller, testified before you last
September, DOD recognizes the importance of growing and maintaining the
cyber workforce. The recent authorities provided by Congress have
allowed the Department to adjust existing personnel policies and to
implement new policies that account for this dynamic need in an
increasingly important mission area. One key authority being the
establishment of the Cyber Excepted Service (CES). As Ms. Miller
relayed to the Subcommittee, fostering a culture based upon mission
requirements and employee capabilities, CES will enhance the
effectiveness of the Department's cyber defensive and offensive
mission. This personnel system will provide DOD with the needed agility
and flexibility for the recruitment, retention and development of high
quality cyber professionals.
conclusion
We believe a cyber capable adversary will focus their efforts on
disrupting DOD's front line mission systems, during a conflict or in
preparation for conflict, by exploiting vulnerabilities we did not
realize we had. Increasing automation across the joint networks will
support our Joint Forces' globally-integrated multi-domain operations.
The close working relationship between DOD CIO, DISA, and PCA is
critical to our ability to remediate our cybersecurity vulnerabilities.
The importance of the connection between policy, network monitoring,
and remediation cannot be overstated. The Department has clearly
defined cybersecurity problems to be solved, and has a well thought out
remediation approach. The right mechanisms are in place to monitor and
report our progress in network security.
I want to emphasize the importance of our partnerships with
Congress in all areas, but with a particular focus on cybersecurity.
The increased cyber authorities granted to the DOD CIO with each
National Defense Authorization Act are one key example of this
partnership. Continued support for a flexible approach to cyber
resourcing, budgeting, acquisition, and personnel will help enable
success against an ever-changing dynamic cyber threat. I look forward
to continuing to work with Congress in this critical area. Thank you
for the opportunity to testify this afternoon, and I look forward to
your questions.
Senator Rounds. Vice Admiral Norton, welcome.
STATEMENT OF VICE ADMIRAL NANCY A. NORTON, USN, DIRECTOR,
DEFENSE INFORMATION SYSTEMS AGENCY, AND COMMANDER, JOINT FORCE
HEADQUARTERS-DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE INFORMATION NETWORK
Vice Admiral Norton. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member, and distinguished members of the subcommittee.
As Mr. Deasy said, I'm Vice Admiral Nancy Norton, and I
serve as the Commander of the Joint Force Headquarters-DODIN,
or JFHQ-DODIN, and the Defense Information Systems Network--I'm
sorry, the Director of the Defense Information Systems Agency,
also known as DISA.
Thank you for your invitation to join Mr. Deasy and
Brigadier General Crall here today as we discuss our
cybersecurity efforts.
The JFHQ-DODIN was created to globally integrate command
and control (C2) for DODIN operations and Defensive Cyberspace
Operations Internal Defensive Measures, or DCOIDM, across all
43 DOD components. As an operational component command under
U.S. Cyber Command (CYBERCOM), JFHQ-DODIN provides unity of
effort and unity of command across the DOD's layered defense
construct to protect DOD networks. JFHQ-DODIN exercises
Directive Authority for Cyberspace Operations, or DACO, to
establish a coordinated approach for implementing priority
actions at all levels of cyber defense.
In addition, we issue orders and directives to all DOD
components that address threats and vulnerabilities to the
DODIN. Our daily interactions with all 43 DOD components
involve sharing cybersecurity operations information and cyber
intelligence, validating status of directed cyberspace actions,
and updating defensive cyber priorities regarding unclassified
and classified networks and cyber-enabled devices that are
connected to the DODIN.
JFHQ-DODIN provides the operational requirements and
expected outcomes aligned to the Cyber Strategy and the cyber
top ten, which benefit from the standardization of capabilities
across the cyber enterprise that is directed under the DOD
CIO's authority. Additionally, JFHQ-DODIN conducts cyber
readiness inspections, which require each network owner and
their cybersecurity service providers to understand how their
cyber readiness relates to their own mission and operational
risks, and reviews their cyber compliance factors.
DISA is a combat support agency that provides, operates,
and assures command-and-control and information-sharing
capabilities in direct support of joint warfighters, national-
level leaders, and other mission and coalition partners across
the full spectrum of operations. Its primary purposes are to
provide the information technology necessary for the DOD to
protect our Nation and to support the JFHQ-DODIN and U.S. Cyber
Command in defense of ongoing cyber attacks, clearly critical
to national security.
DISA is a combined workforce of approximately 16,000
military, civilian, and contract employees. DISA is operating
and evolving a global enterprise infrastructure based on common
standards set by the DOD CIO, enabling effective, resilient,
and interoperable solutions that support multidomain warfare in
the face of escalating cyber threats. DISA directs,
coordinates, and synchronizes the DISA-managed portions of the
DODIN supporting the DOD around the world, and supports U.S.
Cyber Command in its mission to secure, operate, and defend the
DODIN.
DISA's acquisition strategy works to provide efficient and
compliant procurement services for information technology,
telecommunications, and cybersecurity capabilities in defense
of our Nation. The agency relies on a robust partnership with
industry to achieve its mission. Just as the military services
look to industry to design, build, and field weapons and
platforms based on stringent requirements, DISA looks to
industry to design, build, and field cybersecurity tools that
will meet our stringent requirements in the rapidly evolving
cyber domain. DISA's trusted partnerships with industry are
critical to bringing effective and secure capability to leaders
and warfighters around the world. DISA routinely engages with
industry to ensure they have a clear understanding of what the
Department needs are now and how we anticipate they will evolve
in the future. Both DISA and Joint Force Headquarters-DODIN
focus on one primary endeavor: to connect and protect our joint
warfighters in cyberspace to increase lethality across all
warfighting domains in defense of our Nation.
I thank you for this opportunity to be here today, and I
look forward to answering your questions.
Thank you.
Senator Rounds. Thank you, Vice Admiral Norton.
General Crall, you may begin.
STATEMENT OF BRIGADIER GENERAL DENNIS A. CRALL, USMC, PRINCIPAL
DEPUTY CYBER ADVISOR AND SENIOR MILITARY ADVISOR FOR CYBER
POLICY
Brigadier General Crall. Thank you, sir. I certainly
appreciate, like the others, the opportunity to come before the
subcommittee and share a few thoughts and ideas, answer your
questions. But, more importantly, I thank you for your genuine
interest and help in this critical domain. It's made a
difference.
Just want to cover a couple items. If last year, maybe, the
theme was on strategy, sir, and you've mentioned the fact that
we finally published a Cyber Strategy, complete with a posture
review, we can take a look at some of those gaps that we have,
and get after them. I would say this year's moniker is a bit
different. This is about implementation. We know where we need
to head. We know the pacing that we have in front of us. But,
it's now time to show results. So, I would say that this is the
year of outcomes. We're focused on delivering the capabilities
and improvements that we've discussed for some time. We have
actionable lines of effort that come from our Cyber Strategy.
These are things we can do and we can measure our progress
against. That's what we're focused on.
So, while it's a good year for implementation, I would say
it may not be a good year for some items. And let me just share
with you a couple of those.
The first is stovepiped solutions. It's a bad year for
those who like to approach this in a way that we have endless
niche capabilities, that run off and do business their own way,
lack standards, individual development, and have difficulty in
integrating. We're putting an end to that practice, which has
really robbed us of success.
It's also a bad year for those who don't like measures of
effectiveness or discussions on data-driven return of
investments. We owe an accountability for how we've spent our
money and also a level of accountability on what capabilities
we've achieved in the spenditure of that money and effort.
Lastly, I would say it's a bad year for those who like
endless pilots, pathfinders, and experiments that lead to
nowhere. This is about getting to results, experimenting
quickly, and the learning that we get from those, and putting
that back into implementation.
So, I do agree that there's a sense of optimism. I think
the Department has turned a corner. But, this is the year that
we really have to show the results of that effort.
I look forward to answering your questions.
Senator Rounds. Thank you, General Crall.
We've just been advised that we have votes at 3 o'clock.
So, we will probably just keep the hearing going, but we'll
take turns leaving, going and getting the vote in, and then
coming back in. So, no disrespect meant, but we're going to be
rotating in and out.
To all witnesses--and this is a question that I guess I
gave you all kind of a heads-up on that I'm going to ask
today--in a hearing with private industry on best cybersecurity
practices, we heard from Dimitri Alperovitch, of CrowdStrike,
that they have a 1-10-60 challenge for responding to cyber
intrusions: 1 minute to detect it, 10 minutes to understand it,
and 1 hour to contain it. How well would DOD measure against
these metrics? Are there any services or components that are
better positioned to meet these goals?
Mr. Deasy, I'll let you start.
Mr. Deasy. Sure. So, this is clearly an operational
question on how you handle a realtime event.
Senator Rounds. This is a metrics question.
Mr. Deasy. Absolutely. So, this is clearly best for Vice
Admiral Norton to answer, since this is what she faces every
day.
Vice Admiral Norton. Yes sir.
I appreciate that question, and definitely enjoyed the
conversation that you had with industry in talking about that.
That way of thinking about the challenge that we have, 1-10-60,
was a good way of laying out what kinds of speed that we need
in order to pace cybersecurity threats.
We have not, in DOD, laid out a similar kind of benchmark,
like the 1-10-60, but absolutely are looking at what the
requirements are for detecting as rapidly as possible,
responding as rapidly as possible, and how we can continuously
increase that pace at the pace of cyber. So, I would like to
take that question for the record for specifics on the
response, but very definitely understand that we are watching
and building towards a timed pacing of our adversary like that,
just without that 1-10-60 construct.
[The information referred to follows:]
Vice Admiral Norton. The DOD absolutely recognizes the need
for utmost speed in resolving cyber incidents, the focus to
date has been on adopting automation to reduce cyber incident
response time, to the greatest possible. DOD does not measure
an incident response interval for analyst operations, analogous
to the 1:10:60 rule. DOD does keep metrics on automated
systems, for example from Oct 2017 - July 2018 the Sharkseer
program created 300,000 automated response actions and
mitigated 3.2 Billion distinct threats. The DODIN has a 3-
tiered defensive framework, where security and defense is
layered around Tier 1: the outermost perimeter; Tier 2: the
mid-tier; and Tier 3: the endpoint. There are cybersecurity
sensors at each tier to detect suspicious or malicious activity
in place by DISA or other DOD components that operate close to
network-speed. These sensors auto-inject commercial threat
intelligence and auto-block commercially known and provided
threat vectors. This type of automated capability is provided
by DISA for most (not all) of the DODIN at the boundary (Tier
1). The DODIN is comprised of multiple networks below Tier 2,
and multiple classifications. Each of the 43 DODIN Components
designated as Area of Operations (AO) Commanders or Directors
provide the cybersecurity response reporting requirements for
the AO over which they are responsible. Their Cybersecurity
Service Providers (CSSP) have the responsibility for
Significant Activity (SIGACT) reporting to be conducted to
JFHQ-DODIN within 1 hour of detection of suspicious or
malicious activity, and CJCSM 6510 reporting is ongoing
afterwards with JFHQ-DODIN analysts and AO operations centers
working together.
Senator Rounds. Okay. But, I'm going to go one step
farther, and this time I'm going to direct it to General Crall.
Metrics are important. In this particular case, CrowdStrike,
who is public, clearly can say, in public, that's their goal.
Are these metrics that should be attainable, or are these
metrics that an enterprise such as the DODIN can look at right
now? Are there metrics out there that we're trying to achieve?
Share with me your thoughts about the importance of this type
of an approach.
Brigadier General Crall. Yes sir. I think, even in my
opening, I talked about our ability to measure. So, there's no
doubt that we need metrics in place. I can't comment
specifically to the 1-10-60, whether that's the right metric
for every DOD domain. These domains are constructed quite
differently. And, even with some tactical-edge considerations
on how they operate, we take some unique risks at the tactical
edge that we might not take in other aspects of our network.
So, those need to be tailored to the mission at hand.
But, I would say this. The right question for a closed
session, perhaps--is, What are our metrics? How are we striving
to achieve them? In a closed session, I think we could talk
about some of the first efforts that Mr. Deasy has laid out,
that I'm helping institute, as it comes to some detection,
remediation efforts that would drive that.
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
Mr. Deasy, you have publicly announced that your four
priorities are cloud, AI, cybersecurity, and C2. What progress
have you made in modernizing the Department's cybersecurity?
Does your office have all of the resources it needs to execute
these priorities?
Mr. Deasy. I would say that, when I talk publicly about
those four priorities, one of the things that I point out is
how interlinked those are, meaning that, if you're having a
cloud conversation, the way we're going to institute cloud is
very much going to help our cyber posture. It's going to help
the way we build applications and it's going to help the way we
house our data. When we think of AI, AI is very much going to
help the cyber agenda. Some of our early national mission
initiatives are looking at, how do we use AI, for example, to
look at insider threats? How do we look for anomalies in our,
environment? Finally, on the command, control, and
communications (C3) side, we know that we have generations of
communications equipment that were designed in what I'll call a
pre-cyber era. So, as we build the next generation of command,
control, and communications, we are building them, first and
foremost, with what it means to have the right cyber in place.
As I go about discussing these priorities, we always say
that cyber is at the heart of the digital modernization of the
Department of Defense. Everything that we are banking on and
building for the future is starting with the mindset of, we
must bake cyber in from the start.
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
Senator Manchin.
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Deasy you have quite an impressive resume, basically in
the private sector. Coming to the government sector, we
appreciate you for your service. Seeing that over the years how
we've been hacked and the espionage that's gone on, and the
things that I have mentioned, as far as a thousand different
sites, if you will, and none of them seem to be talking to each
other or protecting each other, do you believe that we can
rapidly close that gap and change our approach to how we do
business?
Mr. Deasy. It's an outstanding question, and probably one
of the top ones every day I address. I think General Crall
actually hit upon it. The days that people, what I like to
refer to as roll their own solutions and stand up unique
systems to solve unique mission sets, has to be revisited. So,
one of the things, especially now, given the new authorities
that I have, is that we are putting out a tone that, as we go
through the remediation of our various cyber programs, the days
of debating, what are the various tools and software that we're
going to use? We have to stop. We have to quickly move from the
debate of what's the right source of a solution to the
implementation approach. I've always said, there's no reason we
need different tools to solve for many of these problems. The
way we will implement those tools are obviously going to be
different if you're dealing with a tactical edge and advanced
space versus if you're going to deal inside the Pentagon. But,
I have been very direct and quite vocal that we need to
standardize more, we need to stop rolling individual solutions,
and we need to move beyond the debates of, what are the right
product sets? And we need to spend all of our time talking
about how to get the work done.
Senator Manchin. I wanted to ask you about your cyber top
ten to see where you're working. But, first of all, on the
different types of systems we have been using in different
applications in the companies we have dealt with, or contracted
with, speaking of Kaspersky and Huawei, have you all been able
to see if we're still using those contractors? Or their
equipment?
Mr. Deasy. I would say that some of this discussion should
probably be held in a private--you know, classified session.
But, I can say, generically, that, yes, we are aware of the
capability of those particular----
Senator Manchin. Because I was on Intel, so I know where
you're coming from, but, have you all done the evaluation we
probably requested in Intel to tell us who is still using--in
any departments, are still using these components?
Mr. Deasy. Yes. We have evaluated. Happy to share with you,
offline, what the results of that.
Senator Manchin. We'd love to see that.
Mr. Deasy. More importantly, I would share with you the
approach we're using, as we find additional vendors, how we
deal with this.
Senator Manchin. Well, maybe the Chairman and I can get
together with you all on that in a classified setting.
Mr. Deasy. Okay.
Senator Manchin. How about your top-ten issues to
characterize your priorities?
Can you tell me what are your items of your top-ten list,
and what's the relationship with the Cyber Strategy?
Mr. Deasy. The way that I describe the top ten is, we
stepped back--because if--depending on who you went and talked
to inside the Department and said, what is a risk? You would
get a very different answer, if you're talking to someone who's
sitting at an endpoint, your desktop, or if you're out managing
a weapon system. So, we stepped back and said, if you think
this through the eyes of an adversary and how they think of the
world, how they would traverse the Department of Defense. We
stepped back, and we laid out a set of priorities to address
all the points of interventions where we think adversaries
would try to intersect with us. Obviously, it would not be
prudent for me, today, to walk through each of those individual
ten things, as one could draw conclusions from that, but
suffice to say we've taken a very holistic approach, for the
first time, of how we think about all aspects of the chain of
how data moves across Department of Defense, and then, what are
the points that we need to put prioritization against?
Senator Manchin. Admiral Norton, you're the Director of the
Defense Information System Agency, correct? But, you're also
dual-hatted as the Commander of the Joint Force Headquarters
for the DOD Information Network for the totality of the DOD's
networks. Are all the cybersecurity providers scattered across
DOD; are they under your purview, your command?
Vice Admiral Norton. They are not under my command, sir,
they are under my Directive Authority for Cyberspace
Operations. So, those cybersecurity service providers (CSPs),
in some cases, work for me, as DISA; in other cases, they work
for the military----
Senator Manchin. How about the cyber protection teams?
Vice Admiral Norton. The cyber protection teams are the
same thing. I do have some. I have six of those that work for
me, specifically, as the Joint Force Headquarters-DODIN,
directly supporting the DODIN backbone and the perimeter
defenses. But, others of the cyber protection teams are
assigned to the services and some to each of the combatant
commands, as well. But, all of those, both the cyber security
service providers and the cyber protection teams, as well as
every system administrator, every one of those cyber
workforces, is under my Directive Authority for Cyberspace
Operations (DACO), meaning I can synchronize the actions across
all of the DOD for any responses that we need to take, any
changes that we need to make on the network, based on that DACO
that I have under U.S. Cyber Command.
Senator Manchin. How can you prevent, through cyber, the
attacks that may be going on, could be going on, if you're not
over total control? Your one directive goes across all of the
different commands, but they don't report directly to you, and
each of the commands have different chains?
Vice Admiral Norton. Yes sir. So----
Senator Manchin. Is that a disconnect there?
Vice Admiral Norton. I don't believe it is. JFHQ-DODIN was
stood up specifically to do the synchronization and command-
and-control of the defensive cyberspace operations forces
across the DOD. So, it would be very difficult to aggregate
them all into one command. There are about 250,000 cyber
workforces across the DOD. They're as disparate as serving in a
squadron in the Air Force or a submarine in the Navy, every one
of the agencies, across the board. But, with that Directive
Authority for Cyberspace Operations, I'm able to mandate what
kind of actions they're taking on a daily basis, and do that
through a daily cyber tasking order that we have with all 43
components.
Senator Manchin. I think, in a nutshell, what I'm asking,
how do we prevent a Snowden from continuing all the different
breaks that the public knows about? There's more that they
don't know about. The ones that have been very public, have we
taken steps? Mr. Deasy or General Crall, you've seen this
through your career. Are there steps being taken to close that
loophole so that doesn't repeat?
Vice Admiral Norton. Yes sir. We absolutely have. There are
many, many actions that we've taken. Snowden, of course, was an
insider threat, and we have taken specific actions----
Senator Manchin. Right.
Admiral Norton.--addressing an insider threat, across the
Department. There's always more to be done, because that's a
very complex problem. But, we absolutely have. And Joint Force
Headquarters-DODIN has only been in existence for 4 years, this
week, so we are maturing in the ability to synchronize all of
those efforts. We didn't have this when Snowden was able to
infiltrate and exfiltrate the data that he did.
Senator Manchin. I'm going to go vote, and I'll be right
back.
Vice Admiral Norton. Yes sir.
Senator Rounds. Let me just continue on, because I think
that's an important part of it. The reason why we do the open
hearing now is to talk a little bit about how big this
challenge is, because you're talking about not just all of the
Armed Forces, but you're also talking about our acquisition
processes, you're talking about a huge contractor base out
there that is just as susceptible to cybertheft as our armed
services are. And yet, all of our air, land, and sea domains
are at risk if our cyber domain is not secured, just like our
space domain has to be secured. And I think that's part of the
message we're trying to get here, is, this is not something
that can be done simply by the Department of Defense alone.
This is a case of where we have to have the rest of industry,
obviously, in tune with us. Can you talk a little bit about the
coordination which you're trying to do with those entities that
are defense contractors and their subcontractors, how big this
is, but also what you're doing to try to focus on that?
Mr. Deasy. I'll be happy to address that.
On that top-ten priority list is the defense industrial
base, or often referred to just as the supply chain. It's very,
very clear that defending our networks extend all the way out
to our contractor networks. You could argue they're just an
extension of what we do. We pass classified data. They do
things on behalf of us. So, there's no doubt, when you look at
the first tier and the second tier, and you think about
exfiltrations and the problems that have occurred, we have to
treat our subcontracting base the same way that we think about
defending our own networks.
Now, to that end, we get some help. There are standards
that our defense contractors are obligated to follow. It's the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) standard.
It's the same one the Department of Defense follows. The Deputy
of Defense Secretary recently stood up a task force. I had made
a recommendation that we need to look at, holistically, from
the day we awarded a contract to the moment we have an exfil or
a spill occurred, and how we then handle that needs to be re-
thought through. Right now, there is a task force that is
stepping through the entire way through which we handle our
contractual relationships, our notification of problems, our
forensics, and, when we do have a problem, to improve upon
that.
This problem is not necessarily a tier-1 supply level, it's
down in the tier 3 and the tier 4.
Senator Rounds. Explain what that is.
Mr. Deasy. In many cases, we will contract with a very
large traditional defense, but they don't build everything for
us, they don't engineer everything for us. They will go out and
contract with a firm----
Senator Rounds. Which means they share classified
information with their subcontractors, who may very well share
that same classified information with a subset of contractors
again.
Mr. Deasy. And that entire chain is tracked. Where the
issue breaks down is, as you go down to those various
subcontractors, do they understand, are they equipped, do they
have the knowledge and the capability to defend themselves? And
what is it that we should be doing more of to help them learn
how to defend themselves at those tiers?
Senator Rounds. Okay. It's not a new problem. But, most
certainly, it's one that this is where we find a lot of our
hygiene problems at. And that's the way most of our information
is lost, is through improper cyber hygiene, meaning somebody at
a level, basically, made a mistake, and somebody got into their
system and now has access.
It's one thing to make a law or a rule. It's another thing
to be able to enforce it. Talk to me about your enforcement
actions and how you see ways to, not only make the law, but
enforce the law, and then to follow and audit the process. What
do you have in place, and where are you short of capabilities
today?
Mr. Deasy. First of all, you make a very good point. If you
look at a lot of the problems that have occurred and where the
forensics have been done, it does come back, many times, to
basic hygienes. So, we start with a self-certification process.
We are now looking at a new process that the Office of the
Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment
(A&S) is leading, and that is, how do we then build in a
confidence score against their certification? Ellen Lord's
organization, where they go through and they evaluate that
self-assessment, they put a confidence score against that, and
what they're now looking at is, how do we go out and have a
closed-loop system, where we can go out and validate what it is
that they self-assessed against? This is a massively large
supply base, so there's discussions right now on, what is the
right approach on doing that, given that trying to get every
single member of that supply base might be overly challenged?
And so, how do you sample, and how do you do this in a way
where you can start to get confidence that, as you move down
those tiers, that their self-certification----
Senator Rounds. Let me follow up, because I think that's a
critical lead-in to another piece here. As other members come
back, we'll allow them to get into this, as well, but I have to
ask. Even if you could hire--and I know that you need to hire
more experts in cybersecurity, but you're also going to have to
hire and contract out with entities that have real expertise in
cybersecurity. Do you have a process in place to invite and vet
expertise within cybersecurity that we can use to help us? And
then, once you get past that stage, and you recognize that you
can't do it with manpower alone, you're going to have to have
the additional electronic resources, including AI. Can you work
your way through that, from looking outside of government,
manpower needs, and then also moving to AI?
Mr. Deasy. As you know, I do come from private industry,
and this problem for large companies, private industry is no
different; i.e., they don't have the capability to evaluate
every one of their supply-chain vendors. So, what has happened
in private industry, which is what we are now looking at for
the DOD, is actually a process of identifying, possibly even
certifying, companies that can play the role that can follow
the NIST standard and actually go in and look at a second-,
third-tier supplier.
Senator Rounds. Are you taking invitations for that now?
Mr. Deasy. No, we are just in the early discussions of how
we might do that. As I said, A&S is the lead for this. I've
been advising them on how this has been done elsewhere.
To your AI question, there is definitely going to be value
in looking at, How do you take the entire supply base, the NIST
standards, the hygiene problems we see, and can you apply AI to
this problem to start to identify where you most likely are
going to experience problems inside your supply chain? We are
literally just in discussions. I do not want to suggest that we
have an active program underway. But, I would suggest that this
is a good case where we can apply machine learning to looking
at this problem.
Senator Rounds. I will give Senator Scott an opportunity to
get settled, but I'm just going to ask you one more question.
Then I'll move to Senator Scott.
Right now, there really is a difference between AI and
machine learning. Are you deeper in with machine learning right
now to cover a lot of the items right now that otherwise we
just don't have the manpower to cover? How far along are we?
Mr. Deasy. We are still very much in the early days. I
would actually be very happy to come and have a session with
you on what is called the Joint Artificial Intelligence Center
(JAIC) and how we're using that to apply new AI/machine-
learning algorithms to solve for some of these problems that I
think you're touching upon here today. But, probably best that
I come and talk to you offline about how we're approaching the
AI/machine-learning problem.
Senator Rounds. Very good. Thank you.
Senator Scott.
Senator Scott. I'm sorry if I ask a question that
somebody's already asked.
You get a lot of wonderful vendors from all over the United
States and around the world that want to sell you stuff. How do
you all make a decision on what you're going to buy and who's
the best vendor?
Mr. Deasy. There's a number of us that can do that. Why
don't we start with Vice Admiral Norton.
You use a number of suppliers. How do you go through your
vetting process?
Vice Admiral Norton. Well, we have a lot of different
mechanisms that we interact with industry, starting with very
public and very open things, like we have a forecast industry,
where everybody is invited to come in and hear about what we're
doing, what is already ongoing, what is planned in the near
future, and then opportunities for each of those vendors to
talk to the program managers and the leadership at DISA and get
an understanding of what they might be interested in pursuing.
We have a Small Business Programs Office that specifically
targets and interacts directly with the small businesses that
have interest in any of our activities. They feed back into
different parts of DISA for further communications. So, that
gives us the understanding with industry of what's available.
From there, it's evaluation based on the performance
criteria that we've set for the particular product or
particular capability that we need in understanding what the
acquisition strategy might be. In some cases, that means doing
a major evaluation of a number of different contractors at
companies that have similar products, and evaluating them for
the best fit. In some cases, it means something like an other
transaction authority, where we have a couple of different
prototypes, and both of them are able to build out and
demonstrate, what capability would best suit the need that we
have.
Brigadier General Crall. Sir, thank you.
This really does come down, as Admiral Norton talked about,
to requirements. That's both what I need today and what I
anticipate, not just simply chasing after a capability that I
might not need or couldn't find a use for, which sometimes they
come packaged. We do look at performance. And we look at
performance in measures at that tactical edge, which is
different. We've found vendors, in many cases, that work very
well in a flagpole or garrison environment, but, when we start
getting to thin line, red line, or austere conditions, the
product may not perform as well, and that's a consideration for
a warfighting machine that's expected to operate in an
information-contested environment. So, that's one area that we
take a look at. And, of course, no shortchanging the idea of
cost at something that's sustainable or affordable.
But, the other piece that I think is important is how
flexible it is, the thing that we're looking at. Requirements
do change, and one of the big concerns is not getting locked
into something that requires a level of emulation, patching,
or, really, caretaking that could exceed the cost of the
product to begin with. So, looking at more informative ways to
do it.
But, the problem really isn't so much about us finding the
right vendor that can provide what it is, it's the vendor's
patience in dealing with us and our lack of flexibility in
acquisition. We find more vendors most likely to walk away from
trying to deal with us because of simply the way that we
contract. And I'm not saying that we shouldn't contract that
way. There's reasons why we have some of the contracting rules
and regulations, to ensure that we behave properly. But, in
industry, as Mr. Deasy will attest, his experience of finding a
solution, matching a vendor with a need, can be done very
quickly in the civilian world, where we might find ourselves
years out. By the time we compete properly, line up the
resources, make sure it's within our Program Objective
Memorandum (POM) cycle, and actually move on it, the product
might not even be viable at the time of purchase.
Senator Scott. So, what needs to change?
Brigadier General Crall. Sir, I think we're doing the
change on the front end, as we are focused on requirements. So,
I think we're doing our part. We've had a great relationship
with the vendors; really, industry is going to help us get
through many of the problems we're talking about. They
absolutely bring the technology we need to bear. But, focusing
on requirements, that's our responsibility. I think we've done
a better job. The way we consume products as a service model,
vice having to own everything, is a methodology that we're
looking at. I think we need to be more thoughtful on how we
come back to Congress and ask for some help on how we acquire.
The acquisition machine needs to change.
Mr. Deasy. If you ask me, it's one word: speed. I think
about how, in the private industry, from the time that they
identify that the adversary now has a new set of methodologies
and tactics, the ability to go out and scan industry to see
who's addressing that, quickly find those companies, bring them
in, evaluate them, move through the procurement cycle, and get
them operationally installed inside the environment has to be
done with a lot more speed than we have today.
Senator Scott. May I continue?
Do you ever feel taken advantage of by a vendor that talks
you into a type of Request for Proposal (RFP), and then you
find out, at the end, there were other vendors that you
couldn't even do business with because of the RFP you started
out with? How do you deal with that, if that's true?
I used to be an investor in national security, and we'd do
business with the Government. We won based on how well we did
with the RFP. Do you feel that industry does that to you?
Mr. Deasy. I have not seen that. What I have seen sometimes
is a poor understanding of your requirements up front, and so
you're misaligned because you haven't spent enough time really
understanding what your requirements are. The vendor's trying
to then come in and sell you something that may or may not meet
your requirements. I see more of a disconnect between what the
vendor is trying to tell you it has versus the requirements.
That needs to be probably vetted at the front end better.
Vice Admiral Norton. One of the things that DISA has done
routinely is put out requests for information (RFIs) in advance
of an RFP broadly, and have an ongoing dialogue with industry
so that they get a good understanding of what it is that we're
looking for, what is available, not trying to put out an RFP
for something that will never be produced and will never
deliver. So, we'll spend a lot of money on some vendor trying
to do that. We don't do that anymore. We always baseline with
an RFI, and that gives us a lot of opportunity for
understanding.
Senator Scott. Part of being decentralized is that it seems
like it would make it difficult for somebody to intrude. As you
get more centralized, are you concerned that'll make it easier
for somebody to intrude, because, once they figure out exactly
how to intrude in your system, they hit everybody at the same
time? Do you have any concerns about that?
Vice Admiral Norton. I am always concerned about that, sir,
and the balance between the ease of operation and the speed at
which you can operate a very homogenous network at a large
scale. If everything is the same and you're able to automate
the processes of changing that, then you can do that very
rapidly. So, operation and cybersecurity can be done very, very
rapidly. But, that same ability is also a potential weakness if
an adversary is able to get in, because then they can do the
same kind of thing. So, you have to balance that. How do you
block that so that kind of adversary behavior isn't able to
penetrate your entire network?
Mr. Deasy. One of the things I've been advocating for since
joining is, people always ask, are we better off being
decentralized? And I would say, but then you have a thousand
ways of which someone can get in, so that's the downside of
that. If you centralize, then if someone could get in, the
breadth of the surface space they can cause damage is much
larger. I always say, it comes down to how you architect for
that centralized approach. If you architect with a very flat
area, where, once they get in, they can cause great havoc,
that's not appropriate. If you're smartly architecting for a
centralized approach, where you're limiting what I like to call
the ``blast radius,'' where the problem can occur, then
actually centralization has some huge merits that you don't get
from a decentralized site.
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
Let me just move on. And I'll have Senator Wicker.
Senator Wicker.
Senator Wicker. Well, thank you very much.
It's too bad we've got so many balls in the air; we can't
be here for the entire hearing.
Has anyone asked you all about China and Huawei and ZTE and
Chinese-owned information companies yet? Has anyone asked that
in this hearing today?
Mr. Deasy. Yes sir. Earlier, it was asked. And what we said
was, yes, we understand the nature of the problems with those
products. We have a good understanding of where they are, and
are not, inside of our environment. And we said that, if you
would like to go deeper, given the sensitivity and the nature
of what those products do, we'd be best to have that
conversation in a closed hearing.
Senator Wicker. Yes. But, let's see what we can talk about
in an open setting like this.
In terms of our National Security Strategy and our new
national security policy, is what is contained in there
adequate to meet this challenge? How much of DOD's information
flows over commercial networks, for example? And do we need to
be concerned about that? Is there something going on now with
commercial providers to improve cybersecurity of these
information networks that involve crucial national security
matters?
Mr. Deasy?
Mr. Deasy. Yeah, there's a couple there. There's a part on
strategy, and I'll let General Crall take the strategy.
You bring up a good point. If you think about how data
moves across the Department of Defense, both the continental
United States (CONUS) and outside the continental United States
(OCONUS), you have to ask yourself, Where are you touching the
commercial side of an environment, and how well do we
understand the commercial nature of what products, like
Huawei's, might be in there? We have a very good understanding
for CONUS, what that looks like and what those vulnerabilities
are. For OCONUS, as you can imagine, it's a lot more
complicated, because those networks sit with providers outside
the United States. So, we have to architect and be a lot more
thoughtful about how we set up on an OCONUS basis because of
that.
Senator Wicker. If there are Huawei products, what's our
concern?
Mr. Deasy. The concern is that, inside those products,
there will be engineered solutions that allow them to capture
information that can be sent back to the adversary.
Senator Wicker. And those solutions would already have been
engineered and already implanted, in certain instances. Isn't
that correct?
Mr. Deasy. I cannot speak to the detailed engineers'
designs of the Huawei products, but, in theory, yes, if that
product was engineered with backdoors where it was
exfiltrating, that would be the case.
Senator Wicker. So, I'm concerned that that capability may
already be out there and installed in many places outside the
continental United States, which is what you're saying when you
say ``OCONUS.''
Mr. Deasy. Uh-huh.
Senator Wicker. Now, General Crall, what would you like to
add about that?
Brigadier General Crall. Sir, I realize the focus on
outside CONUS, but I don't know that I would exclude inside
CONUS.
Senator Wicker. Right.
Brigadier General Crall. To your point, we're talking about
networks and service providers and that there's some level of
granularity you can have in researching the flow of traffic and
how they're handled, but there's also the smaller end
peripherals, the switches, the routers, and the hardware that
allow these connections to take place. We understand what white
gear is. It's the fact that you can't trust what's on a label.
There's a concerted effort to ensure that what's marked is, in
fact, what's inside. So, you have concerns that there could be
challenges in making sure that the authenticity of the gear is
what's stated. And that concern is shared. In a closed session,
sir, we'd be able to provide a little more detail on how we
examine that.
Senator Wicker. Admiral, do you have anything to add?
Vice Admiral Norton. Just that we have done an enumeration
of that equipment, and so we do understand what is out there.
Again, we can talk about the specifics in a closed hearing.
Senator Wicker. Very good.
Well, thank you very much.
And I am told that Senator Gillibrand is next.
Senator Rounds. Senator Gillibrand.
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you so much.
I want to ask a little bit about cybersecurity
architecture, because Senator Wicker talked about ZTE and
Huawei already. Forming consistent and comprehensive
cybersecurity architecture across the DOD and, frankly, across
all of government, is vital to our national security. What
roadblocks are currently in place that inhibit this from being
a reality? Do you all feel that you have the necessary
authorities to overcome those roadblocks?
Mr. Deasy. I don't see roadblocks. I see legacy. That is
probably our biggest challenge. For years--we had this
conversation earlier--we have allowed services and various
components to roll and implement unique solutions that maybe
aren't interoperable or standalone. As I said earlier, the new
authorities that the DOD CIO office was granted, starting this
year, now allow my office to establish the standards and the
architectures that the components and the services have
followed, which was why General Crall made the comment earlier
that this is the year where there will be a lot of noise in the
system, because we are going to drive those standards. We're
going to drive implementation. And we know there will be people
that are going to be very uncomfortable about the fact that
we're no longer going to allow them to stand up their own
architectures or solutions.
Senator Gillibrand. Right.
Do either of you have anything to add?
Vice Admiral Norton. Yes, ma'am. I'll just add that one of
the difficulties of changing the architecture in the military
is that we rely on these systems for ongoing missions every
day.
Senator Gillibrand. Yep.
Vice Admiral Norton. So, the time that it takes for finding
time where you can take a system offline in order to make the
upgrade ends up oftentimes being the long pole in the tent of
actually changing the architecture, which is why we oftentimes
have a lot of legacy. Funding can become a problem, but the
time is actually the driver in most cases. As we build out
future architectures, we have to build in the ability to make
those changes very rapidly on the fly, without having, in some
cases, weeks and even months of downtime for the systems for
something like a ship or an airplane or a headquarters
building.
Senator Gillibrand. Yep.
Brigadier General Crall. Ma'am, I used to think that
starting things was the most difficult thing in the Department.
I've since learned that stopping them, potentially, is more
difficult.
Senator Gillibrand. Welcome to the Federal Government.
[Laughter.]
Brigadier General Crall. I think that really driving toward
ensuring that, while we have a plan to onboard new
capabilities, we're smart in making sure that we can retire
legacy, where appropriate, because we end up in this position
where it's simply not affordable to keep it all alive. We've
been a little slow on retiring legacy, but we have a plan,
under the new Strategy, in the lines of effort to get after
that.
Senator Gillibrand. A section of the NDAA I helped craft
directed the Secretary of Defense to enhance awareness of
cybersecurity threats among small manufacturers and
universities working on DOD programs. What actions have been
undertaken to execute this order? And how successful do you
believe these actions have been? More to that point, a lot of
the industrial base has led to an emphasis on bringing in more
small businesses in the process, but meeting cybersecurity
requirements is really hard for them. What does the DOD do now
to help those small businesses with cybersecurity so that they
could participate in the future?
Mr. Deasy. As we had discussed earlier, that topic is
actually part of our top ten priorities, probably three
dimensions. You mentioned the academia dimension of that. You
mentioned the small business dimension of that. We definitely
need to help figure out how we're going to handle small
businesses. If you look at what it takes today to do good cyber
hygienes to stay ahead of the adversary, we know many of the
second- and third- or fourth-tier supply base simply doesn't
have the wherewithal to do that. We have some thoughts underway
about how we can bring them into cyber hygiene, whether it's a
cloud or an extension of our network, and we can fortify them
with services that we provide. We are in the very early days of
that. But, you should know that we're in active conversations
of how to do that.
The other thing we're doing, as was discussed earlier, is,
we've stood up a task force that reports directly to the Deputy
Secretary of Defense. And that task force is looking at the
end-to-end way that a supply chain works, which includes the
academic world around base research that's done, or maybe more
classified work that's done on our behalf, and how do we really
understand and get a better handle on how that research is
done, where it's done, and what are the mechanisms that these
institutions are using to ensure that things are being done in
a safe, sound manner.
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Manchin [presiding]: Thank you, Senator.
I have a quick question, and then we'll go back to Senator
Wicker for a second round.
In any competition, you're always evaluating your opponent.
As we evaluate our opponents in the cyber technology realm,
China and Russia--where they are today, where we are today, and
their opportunity either to stay ahead or pull ahead, do you
feel comfortable with the direction we're going to offset the
advancements they've made in such a quick period of time?
We can start with General Crall, and come right across.
Brigadier General Crall. Yes sir. I think I'd have
difficulty answering that in open forum. To characterize your
question you never rest, as you know, on any capability or
laurels that we have. We know what we know, but there's a
concern about what we don't know. And we have a lot of
suspicions on where our peer and near-peer competitors are----
Senator Manchin. You're identifying two of your most
challenging competitors. It's going to be China and Russia,
correct?
Brigadier General Crall. There's no doubt, sir, that they
are at the top of our priorities. Their capabilities are
increasing, as are ours which is why it requires great
vigilance.
Senator Manchin. Go ahead, Mr. Deasy.
Mr. Deasy. To the General's point, it is difficult, in this
setting, to answer some aspects of that. I will tell you that I
have a weekly session where I am briefed by U.S. Cyber Command
and the National Security Agency (NSA), and we specifically are
briefed on China and Russia. One of the reasons I wanted to get
into this normal cycle of doing these briefings was, to the
very point that I think you're trying to poke at, is trying to
understand, vis-a-vis where we are on our offensive as well as
defensive capability. And suffice to say that these are very
strong, capable adversaries, but, at the same time, we have
some strong, capable abilities ourselves.
Senator Manchin. Admiral?
Vice Admiral Norton. Yes sir. I will echo their comments
about specifics, but of capabilities against our adversaries
would be better in a closed session. But, I will say that China
and Russia both have very clearly exercised and demonstrated
their, not just ability, but willingness to fight in this
domain. And we see that every day. Regardless of the adversary,
we see the concerted effort to attack the United States and the
Department of Defense.
Senator Manchin. Is Acting Director Shanahan committed to
implementation of the new Cyber Strategy?
Mr. Deasy. Absolutely. One of the things I said in my
opening remarks that I should really stress is, when I came
onboard, one of the things that he wanted to establish was a
weekly cadence for CIO Cyber. We call it the CIO Cyber Working
Group. He personally, before his new duties came into play,
chaired that meeting. He was at it every week. He would look
for the metrics. He would be quite the tasker of ensuring the
activities were getting done. He's done a very strong handoff
of duties to Deputy Secretary Norquist, who is now continuing
that. You should know that one of the things I have been
incredibly pleased with since joining the Department is to see
the top of the house be extremely active on what I'll call a
very frequent basis--i.e., weekly--in the engagement of all the
activity that you heard us talk about today.
Senator Rounds [presiding]: Senator Wicker.
Senator Wicker. Well, that's good to know. It's
encouraging. And I'm sure it's encouraging to Senator Manchin,
too.
My last question deals with data rights and data control
policies, getting the best technology, but at an affordable
price. You've got a company with good technology. They're
profit-oriented. They don't have to make a deal with anybody.
They're under no special obligation to do business with the
government. So, how are we doing with regard to our policy
there? Does it deter cutting-edge cybersecurity companies from
doing business with the Pentagon? Is it difficult to strike a
balance between getting the best and getting something we can
afford? And what's your assessment of the Department's data-
rights and data-control policies?
Brigadier General Crall. Yes sir. I can certainly tell you
there's a focus. You bring up a couple issues when it comes to
rights. I think the verdict is still out, by the way, on who
owns data. Lawyers will tell you, when you go through this
understanding of where it's housed, how it's moved, what
residual components of data reside. We care. We're concerned.
And we have policies in place on where we put that data in the
Department of Defense.
To your comment about the struggle between affordability
and really doing business with the best--the best customers are
always the desired customers--it would not be truthful for me
to tell you that, in every instance, we get the best of both
worlds. Again, because of some ways that we acquire services,
we often, or at times, have gone with what is the most
expedient or those we could do business with based on rules and
regulations. So, we're still finding our way through that, in
some cases.
But, the real focus, I think, for the Department, when it
comes to policy and implementation on the strategy, is really
how we start focusing on data and data security at rest and in
transit. Maybe less with how data are stored or transported in
conventional ways, but more accurately now is, how do we
safeguard it in all aspects of it at rest and in movement?
Senator Wicker. Are you able to be specific about rules and
regulations that you referred to? What would be an example?
Brigadier General Crall. Sir, I would like to come back to
you in writing on rules and regulations, to be specific. But,
the idea, for example, if we wanted to host data in a
commercial cloud today, and let's say that data was
unclassified data, there's a reason why we tend to put this
data repository under certain controls, like Federal ramp, and
conditions on storage and security, but also on premises. I can
just answer for the Marine Corps, that, when I was the CIO,
prior to this job, I personally felt uncomfortable in some
business arrangements of putting my data in a commercial cloud,
where I could not guarantee, if I stopped doing business with
that company, what it meant to return the data to me. It's
electronic. I didn't know what I would get back. So, a very
specific example personally----
Senator Wicker. You didn't know if you would get it all
back.
Brigadier General Crall. That's correct, sir. So, I ended
up storing that data on prem, where I could control it, and I
asked for services to push that data through those commercial
contractors. But, things have changed since then. There are
some safeguards that are out there that make doing business
that way maybe a little better when it comes to encryption,
which is what I was getting after, meaning I might be able to
house that data under certain rights where I hold the keys to
that encryption and feel more secure about where it resides.
Senator Wicker. Okay. Well, you're going to get back to me
with a supplemental answer on it for the record.
Brigadier General Crall. Yes sir.
[The information referred to follows:]
Brigadier General Crall. Following up on my 29 January
testimony, I would like to confirm and further highlight
Department of Defense issues, challenges and progress,
associated with Data Rights Management. The anecdote I shared
during my earlier testimony was based on my time as the USMC
Chief Information Officer, but I believe the challenges I
highlighted still reflect relevant problems. The Department is
addressing some of these issues, while others remain
unresolved. These include:
Data Replication (If data is replicated to a
foreign country, is the Department now subject to foreign or
international laws?)
o
Storing data in facilities outside of U.S. legal
jurisdiction can subject that data to foreign and international
laws. The lack of legal precedents, conflicting case law, and
the potential for extraterritorial jurisdiction and secret gag
orders placed on the cloud providers, increase these risks.
Because of these liabilities, the Department implemented
contract clauses in the Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation
Supplement (DFARS) that require the cloud contractor to
maintain all DOD data within the United States and outlying
areas, or in DOD facilities when OCONUS. Under this clause,
overseas hosting locations would be limited to U.S. embassies
and U.S. military facilities operated under a Status of Forces
Agreement (SOFA) that provides for U.S. legal jurisdiction.
Decryption Keys (Who holds them for data at rest
and in transit?)
o
The Department requires encryption of data-in-transit
and data-at-rest using NSA approved cryptographic solutions
with the DOD mission owner having control over the management
and use of the keys. In situations where encrypting data with
DOD key control is not supported by the service provider, the
Mission Owner's Authorizing Official is required perform a risk
analysis and make an informed decision on the risks before
transferring data into the commercial cloud. If we decide to .
. . then . . . the risk is.
Metadata (Who owns metadata? Can vendors sample
or compile metadata?)
o
Metadata used for Cloud Service Provider (CSP)
operational management and user-experience improvement has the
potential to be exploited. This information reveals patterns in
workload activity volumes and flows, as well as the
relationships of those workload activity volumes and flows to
specific users and locations. The Department's cloud
contracting clauses establish limitations on the contractor's
access to, and use and disclosure of both government data and
metadata. These clauses limit the contractors use of metadata
only to manage the operational environment that supports the
Government data and for no other purpose unless otherwise
permitted with the prior written approval of the Department.
Accreditation and Assessment (How can we trust
vendor accreditation packages?) The Federal Information
Security Modernization Act (FISMA) of 2014, 44 U.S.C. Sec.
3551 et seq., Public Law (P.L.) 113-283, requires a security
assessment be performed using the standard processes and
controls published by the National Institute of Standards
(NIST). Under FISMA, the Federal Government is not permitted to
use a cloud service provided by a vendor unwilling to allow a
risk assessment performed in accordance with NIST standards.
Some vendors have been unwilling to conduct these assessments
claiming that costs are high and hard to recoup. Additionally,
not all vendors share their assessment documentation (not
required to), making it difficult to assess the quality of
their work. It is important to note that the Federal Risk and
Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP) effort has been
instrumental in helping to address these concerns. For example,
FedRAMP allows third-party assessment organizations (3PAOs); a
group of certified, independent assessors than can satisfy the
requirements of both the Government and the commercial cloud
vendors.
Data Return (What happens to the data when a
contract is closed?)
o
The DFARS cloud computing services clause requires the
contractor to provide the Contracting Officer all Government
data and metadata in the format specified in the contract and
to dispose of the data and metadata in accordance with the
terms of the contract. The contractor is required to provide
confirmation of the disposition In accordance with contract
closeout procedures. The contactor and its employees are not
allowed to access, use or disclose Government data unless
specifically authorized by the terms of the contract, and then
only for the purposes specified in the contract. These
prohibitions and obligations survive the expiration or
termination of the contract. The DOD is free to take additional
steps to secure its data. For example, just as there are
utilities that overwrite PC hard drives with zeros, or randomly
generated patterns, similar utilities can be deployed in the
cloud to overwrite encrypted data before data deletion request
is generated. This step reduces the likelihood of a dataset
accidentally not being deleted by the CSP, and being discovered
by an adversary that later breaks the encryption code. Despite
these procedures, there is no such thing as a true ``return''
of data as electronic copies can exist. This places even
greater importance on ensuring the appropriate risk decisions
are made concerning encryption; assessments of controls; and
where data is placed (classified or general purpose cloud)--no
different than in our own environment.
Senator Wicker. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Rounds. Thanks.
Senator Blumenthal.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for your service and for being here today.
In an annual assessment of cyber threats reported by
Bloomberg News--you may have seen that report--the DOD's
Operational Test and Evaluation Office (OT&E), found that the
Department has not fully grasped how to counter new threats
posed by emerging technologies like artificial intelligence.
Mr. Deasy, the CIO position has served as the principal advisor
to the Secretary of Defense for a breadth of issues beyond
cybersecurity, including information technology, communications
networks, and the like, command systems. In your prepared
remarks, you cite a number of emerging technologies that DOD
has identified for potential use, such as software-defined
networks. I know that Senator Rounds asked you some questions
on this topic. You also noted that DOD has evaluated machine
learning, artificial intelligence systems that are working to
integrate these capabilities and networks. So, for you, and
maybe for all the witnesses, what are the artificial systems
currently useful at DOD, and what's holding DOD back elsewhere
in the field? Is it in-house expertise? Technical resources?
And maybe you would comment on the Bloomberg report, as well.
Mr. Deasy. Yeah. So, we work very close with the DOT&E, so
are very much aware of that report. It's quite interesting.
When you go through the observations in that report, it points
out things like leadership responsiveness finding hygiene
problems. It points out things like nuclear command and control
in this age and the serviceable life of equipment. It talks
about stolen credentials and breaches of defense contractors.
The top-ten program that we have been referring to throughout
the testimony today was actually created, as I said earlier, to
look at, holistically, where are all the intervention points
that adversaries can touch us, and how do we address that? So,
I'm pleased that, when I look at this report, many of the
things that are sitting inside of the top-ten stuff that we're
starting to implement actually mirrors very nicely to the
report.
The very end of that report makes observations about where
there could be improvements. One of the things that it points
out clearly in there is that they now believe the Department of
Defense is scoping the task properly, they believe there is a
followup--there is an organizational construct in place across
the Department of Defense to address these problems, and that
we now know what are the tools and the skillsets that we have
to put in place to get after it. So, that's kind of part A to
your question.
To the part around the other activities, may it be
artificial intelligence, the use of cloud, the use of next-
generation command and controls--as I stressed earlier, when I
talk about the digital modernization of Department of Defense,
I always like to remind people that this is a highly integrated
set of things that we're doing. I always start off by saying
there is no doubt that AI and what it offers the Department is
going to be quite significant. How we implement that is going
to require that we put in a robust enterprise cloud. How we
secure that cloud, how we use commercial providers to put the
AI on top of that is very important. However, if we don't solve
for next-generation command-and-control communications, we will
not get the necessary information out to the warfighter. So,
you must look at cyber from a communications standpoint, and a
satellite standpoint, as well.
All of these things, to me, are tightly, tightly
integrated, and that's why, when we talk about the digital
modernization programs in the Department of Defense, cyber has
to sit at the forefront of everything that we do, sir.
Senator Blumenthal. Do either of you have any comment?
Vice Admiral Norton. Yes sir. I'd like to say a couple of
things.
One of the things that they talk about in that report is
the importance of understanding the cyber terrain and starting
to really grasp that. That has been a major effort of the Joint
Force Headquarters-DODIN. We actually put out an order that
specifically lays that out for the 43 DOD components to
identify, map their cyber terrain, map what is key cyber
terrain so that we can recognize where additional forces need
to be put, where additional emphasis might need to be, to
include putting some of our cyber protection teams on that key
cyber terrain. In my opening comments, I mentioned that I am
responsible for the command readiness inspections that we have
changed from just a readiness inspection of a checklist of
configuration to an operational readiness inspection that
operational evaluation is going to that command to understand.
Do they understand what their key cyber terrain is, relevant to
their mission, specific to their mission? Therefore, do they
know how to protect their mission by protecting that key cyber
terrain? Those are the kinds of things that DOT&E has
recognized that are really critical for us to move forward and
to not have to expand resources tremendously to protect
everything equally, but to focus our resources on the things
that are most important in the DOD.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you.
Brigadier General Crall. Sir, I find it interesting that we
answer that question a little bit based on some of our
portfolio experience and where we sit. Mr. Deasy talks about,
scoping the problem set, which is in the report. Admiral Norton
talks about knowing your terrain. A third in that top three of
what they talked about the Department may be doing fairly well
at, or at least at the cusp of, is unity of effort. Mr. Deasy
has talked about not going our own ways or allowing, these
niche solutions that don't really work well together. As one of
the implementors of that strategy, we have a strategy that we
can execute, we have very clear goals and guidelines, and are
really looking to ensure that we do this smartly, that we come
together to solve that problem. So, I think those three answers
really fit well in the top three that came out of the findings
in that report.
Senator Blumenthal. Was lack of unity of effort a problem,
do you think?
Brigadier General Crall. I think it has been a problem,
sir, to be fair. I think that we've turned a corner on that,
that, even well-intentioned people doing business in opposite
directions really puts us in a fix. For example, simply putting
requirements out on a table and allowing them to be solved in
any way, shape, or form sometimes means to get those solutions,
to work together as the government needs it to do, especially
DOD, you might have more money in emulation and more
engineering problems in getting things to fit that are
dissimilar than you would if you had a common solution going
forward. So, yes, I think it's a fair criticism of past
performance, but I'd like to say that I think we're on a
different track. And I'm pretty optimistic that we can pull
together.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you.
Thank you all.
Senator Rounds. I'd like to follow up just one step
further. And I'm going to go to Vice Admiral Norton with this.
Today, the Department's cybersecurity architecture appears to
be fairly decentralized with, in this particular case, JFHQ-
DODIN possessing what I think would be only limited visibility
into its components, networks, and endpoints. Number one, is my
premise correct? I think it is. Second of all, if it is, then
is this because of a policy decision that needs to be changed?
Is it a capacity issue on behalf of JFHQ-DODIN? Or is it a
technical problem? Does JFHQ-DODIN need additional resources or
authorities to be more effective?
Vice Admiral Norton. Well, first, it was definitely not a
policy decision to decentralize the data. Remember, I said that
Joint Force Headquarters-DODIN has only been in existence for 4
years. We just reached full operational capability a year ago,
this week. So, all of those networks that Senator Manchin
talked about--those thousand networks--they all grew up with
their own ability to look at their own network independently.
Over time, we're starting to aggregate that in a way that does
centralize the ability to view that.
Over the last year, Joint Force Headquarters-DODIN has made
tremendous progress in gaining visibility on all of those
networks across the DOD. Certainly at the tier-1 level, at the
Internet access points, and at the endpoints, and helping to
aggregate, as General Crall said, in some cases in difficult
ways, because the technology doesn't necessarily make that
easy, because they all acquire those in different ways. But,
bringing that data together gives us, at Joint Force
Headquarters-DODIN, a much better understanding of what
everybody's cyber posture is across all of those networks.
We're certainly not perfect. It's certainly not in a manner
that is technically easy and quick, based on the disparate
kinds of solutions.
Senator Rounds. Specific resource needs?
Vice Admiral Norton. An architecture that allows for the
kind of standardization that Mr. Deasy is working on and the
policy that requires more standardization that General Crall
has talked about, are already in the work. I have the
authority, under that Directive Authority for Cyberspace
Operations, and have used that authority, to be able to get
that data and start to give that visibility to both my forces
and to U.S. Cyber Command.
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
Senator Manchin. Just one followup, there.
I think, for Mr. Deasy and General Crall, I understand that
there's a so-called cross-functional team composed of a small
number of experts from across the Department, which works with
both of you. Congress created this cross-functional team.
Sometimes we're not always spot-on, to say the least. I want to
know if you all agree with this team? Is it functioning well,
or are there things we can do to help?
Mr. Deasy. I'll start with that. Much of the work is
actually led by General Crall.
I think we actually have, for the first time, a series of
things that are going on that are well. You have a Secretary
and a Deputy, as I mentioned earlier, that are highly actively
engaged in this topic. So, you need the top of the house to be
highly engaged on this. But, you have a set of leaders that are
very impatient, including myself, that are done admiring the
problem and are moving into tasking. This is including being
less tolerable on people being able to go off and use their own
solutions. The authorities that you all gave me, starting this
year, around being able to set architectural standards are
quite significant. We are now starting to use those new
authorities.
Finally, you used the term, ``cross"--you know, a team
that's been brought together. That, in my opinion, is probably
the biggest thing that has helped us, is empowering General
Crall by giving him a set of experts that cut across the
Department, that are actually helping him now to drive those
solutions.
Brigadier General Crall. Sir, Congress got that right. The
cross-functional team works. And it has several advantages.
It's only as good as it's paid attention to. There are probably
examples of some cross-functional teams maybe not producing.
But, the cross-functional team that's involved under the PCA is
well resourced, in the sense that we've got the right people.
The participating agencies that provide representation in the
workforce sent us their best. So, I'll start with that. We've
got good people.
The second piece is, we can approach problems in ways that
don't have some of the biases. You know, we don't have any
stake in the fight or any legacy that we hold on to. It really
is about the mission. So, we normally come to the table with an
advantage in solving some of those problems. It's been
instrumental in moving the strategy into implementation.
Senator Manchin. Great.
Thank you all so much. Thank you all for being here.
Senator Rounds. Okay.
I want to take this opportunity to thank our members and
Senator Manchin for participating today. This has been very
helpful to us.
I'd like to thank our witnesses today for their
participation. There were several questions that you indicated
you would prefer to answer in a classified setting. I would ask
that you provide us with those answers. Committee staff has
indicated that you may bring those in at the level of Sensitive
Compartmented Information (SCI) in your responses. We would
expect you to be able to do that in the next couple of weeks.
Okay?
With that, I want to thank everyone for participating.
This subcommittee meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:55 p.m., the subcommittee adjourned.]
[Questions for the record with answers supplied follow:]
Questions Submitted by Senator Mike Rounds
cyber strategy
1. Senator Rounds. Mr. Deasy, there are myriad weapon systems and
enclaves that are often not considered part of the standard network.
How do you define the DODIN?
Mr. Deasy. The Department of Defense information network (DODIN)
includes all systems, subsystems, or system components (software,
firmware, and hardware) performing DOD mission functions. This includes
DOD systems, subsystems, and system components used to manage
information, interact with the physical environment, or perform a
combination of both. Weapons systems, control systems (e.g., industrial
control systems), and traditional information systems are considered
part of the DODIN.
2. Senator Rounds. Mr. Deasy, most topics discussed at the hearing
were focused on the standard network. What cyber teams are protecting
our assets such as nuclear command and control, F-35s, ships, and our
aircraft carriers with industrial control systems?
Mr. Deasy. Under U.S. Cyber Command, the Department of Defense has
133 cyber mission force teams operating at full operational capability,
protecting Nuclear Command and Control systems, aircraft, ships, and
the entirety of the Department. The force conducts a variety of
missions: Cyber National Mission Teams defend the nation by identifying
adversary activity, blocking attacks, and maneuvering to defeat them.
Cyber Combat Mission Teams conduct military cyberspace operations in
support of combatant commander priorities and missions. Cyber
Protection Teams defend DOD's information network, protect priority
missions, and prepare cyber forces for combat. Cyber Support Teams
provide analytic and planning support to national mission and combat
mission teams. Some teams are aligned to combatant commands to support
combatant commander priorities and synchronize cyberspace operations
with operations in the other four domains--land, sea, air and space--
and some are aligned to the individual services for defensive missions.
The balance report directly to subordinate command sections of U.S.
Cyber Command, the cyber national mission force, and Joint Force
Headquarters-DOD Information Network. Specific to Industrial Control
Systems (ICS), the Department has a much greater understanding of ICS
vulnerabilities and is becoming more proactive in addressing ICS
cybersecurity. As the Department continues to modernize capabilities,
the use of ICS is increasing with corresponding increase in scope of
what must be defended and need for means to prioritize limited cyber-
defense resources. In addition to ensuring availability of trained and
qualified personnel to operate the ICS, resources are needed to
maintain, update, and protect them just as must be done for traditional
IT networks. Providing cybersecurity oversight of ICS by a
cybersecurity service provider (CSSP) is relatively new concept and
requires engineering support to develop the toolset and the situational
awareness/reporting capabilities necessary for effective defense
3. Senator Rounds. Mr. Deasy, how is DOD being proactive to assure
that security is applied to 5G from the beginning, rather than as an
afterthought?
Mr. Deasy. The Department of Defense (DOD) is aggressively working
on establishing a DOD 5G Strategy that addresses all aspects of 5G to
include security. Deputy Secretary of Defense Shanahan commissioned a
number of high level studies to include the Defense Policy Board, the
Defense Science Board and the Defense Business Board each with their
own area of focus. The results and recommendations from these boards
are currently being submitted and evaluated. With specific regard to
security it is critical the DOD engage with other Departments and
Agencies (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Federal
Communications Commission, National Telecommunications and Information
Administration), industry, Federally Funded Research and Development
Centers / University Affiliated Research Center, and universities to
ensure any security objectives meet national requirements. Although the
Department is still working on specific recommendations and courses of
actions the DOD Chief Information Officer is considering the following
with regards to 5G security and standards: Resource 5G cyber testbeds
Identify objectives for National Security Policy Identify
vulnerabilities and mitigation plans Introduce Supply Chain
specifications into 5G standards Support 5G Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers Effort on Microelectronics Integrity Stand-up
red/blue team Telecommunications security program(s) Employ Federal
Risk and Authorization Management Program moderate/high security
baselines to 5G.
4. Senator Rounds. Mr. Deasy, has the DOD performed a comprehensive
risk assessment on cloud computing as well as a comparative analysis on
using one cloud service provider versus multiple providers?
Mr. Deasy. The Department continues to perform an ongoing
comprehensive risk assessment of cloud security risks. This assessment
is not limited to a particular current or future program, but rather is
a holistic assessment across the Department's cloud portfolio. The
Department's assessment is ongoing, continuously analyzing and
understanding how to characterize risks and effectively mitigate them.
When considering one cloud service provider versus multiple providers,
the Department's strategy incorporates a multiple cloud, multiple
vendor environment, which includes General-Purpose cloud and Fit-For-
Purpose clouds. The cloud security risks resulting from the
aforementioned risk assessment are relevant across the commercial cloud
industry. Whether any particular contract is a single award or multiple
award does not alter the fact that the Department is a multiple cloud,
multiple vendor environment with security risks relevant across all
environments.
5. Senator Rounds. Mr. Deasy, you briefly mentioned the Joint
Artificial Intelligence Center (JAIC) and that the JAIC is applying AI
and machine learning to solve some of present day's most complex
problems. What are some of the problems that the JAIC is solving?
Mr. Deasy. Artificial Intelligence (AI) has the potential to
transform every corner of the DOD. AI will enhance the Department's
operational effectiveness, improve readiness, and increase efficiency
of business practices. To harness the power of AI, the JAIC partners
with the Military Services and other components across the Joint Force
to systematically identify, prioritize, and select new AI mission
initiatives. At the same time, the JAIC will develop a common
foundation that is essential for scaling AI's impact across DOD. This
foundation includes shared data, reusable tools, frameworks, libraries,
and standards, and cloud and edge services. The JAIC will deliver AI
capabilities through two means: National Mission Initiatives (NMIs) and
Component Mission Initiatives (CMIs). NMIs are broad, joint, hard
cross-cutting Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning challenges that
the JAIC will actually take on and run using a proven-successful,
cross-functional team approach. CMIs are specific to individual
components who are looking for an AI solution to a particular problem.
Initially, JAIC is focusing on the following NMIs to deliver mission
impact at speed, demonstrate the proof of concept for the JAIC
operational model, enable rapid learning and iterative process
refinement, and build out a library of reusable tools while validating
an enterprise cloud architecture: Predictive Maintenance to better
forecast, diagnose, and manage maintenance issues to reduce costs,
increase safety and improve operational efficiency. Humanitarian
Assistance / Disaster Relief to reduce the time associated with search
and discovery, resource allocation decisions, and executing rescue and
relief operations to save lives and livelihood during disaster
operations. Cyber Sensemaking to detect and deter advanced adversarial
cyber actors who infiltrate and operate within the DOD Information
Network (DODIN) to increase security, safeguard sensitive information
and allow warfighters and engineers to focus on strategic analysis and
response. Future NMIs may include smart automation projects to increase
back-office efficiency and effectiveness, and a focus on the National
Defense Strategy and operations against peer competitors. These early
projects serve a dual purpose: Deliver new AI-enabled capabilities to
end users Incrementally develop a common foundation that is essential
for scaling AI's impact across the Department. Each of the NMIs and
CMIs will contribute to the Department's AI toolset, or common
foundation that includes shared data, reusable tools, frameworks,
libraries, and standards, and cloud and edge services. As the JAIC
builds and scales each project, the Department's ability to harness the
full operational potential of AI increases. The benefits to the
Department will continue to accrue over time, increasing the level of
understanding of AI across the force while accelerating the delivery
and adoption of AI throughout DOD.
6. Senator Rounds. Mr. Deasy, have the services finalized their
annexes to the DOD AI strategy or have an estimated date of completion?
Mr. Deasy. The United States Marine Corps' annex is complete. The
other Services annexes are still being drafted and undergoing
coordination throughout the Department.
cyber policy implementation
7. Senator Rounds. Brigadier General Crall, you indicated that you
have concerns with industry securing and storing DOD data, as well as
having appropriate accesses to that data. How can Congress help to
maintain the security, confidentiality, integrity, and availability of
your DOD data?
Brigadier General Crall. Following up on my 29 January testimony, I
would like to confirm and further highlight Department of Defense
issues, challenges and progress, associated with Data Rights
Management. The anecdote I shared during my earlier testimony was based
on my time as the USMC Chief Information Officer, but I believe the
challenges I highlighted still reflect relevant problems. The
Department is addressing some of these issues, while others remain
unresolved. These include:
Data Replication (If data is replicated to a foreign
country, is the Department now subject to foreign or international
laws?)
o
Storing data in facilities outside of U.S. legal jurisdiction
can subject that data to foreign and international laws. The lack of
legal precedents, conflicting case law, and the potential for
extraterritorial jurisdiction and secret gag orders placed on the cloud
providers, increase these risks. Because of these liabilities, the
Department implemented contract clauses in the Defense Federal
Acquisition Regulation Supplement (DFARS) that require the cloud
contractor to maintain all DOD data within the United States and
outlying areas, or in DOD facilities when OCONUS. Under this clause,
overseas hosting locations would be limited to U.S. embassies and U.S.
military facilities operated under a Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA)
that provides for U.S. legal jurisdiction.
Decryption Keys (Who holds them for data at rest and in
transit?)
o
The Department requires encryption of data-in-transit and
data-at-rest using NSA approved cryptographic solutions with the DOD
mission owner having control over the management and use of the keys.
In situations where encrypting data with DOD key control is not
supported by the service provider, the Mission Owner's Authorizing
Official is required perform a risk analysis and make an informed
decision on the risks before transferring data into the commercial
cloud. If we decide to . . . then . . . the risk is.
Metadata (Who owns metadata? Can vendors sample or
compile metadata?)
o
Metadata used for Cloud Service Provider (CSP) operational
management and user-experience improvement has the potential to be
exploited. This information reveals patterns in workload activity
volumes and flows, as well as the relationships of those workload
activity volumes and flows to specific users and locations. The
Department's cloud contracting clauses establish limitations on the
contractor's access to, and use and disclosure of both government data
and metadata. These clauses limit the contractors use of metadata only
to manage the operational environment that supports the Government data
and for no other purpose unless otherwise permitted with the prior
written approval of the Department.
Accreditation and Assessment (How can we trust vendor
accreditation packages?) The Federal Information Security Modernization
Act (FISMA) of 2014, 44 U.S.C. Sec.
3551 et seq., Public Law (P.L.)
113-283, requires a security assessment be performed using the standard
processes and controls published by the National Institute of Standards
(NIST). Under FISMA, the Federal Government is not permitted to use a
cloud service provided by a vendor unwilling to allow a risk assessment
performed in accordance with NIST standards. Some vendors have been
unwilling to conduct these assessments claiming that costs are high and
hard to recoup. Additionally, not all vendors share their assessment
documentation (not required to), making it difficult to assess the
quality of their work. It is important to note that the Federal Risk
and Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP) effort has been
instrumental in helping to address these concerns. For example, FedRAMP
allows third-party assessment organizations (3PAOs); a group of
certified, independent assessors than can satisfy the requirements of
both the Government and the commercial cloud vendors.
Data Return (What happens to the data when a contract is
closed?)
o
The DFARS cloud computing services clause requires the
contractor to provide the Contracting Officer all Government data and
metadata in the format specified in the contract and to dispose of the
data and metadata in accordance with the terms of the contract. The
contractor is required to provide confirmation of the disposition In
accordance with contract closeout procedures. The contactor and its
employees are not allowed to access, use or disclose Government data
unless specifically authorized by the terms of the contract, and then
only for the purposes specified in the contract. These prohibitions and
obligations survive the expiration or termination of the contract. The
DOD is free to take additional steps to secure its data. For example,
just as there are utilities that overwrite PC hard drives with zeros,
or randomly generated patterns, similar utilities can be deployed in
the cloud to overwrite encrypted data before data deletion request is
generated. This step reduces the likelihood of a dataset accidentally
not being deleted by the CSP, and being discovered by an adversary that
later breaks the encryption code. Despite these procedures, there is no
such thing as a true ``return'' of data as electronic copies can exist.
This places even greater importance on ensuring the appropriate risk
decisions are made concerning encryption; assessments of controls; and
where data is placed (classified or general purpose cloud)--no
different than in our own environment.
8. Senator Rounds. Brigadier General Crall, how does the DOD
prioritize the Cyber Strategy's lines of effort?
Brigadier General Crall. The Department's Cyber Strategy is
distilled into nine Lines of Effort (LOE), which is comprised of
specific objectives and tasks mapped to achieving the LOE end state as
well as addressing gaps identified in the Department's Cyber Posture
Review. The Department considers all nine LOEs equally important and
interconnected in achieving the objectives of the Cyber Strategy. The
Office of the Principal Cyber Advisor (OPCA) continues to implement the
Cyber Strategy LOEs with emphasis on warfighting outcomes, defense of
the nation, achieving the strategic intent of the National Security
Strategy and the National Defense Strategy.
cyber readiness
9. Senator Rounds. Mr. Deasy, our weapon systems are becoming
increasingly complex. How is the DOD integrating cybersecurity
solutions to maximize interoperability and information sharing in our
current threat environment?
Mr. Deasy. Cyber capabilities have opened new opportunities for
weapons systems. The weapons systems are becoming increasingly complex,
as you stated, but these weapons systems are also integrated into
networks and systems of systems as well. This increases cyber
complexity and risk to the weapons system, the networks and the mission
itself. No single organization in the DOD can hope to solve this
problem by themselves. To tackle this problem my office is working
across the Services, and DOD Components, through the DOD Cyber Strategy
Lines of effort, to holistically improve how we build and engineer
these systems from a cyber-resiliency and security perspective, to
ensure the networks these systems rely on are robust and secure to meet
mission need, and ensure the cyber workforce and mission forces have
the training and tools necessary to maintain and defend these systems.
DOD is working collaboratively to address weapons system cybersecurity
implementation during development and in operations and sustainment. My
office has implemented policy and guidance changes to improve weapons
systems cybersecurity, to include requiring program sponsors to
articulate cyber survivability requirements in the JCIDS process and
requiring weapons systems assessment and authorization to operate
through the cybersecurity Risk Management Framework. USD(A&S) is
incorporating cybersecurity into large-scale military exercises to
achieve a mission view of survivability in a cyber-contested
environment. The DOD Components are leaning forward through efforts
such as the Navy's CYBERSAFE initiative, Air Force's Cyber Resiliency
Office of Weapon Systems (CROWS), the Army's Task Force Cyber Strong
and execution of the Department-wide Fiscal Year 2016 NDAA Section
1647, Evaluation of Cyber Vulnerabilities of Major DOD Weapon Systems,
to identify cybersecurity solutions and leverage individual service
solutions across the broader DOD enterprise.
10. Senator Rounds. Mr. Deasy, is there a prioritized Defended
Asset List for cyber across the DOD?
Mr. Deasy. Defended Asset Lists are maintained by each Combatant
Command for their respective defense and task critical assets.
Identification of Combatant Command, Military Service, and Agency
mission relevant terrain in cyberspace is ongoing and will inform
prioritization of critical assets supporting Defense Critical Missions.
Cyber defense is dynamic and priorities change based on factors such as
missions, threats, vulnerabilities, intelligence, and adversary
posturing. Cyber Protection Teams are currently aligned to monitor and
secure some of DOD's most critical mission assets.
cyber incident response
11. Senator Rounds. Mr. Deasy, insider threats continue to impact
cybersecurity. How is DOD leveraging machine learning and AI as an
analytical tool to proactively identify insider threats?
Mr. Deasy. Detecting insider threats is particularly challenging
and requires analysis of cyber and non-cyber information. The Defense
Security Service is pursuing a project to improve insider threat
detection by leveraging AI to search for anomalous employee behaviors.
Partnering with the Army Analytics Group, we're building machine
learning models that include security clearance, background
investigation, security records, and personnel records (if / when
available). The goal is to give context to the AI capability as it
seeks to interpret anomalies in the cyber data. If successful, we will
be able to detect changes in behavior much earlier and with greater
granularity, while keeping the identity of the individual masked unless
and until absolutely necessary. If unmasked, we'll put supervisors in a
position to have a positive impact on the individual's future through
early intervention. The Joint AI Center is planning an AI effort to
leverage this DSS project to identify misused user accounts based on
cyber data. Together these efforts represent significant initiatives to
afford rapid detection of insider threats as well as compromised user
accounts.
12. Senator Rounds. Vice Admiral Norton and Brigadier General
Crall, you indicated that the DOD has not yet developed a similar
benchmark such as CrowdStrike's 1/10/60 for cyber intrusions; however,
you indicated that you are looking at the requirements for rapid
detection and response, as well as metrics. What requirements and
metrics does the DOD use when analyzing cyber incidents and events to
prevent future occurrences?
Vice Admiral Norton. The DODIN is comprised of multiple networks,
with multiple layers of security across multiple classifications. There
are varying levels of cyber professionals securing and defending the
thousands of networks that comprise the DODIN. CJCSM 6510.01B Cyber
Incident Handling Program is the directive that identifies the system
of record (JIMS) and minimum requirements for incident response, and
specifies the categories of response along with the requirement for
reporting.
Brigadier General Crall. My fellow witness, VADM Norton, is best
positioned to provide a response regarding the requirements and metrics
used by the DOD when analyzing cyber incidents and events and the
prevention of future occurrences.
cyber investment
13. Senator Rounds. Mr. Deasy, China and Russia are making
investments in state-sponsored companies to pursue machine learning and
AI capabilities. What investments should be the focus of our industrial
base to maintain the advantage over China, Russia, and other
competitors?
Mr. Deasy. In pursuit of military AI, China relies on both its
traditional, state-owned defense enterprises and privately-owned
technology companies. For instance, China's large and diverse
technology sector is fiercely competitive and entrepreneurial, which
provides significant advantages in developing AI systems for both
commercial and military applications, compared to Russia. Whereas, the
United States must upon its companies to voluntarily support national
security; the Chinese government has many tools available to induce and
even coerce the cooperation of Chinese technology firms for military
and espionage activities. There are two categories of investments that
the Department of Defense needs to make in order to improve our overall
competitive position in AI: those that pick low-hanging fruit, and
those that address the long-lead items of AI transformation. Low
hanging fruit project opportunities are those in which the Department
already possesses a great deal of data in a format for which there is
mature AI technology available. An example would be Project Maven's use
of drone video imagery; as, image analysis AI technology is mature in
the commercial and academic technology community. Additionally, the
Department of Defense had collected far more drone video data than its
human analyst community could ever hope to analyze. Currently, the
Department of Defense is engaged in an effort to identify other
existing datasets that are strong candidates for AI projects. Long-
lead, AI transformation projects address those aspects of DOD
operations where AI could make a powerful impact, but data is not being
collected or stored in a way that is easily amenable to machine
learning analysis and AI system development. Currently, the DOD
possesses large and potentially very useful datasets that continue to
be recorded using outdated practices. Even when digital data collection
is the norm, the use of different dataset structures and processes may
make machine learning data analysis difficult. Over the last decade,
leading commercial AI companies began addressing data collection,
standardization, and quality improvement activities, to their benefits
today.. Improving DOD's data management to better enable AI
applications development will not be quick or simple. However,
addressing data integrity and other AI long lead items is a vital
prerequisite to our goal of transforming the Department of Defense
through AI. We are committed to fulfilling the promise of the DOD AI
Strategy to ensure that the U.S. military retains its competitive edge.
__________
Questions Submitted by Senator David Perdue
cyber investments
14. Senator Perdue. Mr. Deasy, Vice Admiral Norton, and Brigadier
General Crall, our adversaries are making significant investments in
their cyber capabilities to include artificial intelligence and machine
learning capabilities. What investments is the DOD making to improve
our cyber capabilities to include artificial intelligence and machine
learning - R&D, industry, universities, personnel, education &
training?
Mr. Deasy. The JAIC is establishing a National Mission Initiative
for Cyberspace Sensemaking. This effort is meant to bring advanced, but
ready AI, approaches to improve cybersecurity and cyberspace
operations. Our first product lines for this initiative will be: 1)
novel event detection; 2) detecting misused user accounts; and 3)
network mapping for the cyber mission force. Future product lines will
be identified through collaborations with cyber teams, and government
and commercial research and development efforts. DSS and the NBIS PEO,
in partnership with the Army Analytics Group, are investing in AI
enabled capabilities to look across enterprise cyber audit and user
monitoring data, detect minor anomalies, combine it with available
contextual information, characterize events/patterns as internal or
external threats, then route the evidence packages to the appropriate
authorities for action.
Vice Admiral Norton. DISA is currently making several investments
in the Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning (AI & ML) solution
arena as well as taking advantage of existing investments within the
Department. DISA began teaming with advanced research groups such as
DARPA and MIT Lincoln Labs to begin development of cyber focused AI &
ML capabilities, these efforts include a robust cloud-based environment
to support the development of advanced AI & ML algorithms. Working with
the DOD High Performance Computing Center (HPCC), DISA has been able to
leverage the use of super computers that will greatly support
performance gains on advanced AI & ML solutions. These investments into
research will help determine not only the benefits but the strategy for
DISA's future implementation of AI & ML architectures. DISA is also
currently utilizing the Rapid Innovation Fund (RIF) program, sponsored
by the DOD Small Business Office, to contract with small innovative
companies who specialize in AI/ML solutions.
Brigadier General Crall. I support the responses from my fellow
witnesses, Mr. Deasy and VADM Norton, on this specific question
regarding the investments the DOD is making to improve our cyber
capabilities to include artificial intelligence and machine learning.
15. Senator Perdue. Mr. Deasy, Vice Admiral Norton, and Brigadier
General Crall, Secretary Deasy testified that DOD is in the initial
phases of identifying and possibly certifying certain private companies
that can be used to vet expertise within the cybersecurity field that
can be used to help in its cybersecurity efforts. Has DOD considered
including universities in this effort?
Mr. Deasy. As the DOD CIO has previously testified, the DOD is
reviewing the right approaches to assess the ability of private
companies and their suppliers to protect DOD sensitive information on
their systems and networks. One approach being evaluated is identifying
and possibly even certifying companies that can play this role using
the National Institute of Science and Technology (NIST) standards
assess private companies and their second-, third-tier suppliers
capability to protect DOD information. While at this time no decision
has been made, universities may be able assist the Department.
Vice Admiral Norton. As the DOD CIO has previously testified, the
DOD is reviewing the right approaches to assess the ability of private
companies and their suppliers to protect DOD sensitive information on
their systems and networks. One approach being evaluated is identifying
and possibly even certifying companies that can play this role using
the National Institute of Science and Technology (NIST) standards
assess private companies and their second-, third-tier suppliers
capability to protect DOD information. While at this time no decision
has been made, universities may be able assist the Department.
Brigadier General Crall. My fellow witness, Mr. Deasy, is best
positioned to provide a response regarding the use of universities to
vet expertise within the cybersecurity field that can be used to help
in our cybersecurity efforts.
16. Senator Perdue. Mr. Deasy, Vice Admiral Norton, and Brigadier
General Crall, what investments has DOD made in our universities to
grow our cyber force to include artificial intelligence, machine
learning, and engineering?
Mr. Deasy. DOD uses a variety of programs to invest in
universities. These may be individual partnerships at the DOD
Component-level, or enterprise-level investments. For example, in
fiscal year 2018, DOD announced awards to 175 university researchers at
91 institutions in 36 states, totaling $53 million through the Defense
University Research Instrumentation Program (DURIP). DURIP augments
research capabilities at universities conducting cutting edge research
for DOD, through the procurement of state-of-the-art equipment.
Research areas include: Intelligence Collaborative Wireless networks
Research to Maximize Warrior Performance Distributed Deep Learning
Mobile Sensor System Quantitative Metabarcoding of Pollen for Security-
Related Forensics Observational System for Monitoring and Modeling
Group Social Dynamics Internet of Things (IoT) Testing capability
Learning-based Autonomous Systems Secure Data Processing Infrastructure
Another example is the DOD Historically Black Colleges & Universities/
Minority Institutions (HBCU/MI) Science Program. DOD awarded $25.8M to
HBCU/MI institutions in fiscal year 2018 to increase the research and
educational capacity of these colleges and universities and foster the
entry of underrepresented minorities into STEM disciplines.
Vice Admiral Norton. DISA has established a partnership through the
Office of Personnel Management's CyberCorps Scholarship for Service
Program. The program provides funds to colleges and universities for
student scholarships in support of education in areas relevant to
cybersecurity. In return for the scholarships, recipients agree to work
after graduation for the federal government or a federally funded
research and development center, in a cybersecurity-related position
for a period equal to the length of the scholarship. DISA uses this
program to hire students from over 70 colleges and universities across
the United States. DISA has also partnered with NSA to administer the
DOD Cybersecurity Scholarship Program. This program provides full
undergraduate tuition and a $25,000 stipend to students pursuing
degrees in information technology, cybersecurity, and information
assurance. Participants are obligated to work for the DOD as a civilian
employee for one calendar year for each year of scholarship assistance.
Brigadier General Crall. I support the responses from my fellow
witnesses, Mr. Deasy and VADM Norton, on this specific question
regarding the investments the Department has made with universities to
grow our cyber force to include artificial intelligence, machine
learning, and engineering.
17. Senator Perdue. Mr. Deasy, Vice Admiral Norton, and Brigadier
General Crall, is DOD partnering with universities on cyber education
and training to include curriculum, courseware, instruction and
instructors?
Mr. Deasy. DOD CIO is a supporting partner and collaborator with
the National Security Agency/Department of Homeland Security (NSA/DHS)
Centers of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense (CAE-CD). There are
currently 270 colleges and universities designated in the program,
including 76 research universities. New CAE designees are announced
annually. Requirements for designation include alignment of curriculum,
Carnegie research classification, and faculty qualifications to cyber
excellence academic standards established by NSA in collaboration with
participating colleges and universities. Additionally, under the DOD
Cyber Scholarship Authority in Title 10, DOD provides capacity building
grants to selected CAEs each year to enhance faculty and curriculum
development.
Vice Admiral Norton. I agree with the DOD CIO in our effort to
equip the Warfighter, under his leadership the CIO is employing
cutting-edge approaches to deliver advanced military technologies. This
includes Winner Take All competitions (WTAC), Bug Bounties, and
Hackathons, as well as traditional acquisition processes. The
Department of Defense spends billions of dollars every year on
information security. However, until Hack the Pentagon, the DOD had not
yet taken advantage of the crowdsourced approach to identifying
security vulnerabilities that has gained traction in the private
sector. Crowdsourced security brings in world-class security talent
that may not otherwise engage with the DOD and allows these experts to
contribute to national security missions. More than 6,000
vulnerabilities have been reported in government systems through the
Defense Department's crowdsourced security programs and hundreds of
thousands of dollars have been paid to ethical hackers. The program has
also helped the DOD save millions of dollars across multiple
challenges. For instance, the first pilot cost $150,000, while the
normal process of hiring an outside firm to do an audit would have cost
over $1 million. Effectively executed, Winner Take All speeds
acquisition, delivering modernized systems faster, mitigating risk from
outdated tools and systems. The competition yields a single winner
which streamlines implementation, smoothing what is already a complex
operating environment, minimizing unnecessary friction in battlefield
technology. There are potential dangers in WTAC, too; underscoring the
need for transparency and fairness in conducting acquisition this way.
WTAC could lead to frustration in the competitive space, potentially
stymying competition and even innovation in the global technology
market, in the most extreme WTAC worst-case-scenario. Given the
importance of private sector engineering and innovation, fair and open
WTAC are in both the government and industry's fervent best interest.
WTAC enables an innovative private sector to deliver focused
technologies and development to the warfighter at the required pace and
agility.
Brigadier General Crall. My fellow witness, Mr. Deasy, is best
positioned to provide a response regarding the Department's partnership
with universities on cyber education and training to include
curriculum, courseware, instruction and instructors.
18. Senator Perdue. Mr. Deasy, Vice Admiral Norton, and Brigadier
General Crall, is DOD working with our universities to improve their
support and cooperation with DOD?
Mr. Deasy. As the DOD CIO has emphasized, the DOD has numerous
partnerships with academic institutions to provide research
opportunities, faculty development fellowships, curriculum development
support, and student scholarships, fellowships, and internships. We
also continue to seek new avenues for meaningful collaboration in STEM,
cyber, and artificial intelligence topic areas. For example, within the
cyber community, the NSA/DHS CAE program has developed a collaborative
CAE consortium. Through various grants, these institutions are
developing solutions to produce more cybersecurity educators, share
curriculum modules, and provide regional assistance to new academic
institutions to support their designation as a CAE in Cyber Defense.
While some DOD activities are enterprise-level engagements, others
benefit specific DOD Components. For example, DOD organizations have
participated in the Information Security Research and Education
(INSuRE) project. Through the project, students engage in
interdisciplinary, distributed-team research on tasks in the national
information security domain. Students bid on and propose work on
problems that have been contributed by problem sponsors at government
laboratories and research organizations. Research teams are formed and
check in with technical advisors at these sponsors. Teleconferencing
technology is used to connect students in simultaneous class sessions
for problem overviews, student presentations, and other resource
presentations. Students prepare formal proposal and report documents,
and learn to work with mentors (and sometimes teammates) who are not
co-located.
Vice Admiral Norton. As the DOD CIO has emphasized, the DOD has
numerous partnerships with academic institutions to provide research
opportunities, faculty development fellowships, curriculum development
support, and student scholarships, fellowships, and internships. We
also continue to seek new avenues for meaningful collaboration in STEM,
cyber, and artificial intelligence topic areas. For example, within the
cyber community, the NSA/DHS CAE program has developed a collaborative
CAE consortium. Through various grants, these institutions are
developing solutions to produce more cybersecurity educators, share
curriculum modules, and provide regional assistance to new academic
institutions to support their designation as a CAE in Cyber Defense.
While some DOD activities are enterprise-level engagements, others
benefit specific DOD Components. For example, DOD organizations have
participated in the Information Security Research and Education
(INSuRE) project. Through the project, students engage in
interdisciplinary, distributed-team research on tasks in the national
information security domain. Students bid on and propose work on
problems that have been contributed by problem sponsors at government
laboratories and research organizations. Research teams are formed and
check in with technical advisors at these sponsors. Teleconferencing
technology is used to connect students in simultaneous class sessions
for problem overviews, student presentations, and other resource
presentations. Students prepare formal proposal and report documents,
and learn to work with mentors (and sometimes teammates) who are not
co-located.
Brigadier General Crall. My fellow witness, Mr. Deasy, is best
positioned to provide a response on the working relationship with our
universities and the current level of support and cooperation with the
DOD.
__________
Questions Submitted by Senator Jeanne Shaheen
fiscal year 2019 ndaa implementation
19. Senator Shaheen. Mr. Deasy, Vice Admiral Norton, and Brigadier
General Crall, how does the Department of Defense plan to implement
sections 1654 and 1655 of the Fiscal Year 2019 NDAA? What is the
timeline for implementation? Which offices in DOD will be responsible
for the implementation of section 1655? Will DOD seek industry's input
while creating corresponding regulations?
Mr. Deasy. The Department is currently engaged on working through
the timeline and offices for implementation for Sec. 1654 and Sec. 1655
of the Fiscal Year 2019 NDAA.
Vice Admiral Norton. The Department is currently engaged on working
through the timeline and offices for implementation for Sec. 1654 and
Sec. 1655 of the Fiscal Year 2019 NDAA.
Brigadier General Crall. The Department is currently engaged on
working through the timeline and offices for implementation for
Sec. 1654 and Sec. 1655 of the Fiscal Year 2019 NDAA.
__________
Questions Submitted by Senator Martin Heinrich
chinese cyber investments
20. Senator Heinrich. Mr. Deasy, Vice Admiral Norton, and Brigadier
General Crall, do you have concerns about the investments China is
making in Chinese companies to pursue Artificial and Machine Learning
capabilities? If so, how important is it for the U.S. to have a robust
technology industrial base?
Mr. Deasy. I agree with the DOD CIO, having a robust technology
industrial base is vital to executing our A.I. strategy. One of the
JAIC's foundational goals is to developing strong, forward-looking
partnerships with industry, and, also, academia. That are based on the
Department's steadfast commitment to ethics, safety, and international
law. AI in the DOD will be working to solve really big problems.
Commerciality is at the center of what we're trying to accomplish, when
it comes to the actual algorithms. The Department has to build more
expertise with people who have the skills needed. The President's
Executive Order speaks to the need to build that in the United States
over the next 10 years. With the Defense Industrial Base, the
Department will build mutual capacity through AI or data sharing
initiatives, communicating key areas of focus for AI, and coordinating
missions that link defense firms with non-traditional AI providers for
teaming opportunities.
Vice Admiral Norton. I agree with the DOD CIO in our effort to
equip the Warfighter, under his leadership the CIO is employing
cutting-edge approaches to deliver advanced military technologies. This
includes Winner Take All competitions (WTAC), Bug Bounties, and
Hackathons, as well as traditional acquisition processes. The
Department of Defense spends billions of dollars every year on
information security. However, until Hack the Pentagon, the DOD had not
yet taken advantage of the crowdsourced approach to identifying
security vulnerabilities that has gained traction in the private
sector. Crowdsourced security brings in world-class security talent
that may not otherwise engage with the DOD and allows these experts to
contribute to national security missions. More than 6,000
vulnerabilities have been reported in government systems through the
Defense Department's crowdsourced security programs and hundreds of
thousands of dollars have been paid to ethical hackers. The program has
also helped the DOD save millions of dollars across multiple
challenges. For instance, the first pilot cost $150,000, while the
normal process of hiring an outside firm to do an audit would have cost
over $1 million. Effectively executed, Winner Take All speeds
acquisition, delivering modernized systems faster, mitigating risk from
outdated tools and systems. The competition yields a single winner
which streamlines implementation, smoothing what is already a complex
operating environment, minimizing unnecessary friction in battlefield
technology. There are potential dangers in WTAC, too; underscoring the
need for transparency and fairness in conducting acquisition this way.
WTAC could lead to frustration in the competitive space, potentially
stymying competition and even innovation in the global technology
market, in the most extreme WTAC worst-case-scenario. Given the
importance of private sector engineering and innovation, fair and open
WTAC are in both the government and industry's fervent best interest.
WTAC enables an innovative private sector to deliver focused
technologies and development to the warfighter at the required pace and
agility.
Brigadier General Crall. My fellow witnesses, Mr. Deasy and VADM
Norton, are better positioned to provide a response regarding China's
investments in Chinese companies pursuing Artificial and Machine
Learning capabilities as well as the gauge of importance for the U.S.
to have a robust technology industrial base.
21. Senator Heinrich. Mr. Deasy, Vice Admiral Norton, and Brigadier
General Crall, how do winner take all competitions help bolster or
hinder a robust industrial base?
Mr. Deasy. In our effort to equip the Warfighter, under my
leadership the CIO is employing cutting-edge approaches to deliver
advanced military technologies. This includes Winner Take All
competitions (WTAC), Bug Bounties, and Hackathons, as well as
traditional acquisition processes. The Department of Defense spends
billions of dollars every year on information security. However, until
Hack the Pentagon, the DOD had not yet taken advantage of the
crowdsourced approach to identifying security vulnerabilities that has
gained traction in the private sector. Crowdsourced security brings in
world-class security talent that may not otherwise engage with the DOD
and allows these experts to contribute to national security missions.
More than 6,000 vulnerabilities have been reported in government
systems through the Defense Department's crowdsourced security programs
and hundreds of thousands of dollars have been paid to ethical hackers.
The program has also helped the DOD save millions of dollars across
multiple challenges. For instance, the first pilot cost $150,000, while
the normal process of hiring an outside firm to do an audit would have
cost over $1 million. Effectively executed, Winner Take All speeds
acquisition, delivering modernized systems faster, mitigating risk from
outdated tools and systems. The competition yields a single winner
which streamlines implementation, smoothing what is already a complex
operating environment, minimizing unnecessary friction in battlefield
technology. There are potential dangers in WTAC, too; underscoring the
need for transparency and fairness in conducting acquisition this way.
WTAC could lead to frustration in the competitive space, potentially
stymying competition and even innovation in the global technology
market, in the most extreme WTAC worst-case-scenario. Given the
importance of private sector engineering and innovation, fair and open
WTAC are in both the government and industry's fervent best interest.
WTAC enables an innovative private sector to deliver focused
technologies and development to the warfighter at the required pace and
agility.
Vice Admiral Norton. I agree with the DOD CIO in our effort to
equip the Warfighter, under his leadership the CIO is employing
cutting-edge approaches to deliver advanced military technologies. This
includes Winner Take All competitions (WTAC), Bug Bounties, and
Hackathons, as well as traditional acquisition processes. The
Department of Defense spends billions of dollars every year on
information security. However, until Hack the Pentagon, the DOD had not
yet taken advantage of the crowdsourced approach to identifying
security vulnerabilities that has gained traction in the private
sector. Crowdsourced security brings in world-class security talent
that may not otherwise engage with the DOD and allows these experts to
contribute to national security missions. More than 6,000
vulnerabilities have been reported in government systems through the
Defense Department's crowdsourced security programs and hundreds of
thousands of dollars have been paid to ethical hackers. The program has
also helped the DOD save millions of dollars across multiple
challenges. For instance, the first pilot cost $150,000, while the
normal process of hiring an outside firm to do an audit would have cost
over $1 million. Effectively executed, Winner Take All speeds
acquisition, delivering modernized systems faster, mitigating risk from
outdated tools and systems. The competition yields a single winner
which streamlines implementation, smoothing what is already a complex
operating environment, minimizing unnecessary friction in battlefield
technology. There are potential dangers in WTAC, too; underscoring the
need for transparency and fairness in conducting acquisition this way.
WTAC could lead to frustration in the competitive space, potentially
stymying competition and even innovation in the global technology
market, in the most extreme WTAC worst-case-scenario. Given the
importance of private sector engineering and innovation, fair and open
WTAC are in both the government and industry's fervent best interest.
WTAC enables an innovative private sector to deliver focused
technologies and development to the warfighter at the required pace and
agility.
Brigadier General Crall. My fellow witnesses, Mr. Deasy and VADM
Norton, are better positioned to provide a response regarding the
industrial base.
artificial intelligence and machine learning capabilities
22. Senator Heinrich. Mr. Deasy, in the last 3 years, how much has
the DOD invested in classified and unclassified accounts on Artificial
Intelligence and Machine Learning capabilities? Please delineate by
budget accounts and line items.
Mr. Deasy. In the past, the Department of Defense has not
delineated the budget/costs for Artificial Intelligence (AI) or Machine
Learning capabilities. In fiscal year 2018 the DOD CIO established the
Joint Artificial Intelligence Center (JAIC) and, in June 2018,
published a DOD Artificial Intelligence Strategy. Additionally, on
December 4, 2018 my office issued supplemental budget guidance
requiring DOD Components to report their AI budget requests for JAIC,
AI National Mission Initiatives, and AI Component Initiatives within
the DOD IT/Cyberspace Activities budget.
cyber infrastructure and security
23. Senator Heinrich. Mr. Deasy, Vice Admiral Norton, and Brigadier
General Crall, what are the benefits and risks of placing most of our
national security sensitive data within the infrastructure of a single
cloud provider?
Mr. Deasy. Applications and data within a single cloud environment
are able to maximize the native security features of cloud technology,
which includes robust and automated failover and redundancy features.
In addition, one of the main benefits is operationalizing data through
data analytics, machine learning, and artificial intelligence. Having
the ability to consolidate and pool data significantly reduces barriers
to providing access to the necessary data where and when needed for our
warfighters to maximize mission effectiveness. Other examples of
benefits the Department will see is having data pooled to enhance deep
synthetic training of machine learning based on robust data sets, which
will increase readiness and lethality. The general benefits of cloud
computing, such as rapid provisioning, increased availability,
elasticity, on demand usage and automated logging, apply to all levels
of data and are integrated within a single provider environment. The
risks are managed according to the sensitivity of the data by adding
controls at the specified security level. It is also important to note
that a single cloud environment does not mean that all data and
applications are hosted in a single physical environment where
everything is vulnerable to a single attack. Rather, the provider will
have varying levels of logical and physical isolation available, based
the sensitivity of the data, which will work in concert with the
Department's existing cyber security tool sets. Leveraging a single
versus multiple cloud provider environment reduces the number of
potential vulnerabilities, since with each provider comes additional
connection points and accreditations, resulting in the possible
increase in both vulnerabilities and time/cost.
Vice Admiral Norton. As the DOD CIO has emphasized, applications
and data within a single cloud environment are able to maximize the
native security features of cloud technology, which includes robust and
automated failover and redundancy features. In addition, one of the
main benefits is operationalizing data through data analytics, machine
learning, and artificial intelligence. Having the ability to
consolidate and pool data significantly reduces barriers to providing
access to the necessary data where and when needed for our warfighters
to maximize mission effectiveness. Other examples of benefits the
Department will see is having data pooled to enhance deep synthetic
training of machine learning based on robust data sets, which will
increase readiness and lethality. The general benefits of cloud
computing, such as rapid provisioning, increased availability,
elasticity, on demand usage and automated logging, apply to all levels
of data and are integrated within a single provider environment. The
risks are managed according to the sensitivity of the data by adding
controls at the specified security level. It is also important to note
that a single cloud environment does not mean that all data and
applications are hosted in a single physical environment where
everything is vulnerable to a single attack. Rather, the provider will
have varying levels of logical and physical isolation available, based
the sensitivity of the data, which will work in concert with the
Department's existing cyber security tool sets. Leveraging a single
versus multiple cloud provider environment reduces the number of
potential vulnerabilities, since with each provider comes additional
connection points and accreditations, resulting in the possible
increase in both vulnerabilities and time/cost.
Brigadier General Crall. My fellow witnesses, Mr. Deasy and VADM
Norton, are better positioned to provide a response regarding the
benefits and risks of placing most of our national security sensitive
data within the infrastructure of a single cloud provider.
24. Senator Heinrich. Mr. Deasy, Vice Admiral Norton, and Brigadier
General Crall, what are the security benefits and risks of cloud
diversity?
Mr. Deasy. The benefits of cloud diversity include more variety of
choices in services, partnerships and unique solutions along with the
increased availability of hosting locations. However, technical
complexity increases, based on the number of cloud providers and
available offerings. Cloud diversity may introduce substantial
technical burden to the Department, because the systems in different
clouds, even when designed to work together, will require complex
integration and ongoing management. User training must be specific to
each cloud environment; thus, it means additional training, and in
certain circumstances, specific skills must be learned for the
integration of more than one provider. The greater the number and
diversity of cloud provider solutions and services, the greater the
demand for a cyber workforce with varied skills in a Department already
facing a challenge in hiring and maintaining qualified personnel. Each
provider offers specific services based on proprietary solutions, which
will each need individual authorization. These factors increase the
burdens on the Department's resources.
Vice Admiral Norton. I agree with the DOD CIO, the benefits of
cloud diversity include more variety of choices in services,
partnerships and unique solutions along with the increased availability
of hosting locations. However, technical complexity increases, based on
the number of cloud providers and available offerings. Cloud diversity
may introduce substantial technical burden to the Department, because
the systems in different clouds, even when designed to work together,
will require complex integration and ongoing management. User training
must be specific to each cloud environment; thus, it means additional
training, and in certain circumstances, specific skills must be learned
for the integration of more than one provider. The greater the number
and diversity of cloud provider solutions and services, the greater the
demand for a cyber workforce with varied skills in a Department already
facing a challenge in hiring and maintaining qualified personnel. Each
provider offers specific services based on proprietary solutions, which
will each need individual authorization. These factors increase the
burdens on the Department's resources.
Brigadier General Crall. My fellow witnesses, Mr. Deasy and VADM
Norton, are better positioned to respond regarding the security
benefits and risks of cloud diversity.
25. Senator Heinrich. Mr. Deasy, Vice Admiral Norton, and Brigadier
General Crall, what is the DOD doing to address the risk of insider
threats?
Mr. Deasy. In accordance with Executive Order 13587--Structural
Reforms to Improve the Security of Classified Networks and the
Responsible Sharing and Safeguarding of Classified Information, DOD is
implementing a strategic and layered approach to strengthen the
governance, management and mitigation of insider threats as it relates
to technology, people, and processes. First, with respect to
technology, the Department is actively improving both user and network
monitoring to better mitigate insider threats. DOD organizations are
employing User Activity Monitoring tools and analysis to monitor
individual user activities on computers accessing and storing
information. In addition, we are developing new tactics, techniques,
and procedures that increase our ability to detect and report cyber
insider threat events on information networks. Second, with respect to
people and processes, the insider threat must be addressed through
understanding the individual and their interaction points with the
Department. Thus, the Department is investing in the area of insider
threat social and behavioral sciences (SBS) and considers this one of
its strategic pillars. DOD researchers and social scientists have
partnered with industrial and academic entities to conduct a number of
SBS projects that will help understand the human and the behaviors of
insiders. Building on the outcome of these projects, we are modernizing
and strengthening the hiring process and changing organizational
processes and culture to encourage reporting (including identification
for self-help). We must be able to detect and manage at-risk employees
early-on so any potential threats may be mitigated as early as
possible. Finally, the Department takes a proactive approach to protect
the privacy and civil liberties of its employees and contractors.
Accordingly, all Insider Threat and cyber security related policy and
procedures are reviewed and cleared by the DOD Privacy, Civil
Liberties, and Transparency Division prior to release or
implementation.
Vice Admiral Norton. In accordance with Executive Order 13587--
Structural Reforms to Improve the Security of Classified Networks and
the Responsible Sharing and Safeguarding of Classified Information, DOD
is implementing a strategic and layered approach to strengthen the
governance, management and mitigation of insider threats as it relates
to technology, people, and processes. First, with respect to
technology, the Department is actively improving both user and network
monitoring to better mitigate insider threats. DOD organizations are
employing User Activity Monitoring tools and analysis to monitor
individual user activities on computers accessing and storing
information. In addition, we are developing new tactics, techniques,
and procedures that increase our ability to detect and report cyber
insider threat events on information networks. Second, with respect to
people and processes, the insider threat must be addressed through
understanding the individual and their interaction points with the
Department. Thus, the Department is investing in the area of insider
threat social and behavioral sciences (SBS) and considers this one of
its strategic pillars. DOD has partnered with industrial and academic
entities to conduct a number of SBS projects that will help understand
the behaviors of insiders. Building on the outcome of these projects,
we are strengthening the hiring process and changing organizational
processes and culture to encourage reporting (including identification
for self-help). We must be able to detect and manage at-risk employees
so any potential threats are mitigated as early as possible. Finally,
the Department takes a proactive approach to protect the privacy and
civil liberties of its employees and contractors. Accordingly, all
Insider Threat and cyber security related policy and procedures are
reviewed and cleared by the DOD Privacy, Civil Liberties, and
Transparency Division prior to release or implementation.
Brigadier General Crall. My fellow witnesses, Mr. Deasy and VADM
Norton, are better positioned to respond to the DOD's efforts to
address the risk of insider threats.