- USING INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGY AND PRACTICES TO ENHANCE THE CULTURE OF PREPAREDNESS
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
USING INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGY AND PRACTICES TO ENHANCE THE CULTURE OF
PREPAREDNESS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS,
RESPONSE, AND
COMMUNICATIONS
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JULY 25, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-74
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
34-350 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Rogers, Alabama
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania
William R. Keating, Massachusetts
John Katko, New York
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Will Hurd, Texas
Filemon Vela, Texas
Martha McSally, Arizona
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York
J. Luis Correa, California
Mike Gallagher, Wisconsin
Val Butler Demings, Florida
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California
Thomas A. Garrett, Jr., Virginia
Brian K. Fitzpatrick, Pennsylvania
Ron Estes, Kansas
Don Bacon, Nebraska
Debbie Lesko, Arizona
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Steven S. Giaier, General Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS, RESPONSE, AND COMMUNICATIONS
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York, Chairman
Peter T. King, New York
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Martha McSally, Arizona
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Thomas A. Garrett, Jr., Virginia
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Debbie Lesko, Arizona
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex
(ex officio)
officio)
Kerry A. Kinirons, Subcommittee Staff Director
Moira Bergin, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director/Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Statements
The Honorable Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., a Representative in
Congress From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee
on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communications:
Oral Statement.................................................
1
Prepared Statement.............................................
2
The Honorable Donald M. Payne, Jr., a Representative in Congress
From the State of New Jersey, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communications:
Oral Statement.................................................
31
Prepared Statement.............................................
32
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................
3
Witnesses
Mr. Daniel Kaniewski, Deputy Administrator for Resilience,
Federal Emergency Management Agency, U.S. Department of
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................
4
Prepared Statement.............................................
6
Mr. Daniel M. Cotter, Director, First Responders Group, Science
and Technology Directorate, U.S. Department of Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................
11
Prepared Statement.............................................
12
Mr. Dereck R. Orr, Division Chief, Public Safety Communications
Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, U.S.
Department of Commerce:
Oral Statement.................................................
20
Prepared Statement.............................................
22
Mr. John V. Kelly, Senior Official Performing the Duties of the
Inspector General, Office of Inspector General, U.S. Department
of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................
24
Prepared Statement.............................................
25
Appendix
Questions From Ranking Member Donald M. Payne, Jr. for Daniel
Kaniewski......................................................
45
Questions From Ranking Member Donald M. Payne, Jr. for Daniel M.
Cotter.........................................................
51
Questions From Ranking Member Donald M. Payne, Jr. for Dereck R.
Orr............................................................
52
Questions From Ranking Member Donald M. Payne, Jr. for John V.
Kelly..........................................................
53
USING INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGY AND PRACTICES TO ENHANCE THE CULTURE OF
PREPAREDNESS
----------
Wednesday, July 25, 2018
U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response,
and Communications,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:44 p.m., in
Room HVC-210, Capitol Visitor Center, Hon. Daniel M. Donovan
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Donovan, Lesko, and Payne.
Mr. Donovan. The Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness,
Response, and Communications will come to order. The
subcommittee is meeting today to receive testimony on the
development and use of innovative technology and practices to
enhance the culture of preparedness.
Before I recognize myself for an opening statement, I would
like to welcome the gentlelady from Arizona, Mrs. Lesko to the
committee. Welcome, Mrs. Lesko.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement. I want to
welcome our witnesses here today to discuss an issue that is
important to our homeland security, fostering a culture of
preparedness.
The events of 2017 emphasize the importance of being
prepared for the range of threats that we face. In 6 months
alone, there were 3 devastating hurricanes, some of the
costliest wildfires that moved through California, and 2
separate ISIS-inspired terror attacks carried out in my home
town of New York City.
As the 2018 hurricane season has begun, recovery from last
hurricane season is on-going. For so many Americans, it will be
a long road to pre-storm restoration. I speak from experience
to this point.
Nearly 6 years later, I still have constituents grappling
with the lasting effects of Superstorm Sandy. All of these
events underscore the need to foster a culture of preparedness
where citizens and Government work together to mitigate the
impact of future threats.
We must work together at all levels of government and with
the private sector and the public to identify new and
innovative practices and technology that will enhance our
prevention, preparedness, response, and recovery capabilities.
We need to continually re-evaluate the policies and
practices we use to respond and rebuild in the wake of a
disaster. Investments in mitigation need to be made to create
stronger, more resilient systems in a cost-effective manner.
Local communities have to be empowered to manage their own
basic needs and allow neighborhoods to come together to lend a
helping hand. We need to ensure our first responders have the
tools and cutting-edge technology that will enable them to get
their vital jobs done, whether stopping terrorists or preparing
for the next natural disaster.
American ingenuity should be nurtured to find creative
solutions to ready our communities for the next threat. That is
why I am pleased to have our witnesses here today to discuss
how they are thinking outside of the box as they work to
address the threats that we face.
I am particularly looking forward to hearing how FEMA is
using lessons learned from the 2017 disasters to enhance our
ability, working with our State and local partners to respond
to hurricane season.
I am also interested in learning more about how the Science
and Technology Directorate is supporting FEMA in its efforts
and working to enhance first responder technology. Finally,
essential to any successful response effort, it is the ability
of our first responders to communicate and I look forward to
hearing about NIST's efforts to enhance first responder
communications.
[The statement of Chairman Donovan follows:]
Statement of Chairman Daniel M. Donovan
July 25, 2018
I want to welcome our witnesses here today to discuss an issue that
is important to our homeland security: Fostering a culture of
preparedness.
The events of 2017 emphasize the importance of being prepared for
the range of threats we face. In 6 months alone, there were three
devastating hurricanes, some of the costliest wildfires to move through
California, and two separate ISIS-inspired terror attacks carried out
in my home town of New York City.
As the 2018 hurricane season has begun, recovery from last
hurricane season is on-going and for so many Americans it will be a
long road to pre-storm restoration. I speak from experience on this
point. Nearly 6 years later, I still have constituents grappling with
the lasting effects of Superstorm Sandy.
All of these events underscore the need to foster a culture of
preparedness, where citizens and governments work together to mitigate
the impact of future threats. We must work together at all levels of
government and with the private sector and the public to identify new
and innovative practices and technology that will enhance our
prevention, preparedness, response, and recovery capabilities.
We need to continually reevaluate the policies and practices we use
to respond and rebuild in the wake of a disaster. Investments in
mitigation need to be made to create stronger, more resilient systems
in a cost-effective manner. Local communities have to be empowered to
manage their own basic needs and allow neighborhoods to come together
to lend a helping hand. And we need to ensure our first responders have
the tools and cutting-edge technology that will enable them get their
vital jobs done.
Whether stopping terrorists or preparing for the next natural
disaster, American ingenuity should be nurtured to find creative
solutions to ready our communities for the next threat.
That is why I am pleased to have our witnesses here today to
discuss how they are thinking ``outside the box'' as they work to
address the threats we face. I am particularly looking forward to
hearing how FEMA is using lessons learned from the 2017 disasters to
enhance our ability, working with our State and local partners, to
respond this hurricane season.
I am also interested in learning more about how the Science and
Technology Directorate is supporting FEMA in its efforts and working to
enhance first responder technology. Finally, central to any successful
response effort is the ability of our first responders to communicate
and I look forward to hearing about NIST's efforts to enhance first
responder communications.
With that, I welcome our witnesses here today. I look forward to
our discussion.
Mr. Donovan. With that, I welcome our witnesses here today
and I look forward to our discussion. I am going to allow Mr.
Payne, when he arrives, to give his opening statement. I would
also like to remind Members that statements may be submitted
for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
July 25, 2018
Good morning. I would like to thank the Subcommittee Chairman and
Ranking Member for holding today's hearing on innovative technology and
practices for increasing preparedness.
Throughout my 25 years in Congress, I have seen natural disasters
devastate both my District and other communities across America.
Unfortunately, the 2017 hurricane season was no exception. In fact, it
was one of the most devastating hurricane seasons in history, with
Harvey, Irma, and Maria striking our shores.
I am concerned about the Nation's preparedness for natural
disasters. Clearly, nearly 13 years after Hurricane Katrina, we are
still struggling with gaps in preparedness. The 2017 hurricane season,
and Hurricane Maria in particular, exposed many of these gaps.
For example, FEMA's recently-released 2017 Hurricane Season After-
Action Report recognizes that one of the many errors in the Federal
response to Maria was that FEMA did not have enough disaster supplies
in Puerto Rico.
That is a basic element of disaster preparedness that FEMA has to
get right.
I hope the Trump administration will take seriously the after-
action report, along with upcoming work from the DHS Inspector General
and the Government Accountability Office, to improve their abysmal
preparedness and response for Hurricane Maria.
While I look forward to a productive conversation on technology
today, we must also continue to press FEMA on how it handles the
fundamentals of disaster preparedness.
In its efforts to move forward in preparedness technology
innovation, I hope FEMA, S&T, and NIST will prioritize technology that
will aid first responder efforts to keep communities safe and provide
for efficient asset management during natural disaster response.
Finally, I would note that preparedness has become even more
important in the face of climate change, which is affecting weather
across the globe and right here at home.
Unfortunately, the Trump administration has failed to recognize
climate change, even dropping the concept from FEMA's Strategic Plan.
Given how destructive the 2017 hurricane season was, along with the
wildfires that year, FEMA must get serious about the science behind
these events.
How can we expect communities to prepare for extreme weather when
the Federal Government will not acknowledge that destructive weather
patterns are occurring at a rate not seen before? I urge our witnesses
from FEMA, NIST, and S&T to thread climate change into preparedness
technologies and innovation.
I thank all the witnesses for attending today's hearing. I look
forward to your testimony.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Donovan. But in the mean time, I now would like to
introduce our panel of witnesses.
I thank you, all, for being here to discuss this very
important topic.
Dr. Daniel Kaniewski, he currently serves as the deputy
administrator for resilience at the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. Thank you for coming today, sir.
Mr. Dan Cotter is the director of the Science and
Technology Directorate's first responders group at the
Department of Homeland Security. Welcome, sir.
Mr. Dereck Orr is the chief of the National Institute of
Standards and Technology's public safety communications
division. Welcome.
Mr. John Kelly is the senior official performing the duties
of the inspector general at the Department of Homeland
Security. I welcome you, sir.
The witnesses' full written statements will appear in the
record. The Chair now recognizes Administrative Kaniewkski for
5 minutes for his opening statement.
STATEMENT OF DANIEL KANIEWSKI, DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR FOR
RESILIENCE, FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Mr. Kaniewski. Good afternoon, Chairman Donovan, Ranking
Member Payne, distinguished Members of the committee. My name
is Dan Kaniewski and I am here to testify about how FEMA is
using innovative technology and practices to enhance the
culture of preparedness.
Now, as many of you know, 2017 was a busy hurricane and
wildfire season. I was awaiting Congressional confirmation as I
watched Hurricane's Harvey, Irma, and other disasters around
this country happen in front of my eyes.
Now, I was on the sidelines. I was watching this on TV. I
was afraid I would miss hurricane season. Now, as it turns out
my fears were unfounded. I became FEMA's acting deputy
administrator the day Maria made landfall.
Consider the following about last year's historic disaster
season. Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria caused a combined
$265 billion in damage. Each of these hurricanes was among the
top 5 costliest hurricanes on record.
In response, FEMA coordinated large deployments of Federal
personnel, both before and after the storms' landfall to
support response and initial recovery across 270,000 square
miles. FEMA facilitated logistics missions that involve more
than $2 billion worth of commodities, moving across several
States and territories using multiple modes of transportation.
In total, hurricanes and the California wildfires affected
more than 47 million people, which is 15 percent of the U.S.
population. FEMA registered nearly 4.8 million households for
assistance. That is more survivors registered than Hurricanes
Katrina, Rita, Wilma, and Sandy combined.
Now, we recently released our findings from our
comprehensive review of our response to last year's hurricanes,
it is the 2017 Hurricane Season FEMA After-Action Report or
AAR, which is available on FEMA.gov. As a standard procedure
post-disaster, the AAR is not meant to place or skirt blame, it
is intended to identify what went right, and what can be
improved before the next disaster strikes. AAR's are part of
our DNA in emergency management.
Thousands of emergency managers see the value in learning
from ourselves and each other. Our lessons learned are driving
targeted improvements across the agency, and directly informed
our 5-year strategic plan. Today, given the focus of the
hearing as a culture of preparedness, I will highlight goal one
in that strategic plan which is fostering a culture of
preparedness.
First, we need to acknowledge that during a disaster,
individuals in the impacted communities are the first
responders. There will never be enough first responders,
emergency managers, or service providers to meet the needs of
the entire community impacted by the disaster event. The
innovation that we need to make is to change the culture of our
Nation to one of preparedness. We need to empower individuals
with the skills and information they need to help speed the
response and recovery efforts.
Toolkits to help build individual preparedness are
available at ready.gov. As discussed more in detail in my
written testimony, FEMA is involved in a number of innovative
technologies to enhance our ability to help people before,
during, and after disasters. Crowdsourcing is not new, but FEMA
leveraged this capability from volunteer networks to enhance
situational awareness during the 2017 disasters.
Immersed is a virtual reality tool created by FEMA that
allows users to assess the benefits of mitigating against flood
hazards. The Flood Apex Program is a program of DHS Science and
Technology Directorate and supports FEMA and communities to
better understand the breadth and severity of flood events.
Of course, not all innovations are technological in nature.
At FEMA we are continually examining ways in which we do
business and find more effective and efficient ways to
accomplish the goals of our strategic plan. To ensure our
agency is best aligned with our strategic priorities, for
example we recently announced the formation of a new
organization called FEMA Resilience. Which is an organization I
am proud to lead.
We are also finding better and smarter ways of doing
business in the field that have a more direct impact on
survivors. For example, we are streamlining our inspections
process to damaged homes, so that fewer people need to knock on
a survivor's door to validate damages sustained in disaster. As
we utilize authorities granted by Congress, FEMA continues to
engage reinsurance markets as one tool to help strengthen the
financial framework of the National Flood Insurance Program.
FEMA secured $1.4 billion in reinsurance coverage from 28
reinsurers to cover qualifying NFI fee flood losses in fiscal
year 2018. To complement that coverage, FEMA is exploring
additional reinsurance placement through a transaction that
would for the first time engage the capital markets. Finally,
as tomorrow is the 28th anniversary of the Americans With
Disabilities Act. I would like to highlight a few things that
we are doing at FEMA to align with access and functional needs.
We are empowering all of FEMA employees through the
development of training so that every single FEMA employee is
able to integrate serving people with disabilities into the
work we do every day. We are also encouraging our State and
local partners to improve accessibility in their communities
for people with disabilities by utilizing mitigation funds to
build back stronger utilizing universal design buildings, so
everybody can access and utilize community facilities. That
improves communities' resilience. Now, there are many efforts
going under way right now at FEMA, and we continue to move
forward with those with our dedicated work force, our partners,
our stakeholders to innovate and improve the way we help people
before, during, and after disasters.
Congress and this committee are key partners in all of
this, and we appreciate your support, and ask for your
continued partnership. Thank you again for the opportunity to
testify. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kaniewski follows:]
Statement of Daniel Kaniewski
July 25, 2018
introduction
Good morning Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, and Members of
the subcommittee. My name is Daniel Kaniewski and I am the acting
deputy administrator at the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
On behalf of U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Secretary
Nielsen and FEMA Administrator Long, thank you for the opportunity to
discuss lessons learned from the 2017 hurricane season, FEMA's new
Strategic Plan, and how both of those are driving innovation at FEMA
and emergency management at all levels.
2017 hurricane season
The 2017 hurricane season was busy for many of us in the emergency
management field. I was awaiting Congressional confirmation as I
watched Hurricanes Harvey and Irma come ashore and was anxious to join
FEMA, worried that I would not be able to contribute to FEMA's efforts
during the hurricane season. It turns out the worry was misplaced as I
became the FEMA acting deputy administrator the day Maria came ashore
in Puerto Rico.
Administrator Long has testified before this committee and others
about the extreme nature of last year's disaster season, so I'd like to
take this opportunity to focus on some of the key themes and lessons
learned from these experiences.
key themes & lessons learned
Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria caused a combined $265 billion
in damage and were each, individually, among the top five costliest
hurricanes on record. In response, FEMA coordinated large deployments
of Federal personnel, both before and after the hurricanes' landfalls,
to support response and initial recovery efforts across 270,000 square
miles. These deployments included more than 17,000 FEMA and Federal
Surge Capacity Force personnel, and nearly 17,000 personnel from the
Department of Defense. FEMA facilitated logistics missions that moved
more than $2 billion worth of commodities across several States and
territories, using multiple modes of transportation. FEMA Urban Search
and Rescue Task Forces, comprised of State and local emergency
responders, saved or assisted nearly 9,500 lives across the 3
hurricanes. In total, the hurricanes and California wildfires affected
more than 47 million people--nearly 15 percent of the Nation's
population. FEMA registered nearly 4.8 million households for
assistance.
The unprecedented scale, scope, and impacts of the complex
combination of disasters, tested the improved capabilities that were
developed and as a result of lessons learned from Hurricanes Katrina
and Sandy.
Following the 2017 hurricanes, FEMA thoroughly reviewed
preparations for the immediate response to, and initial recovery
operations. Some themes that emerged as we identified lessons learned
to help the agency, the emergency management community, and the Nation
in preparation for future events include:
Sustained Whole Community Logistics Operations.--The scale
and duration of life-saving and sustainment operations showed
that FEMA must be ready to support logistics missions that span
weeks or months, particularly in remote locations where
commodities and equipment are transported by non-traditional
methods. Plans and procedures for resource movement and
transportation logistics, including the last mile of delivery,
must be effectively coordinated with other government agencies,
non-profit organizations, and the private-sector supply chain.
Federally Supported, State-Managed, Locally-Executed.--
FEMA's ability to provide support in disasters builds on, and
is subject to, the capacity of State, local, Tribal, and
territorial (SLTT) governments. If these governments are well-
resourced, well-trained, and well-organized, the effectiveness
of FEMA's assistance is enhanced. If the SLTT government's
ability to respond--for example, the ability to provide law
enforcement, medical support, or commodity distribution--is
diminished, then FEMA and its partners must find ways to
deliver and support these critical services. FEMA is not
traditionally a first responder but had to play a more direct
response role following Hurricane Maria.
Staffing for Concurrent, Complex Incidents.--When Hurricane
Harvey made landfall in Texas, FEMA had staff deployed to 32
Presidentially-declared disasters across 19 field offices. By
the time Maria made landfall, following Harvey and Irma,
decisions regarding personnel made in support of one incident
had impacts to on-going disaster operations. FEMA and our
Federal Government partners rapidly surged and deployed
personnel to support immediate response operations. FEMA also
relied on mission assignments and the Surge Capacity Force to
supplement our existing disaster workforce, pulling resources
and personnel from across Federal Government departments and
agencies.
Survivable and Redundant Communications.--Following
Hurricane Maria, Puerto Rico's communications infrastructure
was so completely devastated that assessing the needs and the
capability of Puerto Rico and its municipalities proved
extremely difficult. FEMA provided satellite phones to each of
the 78 municipalities in Puerto Rico to gather information on
municipality impacts and critical needs. However, this short-
term solution had limited success in addressing overall
communications challenges. The private sector played a key role
in restoring communications, including cell towers and allowing
open roaming services, and is a critical partner for
restoration of communications.
Responding During Long-Term Infrastructure Outages.--Too
often, we assume the loss of power, communications, and water
infrastructure following disasters will be limited in duration.
The condition of critical infrastructure in Puerto Rico and the
U.S. Virgin Islands, the logistical difficulties of
transporting crews and equipment to the islands, as well as a
number of other unique factors, created significant challenges.
We need to be prepared for long-term outages of these critical
systems, while our SLTT and private-sector partners work to
mitigate future damages to these vital systems.
Land Use Planning.--In Texas, we saw the importance of land
use planning and local building codes. New development should
be built away from high-hazard areas and existing structures
should be relocated to safer areas when possible to minimize
impacts from hazards. It's both how we build and where we build
that affect local and regional risk. Land use regulations are a
vital resilience tool for local governments and FEMA encourages
regional coordination to help make decisions that best reduce
risk. Codes and standards are also only as good as the
mechanisms in place to enforce them.
Disaster Sheltering and Housing.--Providing housing for
survivors following the 2017 hurricanes was a challenge,
especially when a disaster devastates a community that already
had limited affordable housing. Regardless of the readiness of
an SLTT government, when dealing with the displacement of tens
of thousands of survivors from their homes, there is no easy or
one-size-fits-all solution. FEMA has authorities to provide
sheltering options including the Transitional Sheltering
Assistance (TSA) program that provides assistance to SLTT
governments for survivors to stay in hotel rooms, as well as a
program that provides for basic and temporary home repairs to
make a home safe and habitable while the survivor makes
arrangements for more permanent repairs.
Any sheltering option is, by design, a temporary, short-term
solution, designed to be a bridge to middle- and longer-term
solutions. We have other programs and authorities that assist
with housing, including rental assistance, repair assistance,
multi-family lease and repair program, and manufactured housing
units. With all of these options, we partner with our SLTT
stakeholders to identify the sheltering and housing solutions
that make the most sense for each State, each event, each
community, and each survivor.
The State of Texas, for example, is taking a very hands-on approach
to managing housing solutions for their residents after
Hurricane Harvey. States have a much better familiarity with
the needs of their residents, the local laws and ordinances
that can impact some of the FEMA housing options, and are
better situated to design and administer to the survivors in
their communities. Regardless of the tools we are able to
provide, however, permanent housing solutions and full recovery
needs are best addressed by insurance. FEMA assistance programs
are not designed to return a survivor's home to its pre-
disaster condition. As we know, though, there are too many
people in our Nation that are underinsured or not insured at
all.
fema strategic plan
We used many of these lessons to inform the goals in our Strategic
Plan, which includes: (1) Building a Culture of Preparedness; (2)
Readying the Nation for Catastrophic Disasters; and (3) Reducing
Complexity of FEMA Programs.
Build a Culture of Preparedness
First, we need to acknowledge that during a disaster, individuals
in the impacted communities are the first responders. We need to
empower individuals with life-saving skills to help speed the response
and recovery efforts. Do they know how to shut off their water and gas?
Do they know to check on their neighbors? Do they know CPR? We also
need to encourage individuals to be financially prepared for disasters.
Another key element to fostering a culture of preparedness is
closing the insurance gap, which is the difference between what is
currently insured and what is insurable. There is no more important or
valuable disaster recovery tool than insurance, and we need to
dramatically increase coverage to close the gap. This of course
includes our country's National Flood Insurance Program.
As we approach the 2018 hurricane season, it is more important than
ever that individuals protect themselves with flood insurance. Flood
insurance--whether purchased from the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP) or through private carriers enables insured survivors to recover
more quickly and more fully after flood events. It is one of the best
ways for individuals to financially protect themselves from losses
caused by floods. Without flood insurance, survivors must recover with
loans and very limited Federal assistance. For example, in Harris
County, Texas following Hurricane Harvey the average Individual
Assistance grant was $4,200, in comparison to the average insurance
claim payment of $113,000.
Following a series of short-term extensions--and two brief lapses
in the program's ability to sell and renew policies--Congress must now
reauthorize the NFIP to sell and renew flood insurance policies no
later than July 31, 2018.
FEMA continues to emphasize the importance of a multi-year
reauthorization to promote stability in the real estate and mortgage
markets and enable households and businesses to manage their risks
through the purchase and renewal of flood insurance policies.
But it's not just flood insurance. All types of insurance have a
role to play in reducing financial risk for individuals, communities,
and Federal taxpayers. We aim to help transfer risks from individuals
and governments to private insurance and reinsurance markets, through
public education and innovative programs.
Those who are most vulnerable are also less likely to have
insurance--making their disaster recovery even more challenging, and in
some cases, nearly impossible. FEMA programs were never intended to
supplant homeowners' insurance policies. FEMA's average disaster
payment to individuals and households is a few thousand dollars. This
is far short of what most homeowners would need to rebuild, yet few
individuals understand the limited scope of FEMA's individual
assistance programs.
We also need to build more resilient communities to reduce risks to
people, property, and taxpayer dollars. Developing resilient
communities ahead of an incident reduces loss of life and economic
disruption. When communities are impacted, they should focus on
rebuilding infrastructure smarter and more resilient to reduce risks of
damages, protect taxpayer investments, and promote economic stability.
Thus, as some are aptly calling our ``moonshot,'' FEMA aims to
quadruple National investment in mitigation by 2022. The National
Institute of Building Sciences in the United States recently released a
study that found, on average, $1 spent on Federally-funded mitigation
grants saves the Nation $6 in future disaster costs. This is up from a
2005 study that found that $1 spent on mitigation results in $4 in
savings.
Reorganization
As you may surmise, many of these objectives under the Culture of
Preparedness Goal are closely related and all aimed at making our
Nation more resilient. In order to ensure our agency is aligned with
this goal, the administrator recently announced the formation of a new
organization in FEMA called Resilience.
The new organization includes the National Preparedness
Directorate, Grant Programs Directorate, Federal Insurance and
Mitigation Administration, and National Continuity Programs. I am proud
to lead the new Resilience organization as deputy administrator, along
with Carlos Castillo, who is our associate administrator for
Resilience.
Ready the Nation for Catastrophic Disasters
Of course, if we are more resilient as a Nation, we can focus more
of our efforts on readiness for truly catastrophic disasters. As I
mentioned earlier, the 2017 disasters challenged many of our planning
assumptions for catastrophic disasters. We can't just continue to plan,
train, and exercise for what's easy; we need to prepare for
catastrophic events that stress our logistics, supply chain, continuity
of operations, communications, and staffing capacities--just to name a
few.
FEMA's internal focus will be on ensuring that the agency is ready
for catastrophic disasters. Thus for the 75 percent of Presidentially-
declared disasters that are under $41 million each year, FEMA is
looking for State and local governments to play a more significant
role. FEMA will continue to fund recovery for these smaller disasters,
but will increasingly rely on the State and local governments to manage
their own recovery programs.
FEMA aims to have these smaller disasters be Federally-supported,
State-managed, and locally executed. An example of this is in Texas
where the State has stepped forward to run the housing mission there
rather than it being a Federally-led endeavor. This allows the State to
administer innovative housing solutions with FEMA support. We are also
working on embedding more FEMA staff with our State and territorial
partners to help them with readiness for catastrophic disasters.
Reduce Complexity of FEMA
Finally, FEMA is committed to simplifying our recovery process and
making FEMA's programs as clear and easy as possible for survivors to
navigate. We can't implement any of these goals and strategies without
ensuring they meet the needs of survivors. Throughout the Federal
Government, there are a number of programs intended to offer assistance
to survivors. We are working with our partners to streamline and
consolidate some of these activities to ensure survivors can better
navigate our various programs.
innovation
The Strategic Plan provides us a framework through which we can
develop and create innovative solutions to the challenges we faced--and
lessons we learned--during the 2017 disasters.
Streamlining Inspection Process
One of the innovations we implemented real-time during the 2017
hurricanes was in line with our third strategic priority, reducing the
complexity of FEMA. Thanks to some outside-the-box thinkers in the
field, we were able to streamline some of our processes for disaster
survivors. One way FEMA supports local communities post-disaster is by
providing damage estimates that can validate damage to a survivor's
dwelling, when requested. Information collected during damage estimates
often duplicates information collected from other inspections,
including those for individual assistance and flood insurance. These
overlaps can result in unnecessary process delays and wasted resources.
A mitigation team was working in Austin, Texas, to support
Hurricane Harvey and wanted to find a way to streamline the process.
The mitigation team then piloted a way to collect and analyze
individual assistance and National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
inspection data to create a ``damage portfolio'' to triage homes that
likely were, or were not, damaged substantially by the disaster. This
initial information collection negated the need for a second
substantial damage inspection.
Thus far, the pilot has been a huge success:
It reduced damage inspections by 66 percent and already
saved $14 million by reducing inspection costs.
We inspected 29,000 structures damaged by Hurricane Harvey
instead of 80,512.
We reduced the total project completion time from 123
workdays to 51 workdays.
We are exploring ways to use technology to further streamline the
inspection process.
Crowdsourcing
FEMA also leveraged crowdsourcing data from digital volunteer
networks to enhance situational awareness during the 2017 disasters.
Volunteers crowdsourced information from on-line sources, including
social media and other open datasets, to build curated products and
maps. They reviewed satellite imagery creating more comprehensive maps
and analyzed aerial imagery to assess damage.
Coordination between FEMA and these volunteers created two-way
communication to foster unity of effort. FEMA used crowdsourcing to a
greater degree than in previous disasters to augment its traditional
methods to gain situational awareness on critical infrastructure.
Crowdsourcing also aided the agency in collecting and analyzing images
to determine the extent of the damage in Puerto Rico.
IMMERSED
Consistent with our first strategic goal, we are looking at ways to
reduce risk through mitigation efforts. Flooding is the most common and
costly natural disaster, which is why it's critical for community
leaders to be equipped with the information, tools, and skills needed
to take mitigation action and build resiliency. To help educate
community leaders about the value of being prepared for the worst, FEMA
created a virtual reality experience about flooding and resilience
called IMMERSED.
Using technology to place users at the center of a flood crisis,
IMMERSED allows them to assess damage in a community and see the
benefits of mitigation first-hand. By working through simple tasks,
users experience a major flood event in a realistic manner. After
experiencing IMMERSED, users are encouraged to explore additional
information about mitigation actions and are provided details on grants
and other available programs to support communities.
Modernizing the HURREVAC Application
For years, the HURREVAC application, a storm tracking and decision
support tool of the National Hurricane Program, supported emergency
managers as they handled the challenge of developing detailed
evacuation plans, preparing staff through training exercises, and
evaluating real-time forecasts to determine if evacuations were
necessary. FEMA created a working group with State, local, and Federal
partners to provide input into the next generation of HURREVAC. Working
in collaboration with the DHS Science and Technology Directorate, the
working group focused on how FEMA could enhance the current HURREVAC
capabilities, creating an integrated common operating picture for all
levels of government.
A new emergency management hurricane decision-support platform is
being developed and will be tested during the 2018 Hurricane Season.
This modernized application, called HV-X or HURREVAC-eXtended, will
enable emergency managers to make timely and accurate evacuation-
related decisions.
Flood Apex Program
The Flood Apex program at the DHS Science and Technology
Directorate is supporting FEMA in driving new innovation for the flood
management community. It was created to bring together new and emerging
technologies with the sole purpose of increasing community resilience
to flood disasters. Flood Apex provides new decision support tools to
FEMA, State and local governments, and other stakeholders throughout
the emergency management community.
Flood Apex is developing new lightweight, networked flood sensors
through the Small Business Innovation Research program that are cheaper
than current solutions and easier to deploy in large numbers. These
sensors can be deployed in a variety of locations that experience
flooding, not just along rivers. Damages to critical infrastructure,
such as roads, bridges, dams, and levees, make up a significant portion
of the costs from flood disasters.
Future Innovations
We are also exploring the use of Unmanned Aerial Systems (aka
drones) for aerial imaging in remote, contaminated, hazardous, or
dangerous areas that pose significant risks to aircraft crews or ground
personnel; as well as tactical search-and-rescue or victim recovery
operations that require dynamic, near-real-time observation systems.
We're looking to harness innovative solutions to advance our other
strategic goals as well. For example, FEMA is using what we call
PrepTalks to advance our priority on fostering a culture of
preparedness and to spur innovation within the emergency management
community. PrepTalks are given by subject-matter experts and thought
leaders to spread new ideas, spark conversation, and promote innovative
leadership for the issues confronting emergency managers now and over
the next 20 years.
Last, we recognize that good ideas for innovation can come from a
diverse range of sources. Administrator Long hosted ``Discovery Change
Sessions'' to engage stakeholders and inform the Strategic Plan. FEMA
received 2,300 comments from these sessions, and we conducted a trend
analysis that informed the three goals in our Strategic Plan.
Additionally, the administrator initiated Partner Strategy Sessions,
welcoming more than 150 members of the public to share thoughts and
reactions to our Strategic Plan. From these sessions, FEMA received
1,100 ideas for implementing the Strategic Plan. We believe that our
Strategic Plan is not only applicable to what we do at FEMA, but can be
a blueprint for all levels of emergency management.
FEMA also is empowering its own employees at all levels, and
promoting a culture of learning, creativity, and innovation within the
agency through our Innov8 initiative. Innov8 is an agency-wide
collaborative process that allows all FEMA employees, including
Reservists and IM COREs, to submit proposals for action aligned with
the 2018-2022 FEMA Strategic Plan.
conclusion
Congress, and this committee in particular, is a crucial partner in
this process. I appreciate the active engagement of this committee as
we look for ways to more effectively fulfill our mission.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify before this committee,
and I welcome any questions you may have.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, sir. The Chair now recognizes Mr.
Cotter for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF DANIEL M. COTTER, DIRECTOR, FIRST RESPONDERS
GROUP, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY DIRECTORATE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY
Mr. Cotter. Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne,
distinguished Members of the committee, thank you for inviting
me here to speak today. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss
Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology
Directorate's work in using innovative technology to enhance a
culture of preparedness. Chairman Donovan, I would like to also
take this opportunity to again, thank you for your visit to New
Steel in New York City last August.
Both our staff and many local first responders, they really
appreciated the opportunity to show you the innovative work
they have been doing, it has been a real lasting boost to both
our staff's morale and the first responders and community. So
thank you for that, sir. I have been the director of the First
Responders Group or FRG for the last 3 years, and I have over
30 years of experience working on programs to aid and
preparedness. Science and Technology partners with the agencies
at all level of government by developing requirements,
conducting technology scouting, leveraging existing
investments, developing innovative technologies, testing and
evaluating technologies, transitioning and commercializing
technologies.
But most importantly, integrating these technologies into
regular use. For example, the Flood Apex Research Program was
initiated at the direct request of the FEMA administrator. We
have partnered on research related to public safety
communication for nearly 15 years with the public safety
communications research laboratory for the National Institute
of Standards, represented by Derek Orr here today with us.
I would like to use my time to highlight several examples
of our work on behalf of FEMA and the public safety community
from my written testimony. Providing advanced personal
protective equipment for first responders is one of our key
research areas. In the past, we have developed lightweight
wildland fire fighting gear with over 17,000 units in use at
this time.
We recently developed new firefighter gloves that provide
high levels of burn and puncture protection and far greater
dexterity. Over 2,300 pairs of these gloves have been sold to
date. One of our latest products to come on the market is
improved turnout gear for firefighters. In essence this is
their work suit, this is what they wear when they go to work in
a fire.
The new gear we have developed is specifically designed to
reduce exposure of firefighters to cancer-causing particulate
matter. We have achieved this by adding Nomex leather
interfaces around things like the wrists, to prevent the
cancer-causing particulate matters for reaching the skin of
our--of our firefighters.
Another example RIC-M, the Radio Internet-Protocol
Communications Module. This $800 device provides an alternative
for public safety organizations to spending $15,000 or more to
upgrade their legacy radio systems. We have sold or our
commercial partners sold over 450 of these units. That is a
cost avoidance benefit to public safety of about $6.5 million.
Finally, I would like to highlight our low-cost flood
sensors. Today, we rely heavily on highly capable hydrologic
and meteorologic monitoring stations for flood warnings.
However, these stations may cost as much as $50,000 or more.
The sensors we are developing will cost under $1,000, this will
enable communities to economically densify flood detection
networks, extending the abilities of communities to detect
rising water beyond what is currently possible.
This will allow for improved local flood warnings, leading
to fewer deaths, injuries, and damages. My written statement
for the committee includes additional work examples including
our collaboration with FEMA and with PSCR. We in S&T work,
support, and improve at all levels of government first
responder safety and effectiveness to mitigate the impacts of
natural disasters, as well as support other missions outlined
in my written statement by developing innovative tools to
enhance mission performance and preparedness.
Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, distinguished
Members, thank you again for your attention to this important
mission, and for the opportunity to discuss and work with you
today. I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cotter follows:]
Prepared Statement of Daniel M. Cotter
July 25, 2018
Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, and distinguished Members
of the committee, thank you for inviting DHS to speak with you today. I
appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) Science and Technology Directorate's (S&T) work in
``Using Innovative Technology and Practices to Enhance the Culture of
Preparedness.''
I have been the director of the First Responders Group (FRG) for
the last 3 years and have over 30 years of experience working on
programs related to preparedness. Prior to my time at FRG, I served as
the DHS chief technology officer and geospatial management officer. In
addition, my career has included 17 years of experience working for the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, and the U.S. Geological Survey, and a decade of experience
working at the executive level in the private sector. My experience in
this field led to my selection as a fellow of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science in 2005.
culture of preparedness
FEMA's Strategic Plan for 2018-2022 sets clear goals for building a
culture of preparedness and readying the Nation for catastrophic
disasters. The strategy recognizes the critical roles that State,
local, Tribal, and territorial (SLTT) governments, as well as the
private sector and non-governmental organizations (NGO's), have in
preparedness and response.
S&T, through research programs such as the Flood Apex program,
Hurricane Technology Modernization, and Radiological/Nuclear (Rad/Nuc)
Response and Recovery project, is delivering innovative capabilities
for FEMA to help meet these goals. These include new capabilities that
were used operationally by FEMA during the 2017 hurricane season.
Critically, all of these programs are based not only on our
partnership with FEMA, but also on a strong, collaborative focus with
our SLTT, private-sector, and NGO partners. Through these collaborative
efforts, we are working with FEMA to ensure that the results of our
research increase disaster response and resiliency at all levels of
governments.
The vast majority of incidents are handled at the local and State
level. For example, first responders and emergency management officials
handle over 240 million 9-1-1 calls per year, rarely requiring any form
of assistance from the Federal Government. However, in those rare
instances when the SLTT community requests the support of the Federal
Government, it is paramount that the responding Federal community is
instantly interoperable with the SLTT community, able to communicate,
and share mission critical data. Federal authorities' ability to
integrate to a wide variety of local needs is essential for rapid and
effective response. Technologies and standards to share data range
broadly from the status of first responder resources in the impacted
area to the status of critical infrastructure, including energy, water,
communications, and transportation lifelines.
Additionally, improved modeling, data analytics, and mitigation
techniques are critical to increase resilience. The need for
technologies to ensure interoperable communications and information
sharing between and amongst the Nation's tens-of-thousands of
governmental units and first responder organizations is more critical
than ever before.
the role of research and development
S&T is unique and essential in its ability to perform research for
our operational components and across the Homeland Security Enterprise.
DHS S&T has statutory responsibilities to perform research to develop
new technologies that enhance safety and efficiency for all first
responder disciplines, such as enhanced personal protective equipment,
and ensure public safety voice and data communications interoperability
between and among the Federal Government and the SLTT public safety
community.
S&T understands that having the right technology in the hands of
the Nation's 3.3 million first responders can save critical minutes or
seconds--and reduce injuries, save lives, and limit property damage.
S&T plays an indispensable role in the Federal Government conducting
critical research and development for first responders across all
disciplines and at all levels of government. These responders serve in
over 70,000 organizations across the Nation including not just FEMA,
but DHS operational components, such as the U.S. Immigration and
Customs Enforcement (ICE), U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP),
Transportation Security Administration (TSA), U.S. Coast Guard (USCG),
U.S. Secret Service (USSS), and the National Protection and Programs
Directorate (NPPD). The needs of responders and the public are at the
center of every decision FRG makes. That is why S&T partners with
agencies at all levels of government by developing requirements,
conducting technology scouting, leveraging existing investments,
developing innovative technologies, testing and evaluating
technologies, transitioning and commercializing technologies, and
integrating technologies into regular use.
S&T supports operational components to address some of the most
critical issues facing the Department and first responders, including:
Improving first responder safety and effectiveness; mitigating impacts
of natural disasters; providing tools to render safe Improvised
Explosive Devices (IEDs); assisting survivors from earthquakes and
other disasters; identifying threats in passenger bags; saving children
from human trafficking, slavery, and sexual abuse; and improving
situational awareness for humanitarian assistance and disaster relief.
S&T also provides systems engineering advice to support complex,
integrated technical solutions, human systems integration, architecture
development, and transition and acquisition decisions.
The goal of FRG research is to ensure first responders: Have the
personal protective equipment they need to work safely in any
environment; are never out of touch with their peers or command
regardless of where they are operating; and have all information needed
in real time to operate safely, effectively, and efficiently. We
summarize this by saying that the first responder of the future will
be: Protected, Connected, and Fully Aware.
The Next Generation First Responder (NGFR) Apex Program is a 5-year
program that began in January 2015, and is part of a longer-term S&T
commitment to envision and assist the responder of the future. NGFR
continually collaborates with first responders across the Nation on
various projects--from developing program requirements to testing
prototypes of technology. These cutting-edge technologies will improve
emergency response time and accelerate decision making to save more
lives.
NGFR is comprised of more than 15 research and development
projects, ensuring that responders are better protected, connected, and
fully aware. NGFR is enabling new, non-traditional public safety
technology developers--including start-ups--to easily ``plug and play''
their technologies into a system. NGFR reduces barriers to developing
first responder technology and opens doors to entrepreneurs, while
lowering costs and increasing choices for public safety organizations.
NGFR is incrementally delivering these capabilities over the program
cycle and will continue to partner with first responders to test and
evaluate innovative technologies before they are available on the
market.
FRG partners closely with NPPD's Office of Emergency Communications
and the Department of Commerce's National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) and National Telecommunications and Information
Administration (NTIA) as well as their associated Public Safety
Communications Research (PSCR) program. By collaborating with these
partners, as well as coordinating directly with the First Responder
Network Authority (FirstNet), an independent authority within NTIA, FRG
is playing an important role in the implementation of the Nation-wide
public safety broadband network.
traceable requirements
As a research organization, S&T recognizes that it is a mission
support organization and does not own the DHS component or first
responder mission. Our job is to understand the needs of the
communities and focus our research efforts into developing effective
solutions. Our goal for most of our first responder research activities
is to provide solutions in the 18-24 month time frame. We make sure
that these new technologies and capabilities are available to first
responders by coordinating closely with FEMA to assure that these
technologies can be made available on the FEMA Authorized Equipment
List (AEL), and therefore eligible for purchase with Federal grant
dollars. This includes working with groups such as the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) and NIST, to ensure compliance with all
applicable standards.
To gather and validate requirements, S&T works directly with front-
line mission personnel at all levels of government and from all
disciplines. As part of this effort, S&T leads the First Responder
Resource Group (FRRG), which is composed of 140 fire, emergency medical
service (EMS), emergency managers, and law enforcement first responders
from various State, local, and Federal agencies across the country,
including DHS operational components. This group meets annually to
identify high-priority capability gaps and to help make first
responders aware of technologies that S&T has transitioned to the
commercial market. The most recent meeting was held earlier this year
and included over 103 attendees with representatives from DHS component
agencies that included FEMA, ICE, CBP, USCG, the Federal Law
Enforcement Training Centers (FLETC), and the Federal Air Marshal
Service. By the end of the meeting, the FRRG members were able to help
S&T identify 24 new capability gaps, which will assist in determining
what new projects will be funded by S&T and ultimately transitioned to
the commercial market place for the first responder community to
purchase.
The FRRG process has led to dozens of cost-effective solutions,
such as:
The Electronic Recovery and Access to Data Prepaid Card
Reader, a card-reading device system capable of analyzing and
freezing funds on pre-paid bank cards that are suspected of
having ties to criminal activity. The device is being used in
42 States by over 900 agencies, as well as in 3 other
countries. Federal, State, local, and Tribal law enforcement
agencies have seized over $10 million in criminal funds after
law enforcement conducted investigations and obtained authority
to seize these funds through the judicial system.
FRG developed the Wildland Firefighters Advanced Personal
Protection System to provide unprecedented protection to
wildland firefighters. The NFPA certified garment system
improves radiant thermal protection; reduces heat stress; and
improves form, fit, and function. The garments are commercially
available from two manufacturers who have sold more than 20,000
garments.
In partnership with first responders, the U.S. Army and the
private sector, S&T developed the Enhanced Dynamic Geo-Social
Environment (EDGE) Virtual Training tool that is available free
of charge to any first responder agency across the country. S&T
established a point of distribution for the software and the
first environment, a multi-story hotel. Currently, 600 agencies
across the Nation are using EDGE, as well as two other nations.
A school building environment will be available later this year
and promises to help first responders and school personnel
better prepare for active-shooter incidents.
tangible results
S&T, through its FRG, has transitioned 47 products and completed 80
other projects that have resulted in knowledge products such as
standards, concepts of operations, and other guidance for first
responders. Working with the DHS operational components, S&T has built
strong partnerships to deliver technically sound, cost-effective
technologies that have yielded significant impacts including:
Aided in identifying over 475 child exploitation victims, in
coordination with ICE's Homeland Security Investigations, using
advanced facial recognition tools.
Improved emergency management mutual aid in 40 States,
reducing time to identify resources from 72 hours to as little
as 30 minutes.
Partnered with 14 countries and over 40 start-ups to
increase technology development globally and bring new
technology to market more efficiently.
Deployed the Android Team Awareness Kit (ATAK) to enhance
situational awareness at National and border security events.
ATAK is a tool that allows all emergency workers to share
situational awareness in an unprecedented way. ATAK has already
saved lives during emergency response activities by enabling
300 unique users across 17 agencies participating in the
hurricane response (i.e., Hurricane Harvey, Hurricane Irma,
Hurricane Maria) to share information and awareness via ATAK,
which impacted 3,000 rescues.
Supported search-and-rescue units across the globe,
including FEMA's Urban Search-and-Rescue teams, by rapidly
locating survivors buried under collapsed buildings after
earthquakes through the use of Finding Individuals for Disaster
and Emergency Response (FINDER). FINDER is a tool that detects
human heartbeats under rubble piles.
Supported radiation detection training, through the National
Urban Security and Technology Laboratory, for over 2,000 law
enforcement officers.
Published over 1,000 System Assessment and Validation for
Emergency Responders (SAVER) Reports--S&T's version of Consumer
Reports for responder technologies.
Published the Radiological Dispersal Device (RDD) Response
Guidance: Planning for the First 100 Minutes, co-branded with
FEMA and the Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security
Administration, which was incorporated into FEMA preparedness
planning and training.
Integrated the Rad Decontamination App into FEMA's
RadResponder toolkit. RadResponder is a smartphone app that can
be downloaded by any first responder and provides them with
just-in-time guidance to deal with rare radiological events.
Created the Toolkit for Radiological Operations Support
Specialist (ROSS), a FEMA National Incident Management System
position developed with S&T, which is posted to RadResponder
for first responder access.
Provided technology evaluations to enhance responder
capabilities during Active-Shooter events, including an
exercise last year with the New York Police Department, Fire
Department of New York, Metropolitan Transportation Authority
(MTA) Police Department and MTA Metro-North Railroad, New York
State Police, and U.S. Army National Guard.
Developed the Smoke and Particulate Resistant Structural
Turnout Ensemble, the first turnout gear to offer firefighters
protection from exposure to hazardous, cancer-causing
chemicals. Today, there is an extremely high likelihood of a
firefighter developing cancer due to exposure to hazardous
chemicals and particulates.
Developed and tested the Pat-down Accuracy Training Tool, a
mannequin with embedded sensor technology that provides
objective feedback on pressure, sequence, and coverage during
pat-downs at four airports and the TSA Academy.
s&t innovations and preparedness
Working with FEMA in supporting the strategic goals of a culture of
preparedness and readying the Nation for catastrophic disasters, S&T is
collaborating with Federal, State, local, territorial, and Tribal
governments, as well as the private-sector and non-governmental
organizations to advance a whole-of-community approach to increase
disaster preparedness.
Shaken Fury
This includes support to FEMA's 2019 National exercise Shaken Fury
19, which S&T is using to help elevate regional resilience in the New
Madrid Seismic Zone through the generation and adoption of new
information-sharing technologies and protocols that will enhance shared
situational awareness between critical response and recovery
organizations and their associated operations centers. This transition
of new innovations and technologies is facilitated through a strong
standing relationship with the Central United States Earthquake
Consortium (CUSEC), an association of 8 member and 10 associated
States.
Within the scope of Shaken Fury 19, S&T is working with FEMA and
CUSEC, as well as the Department of Defense and the National Guard, to
integrate several new candidate capabilities such as:
CUSEC Regional Common Operating Picture enhancements
Tools and guides to improve situational awareness and
emergency management response
Mutual Aid Resource Planner
New technologies for communications restoration, including
the next generation of deployable communications infrastructure
Autonomous mass casualty patient monitoring and tracking
Use of unmanned aerial systems for damage assessment
Testing of S&T sponsored low-cost flood sensors.
S&T recognizes the importance of capturing lessons learned from
events such as Shaken Fury 19; therefore, S&T has developed an Incident
Management Information-Sharing Capability Maturity Model (IMIS CMM)
that provides a means for the SLTT community to objectively assess
their ability to share information with partners. Assessment results
will be used to steer corrective actions to increase interoperability
between all levels of government.
Flood Apex program
The Flood Apex program was created at the request of the
administrator of FEMA to bring together new and emerging technologies
designed to increase communities' resilience to flood disasters and
provide new decision support tools to FEMA, State, and local
governments, and other stakeholders. The Flood Apex program is focused
on six research challenges:
Reducing flood fatalities
Reducing uninsured losses
Improving mitigation investment decisions
Enhancing community resilience
Improving data and data access
Improving modeling and predictive analytics.
To address these challenges, S&T is focused on:
New flood sensors and alerting
Smarter remote sensing and situational awareness
New products from high-performance computing and artificial
intelligence
Realigned economic incentives and risk analysis.
While the Flood Apex program is not scheduled for completion until
fiscal year 2020, research products are already transitioning into
operational use. These include the use of deep learning techniques with
high-resolution satellite and aerial imagery, to produce building
outlines needed by FEMA for recovery operations. Over the course of
hurricane response and recovery operations, S&T delivered over 19
million building outlines across 8 States, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin
Islands. These outlines supported a variety of Federal and SLTT
emergency management and first-responder functions and activities. FEMA
alone used these data to expedite over 115,000 damage assessments. The
Flood Apex technologies helped support FEMA in speeding the release of
over $200 million in disaster assistance to survivors.
Other technologies, such as the low-cost flood sensors, Observed
Flood Extent, and HAZUS Tsunami Module, have been proven and are now
moving to various States of adoption and use. We are working with the
Association of State Flood Plain Managers and others to stimulate
flood-proofing innovation and advance flood mitigation. These
innovations include pursuing development of Nationally-recognized
standards for flood-proofing products, such as water-proofing
materials, semi-permeable barriers, and smart sensors.
On-going Flood Apex research is supporting FEMA in the areas of
flood insurance research, working with leaders in the private sector
and academics. FEMA recognizes that insurance is one of the most
important disaster recovery tools. Our research is focused on helping
FEMA to close the insurance coverage gap in the area of flood
insurance.
Wireless Emergency Alerts
S&T's research and development efforts are also having game-
changing results on emergency alerts, warnings, and notifications to
communities across the Nation. S&T led an effort to improve geo-
targeting capabilities and public response to alerts and warnings. In
partnership with FEMA, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), and
the wireless industry, S&T helped develop Wireless Emergency Alerts
(WEA) to enable the dissemination of alerts to mobile devices and the
geo-targeting of specific locations so that only people in the affected
area are notified. As part of FEMA's Integrated Public Alert and
Warning System, WEA enables the distribution of Presidential alerts,
AMBER alerts, and imminent threat alerts (e.g., hurricanes and
tornadoes, where life or property is at risk) to mobile devices,
including cellular phones and pagers. The FCC adopted FRG's research
findings and recommendations on message effectiveness, increased
character length, addition of URL links, pictures, and videos to the
alerts, and employed new technology to support geo-targeting functions.
In the last 5 years, WEA has been used to issue over 35,000 emergency
alerts. The National Weather Service has sent well over 33,000 WEA
alerts. California officials used WEA 4 times in response to the 2017
wildfires in Northern California, and 16 times for the Los Angeles area
wildfires to successfully move citizens to safety. WEA was also used
extensively in all areas affected by the 2017 hurricanes, including 21
WEA alerts sent in Puerto Rico. Additionally, WEA provides awareness
that has aided in the recovery of missing children. In 2016 alone, 179
AMBER Alerts were issued in the United States involving 231 children.
Since system deployment in 2012, WEA has been credited with the safe
return of 47 missing children.
Response and Defeat Operations Support (REDOPS)
Recognizing a gap in responding to IEDs, S&T launched the REDOPS
program, a collaborative effort with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI) and the National Bomb Squad Commanders Advisory
Board to develop render safe countermeasures for the Nation's 466 bomb
squads. REDOPS develops innovative tools, as well as Tactics,
Techniques, and Procedures to support State and local bomb squads.
Results of this research have been published in 9 Special Technicians
Bulletins and 16 Test and Evaluation Reports and have been incorporated
into trainings by the FBI's Hazardous Device School.
Interoperable Communications
One of S&T's key statutory responsibilities is in the area of
ensuring first responder communications and data interoperability. It
is the objective of S&T research in the area of interoperable
communications to ensure that responders are always connected, even in
the most challenging environments. S&T has a long history of
collaboration with NPPD/OEC and NIST/PSCR on developing solutions for
interoperable communicators based on LMR technologies.
First Responder Electronic Jamming.--Without radio and cellular
communications, first responders' safety is imperiled and their
ability to perform their mission is jeopardized. S&T has
continued to conduct extensive research into the impacts and
mitigation of both intentional and unintentional jamming. Over
1,000 first responders at the Federal and SLTT levels have
participated in our innovative research and field
experimentation over the last several years. As a result of
these efforts, we have been able to produce technical guidance
on jamming detection and mitigation for the first responder
community and we are working with the private-sector equipment
manufacturers to help improve communications resiliency.
Additionally, S&T and the FCC released a joint alert to the law
enforcement community with findings from the 2016 First
Responder Electronic Jamming Exercise, which has reached more
than 100,000 stakeholders. The most recent exercise, held in
2017, evaluated how tactics and technologies could help first
responders identify, locate, and mitigate the impact of jamming
threats.
Datacasting.--First responders often have problems sharing mission-
critical information, especially video, when networks become
overloaded. S&T supported the development of a datacasting
capability, which enables voice and video communications to be
transported via existing broadcast television signals to
deliver encrypted data to targeted recipients. S&T conducted
various datacasting technology pilots with the city of Houston.
As a result of these pilots, Houston Fire Department is
currently using datacasting technology during operations.
Specifically, the Houston Fire Department used datacasting
technology to stream video from boots on the ground back to
command centers to provide situational awareness during
Hurricane Harvey response. The investment in datacasting
technology has helped to enable reliable video transmission
during large-scale events where bandwidth and network capacity
are usually problematic. Further, S&T is working with FLETC to
conduct a datacasting technology pilot to improve responder
training in fall 2018.
Information Sharing.--We are working to provide first responders
with the information they need in a timely manner and provide
intelligent technologies that will help them filter through
meaningless information and manage their communications
seamlessly and without losing time and focus. This includes our
partnership with NASA JPL to develop artificial general
intelligence for first responders, a cutting-edge digital
assistant that provides data analytics, and alerting and
analysis. We have conducted testing of this technology in the
field and the feedback from first responders and
experimentation results have been extremely promising.
Project 25 Compliance Assessment Program (P25 CAP).--S&T is
improving Land Mobile Radio (LMR) interoperability through P25
CAP, which has a rigorous process to ensure radio systems are
demonstrated to be compliant to standards and interoperable.
The program affects well over 1 million devices in use today.
S&T significantly enhanced the program to address new
interfaces and standards and formed a new partnership with the
Department of the Interior to establish a laboratory to test
new interfaces not tested before, which will also have a
potential impact on interconnection of LMR systems to FirstNet.
Additionally, we have also developed an Integration Handbook, as
part of the NGFR Apex program, to guide industry in development,
design, test, and integration of responder technologies. This handbook
outlines a ``plug-and-play,'' standards-based environment that enables
commercially-developed technologies to integrate and interoperate. Once
we have completed our coordination with industry and the first
responder community, we hope that the Integration Handbook will become
a key reference for first responder communications interoperability and
part of the FEMA AEL guidance.
Our research also extends into areas of close cooperation with
PSCR. Some examples include:
Cooperation and coordination of research on in-building
location services
Use of LIDAR ``point clouds'' for situational awareness and
3-D mapping
Coordination of R&D on communications resiliency
(participation in First Responder Electronic Jamming Exercises)
Coordination of deployable communications in adverse
environments.
Hurricane Evacuation Planning and Decision Making
We have collaborated with FEMA and the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, as well as State and local emergency managers to develop the
Nation's next hurricane evacuation planning and decision support
system. This new system, called Web-Based HURREVAC, provides an
anywhere, anytime, any device, mobile decision support and training
platform for emergency managers during hurricanes. HURREVAC is being
used by emergency managers in Atlantic and Gulf coastal States, Hawaii,
the U.S. Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico, and will be operational for
the 2019 hurricane season to support 25,000+ emergency management
stakeholders. This new system provides innovative visualizations of
hurricane data and information for evacuation planning and decision
making, reducing uncertainty at all stakeholder levels and improving
shared understanding of available weather information and developing
threats. Using this innovative technology to enhance preparedness will
directly impact local communities by lowering the probability of over
evacuations, avoiding unnecessary costs, as well as lowering the
probability of under evacuations, saving lives.
Training and Virtual Reality
Providing effective, realistic, and effective training tools for
first responders is another role played by S&T. In addition to EDGE,
S&T is developing virtual Incident Command System (ICS) training tools
for firefighters, as well as training tools for TSA and CBP.
We provided 45 ScreenADAPT systems to TSA and conducted
evaluations with hundreds of Transportation Security Officers (TSOs) on
single and dual view systems at 8 airports across the Nation.
ScreenADAPT uses eye-tracking technology to examine visual search
performance and adapt to trainee's needs in real-time. In some
evaluations with TSOs, ScreenADAPT increased efficiency and
effectiveness of trainees, reducing false alarms, and the need for
unnecessary manual secondary bag searches that can slow checkpoint
throughput. S&T developed a web-based version of ScreenADAPT and
transitioned it to USSS to provide a distributed capability for
advanced X-ray image analysis training to 500+ uniformed USSS officers.
S&T also developed and implemented the Eye-dentify system, building off
ScreenADAPT, at the FLETC CBP Field Operations Academy providing
enhanced impostor detection training. Eye-dentify tracks an officer/
agent's eye movements during training to determine where, how long, and
in what sequence a trainee is looking at an ID or a face.
The U.S. Border Patrol (USBP) identified a need for improved
tracking training tools, methods, technologies, and capabilities.
Tracking, also known as ``sign cutting,'' is executed to find evasive,
hidden, or missing people along our Nation's borders. S&T conducted an
analysis of existing training, as well as in depth interviews, ride-a-
longs, and walk-throughs at various border locations. S&T then created
comprehensive, video-based training utilizing both 2D and 3D videos
that have been incorporated into the new training program for all
newly-hired agents at the USBP Academy at FLETC. USBP Academy and FLETC
representatives have collaborated with S&T to provide iterative
requirements and for the development of a comprehensive web-enabled
Signcutting and Tracking Training module that is being transitioned to
provide a distributed capability for both new hire and recurrent/
refresher training.
National Urban Security and Technology Laboratory (NUSTL)
NUSTL has been helping to secure American Cities against threats
for over 60 years, delivering innovative technology, training, and
science in 41 States and 306 cities across the country. This program is
the DHS lead for testing of UAS counter measures technologies. In
addition, the Laboratory develops and transitions to operational use
rad/nuc response and recovery tools. These include modeling and
simulation tools, radiological dispersal device guidance, and creating
a Nationally-recognized position definition for a Radiological
Operations Support Specialist. Through these efforts, NUSTL is enabling
FEMA to:
Increase capability at all levels of government to manage
and characterize complex and catastrophic incidents.
Improve responders' ability to save lives during the initial
response operations of a radiological incident.
Minimize impact to community and economy through improved
methods of incident stabilization, radiological clean-up, and
recovery.
future of innovation
The advent of the era of ``Big Data'' and the ``Internet of
Things,'' combined with the emergence of a way to discover and move
vast amounts of data and information that will result from the public
safety broadband initiative, paves the foundation for our ability to
make rapid progress toward building a culture of preparedness and
readying the Nation for catastrophic disasters. The new tools S&T is
working on in the areas of modeling and simulation, data analytics, and
artificial intelligence will provide unparalleled capabilities to FEMA
and the SLTT community to understand their hazards and risks, mitigate,
respond, and recover.
With the pace of innovation only accelerating, the power of
information and technology in the hands of our first responders will
increase dramatically over the next decade. S&T research, driven by the
requirements of FEMA, other DHS operational components, and the first
responder community, will be an indispensable part of this acceleration
of first responder capabilities. As first responders become safer and
ever more efficient in the mission, the capability of communities to
withstand, recover from, and respond to catastrophic events will
increase.
Combine these advancements with more effective insurance coverage
and tools, mitigation programs enhanced with better analytics and
products, and far more efficient and effective interoperable
communications, and we can be optimistic for a future characterized by
increasing disaster resilience at the local and State level.
S&T is adding value at the intersection of Smart Cities and
Internet of Things (IoT) through the integration of new and existing
technologies applied to public safety needs with an emphasis on
commercialization through industry partners. S&T-funded programs to
advance technologies and implement a streamlined process for getting
capabilities commercialized and available to first responders and
industry investment partners. In fact, we are funding 13 small
businesses to integrate Smart City and IoT technologies in the
following areas:
Unmanned Aerial Systems for indoor search and rescue;
Building sensors for detection and situational awareness;
and
SmartHubs for responder-focused mobile communication and
sensor suites.
Four small businesses are showcasing their prototype SmartHub
technologies today (July 25) in Chicago to public safety officials,
building/real estate and insurance industry partners, and the venture
capital community.
Some of our planned Smart City development includes: Tampa, FL, and
St. Louis, MO, as well as supporting public safety with established
stakeholder communities (e.g. Torrance, CA; Ellicott City, MD;
Charlotte-Mecklenburg, NC; Norfolk, VA; and the States of Kentucky,
North Carolina, South Carolina, and Texas).
Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, and distinguished Members
of the committee, thank you again for your attention to this important
mission and for the opportunity to discuss S&T's work in the area of
preparedness. I believe that the preceding examples are representative
of how DHS S&T is making a tangible difference in the work that
America's first responders do every day. I look forward to answering
your questions.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you very much, sir. Mr. Orr, the Chair
recognizes for 5 minutes and isn't it difficult to speak after
somebody who brought toys with them?
Mr. Orr. I feel a little bit under-prepared but----
Mr. Donovan. That's all right, we will take it into
consideration. Thank you.
STATEMENT OF DERECK R. ORR, DIVISION CHIEF, PUBLIC SAFETY
COMMUNICATIONS DIVISION, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND
TECHNOLOGY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
Mr. Orr. Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, and
Members of the subcommittee, I am Derek Orr, division chief of
the Public Safety Communications Research Program, the PSCR at
the National Institute of Standards and Technology known as
NIST. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today
to testify about innovations in the field of emergency
communications.
PSCR's mission is to research and develop critical
technologies, features identified by public safety entity, so
that these practitioners will soon have access to smarter, and
more effective life-saving technology. PSCR works closely with
public safety, government, and industry stakeholders through
workshops and summits to publish R&D roadmaps and leverages
those road maps to develop targeted strategies and program
plans.
We also work closely with our Federal partners including
FirstNet and DHS's Science and Technology Directorate and the
Office of Emergency Communications to ensure effective
coordination mechanisms are in place to support our shared
public safety mission. Our Nation's first responders deal with
emergencies every day.
Whether it is a routine traffic stop, a multi-alarm fire,
or a large-scale event such as the hurricanes of last summer,
or the attacks at 9/11, the ability of first responders to
communicate with each other on scene as well as through
Incident Command remains one of the most critical determinants
of emergency response success.
At PSCR, we believe that innovative technologies can help
and we are working to accelerate their arrival. First, we
conduct internal research at our laboratories across five key
public safety technology areas. No. 1, ensuring voice
interoperability between current land mobile radio and new
broadband devices for the period of time that these two
technologies coexist.
No. 2, making mission-critical voice communications
possible on new broadband devices. No. 3, advancing location-
based services for personnel and assets especially inside of
buildings. No. 4, researching advanced user interfaces for
their abilities to access and transmit complex information. No.
5, promoting analytics tools that will help public safety make
use of large amounts of data becoming available.
Some of our most recent lab projects include using state-
of-the-art laser technology to quickly and easily map and
develop three dimensional models of buildings for the creation
of enhanced maps and location tracking for first responders, a
virtual reality test environment to measure the impact of
future user interfaces on public safety operations, mission-
critical voice measurement methods which will allow public
safety and industry to compare land mobile radio with
broadband, so as to determine when and if transition to
broadband is possible for mission-critical voice
communications, and small self-contained network-in-a-box
prototypes which responders could rapidly deploy using drones
to establish communications anywhere.
Putting this technology in the hands of public safety
personnel would help them assess emergency scenarios safely and
smartly before sending in boots on the ground. It would help
them reduce the harm to citizens and property and it would help
them avoid unnecessary injury or even death.
PSCR not only conducts internal research but also put
substantial resources into promoting the development of these
technologies externally through grants, cooperative agreements,
and open innovation prize challenges. These efforts give NIST
access to experts and innovators from around the world and
greatly expand the number of researchers focused on key public
safety communications issues.
To date, we have provided over $40 million in grants in
cooperative agreements to nearly 40 recipients, and more
funding opportunities are on the way. Additionally, in 2018,
PSCR launched and completed its first two technology-based
prize challenges with total prize amounts of roughly $400,000.
These challenges were focused on the use of drones for
expanding network coverage and on using virtual reality to
develop effective in-building navigation interfaces for future
heads-up displays. Through these challenges, we have engaged
with innovators from all walks of life, and seen companies in
partnerships form.
I firmly believe that encouraging these open partnerships
between public safety, private industry, and academic
institutions is strengthening the pace of and passion for
delivering tangible solutions. Never before have there been so
many people focused on communications technology R&D beneficial
to our first responders.
In closing, I would like to highlight the PSCR tagline,
``pulling the future forward'', we are committed to reducing
the time in which public safety will access these key
technologies by accelerating the pace of research in the areas
and expanding the number of research focused on the mission.
By establishing measurement methods, enlisting new research
recruits, and developing proof-of-concept technologies, all
with traceable links to public safety, we will transform the
future of emergency response, making the best possible use of
time, talents, and resources.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be
pleased to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Orr follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dereck R. Orr
July 25, 2018
introduction
Thank you Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, and Members of
the subcommittee. I am Dereck Orr, division chief of the Public Safety
Communications Research (PSCR) program, which is one of the primary
Federal programs conducting research, development, testing, and
evaluation for public safety communications technologies. The division
is housed within the Communications Technology Laboratory (CTL) at the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in Boulder,
Colorado. Thank you for inviting me to testify today about innovations
in the field of emergency preparedness and specifically on emergency
communications.
Our Nation's first responders deal with emergencies every day. And
whether it is a routine traffic stop, a multi-alarm fire, or a large-
scale event, such as Hurricanes Harvey and Sandy, or the attacks on 9/
11, the ability of first responders to communicate with each other, on-
scene as well as through incident command, remains one of the most
critical determinants of success for emergency response.
Since 2002, NIST's PSCR program has worked to drive innovation and
advance public safety communication technologies through cutting-edge
research and development (R&D). PSCR works directly with first
responders and the solver community to address the public safety
community's urgent need to access the new and improved technology that
enhances the public safety community's ability to respond to
emergencies. PSCR's mission is to research and develop the features
identified by public safety itentities as critical so that these
features will soon be available to enhance their performance. Drawing
on critical requirements provided by public safety practitioners, such
as the First Responder Network Authority (FirstNet), the PSCR program
provides insight to wireline and wireless standards committees
developing standards for voice, data, image, and video communications.
Since June first of this year, approximately 235 miles southwest of
the NIST labs in Boulder, a significant wildland fire has been burning.
The fire spans almost 55,000 acres and is currently only 50 percent
contained. This incident has required the deployment of almost 1,000
personnel, as well as 24 engines, 7 helicopters, and 2 fixed-wing
aircraft. This is a complex response requiring reliable communications
and constant situational awareness. The primary means of communication
for this response effort is Land Mobile Radio (LMR), a proven
narrowband technology that is used for mission-critical voice
communications; you might be familiar with LMR as ``push a button to
talk'' technology. Almost all information, such as changes in fire
behavior, personnel and asset location, status updates, and weather
conditions, will be transmitted via these radios.
Now, imagine a world in which future technology--for example,
highly deployable drones with autonomous flight controls--serve as
communications hubs, allowing for not only voice communications, but
location-mapping, video analytics, and real-time weather updates.
Imagine that all of this information could be easily transmitted to
first responders' broadband devices, such as smartphones, tablets, and
even heads-up displays. Putting this technology in the hands of first
responders would help them assess emergency scenarios safely and
smartly before sending in personnel. It would help them reduce harm to
people and damage to property. It would help them avoid unnecessary
injury or death.
Congress did much to lay the groundwork for this vision in the
Middle-Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, which, among
other things, charged NIST with utilizing up to $300 million from the
Public Safety Trust Fund to conduct research and assist with the
development of standards, technologies, and applications to advance
wireless public safety communications.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Public Law 112-96, Section 6303.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At PSCR, we believe this future is achievable, and we are working
to accelerate its arrival.
future technologies
Getting cutting-edge technology into public safety community's
hands for day-to-day operations can be a difficult task. For example,
using a smartphone while wearing structural firefighting gloves is
almost impossible. Having to aggregate and make sense of millions of
pieces of information coming in from multiple sources, including from
sensors, video cameras, and social media, while simultaneously
responding to an active incident, is not effective. Many technology
products designed for broader commercial markets do not provide
solutions specific to the needs of the public safety community. Given
this reality, research carried out at NIST can be nothing short of
transformative, helping to focus the attention of product manufacturers
and service providers on critical public safety research and
development. I would like to describe for you a few of the ways in
which PSCR is doing this.
First, we conduct internal research at our laboratories, where PSCR
serves as the objective technical advisor for critical public safety
communications technologies. Over 45 division staff and an additional
50 researchers from other NIST labs and divisions are researching and
developing communications technologies and measurement standards across
five key public safety research areas:
Integrating the Long-Term Evolution (LTE) technology that
powers most mobile phones with traditional first responder LMR
technology for the period of time that these two technologies
will coexist;
Making mission-critical voice capabilities available on LTE
broadband devices;
Enabling location-based services for personnel and assets,
especially inside of buildings;
Enhancing user-interfaces for accessing and transmitting
complex information; and
Promoting public safety analytics tools that will help the
public safety community make use of the large amounts of data
that will be available to them.
Some of our most recent lab projects include:
Using a backpack outfitted with Light Detecting and Ranging
technology, otherwise known as LiDAR, which emits a pulsing
laser to quickly and easily map and develop three-dimensional
models of buildings for the creation of enhanced maps and
location tracking for response activities;
Developing a Virtual Reality (VR) Test Environment for
assessing which future user-interfaces will have the largest
improvement on public safety operations;
Creating mission-critical voice measurement methods that
will allow public safety and industry to compare LMR with LTE,
so as to determine when and if transition to LTE is possible
for voice communications; and
Working with industry partners to prototype small, self-
contained LTE ``networks in a box'' that responders could be
rapidly deploy using drones to establish communications
anywhere.
Second, PSCR puts substantial resources into promoting the
development of these technologies externally, through the Public Safety
Innovation Accelerator Program (PSIAP). The PSIAP is carried out
primarily through grants, cooperative agreements and Open Innovation
Prize Challenges. These PSIAP efforts give NIST access to experts and
innovators from around the world, and greatly expand the number of
researchers focusing on key public safety communications issues. In
2017, PSCR awarded $38.5 million in grants and cooperative agreements
to 33 recipients--including teams from New York University, Rutgers,
the Atlantic City Police Department, and the State of New Jersey Office
of Homeland Security and Preparedness.
Through PSIAP, we are accelerating research in the areas of
mission-critical voice, data analytics, location-based services and
network resiliency. Thus far in fiscal year 2018, we've engaged PSIAP
award recipients both with grants and Open Innovation Prize Challenges.
To date, we have awarded $6.1 million in grants and cooperative
agreements to 7 recipients for research into enhanced user interfaces.
In addition, we anticipate that over $4 million in additional Federal
funding opportunities for mission-critical voice and location-based
services will be awarded by the end of this fiscal year.
In 2018, PSCR has launched and completed its first two technology-
based prize challenges, with total prize amounts of $400,000. These
challenges were focused on baselining the maximum flight time possible
for a drone carrying a payload similar to our ``network-in-a-box''
prototype, and on using the Virtual Reality Test Environment to develop
effective in-building navigation interfaces for future first-responder
heads-up displays. Through these challenges, we have had the
opportunity to engage with innovators from all walks of life (e.g.,
professionals, academics, and hobbyists), see companies and
partnerships form, and witness people become passionate about using
their skills and knowledge to help the public safety community even
after the competitions have ended. I firmly believe that encouraging
these open partnerships between public safety, private industry, and
academic institutions is strengthening the pace of--and passion for--
delivering tangible solutions. Whereas just 2 years ago the PSCR
footprint extended little beyond our laboratories in Colorado and
Maryland, today, roughly 150 entities from around the world are engaged
in bringing innovation to public safety. Never before has there been
such focus on communications technology R&D benefiting first
responders.
Between 2013 and 2016, PSCR engaged hundreds of public safety,
Government, and industry stakeholders through workshops and summits to
publish targeted R&D roadmaps. PSCR leverages these roadmaps and
continues to gather input from our diverse stakeholder base to develop
our innovation strategy and program plans. We also work closely with
our partners at FirstNet, the National Telecommunications and
Information Administration (NTIA), the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS), the Department of Justice (DOJ), and the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC), to ensure effective coordination mechanisms are in
place to support our shared public safety mission. These communities
and partnerships are fundamental to the success of the program,
because, as noted by an attendee at our Annual Public Safety
Stakeholder Meeting, ``it may be the greatest technology in the world,
but if it doesn't help first responders, they're not going to adopt
it.'' We at PSCR are laser-focused on helping first responders.
In closing, I'd like to highlight the PSCR tagline: ``Pulling the
Future Forward.'' By statute, NIST's window within which it must
obligate monies from the Public Safety Trust Fund will end in 2022, now
just 4 years away. To make the best use of the resources provided to us
within this time frame, we are making special efforts to focus our R&D
and program plans by employing the following three criteria, which any
PSCR initiative must satisfy: First, it must address an urgent and
unmet need; second, it must not be redundant with what is happening in
the private sector; and third, it must transform the public safety
mission. This is our success framework.
NIST is committed to reducing the time by which public safety will
get access to these key technologies by accelerating the pace of
research in these areas and expanding the number of researchers focused
on the mission. By establishing measurement methods, enlisting new
research recruits, and developing proof-of-concept methodologies, all
with traceable links to public safety, we will transform the future of
emergency response--making the best possible use of time, talents and
resources.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify about NIST's work
regarding innovations in emergency preparedness technology. I will be
pleased to answer any questions you may have.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, sir. The Chair now recognizes to
Mr. Kelly for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF JOHN V. KELLY, SENIOR OFFICIAL PERFORMING THE
DUTIES OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL, OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Mr. Kelly. Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne,
distinguished Members of the committee, thank you for inviting
me here today, my testimony focuses on Office of Inspector
General audits, assessing the efficiency and effectiveness of
FEMA's information technology activities that support its
multiple missions.
Numerous OIG audits conducted since 2005 disclosed that
FEMA maintains outdated IT systems and infrastructure. This
hinders FEMA's ability to effectively carry out disaster
response and recovery efforts. Long-standing deficiencies
hamper FEMA's ability to effectively integrate internal systems
to perform end-to-end mission functions, track and manage
disaster-related funds, and share information with external
emergency management partners.
These deficiencies limit real-time coordination across
disaster efforts as shown in 2017 and in many other years, FEMA
regularly responds to multiple major disasters, as such,
effective IT systems are essential for FEMA to successfully
execute its mission. We attribute FEMA's IT deficiencies to
ineffective IT management practices.
FEMA lacks four key elements to carry out its mission.
First, it lacks centralized planning, development and
management of agency-wide IT resources. Second, a comprehensive
IT strategic plan with clearly-defined goals and objectives
that guide program office initiatives. Third, an approach to
modernize its IT infrastructure and systems. Finally, a
comprehensive understanding of existing IT resources and needs
throughout FEMA.
In addition, FEMA's chief information officer lacks
centralized budget authority to provide guidance, and
oversight, and establish a formal governance process that
guides agency-wide IT decisions. Despite the importance of IT
resources to FEMA's mission, our reports repeatedly identify
problems with IT systems and infrastructure.
After the four hurricanes devastated Florida in 2004, and
after Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma devastated the Gulf
Coast in 2005, we reported that FEMA encountered challenges
supporting response and recovery operations, establishing a
strategic IT direction for system modernization and improving
its logistic information systems.
More recently, in 2011 and 2015, we reported that FEMA's
outdated mission-central, mission-critical IT systems still
could not fully support emergency mission operations. Our
reports reiterated that a lack of integration among FEMA's IT
systems hindered FEMA from successfully executing essential
functions such as logistics management, financial management,
and grant management.
To address the IT system and management issues identified
in our 2011 and 2015 audits, we made a number of
recommendations. However, this past February, we issued a
management alert, pointing out that FEMA had made limited
progress improving its IT management, and has not taken steps
to adequately address our recommendations.
Many of the issues we identified in our reports, even those
disclosed in our mid-2000 reports, remain unchanged, and
adversely impact day-to-day operations and mission readiness.
The management alert highlighted that due to competing
priorities, FEMA's CIO removed funding and staff resources
needed to effectively address our recommendations.
Given the importance of IT resources to FEMA successfully
executing its mission, that decision was shortsighted. In May,
we initiated a comprehensive audit regarding FEMA's IT
management approach. We expect to issue that report in early
2019.
In summary, IT systems play a vital role in supporting
FEMA's response and recovery efforts. Slow progress in
addressing long-standing IT issues hampers disaster response
efforts and results in wasted money. Having reliable and
efficient IT systems and infrastructure is critical to support
disasters, especially given that Congress appropriates on
average more than $10 billion a year for FEMA's disaster relief
fund.
To be good stewards of tax dollars, FEMA needs strong IT
leadership direction to finally overcome its IT management. Mr.
Chairman, this concludes my testimony. I would be happy to
answer questions from you or other Members of the subcommittee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kelly follows:]
Prepared Statement of John V. Kelly
July 25, 2018
Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for inviting me here today to discuss
information technology (IT) and management practices at the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). My testimony today will focus on
the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Office of Inspector General's
(OIG) work to assess the efficiency and effectiveness of FEMA's IT in
supporting mission operations.
Numerous OIG audits conducted since 2005 have disclosed that FEMA's
outdated IT systems and infrastructure did not enable FEMA personnel to
effectively carry out disaster response and recovery efforts.
Significant long-standing deficiencies continue to hamper emergency
support operations in the following areas:
Inability to integrate FEMA's internal systems to perform
end-to-end mission functions;
Inability to track and manage disaster-related funds
effectively;
Inability to share information with external emergency
management partners; and
Limited real-time awareness or coordination across disaster
response efforts.
We attribute these deficiencies to ineffective FEMA IT management
practices.
Principally, FEMA lacks key elements needed to carry out
centralized planning, development, and management of agency-wide IT,
including:
A comprehensive IT strategic plan with clearly-defined goals
and objectives to guide program office initiatives;
A modernization approach to modernize its IT infrastructure
and systems;
Comprehensive understanding of existing IT resources and
needs throughout FEMA;
Centralized budget authority for the FEMA chief information
officer (CIO) to provide guidance and oversight; and
An established, formal governance process to guide agency-
wide IT decisions.
These challenges have resulted in considerable wasted resources as
system users conducted time-consuming, manual workarounds and ad-hoc
processes.
Such inefficiencies caused delays and prevented FEMA from being
able to quickly scale up and sustain the increased workloads and
information sharing required to respond to major disasters. Until FEMA
provides the IT systems and capabilities needed to meet the demands
posed by emergency management, timely response and recovery from
disasters will be hindered, increasing the risk of delays in providing
disaster assistance and grants.
background
FEMA is the Federal coordinator to prepare for, prevent, respond
to, and recover from domestic disasters and emergencies. FEMA is
responsible for saving lives, protecting property, and protecting
public health and safety in a natural disaster, act of terrorism, or
other man-made disaster. To support its mission, FEMA had a budget of
approximately $15.5 billion for fiscal year 2018. This represented 22
percent of DHS's overall budget of more than $70 billion.
Within FEMA, the Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) is
responsible for providing the critical IT infrastructure and systems to
support the agency's response and recovery missions. FEMA has over 90
operational systems used to provide support across multiple programs.
For example, FEMA personnel rely on the following mission-critical
systems to accomplish its mission:
Logistics management systems such as the Logistics Supply
Chain Management System (LSCMS) and the Logistics Information
Management System (LIMS III);
Response and recovery systems such as the National Emergency
Management Information System (NEMIS), the Emergency Management
Mission Integrated Environment (EMMIE), and the web-based
Emergency Operations Center (WebEOC);
Mitigation and preparedness systems such as the Non-Disaster
Grants Management System (ND-Grants) and Mitigation Electronic
Grants (eGrants); and
Mission support systems such as the Web Integrated Financial
Management Information System (WebIFMIS).
Despite the crucial role of technology, FEMA's IT systems
historically have not fully met mission needs. Major disasters over the
past number of years exposed numerous limitations in FEMA's IT
infrastructure and system capabilities. We have conducted a series of
audits from September 2005 to the present addressing FEMA's use of IT
to support its mission operations.
long-standing it deficiencies impede fema mission operations
Despite the importance of IT for FEMA's mission, we have identified
numerous problems with FEMA's IT systems and infrastructure. As early
as September 2005, we reported that system improvements and additional
IT user support were needed to better support response and recovery
operations.\1\ In December 2006, we identified significant challenges
to FEMA establishing strategic IT direction and defining the
requirements for system modernization.\2\ Further, in May 2008, we
reported that FEMA's logistics information management systems did not
provide complete asset visibility of disaster goods, such as
commodities and property, from initial shipment to final distribution
in disaster areas.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Emergency Preparedness and Response Could Better Integrate
Information Technology with Incident Response and Recovery (OIG-05-36).
\2\ FEMA's Progress in Addressing Information Technology Management
Weaknesses (OIG-07-17).
\3\ Logistics Information Systems Need to Be Strengthened at the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (OIG-08-60).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
system integration issues
More recently, our 2011 and 2015 audit reports on FEMA's IT
disclosed that FEMA's outdated mission-critical systems could not fully
support emergency mission operations.\4\ The audits concluded a lack of
integration among FEMA's IT systems was impeding a number of FEMA's
essential operational functions, including logistics management, asset
management, and financial management. Examples of the lack of
integration among the various types of systems include:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Federal Emergency Management Agency Faces Challenges in
Modernizing Information Technology (OIG-11-69); and FEMA Faces
Challenges in Managing Information Technology (OIG-16-10).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Logistics Management Systems: FEMA's multiple logistics
systems were not integrated and could not support its end-to-
end supply chain process. FEMA had not integrated the systems
used in its property inventory and supply chain processes,
which resulted in fragmentation of data across multiple
logistics systems. Specifically, the property management
system, LIMS III, and the supply chain management system,
LSCMS, were not integrated. Most commodities, such as IT
equipment and furniture, were tracked in both systems, with
staff performing the same functions in each system. Also, the
information in LIMS III was not timely or accurate because data
was not automatically shared between LIMS III and LSCMS as
commodities were shipped. Given this, users had to manually
enter data in LIMS III to close out orders. Moreover, because
the shipment did not show up in LIMS III until FEMA personnel
received the shipment, personnel manually updated LIMS III as
shipments were received. Consequently, the processes for
shipping and receiving was labor-intensive and redundant.
As mandated by Congress in 2005, FEMA developed LSCMS to enable a
timely and effective response to disasters and real-time
visibility over shipments of emergency supplies.\5\ We reported
in 2014 that FEMA's supply chain management system may not be
effective during a catastrophic disaster. We found that FEMA
did not properly plan and document acquisition requirements and
may not ever meet critical performance requirements, which can
impair its ability to efficiently and effectively aid survivors
of catastrophic disasters. Our 2014 report contained 11
recommendations, two of which remain open.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ FEMA's Logistics Supply Chain Management System May Not Be
Effective During a Catastrophic Disaster (OIG-14-151).
\6\ Additionally, we have an on-going review examining to what
extent FEMA managed and distributed commodities in the Commonwealth of
Puerto Rico in response to Hurricanes Maria and Irma.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Personnel and Property Management Systems.--FEMA had not
integrated systems to support personnel and property management
functions needed to assign IT equipment at disaster sites. As
we initially reported in 2005, FEMA's personnel deployment
system and its property management system, LIMS III, did not
support effective or efficient coordination of deployment
operations.\7\ Given the continuation of this issue, FEMA
employees completed a number of steps to manually check in and
obtain property, such as IT equipment, at a disaster site. We
concluded that until an effective link between the personnel
and property management systems was established, FEMA faced
additional work due to inefficient management of property and
personnel.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Emergency Preparedness and Response Could Better Integrate
Information Technology with Incident Response and Recovery (OIG-05-36).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Financial and Acquisition Management Systems.--FEMA's
ability to track and manage disaster-related funds was hindered
by the fact that the financial system and the acquisitions
system were not integrated. Combined, these systems handled 80
percent of budget disaster funds. However, each system operated
on a different technical platform, with financial data updates
sent to each system at different times. As a result, the two
systems were operating without synchronized data, and field
office employees manually tracked and reconciled funds that
were allocated across different disaster activities.
Additionally, manual steps were required to deobligate excess
funds after requisitions were completed. Although this step
should be done automatically, personnel performed manual
deobligations that totaled $21 million for fiscal year 2020
disaster funds.
Grants Management Systems.--A lack of integration was most
notable in FEMA's nine different systems used to support the
agency's grant programs, each developed independently to
support a specific type of grant. These systems did not enable
Grant Managers to monitor FEMA activity across grant programs,
as managers had to access one system at a time to search for
open grants and compile the results. One region created its own
tool for tracking information across FEMA's various grant
systems. The numerous unintegrated grant systems also created
complexity for grant recipients, such as States, who need to
access multiple systems to process grant awards and request
payment.
Grants/Financial Management Systems Interface.--FEMA
personnel were also unable to detect duplicate grant
submissions, due to the lack of integration between the grant
systems and the agency's main financial system, WebIFMIS. FEMA
personnel manually entered information from the grant system
into WebIFMIS at certain stages in the grant process.
Similarly, the preparedness grant system, ND-Grants, did not
fully interface with WebIFMIS, resulting in the need to
manually enter information to complete and close out a grant in
both ND-Grants and WebIFMIS. Given these limitations, according
to regional staff, if a State were to suffer multiple
disasters, one person could apply for assistance for each of
the different disasters and not be identified. Further, the
inability of enterprise systems to accurately transmit grant
information between certain systems can result in grantees
receiving incorrect notices that they are not in compliance
with grant requirements, which has resulted in delays in making
grant funds available.
Collaboration Systems.--FEMA's primary watch and response
collaboration system, WebEOC, was not integrated with agency
systems used to request immediate short-term emergency response
assistance. Instead, FEMA personnel entered information into
WebEOC, which processes and tracks the mission assignment
requests, and entered the same information into the financial
approval system used to process mission assignments, and
WebIFMIS. Likewise, the FEMA WebEOC was not integrated with the
WebEOC used by State emergency operation centers, resulting in
an inefficient manual process to update WebEOC with information
from the State centers about on-going disasters. Specifically,
a region had to send FEMA staff to a State emergency operation
center to review the State's information. If a State's request
for assistance was submitted in the State system, a FEMA staff
member printed it out and manually entered the same data into
the FEMA WebEOC.
lack of required systems functionality
The lack of system integration as well as other system deficiencies
resulted in personnel engaging in inefficient, time-consuming business
practices on a daily basis. For example:
One region created 30 Excel spreadsheets to have the
information needed to report on disaster spending by States in
response to Congressional requests. In addition, field
personnel created their own tools, such as spreadsheets and
databases, to fill the gaps from enterprise system limitations.
FEMA personnel could not simply retrieve a standard report
from NEMIS that contained a grant applicant's entire record.
Instead, grant personnel accessed numerous different screens in
NEMIS and compile the results.
Reports in EMMIE could only be prepared for one disaster at
a time. To obtain information across several disasters,
personnel accessed and retrieved a report for each individual
disaster and manually combined the data into one report. In
addition, one grant specialist said that none of FEMA's non-
disaster grants systems were able to generate reports listing
open, closed, or expired grants collectively.
FEMA did not have an electronic capability for the States,
its foremost external partners, to use when requesting
assistance during disasters. Instead, to request Federal
assistance from FEMA, States used a paper Action Request Form.
After the form was faxed, FEMA personnel entered request
information into a tracking system that was intended to track
the request through disposition.
Although NEMIS eGrants was supposed to be an electronic
system of records, it did not have a closeout module. Without a
closeout capability, FEMA personnel relied on paper forms and
manual data entry to finalize grants in the system.
Officials in FEMA's Mitigation Directorate said they relied
on a paper-based application process for the Hazard Mitigation
Grant Program. As a result, according to FEMA's Mitigation
office, an average of 100 to 200 paper applications received
during each disaster, had to be manually entered into the
system.
it deficiencies attributable to fema it management challenges
We attributed FEMA's long-standing system deficiencies to numerous
challenges involving insufficient IT planning and governance agency-
wide.
Planning.--In 2011, we reported that FEMA had not performed
the necessary planning activities to guide its IT modernization
efforts.\8\ As a result of our follow-up audit in 2015, we
reported that FEMA had developed numerous IT planning documents
but had not yet executed them, in part because of the frequent
turnover in the CIO position within the agency. FEMA had six
different individuals, either appointed or acting, serving in
the CIO position over the previous 10 years. For this time
period, the average tenure of the FEMA CIO was about 15 months.
Without a comprehensive, agency-wide IT strategic plan, the
OCIO lacked a clear end-state vision to coordinate and
prioritize modernization initiatives across program offices.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Federal Emergency Management Agency Faces Challenges in
Modernizing Information Technology (OIG-11-69).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Without such a plan, the OCIO and its customers focused on
immediate needs, rather than addressing the long-term
modernization efforts necessary to improve out-dated, legacy IT
infrastructure and systems.
Architecture.--FEMA had not completed its efforts to develop
a complete agency-wide architecture that can be used for
decision making to guide and constrain investments and to
provide a blueprint for IT modernization. Without a
comprehensive baseline architecture, the OCIO was hindered in
guiding IT investments toward a standardized and integrated
environment. The OCIO had not yet completed the baseline
architecture due to staffing and funding shortages.
Systems Inventory.--The FEMA OCIO did not have an
understanding of existing IT resources and needs throughout
FEMA. Specifically, FEMA did not have a complete inventory of
its systems to support disasters. Instead, numerous separate
inventories were maintained throughout the agency and were not
shared. OCIO personnel estimated that the number of FEMA's
systems across all regional offices ranges from 90 to as high
as 700.
Decentralized IT Funding.--The manner in which IT programs
receive direct funding for operations each year contributed to
decentralized IT development practices. Specifically, FEMA
program and field offices developed IT systems independent of
the OCIO without oversight or guidance. Developing new systems
on the network without OCIO involvement created concerns as to
whether systems would operate effectively, meet security
standards, or contain redundant IT functionality already in
place. For example, one directorate spent approximately $7.5
million developing an IT system which was ultimately unable to
meet FEMA's security requirements. Although the OCIO had
developed a standard systems life-cycle practice to be used for
all IT projects, the process has not yet been institutionalized
throughout FEMA.
The decentralization of IT funds and development also has been a
major obstacle to effective management of FEMA's IT
environment. During fiscal year 2010, FEMA spent $391 million
for agency-wide IT needs; however, OCIO's spending of $113
million accounted for only 29 percent of that total IT
spending. The program offices spent the remaining $278 million,
comprising the majority of the agency's IT-related spending. In
fiscal year 2018, OCIO spending was $164 million, comprising 40
percent of the agency's total IT budget of $396 million.
Efforts to modernize and integrate the agency's critical mission
support systems had been put on hold due to Department-wide
consolidation plans, and lack of funding. For example, FEMA was
not able to plan or fund asset management or financial systems
upgrades while DHS officials were identifying a Department-wide
asset management solution. Also, funding for critical
enhancements and upgrades to logistics management systems and
financial systems had decreased over the preceding years. FEMA
was also hamstrung by the increasing costs of software upgrades
for its 20-year-old technologies.
Agency-wide IT Governance.--FEMA struggled to implement
effective agency-wide IT governance. FEMA instituted an IT
Governance Board (ITGB) in February 2012; however, the board's
functioning proved ineffective and it eventually stopped
holding meetings. In addition, ITGB struggled to make decisions
on FEMA-wide IT initiatives. For example, the Consolidated
Appropriations Act, 2012, allocated $13.662 million for FEMA to
modernize IT systems.\9\ One of the main initiatives undertaken
by the ITGB was to decide which projects should receive this
funding. However, the process ITGB implemented to solicit,
evaluate, and select candidate IT projects was unsuccessful.
ITGB did not use the results obtained from this process because
members did not concur with the scoring results.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Public Law 112-74.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CIO Authority.--FEMA had not implemented effective agency-
wide IT governance, in part, because the CIO still did not have
sufficient authority to effectively lead the agency's
decentralized IT environment. As we reported in 2011, the
OCIO's budget still accounted for only one-third of the
agency's total IT spending, with the FEMA program offices
accounting for the remaining two-thirds. As previously stated,
the OCIO's fiscal year 2014 IT spending was approximately $170
million of $450 million for the entire agency.
recommendations
To address the IT system and management issues identified in our
2011 reports, we made a number of recommendations to the Chief
Information Officer in the following areas:
Develop a comprehensive IT strategic plan,
Complete and implement a FEMA enterprise architecture,
Establish a comprehensive IT systems inventory,
Establish an agency-wide IT budget planning process and
obtain agency-wide IT investment review authority, and
Establish a consolidated modernization approach for FEMA's
mission-critical IT systems.
We closed these 2011 recommendations based on FEMA's quarterly
reports to us on corrective actions taken.
Further, in 2015, we recommended the FEMA CIO finalize key planning
documents related to IT modernization and execute against those
planning documents, fully implement an IT governance board, improve
integration and functionality of existing systems, and implement
agency-wide acquisition, development, and operation and maintenance
standards. Of the 5 recommendations from the 2015 report, 4 remain
open. We closed 1 recommendation regarding implementing an IT
governance board based on documentation that FEMA provided.
follow-on audits to determine progress in fema's it management
As we periodically do, we conducted a verification review in
December 2017 to assess FEMA's efforts to address our 2015 report
recommendations. Congressional interest, as well as our analysis of the
compliance updates, indicated a need for further review to determine
the adequacy of FEMA's efforts to resolve our open recommendations.
Since the publication of our report in 2015, FEMA has provided 6
compliance updates on its efforts to address our 5 report
recommendations.
However, we found during our January and February 2018 review
fieldwork that FEMA had made limited progress in improving its IT
management and had not taken steps to adequately address our
recommendations. Many of the issues we reported based on our prior
audits dating back to 2005 remained unchanged, adversely impacting day-
to-day operations and mission readiness. Especially disconcerting, our
recent work revealed that the justification that FEMA provided to
support our closing the recommendation to implement an IT governance
board was misleading and FEMA had not truly met the intent of the
recommendation.
Given these deficiencies, we suspended our verification review and
issued a Management Alert.\10\ The Management Alert indicated that,
given competing priorities, the CIO had removed the funding and staff
resources needed to effectively address our report recommendations. The
Management Alert also stated we would initiate a more comprehensive
audit regarding FEMA's IT management approach, with the objectives of
assessing the extent to which FEMA has implemented IT management
practices mandated for Federal agencies, and identifying challenges to
ensuring FEMA's IT systems adequately support disaster response mission
operations. We began our current audit work in May 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Management Alert--Inadequate Progress in Addressing Open
Recommendations from our 2015 Report, ``FEMA Faces Challenges in
Managing Information Technology'' (OIG-18-54).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As part of our on-going audit, we seek to identify and assess any
challenges, impediments, or constraints associated with the ability of
FEMA's IT systems to adequately support day-to-day mission operations.
We are assessing FEMA's approaches and outcomes related to key IT
management practices, including IT strategic planning, governance,
budgeting, and acquisitions. Last, we are following up on specific
issues identified in our previous reports on FEMA's IT management. To
date, the audit team has conducted numerous interviews with FEMA
personnel across all program offices. The team has also traveled to
FEMA's field offices in Houston, TX and Austin, TX to learn about
specific IT-related challenges that FEMA personnel experienced during
their response and recovery efforts for Hurricane Harvey. We expect to
issue our final audit report early in 2019.
conclusion
IT systems play a vital role in supporting FEMA's response and
recovery efforts. Slow progress in addressing long-standing IT issues
can hamper disaster response efforts and result in wasted money,
continued ineffective systems, and inefficient processing. Having
reliable and efficient IT systems and infrastructure is critical to
support disasters that typically occur from year-to-year, as well as
the increased disaster relief efforts in the wake of the 2017 hurricane
season. To date, Congress has appropriated about $49.5 billion to
FEMA's Disaster Relief Fund for these recovery efforts.
Strong IT leadership direction is needed to stop this pattern and
ensure corrective actions to overcome the IT management challenges once
and for all. Improvement is essential--for the sake of the taxpayer,
FEMA IT users, first responders, and disaster victims. Our on-going
audit is aimed at emphasizing this need for positive change. We will
advise you on the results of our on-going work once completed.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony. I am happy to answer any
questions you or other Members of the subcommittee may have.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Kelly. The Chair now recognizes
the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Payne, in any opening
statement that he may have.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your
indulgence and welcome the witness, and, you know, as usual, I
would like to thank you for holding this hearing to address the
technology and innovation in disaster preparedness. Damage from
the 27 disasters broke records and made last year the costliest
year of disaster-related damage in American history.
I hope to hear from--well, I did hear from the witnesses,
and maybe I didn't. I mean, about how you are taking the
lessons learned from the 2017 hurricane season and investing in
technologies that will be pushed out to communities. Now more
than ever, communities are facing mounting threats from extreme
weather patterns.
We are seeing where climate change is having a direct
impact on the strength and frequency of storms, as such we must
all take measures to ensure that life-saving preparedness
technologies are developed and pushed out to the Federal,
State, and local leaders. For these reasons, I am dismayed that
the FEMA 2018-2022 strategic plan failed to mention climate
change, and given the record-breaking year we saw for natural
disasters.
Additionally, I was disappointed when FEMA's 2017 hurricane
season after-action report failed to mention climate change,
when we saw Hurricane Harvey produce a historic 60 inches in
rainfall and back-to-back Hurricanes Irma and Maria devastated
the Caribbean. I hope to hear from the witnesses today about
how you are using climate change research to push for advances
in preparedness technologies.
It is not good to have conversations about technologies
here in Washington, DC when people on the ground do not have
access to those technologies. FEMA noted many of their
shortcomings in response to Hurricane Maria in the 2017
hurricane season after-action report. One such shortcoming that
needs to be addressed today is how to get these technologies to
the people that need them the most.
That way, well before a Category IV or V storm hits
communities, they will have been made aware of the helpful
preparedness technologies that are available and that we
discuss here in Washington, DC. I am particularly interested in
hearing from Deputy Inspector General Kelly about past audits
in FEMA's technologies that the Office of Inspector General has
performed throughout the years.
I would like to thank the witnesses for participating in
today's hearing, and I was glad to hear their opening
statements, and I look forward to hearing from all of you about
the progress that has been made with technologies and
preparedness. With that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back the
balance of my time.
[The statement of Ranking Member Payne follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Donald M. Payne, Jr.
July 25, 2018
Damage from the 2017 natural disasters broke records and made last
year the costliest year for disaster-related damage in American
history. I hope to hear from the witnesses today about how you are
taking lessons learned from the 2017 hurricane season and investing in
technologies that will be pushed out to communities.
Now, more than ever, communities are facing mounting threats from
extreme weather patterns. We are seeing where climate change is having
a direct impact on the strength and frequency of storms. As such, we
must all take measures to ensure that life-saving preparedness
technologies are being developed and pushed out to Federal, State, and
local leaders.
For these reasons, I was dismayed that FEMA's 2018-2022 Strategic
Plan failed to mention climate change, given the record-breaking year
we saw for natural disasters.
Additionally, I was disappointed when FEMA's 2017 Hurricane Season
After-Action Report failed to mention climate change, when we saw
Hurricane Harvey produce a historic 60 inches in rainfall and back-to-
back Hurricanes Irma and Maria devastated the Caribbean.
I hope to hear from the witnesses today about how you are using
climate change research to push for advances in preparedness
technologies.
It is not any good to have conversations about technologies here in
Washington, DC, when people on the ground do not have access to those
technologies.
FEMA noted many of their shortcomings in response to Hurricane
Maria in the 2017 Hurricane Season After-Action Report. One such
shortcoming that needs to be addressed today is how to get these
technologies to the people that need them the most.
That way, well before a Category IV or V storm hits a community,
they will have been made aware of helpful preparedness technologies.
I am particularly interested in hearing from Inspector General
Kelly about past audits in FEMA's technologies that the Office of
Inspector General has performed throughout the years.
I would like to thank the witness for participating in today's
hearing. I look forward to hearing from all of you about the progress
that has been made with technologies in preparedness.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Ranking Member. I will recognize
myself for 5 minutes for questioning. But first, I would like
to address the after-action report that you are talking about
and knowing that we are talking here about technology and
preparedness the purpose of that. What was some of the findings
that you think that you--were needed or could be needed in the
future after analyzing what has happened in the 2017 season?
Is there technology to help us prepare better? Is there
something that Congress needs to do to help you, to help our
Nation to be prepared better for the upcoming seasons and the
seasons going forward? I would also like to ask you as a second
question about artificial intelligence and the use of
technology and artificial intelligence.
I know some of the mapping and modeling may have been
deficient in the past, and now with new innovative ways of us
predicting and preparing, is any of that technology useful to
you in your efforts?
Mr. Kaniewski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, as was
referenced, we did learn a lot of lessons from the 2017
hurricane season. The 50-page after-action report is a very
blunt self-assessment about what, some of things we did right
and some of the things that we need to improve in the future.
As I mentioned before, we think in the emergency management
world it is very important to be transparent about those
lessons. So, I am happy to hit a couple of those lessons
specifically for you, logistics, logistics bedeviled us both in
the early, the immediate aftermath, by getting commodities,
supplies, and equipment particular to Puerto Rico and Virgin
Islands during Hurricane Maria.
Shipping everything by sea and by air was a huge challenge,
it wasn't something that FEMA had faced before. Normally, we
can truck in supplies even across State lines, it's not a
problem. But the logistics network and the supply chains
associated with that, not just at FEMA, and not just emergency
management agencies, but the private sector.
That's going to get to my second point which is critical
infrastructure. Critical infrastructure sectors are absolutely
essential to provide those services that you and I need as
Americans, that disaster survivors need as Americans immediate
after--in the immediate aftermath of a disaster.
Those supply chains, those logistics, and the ability for
those private-sector companies to get the power back on, or
water, or the hospitals back on-line, a lot of those
responsibilities fall within the private sector. We at FEMA
acknowledge now that we need to be more supportive of the
private sector, No. 1, and No. 2, more integrated with.
Then No. 3, let me mention staffing. I think I am quoting
Administrator Long and one of his previous Congressional
testimonies where he said, ``By the time Maria hit, we were
tapped out.'' We were--we simply did not have the number of
personnel necessary to effectively respond to three concurrent
catastrophic complex catastrophes last season, but it was
something like we had not seen before.
But in the future, we realize we do need to be prepared for
these things. So on staffing, we made great use of the DHS
Surge Capacity Force for the first time, where we leveraged
thousands of personnel not only from DHS, but throughout the
entire Federal Government. I think moving forward, we could
leverage technology for that as to get the word out quickly
about what specifically we need, what type of critical skills
we could use.
In the case of Maria, we needed bilingual staff. So if you
were a Spanish speaker, we wanted you, but it might have been
hard to reach those particular individuals throughout the
entire Federal Government, other than doing what you can
imagine we did, which is send out e-mails saying, if you speak
Spanish, and if you want to serve your country, and deploy to
Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, we want you. Want you to
help us.
Ironically, one last mention. Ironically, technology was a
hindrance for us in Puerto Rico, because remember without power
and communications, we couldn't use our traditional--method of
registering disaster survivors for aid with an iPad or other
electronic devices like a computer.
We had to go back the old way, we had to get paper out of
the store rooms and put them on clipboards and deploy
volunteers and members of the Surge Capacity Force to go door-
to-door to register people for aid with pen and paper. That
ironically as it sounds was an innovation, going back to paper,
because we did not have a functioning communication system that
would enable us to connect to the internet in Puerto Rico and
the Virgin Islands.
Mr. Donovan. I only have a few moments left, just for some
of our colleagues, Don and I come from the northeast, he from
New Jersey and me from New York, so we don't experience things
like tornadoes that are less predictable. Hurricanes we see
days in advance, we don't know what path they are going to
take, but we kind-of know where the hurricane territories are.
So, knowing that allies but--and I visited Puerto Rico 2 weeks
after the storm and then 3 months after the devastation.
I saw the remarkable recovery was going to take a long
time, but saw the remarkable devastation 2 weeks after the
storm had hit. Knowing that Spanish-speaking communities are in
this pathway again, knowing that places with poor
infrastructure, my understanding is a lot of the infrastructure
in places like Puerto Rico were built in the 1950's.
Since we are talking about preparedness, are we taking any
measures to be prepared for the nine--2018 season and 2019
season, the 2020 season? Again, my question will be to all you,
because I think with three of us you probably ask a second
round of questions, is what can we do, we all lawmakers, you
are the boots on the ground, we need to assist you, what is it
that Congress could do to help you make your job more efficient
and more effective?
Mr. Kaniewski. Well, Mr. Chairman, first on preparedness, I
was so glad to see the title of this hearing was build a
culture of preparedness, and the fact that that aligns with our
goal No. 1 of our strategic plan shows our shared interest in
this issue. I think now is the right time to have a
conversation with the American public to say, ``Listen, FEMA is
not a first responder.''
FEMA cannot be there in the minutes, hours, and sometimes
days following a disaster. We are asking you, the American
public, to take responsibility and be prepared, be prepared now
in the traditional ways that we have talked about for many
years. Listen, ready.gov, and other ready initiatives have been
around since the DHS's inception, it was a result of 09/11
where we said citizen preparedness is important.
But what we feel that FEMA is we need to take this is step
further. No. 1, we have to have open and honest conversations
about this, that FEMA is not a first responder, that you need
to be prepared. But we--at the same time, we can't scare the
American public and just tell the American public you need to
be prepared without providing specific guidance.
So, if you go to ready.gov you will see particular
protective action guidance for a number of different scenarios.
Ask these kind of questions, and I often do this in my public
speaking engagements, is to ask the audience how many know CPR
or how many know how to shut off the water or gas to your home?
How many know just to check on your neighbors, especially those
neighbors that have special needs? Very few hands go up.
Now second, something, this might seem kind-of strange
coming from someone at FEMA, but we as Americans need to be
better financially prepared. Did you know that 44 percent of
Americans can't put their hands on $400 that they might need in
an emergency? Forty-four percent, nearly half of Americans
don't have that much cash on hand.
We need to make sure that Americans are financially
prepared, and that includes insurance and of course I have a
self-interest here on flood insurance. I think every home
should have flood insurance because every home can flood. Do
not pay attention to the line about 1-in-100-year flood-plain.
Do not pay attention to your--frankly to those that advise you,
you don't need flood insurance because you are outside. We are
partnering with nontraditional audiences like the realtors to
say ``We need you to tell your clients that just because they
are not in a flood zone doesn't mean they don't need flood
insurance.''
It shouldn't be, ``Don't worry, new homeowner, you are
going to save some money each month because you don't have to
have flood insurance. You are not required to have that by
law.'' The conversation should be any home can flood. Again,
some self-interest here, floodsmart.gov which by the way was
recently updated and a great example of how FEMA is embracing
technology, if you haven't seen floodsmart.gov recently, I
encourage you to do so. But the best time to buy is when it is
dry.
It takes 30 days for a policy to take effect. I hope every
American knows that they need insurance. It is not just flood
insurance by the way. Many Americans are sorely underinsured.
As your family grows, as you add new furniture or even an
addition on your home, make sure that your insurance is keeping
up with your life because if you are underinsured and you lose
everything, you are going to have a very, very hard time
recovering.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, sir. I remember when New York City
after the 2003 blackout started civilian emergency response
teams teaching civilians to do things that were not dangerous
but--so we didn't have to use first responders to direct
traffic and things like that.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Payne.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think you made some very good points with respect to FEMA
not being a first responder. But in anticipation of your
resources being needed, I think there are a lot of areas where
you could have done better. Knowing that this situation, this
circumstance was around the corner, I don't understand how in
some areas we plan for the worst and then other areas, we just
kind-of ``Well, we know something is coming, but we didn't
expect it to be that big.'' I mean, I would think in these
circumstances, you try to plan for the worst.
I think that almost every instance should be looked at as a
Category IV or V and then you ramp down as you don't need as
much resource. So, that would just be something I would point
out. One of the points that really stuck in my mind was when
just after the circumstance, we were in the middle of it and
there just happen to be an article that former Secretary
Clinton was quoted on, and she said, ``Well, I would have had
the ship Comfort ready.'' Then that is when the Government got
involved and got the ship ready which just took another 2 weeks
to get ready and ramp up.
Why wouldn't you have that within 2 or 3 days of being
ready on the circumstance? Secretary Clinton, she is retired
now but she just mentions it in an article and then that was
the impetus of it being used, but that is for another day.
Now, let us see. Administrator Kaniewski, in the 2017
hurricane season after-action report, FEMA indicated did not
properly take into account the factors that would make it
difficult for Puerto Rico to withstand a major hurricane. FEMA
also admitted that it did not anticipate the logistics demands
as you stated associated with the response activities on the
island. Now that FEMA has identified these shortcomings, do you
believe the agency has the tools necessary to respond
appropriately should a similar disaster strike Puerto Rico?
Let me just say, I give a lot of credit for you admitting
where some of the shortcomings were, where a lot of times get
that part of it. So, I commend you on that a bit. So, could you
respond, please?
Mr. Kaniewski. Thank you, Ranking Member.
Yes, much of what you mentioned aligns directly with Goal 2
in our strategic plan which is enhancing the Nation's
catastrophic readiness. So, just as the same that Goal 1 said
individuals need to be prepared and FEMA needs to be prepared
to assist, Goal 2 says FEMA's role should really be in our view
focused on catastrophic events.
We estimate that probably 80 percent of events could be
best managed at the State level. What we call Federally-
supported, State-managed, locally-executed disasters could be
the new norm going forward for potentially up to 80 percent of
disasters. Now, all of those would still be funded by FEMA, by
the Federal Government, but we believe that the State is best
positioned to manage their own response and recovery, and for
FEMA to fill in the gaps in those responses to play a much
larger role in those 20 percent of truly catastrophic disasters
just like Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, Maria, and the California
wildfires.
I think what many people also forget is that last year,
prior to Hurricane Maria, FEMA had not only Hurricanes Harvey
and Irma, but we had 30 other disasters even prior to
Hurricanes Harvey where FEMA personnel were deployed all around
the United States. The lesson we learned of course is that
created huge staffing challenges for us when the really big one
hit with Hurricane Maria.
So, we had to reallocate staff and resources from all over
the country, including from Texas and Florida to Puerto Rico
and Virgin Islands. That was a huge challenge. So, going
forward, what we are doing is making sure that, No. 1, we have
more prepositioned personnel and assets and frankly, as a
result of the busy hurricane season we had and the open
recovery effort, the on-going recovery efforts in those four
areas, we now have personnel prepositioned there for this
hurricane season. So, personnel are there, thousands of FEMA
personnel are prepositioned in those likely hurricane-prone
areas.
We have also pre-deployed far more commodities this year.
The way we did that was we increased the level of contracts
that we had and deployed--again, in Puerto Rico alone, we have
7 times the amount of commodities there today than we did
before Maria hit. Now, that is not because we ran out of
commodities last year. It is because we could run out in the
future if something even worse were to hit.
So, we need, to your point, to not just plan for a bad day,
but a really bad day. Today, I am confident that because of
their updated plans and procedures and because of the
additional personnel and commodities and equipment that is pre-
deployed to those likely hurricane-prone areas that we are
better prepared. Finally, I will say that we exercise those
plans. So, just this spring and for National exercise,
National-Level Exercise 2018, we simulated a hurricane striking
in the mid-Atlantic. To your point, it was a Category IV
hurricane.
It gave us the opportunity to test many of those plans and
procedures, some of which are brand-new. Some of which now
engage the private sector in a way that we hadn't before and we
did that in an exercise so that now we can be better prepared
for a real-world event for the hurricane season this year.
Mr. Payne. OK. Thank you. OK. I am way over my time.
So, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Mrs. Lesko.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I have 5 minutes and
I have three questions. So, hopefully we can answer all three.
The first question is actually addressing Mr. Kelly's
comments and the question is actually for Mr. Kaniewski. I
would like you to respond to his assessment that the IT
infrastructure in FEMA is outdated and needs to be fixed and
what is your response?
Mr. Kaniewski. Well, first of all, many of those IG reports
that were mentioned, FEMA concurred with and we have embraced
those findings and are doing our best to implement them. I will
also note that, as the inspector general noted, these are
problems that have existed since at least 2005 and so, we can't
fix them overnight, but we are putting personnel and resources
toward fixing them.
We have taken some immediate actions. We have changed our
leadership in CIO. I think that sends a strong signal that we
are doing things differently now and we are focusing like I
said time--our time of the leadership team as well as the
personnel and resources on fixing some of those challenges.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you. Do you have a time line on what you
are doing? Or, actually, since we don't have time, if you could
just email it maybe to the committee and then they can email it
to me.
My next question actually has to do with, since I am from
Arizona, we have wildfires. In fact, I think it was about 5
years ago the Yarnell Hill Fire killed 19 Prescott hotshot
firefighters. I was wondering what--this is to any of you, how
do you work with States like Arizona to help mitigate these
wildfires?
Mr. Kaniewski. I will go first with one quick answer which
is first of all, I am a former firefighter paramedic and I
understand the devastation that can be caused by wildfires.
But, yes, it has been--one, it has been several busy wildfire
seasons and we at FEMA realize that we need to do more than
respond to wildfires.
A recent innovation is that for Fire Management Assistance
Grants, those grants that we give out quite regularly to those
areas hardest hit by wildfires that pays for response to those
wildfires, reimburses State and local governments for their
responses. We are now adding a mitigation component. In fact,
we have added a mitigation component.
So, for each of those Fire Management Assistance Grants, we
are not just reimbursing for the cost of response. We are
helping to make an investment in those local communities to
lessen the impact of future wildfires.
Mr. Cotter. I might add that we are working with the State
of California in particular on software that would allow all
the people involved in the firefighter community to understand
the situation real-time. In particular for fire lines breached
that people know to rally back and what point to, that may be
they are using land mobile radios in the communication, voice
may not be clear, and in sync communication using a software
package and assist and maybe leave it to my colleague from PSCR
to talk about the deployable comms piece of that which could
have been very important in Yarnell.
Mr. Orr. Certainly. Thank you. Our laboratory is in
Colorado and obviously, we are dealing with several very large
fires right now as well. So, that is a very important topic for
us. All the areas that I listed whether it would be analytics,
enhanced user interfaces like heads-up displays, mission-
critical voice-over-broadband or location-based services, every
single one of those areas would be useful on the fire ground of
a wild land fire.
The area that Dan mentioned related to deployable is an
area of research we are doing actually on behalf of DHS and
Dan's group in S&T which is focused on the ability to use a
self-contained LTE network in a box probably about this big and
is the entire LTE network all deployed in a box about that big
and we are looking about--taking a look at the ability to
deploy that on a drone so that in the middle of a wild land
fire where there is no infrastructure and no capability to
drive in a truck, you would be able to put up a completely
self-contained LTE network with all the mapping, the data
transfer, the voice communications, wherever you want it and it
would be able to follow you wherever you went.
So, those kinds of applications I think would be fantastic
to be able to deploy on a fire ground whether it would be in
the wild land or an urban setting.
Mr. Kelly. From the IG's perspective, we concur with the
deputy administrator. Hazard mitigation grants if well-managed
can be very effective and it actually prevents the disaster or
the effects of the disaster before that actually occurs.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you. Thank you.
I think I have run out of time. Do we have time for one
more question, Mr. Chair? OK. Are we? Well, OK, thank you, Mr.
Chair. I do have one last question.
I have a constituent who has an idea on communications for
law enforcement and for preparedness. So, what is the best way
for an entrepreneur person to transfer their information to
you? Should they just--I get your cards and tell them to call
you or what is the best way to do this?
Mr. Kaniewski. Speaking on behalf of FEMA, we have an
industry office that does just that, that liaises with industry
including entrepreneurs for their ideas. We also realize we
need to do a better job of engagement. We hope to soon have a
private sector portal on our website. So, this can be done
electronically and that is something that we are aiming to do
very soon.
Mr. Cotter. Similarly, in Science and Technology we have
industrial engagement liaisons, certainly can provide that
information as follow up. Also depending in the type of
technology he wants to offer, we have open procurement requests
for industries, small businesses to apply to.
Mr. Orr. So, at PSCR, we--I would encourage somebody to go
to our website. We have a newsletter that alerts people to
opportunities for funding whether it is grants or prize
challenges. I do think our use of open innovation prize
challenges allows us to provide funding to entities and people
who might not normally be in the normal grant loop or
procurement loop for the Federal Government. So, it does allow
for a new way to interact with all kinds of innovators that are
out there that have great ideas to help solve these issues.
Mr. Kelly. If those actions don't work, your constituents
should submit a hotline complaint to our hotline because there
are some ways of getting things done also.
Mrs. Lesko. I like how you think. All right, thank you very
much.
I yield back. Well, I took extra time.
Mr. Donovan. That is all right. We will take it from you in
the next round.
Mr. Orr, that was an incredible, insightful thing you spoke
about, this box on a drone in wildfires. It sounds like
something that may be have been taken advantage of in Puerto
Rico when the technology was down, too, that you could have
this hotbox, whatever you call it.
Can you describe--in your testimony, you are talking about
other awards, one at the university in New York City, Homeland
Security division in New Jersey received some of your awards.
Can you tell us about some of the projects that are out there
and if there is some kind of time frame on them?
Mr. Orr. Absolutely. I would be happy to. One, we know we
have a lot of work to do in a fairly constrained period of time
at PSCR. The funding we were given from the 2012 Act that
created the FirstNet and also funded our activities from the
auction funds provided the time line on it of 2022.
So, we have a lot of work to do in a short period of time.
Although we are doing a lot of the key measurement science
inside of our labs, we also know we need to get as many
researchers as possible looking at this from around the country
and around the world. So, as I said, we have already released
over 40 grants and over $40 million to address all the issues I
talked about. So, we have got grants in mission-critical voice
and it is academia and industry that are part of these.
We have got grants in analytics. We have got grants focused
on location-based services. We have got grants focused on
enhanced user interfaces for the future first responders. So,
we are addressing all the areas that I have talked about. Most
of the grants on average are 2 years because we want a
turnaround on these grants and have enough time to then iterate
and do another one or two iterations on grants and prize
challenges from the results from the first.
So, most of them are 2 years. Some of them are 3 if they
were to an academic institution and then there was a PhD-
related researcher that needed 3 years as part of their PhD
program. But most are 2 years and they are covering our entire
swath of areas.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you.
Mr. Cotter, I did visit New Steel, remarkable work that
they are doing there. Can you tell me what other needs you may
have from Congress besides our local support to advance the
technology that New Steel is working on?
Mr. Cotter. Yes, sir. Thank you very much for your support.
Really, that has been wonderful. It certainly has enabled us to
keep doing what we are doing. I might just like to mention that
much of what you have seen and certainly appreciate the work
for the New York City regional and local first responders, I
also like to stress that New Steel really has a National
presence and we have done work in 41 States, 306 cities across
the Nation.
They have trained over 2,000 different first responders
around the community, just an amazing amount of work. Just
recognizing that they are not just a New York City asset, they
are truly a National asset for us.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Payne.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let us see. Deputy Inspector Kelly, in my review of the
FEMA's 2017 hurricane season after-action report, I was struck
by how many of the findings were problems that we have had and
heard of before as identified by your office. I have been on
this subcommittee for 6 years now, 3 terms. I have had 3
different Chairpeople. This has been the best one who has
stayed the longest.
But, specifically, I noted that FEMA staffing challenges,
coordination with State and locals and asset visibility were
issues your office flagged many years ago. Now, have you had a
chance to review the after-action report? If so, what are some
of the issues that continually come up and have yet to be
addressed?
Mr. Kelly. Ranking Member, yes, I did have the opportunity
to review the after-action report. I thought it was very
thorough. Some of the things that you identified there, both
staffing issues and logistics problems are things that we have
harped on in the past.
In September 2016, we issued a report on FEMA's
qualification system, their staffing system. They were supposed
to have basically 11,000 reservists or temporary workers to
surge for disasters. At the time that we did the audit, they
had less than half of those individuals on board. So, they had
basically a deficiency of half of the people that they thought
they needed to respond to disasters.
I noticed in the after-action report, they showed what
appeared to be some progress in increasing the number of staff
associated with that program. But they were far below what they
needed. I think in years like 2017, it shows the problems with
not having the staff on board. Now, in FEMA's defense, there
are a number of challenges for them to get the staff that they
need, many of which are beyond their controls. When you have a
strong economy, it is very difficult to get people to give up
their jobs to take on a part-time job. Maybe they need some
legislative fixes to help work in that area.
Another area on logistics that you addressed, we have found
problems with their integrated systems. The deputy
administrator emphasized the Federally-funded, State-managed,
and locally-executed mantra that FEMA has which is a very good
mantra, we strongly support that. But to have that work
effectively, to be good stewards of the tax dollars, FEMA needs
to have integrated systems that the State and local communities
can tap into.
We understand that they have significant problems actually
getting information from FEMA because of the firewalls that
have been set up, and that poses significant challenges to
those who are trying to respond to the disasters.
Mr. Payne. OK. Thank you.
To the point that the deputy administrator was making in
terms of people being bilingual and all, it would appear to me
from the area that we come from, there were people that have
that common interest in seeing things happen there with our
large Puerto Rican community and Caribbean community in those
areas to even go on local TV to say, ``We need people to
volunteer.'' There are people that had a natural interest in
what was happening to family members and what have you that a
little promotion in that area.
People were coming to my office all the time saying,
``Well, how can we help? What can we do? We want to be
helpful.'' To know that you were looking for people like that
would be helpful in the onset, to your point about many of the
FEMA's public-facing technologies for preparedness require a
certain level of means, tech savviness, and literacy.
For example, the preparedness information on floodsmart.gov
or information being sent through the FEMA app all require a
certain level of technology knowledge that not everyone has.
How is FEMA's preparedness message reaching populations with
limited access to technology? I have some of the most affluent
constituents in New Jersey and some of the poorest. So,
everybody as a State does not have the same means. How do you
address that, sir?
Mr. Kaniewski. Well, thank you. Yes, thank you, inspector
general, for his, I thought, very insightful and balanced
comments about the challenges we face.
Just as an overall statement, I will say that you don't
want to look at AAR in isolation. You want to look at the AAR
in tandem with our strategic plan. They really are linked
documents. AAR is where we think we can improve and the
strategic plan is where we want to go in the next 5 years.
So, first on the issue of staffing, yes, we do face many
challenges in recruitment, in retention of our disaster
reservists. You may not know this, but our reservists are not
treated the same way legally as the reservists in the armed
forces. They don't have a status that allows them either to
become a full-time employee. There is no career path there. No.
2, if they are to leave work, if there is a disaster and they
leave work, there is no protection on them being able to return
to their jobs. So, there are a number of challenges in addition
to what you heard.
As far as getting volunteers in the immediate aftermath of
a disaster, I agree, we definitely want to leverage the
volunteer base. That is generally done through the
nongovernmental organizations. FEMA can't welcome volunteers on
as easily. We have that reservist program, right, and that
would take some time to get on board. But in the immediate
aftermath, the best thing that someone can do if they want to
help in a disaster is go to a nongovernmental organization.
If you say, ``I am not sure which one to go to'' or ``Which
one is the best based on my interest or my expertise?'', the
answer is NVOAD. Now, that is an acronym for the National
Volunteer Organizations Active in Disaster. Would you believe
today at FEMA headquarters is our voluntary partnership day?
So, today, we are showcasing all of these volunteer
organizations we are working with and strengthening those bonds
with those organizations, so they can bring on volunteers. They
can provide specialized resources.
As far as other employees, how we can leverage those with a
particular interest, I think we can all agree. Those that have
the most interest in their recovery are the disaster survivors
themselves. I am very proud to say that today, FEMA is one of
the largest employers on Puerto Rico. We have I believe 1,500
local hires that are managing not only our recovery programs,
but managing their recovery for the future.
Now, to your point about not everybody having access to
technology, I agree. We know that there are always be a segment
of the population that we can't reach via technology. So, no
matter how much we go on Twitter, or how much we post on the
website, we have to have relationships on the ground. Now, for
FEMA, that might mean our regional offices. It might mean our
joint field offices. So, anybody in the disaster site can go to
our joint field office and get some one-on-one assistance.
But in addition, we are working with the NGO community and
I want to mention one in particular, which is Operation HOPE.
Operation HOPE has an unbelievable mission. They are out there
educating people on financial literacy. We have partnered with
them. We have developed an emergency financial first aid kit to
help those that do not have the financial literacy, help them
prepare for a disaster, help them prepare for any emergency
that they might have.
If you ever want to see an inspiring story, look at John
Hope Bryant, the founder of that organization. I am going to
use a plug here for our prep talk series, I don't know if
anybody has heard of that. But think of it as like a TED Talk
for emergency management. This has been very popular and John
Hope Bryant himself did one of our first prep talks. So, you
can find that on-line. I think that message really resonates
with me and it reminds me every day that we need to make sure
that we are helping everyone, every American, not just those
with access.
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Donovan. The Chair recognizes Mrs. Lesko for any
questions she may have. You are their favorite Member.
For not only your testimony and not only your patience with
us today, but also to your service to our Nation, there is a
lack of understanding sometimes of what everyone's role is.
Sometimes, there is a lack of understanding, not from the
people on this committee, but other Members of Congress what
your role is. So, what you have shared with us today is
insightful.
Know that you have our support and please again--no one
answered my question, but we are lawmakers. Sometimes we make
laws that aren't as effective as the people who need to use
them would wish them to be. So, this communication that we have
doesn't end here today. Let us know how we could help you
protect our communities.
The Members of the subcommittee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses. We ask that you respond to those
in writing. Pursuant to the committee rule VII(D), the hearing
record will remain open for 7 days.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:51 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
Questions From Ranking Member Donald M. Payne, Jr. for Daniel Kaniewski
Question 1a. In its 2017 Hurricane Season After-Action Report, FEMA
admitted it did not have situational awareness of the damage inflicted
by Hurricane Maria. Three days after the storm, FEMA and Puerto Rico
had not begun water and wastewater assessments and ``communications
challenges inhibited reporting of road outage assessments.'' A week
after the storm hit, FEMA still did not have information on the status
of ``24 of 52 wastewater treatment plants or 37 of 69 hospitals.''
Is there technology to improve FEMA's situational awareness after a
catastrophic natural disaster?
Question 1b. If so, what is it?
Question 1c. Is FEMA exploring such technology?
Question 1d. Beyond technology, what more can FEMA do to improve
post-disaster situational awareness?
Answer. In the immediate aftermath of Hurricane Maria, critical
lifelines across Puerto Rico were unavailable or severely affected,
including power, communications, and transportation. Specifically, the
lack of viable means of communication impacted the Commonwealth's
ability to gain situational awareness across the island. The Governor
and the Puerto Rico Emergency Management Agency (PREMA) were unable to
communicate with the 78 mayors, municipal emergency managers, and first
responders. This lack of communications reduced the ability to receive
damage assessments and reports of key impacts, and threatened State and
local continuity of government. FEMA rapidly deployed communications
equipment and its Mobile Emergency Response Support (MERS) teams to
help establish contingency communications networks across the island,
including delivering satellite phones to each municipality, which
helped improve communication and reporting.
Further, Federal, State, and local responders had to conduct in-
person assessments of many key lifeline-enabling infrastructure,
including hospitals and water treatment plants. Emergency Support
Function (ESF)-8 (coordinated by Health and Human Services) and ESF-10
(coordinated by Environmental Protection Agency) led Federal support to
assess and identify requirements to stabilize their associated
lifelines. However, many areas were isolated due to road closures, and
owners and operators of the facilities faced the same communications
challenges experienced by the municipal governments. In the initial
weeks of the incident, various response teams, including FEMA's
National Urban Search and Rescue Response System's Task Forces,
conducted assessments of hospitals and other critical infrastructure to
determine status and key requirements and share their findings with the
appropriate entities. Transportation and power limitations complicated
efforts to conduct assessments, but a lack of resilient and redundant
communications infrastructure was the major limiting factor in gaining
situational awareness.
To prevent a complete communications failure following a large-
scale incident in the future, State and local governments, and owners
and operators of critical infrastructure should focus their efforts on
building redundant means of communication, including emergency
communication. For example, high-frequency radio would likely be one of
the few forms of available communications following a catastrophic
incident. The Federal Government can emphasize the importance of
preparedness, continuity planning, and contingency communications
capabilities for State and local constituents. FEMA's grant programs
provide funding mechanisms for State and local governments to procure
critical preparedness equipment, and can be used to build organic
contingency communications capabilities for the State and local
governments and first responders.
FEMA is also making strides to improve situational awareness and
reporting across the response lifelines (transportation,
communications, power/fuel, food/water/shelter, safety and security,
health and medical, and hazardous materials). FEMA is partnering with
the National Protection and Programs Directorate (NPPD) to leverage
steady-state public-private coordination mechanisms across the 16
critical infrastructure sectors during response operations. National-
level reporting mechanisms will provide a means to receive status
updates and requirements from industry and infrastructure owners and
operators, aimed at improving reporting and situational awareness,
unity of effort, and operational prioritization. To institutionalize
these improvements, FEMA is revising the National Response Framework to
focus response toward the stabilization of critical lifelines and
establish a new Emergency Support Function-14 (Cross-Sector
Coordination).
Establishment of an interoperability operational framework allowing
for voice and data exchange (e.g., IP-based gateways) between varying
communications technologies and networks such as HF communications,
satellite communications, and commercial wireless broadband/WiFi and
cellular pending degree of infrastructure damage and wide-spread nature
of natural disaster. Increased alignment with commercial communications
providers in the area of the natural disaster to determine (via
provider network management systems) which cell sites may still be
operational with sufficient backhaul and power (including assessing
battery life).
Build a shared Federal LMR network in PR and the U.S. Virgin
Islands (USVI) to support assigned, dedicated channels for
participating Departments, Agencies, and Components (D/A/Cs), augmented
with dedicated interoperability channels in Federally-assigned very
high frequency (VHF) and ultra-high frequency (UHF) bands. A network
designed to carry voice and LMR data traffic, and expand to include
other technologies as needed, and accommodate participation from local,
territorial, and Commonwealth subscribers.
Question 2. In the aftermath of Hurricane Maria, several large-
scale tech companies like Facebook, Tesla, and Google came to Puerto
Rico to assist with emergency response and rebuilding efforts. How does
FEMA plan to better leverage and coordinate with the private sector for
short- and mid-term technology needs for future disasters?
Answer. Technology integration and innovation in disasters has been
a reality during this historic hurricane season. The FEMA Private-
Sector team comprised of approximately 60 staff across HQ, Regions, and
deployed staff managed the integration of the business community into
response and recovery across not just the three largest disasters in
Texas, Florida, and Puerto Rico but nearly 30 other disasters including
the fires in California. Given the scale of these incidents, the
maturation of emergency management within the business community, and
continued integration of the private sector into government operations,
innovation in disasters continues well into recovery. At the height of
response, FEMA was directly coordinating with more than 1,200 National
businesses daily including key technology and innovation leaders who
helped support affected States and survivors.
Through the National Business Emergency Operations Center (NBEOC)
FEMA coordinates with business, industry, and infrastructure owners and
operators, which had more than 800 National members at the time of
Hurricane Maria, including technology companies of various scale,
capabilities, and maturity. FEMA currently has nearly 40 signed
coordination agreements with technology companies including: Arc
Aspicio, Airbnb, Amazon, CenturyLink, Cisco TacOps, Dbi Services,
Digital Global Systems, Dun & Bradstreet, Esri US, Everbridge, Excel
Technologies, Facebook, Google Disaster Response, Hughes Network
Systems, Humanity Road, Icloud, Information Technology Disaster
Resource Center, Intel, SABER, Lyft, MIT, M2Catalyst, MapR Federal,
Microsoft, Microsoft Philanthropies, MutuaLink, Nextdoor, Oracle, Plum
Laboratories, SABER, Sprint, Siemens, Twitter, Uber, Verizon, World
Wide Technology, Zillow Group.
Since 2015, the Tech Sector Collaboration Program effort has been
aligned closely with the NBEOC as part of the National Response
Coordination Center (NRCC) where these companies and non-governmental
organizations, such as Information Technology Disaster Resource Center
(ITDRC) and Humanity Road, are aligned in response operations.
During Hurricane Harvey, program members along with additional
technology companies held daily conference calls in addition to normal
NBEOC calls for more specific tech issues based on the situation. This
consistent collaboration resulted in Cisco and ITDRC assisting San
Antonio Food Bank in 10 affected neighborhoods with data connectivity
so they could assist Harvey survivors in registering for Disaster
Unemployment Assistance while also providing connectivity for donation
management warehouses in Texas. In a combined effort, Dell, Google,
Cisco, DISH, and Ruckus provided network infrastructure, internet
backhaul, and computer hardware for evacuation shelters in Dallas,
Austin, Houston, and in surrounding areas, along with Intel's
coordination with the American Red Cross.
These efforts made an impact. Humanity Road provided situational
reporting areas of approximately 8.7 million people. The team monitored
and relayed urgent needs where Twitter traffic averaged 6.5 million
tweets daily to first responders. They had a team of 50 volunteers from
8 States and 7 countries with an additional 13 translators from
Translators without Borders. Humanity Road volunteers supported the
public with information needs, as well as the Army National Guard and
U.S. Coast Guard with a rescue map containing more than 1,000 requests
for rescue which informed rescue operations.
During Hurricane Irma, ITDRC provided assets and volunteers to
provide voice and internet connectivity for the county Emergency
Operations Center enabling several departments in the city of Marathon,
Florida to coordinate response as well as in the various Florida
Chambers of Commerce and Florida Department of Law Enforcement.
Additionally, they equipped the AmeriCorps teams with their technology
in TX, Florida (FL), Puerto Rico (PR), and the U.S. Virgin Islands
(USVI), as well as providing technology resources to National and
regional nonprofits such as Team Rubicon, Red Cross, Catholic
Charities, and Toolbank. Humanity Road co-located with FEMA in Big Pine
Key, FL supporting local response through situational awareness
reporting and staffing a resource information center for 2 weeks. Also,
the mobile app Gas Buddy provided data to the Florida Department of
Emergency Management and FEMA as part of supply chain stabilization for
fueling in Florida to reduce lines and address shortages.
During the first week of Hurricane Maria response, FEMA for the
first time established the Puerto Rico Business Emergency Operations
Center in the Joint Field Office (JFO) to ensure clear coordination
with the private sector for supporting business continuity, industry
solutions, and infrastructure restoration aligned with various sectors.
This helped ensure, for example, that the Puerto Rico Chief Information
Officer's request for fielding of Project Loon to Google was
appropriately coordinated. In another innovation, Tactivate, an
entrepreneurial expeditionary team working with the Puerto Rico Offices
of Family Services and local authorities, enabled data connectivity
allowing more than $250,000 in electronic transactions within remote
communities so survivors could access their assistance funds and
increase their personal resilience. In both cases, FEMA supported the
efforts of the Puerto Rico government and the technology companies,
only coordinating where needed as opposed to directing efforts. The
director, private sector met with a multitude of companies not limited
to Tesla, Google, ESRI, Microsoft as well as the Puerto Rico technology
incubator Parallel 18 and other Silicon Valley firms.
In other post-Maria operations, ITDRC, DISH, Datapath, Sprint,
Google, and Dell volunteers pooled resources to provide 40 notebooks to
the USVI to register survivors for assistance. Through the collective
efforts between PR Emergency Management Agency, DISH, and ITDRC in
response to an urgent need, the companies collaborated with HughesNet
to donate a satellite establishing internet connectivity for the only
operating pharmacy in Cabo Rojo providing medicines to more than 49,000
citizens. Intel also provided drone expertise for locating survivors
and damage assessment efforts in PR following successful deployment
training for immediate response needs in the Mexico City earthquake.
Today, Microsoft continues providing data visualization for the
Governor of Puerto Rico's status.pr website and supporting NetHope and
other partners in the Caribbean providing pallets of solar panels and
batteries to support TV White Space emergency connectivity sites.
Currently in Puerto Rico, FEMA is working with private sector to
coordinate opportunities to jointly bury fiber with PREPA, PRASA, and
transportation. This allows the carriers to save time and resources
where trenching is already occurring or where vaults are being built on
new roads. Through the ``sector-based'' recovery model, agencies are
coordinating with the private sector (both telecom and broadcasters) to
develop the generation and distribution of wireless and emergency
alerting.
Overall, during the 2017 hurricane season, the NBEOC received more
than 10,000 inquiries, offers of capabilities, and several pitches from
technology companies. FEMA is currently developing a new effort to
collect, filter, and evaluate the feasibility of these unsolicited
offers for potential use and provide innovations to the agency and the
emergency management enterprise for consideration. This will be jointly
managed by the Office of the Chief Procurement Officer and the Private
Sector Division in the Office of Response and Recovery.
The lessons learned from the historic 2017 hurricane season and the
complexities presented by a dynamic threat and hazard environment make
clear that private-sector operational integration is essential based on
the systemic interdependence and disconnects which can be addressed
supporting community economies Nationally. As a result, FEMA requested
and received authorization from the Secretary of Homeland Security to
update the National Response Framework (NRF) and develop Emergency
Support Function-14.
ESF-14 will create an integrated, designated, formal response
coordination mechanism that will allow greater insight into the needs
for business resumption, infrastructure restoration, and other private-
sector-enabling activities which can shift systems from disrupted to
sustainable operations. This will improve precise information sharing
between Government and the private sector based on information
requirements and stabilization indicators collaboratively developed
that will accelerate response and recovery. And most importantly from a
technology implementation perspective, greater actionability for
issues, concerns, and complex challenges requiring sustained
collaboration to stabilize the incident.
Recent coordination with the technology community includes, but is
not limited to:
NLE18 (May 2018): NBEOC Members in active exercise planning
and conduct: Amazon, Cisco TacOps, DBi Services, Dun &
Bradstreet, Everbridge, Humanity Road, ITDRC, Microsoft, MIT,
MutuaLink, Nextdoor, Plum Laboratories, SABER, Uber.
Airbnb (May 2018): Engagement with Individual and Community
Preparedness Division on community engagement around hurricane
preparedness.
White House (May 30, 2018): Facilitated tech sector
participation for White House Office of Science and
Technology's ``Improved Information Sharing for Whole Community
Disaster Response'' Workshop.
Zillow (June 2018): Engagement with FIMA Risk Management
Division to promote awareness of flood zones and using data.
Private Public Partnership Conference (July 24-25, 2018):
Hosted a Technology Integration Workshop with the DHS Private
Sector Office as well as tabletop exercise and operational
coordination including Airbnb, Amazon, CenturyLink, IBM,
Nextdoor, Siemens, Twitter, and Verizon.
Last, the Private Sector Division was moved from the Office of
External Affairs to the Office of Response and Recovery. The Division
is being resourced to contribute to private-sector integration across
community lifelines and retool the Tech Sector Collaboration Program to
expedite the potential use of technologies during disasters including
aligning with existing capabilities or crises response efforts of the
tech community. This process will include working with DHS Science and
Technology and the DHS Private Sector Office.
FEMA's Tech Sector Collaboration Program is only one way that
technology-driven capabilities can be used in disasters. Some companies
seek collaboration only with certain non-governmental organizations or
on their own, instead of coordinating with FEMA. While the program is
not designed for individuals, we do guide those volunteers to the
Volunteer Organizations Active in Disasters and other proven partners
such as the Information Technology Disaster Resource Center (ITDRC).
Technology integration and volunteerism in disasters will continue, and
the FEMA Private Sector Division will continue to support these
efforts.
Question 3. According to FEMA's recently published After-Action
Report, the 2017 ``hurricanes and wildfires collectively affected more
than 47 million people--nearly 15 percent of the Nation's population.''
Given these statistics, it is likely that close to 10 million of these
affected individuals should have been provided with the civil rights
protections of equal access to emergency services and programs. Given
the thousands of disaster-related deaths and the disproportionate
impact of the disasters on countless people with ``chronic health
conditions'' and disabilities, why is it that the FEMA After-Action
Report doesn't make any mention or provide any recommendations for
improvements in meeting its disability civil rights obligations?
Answer. FEMA is committed to serving all survivors, including
survivors with disabilities and other access and functional needs and
did during the 2017 hurricane season. The final chapter of the After-
Action Report (AAR), on Mass Care to Initial Housing Operations,
focuses specifically on areas where FEMA can improve services to all
survivors, including those with disabilities and other access and
functional needs. FEMA describes how the implementation of the Direct
Lease program may have better served survivors with disabilities and
other access and functional needs. As noted on page 45 of the AAR:
``Due to the shortage of available housing resources to accommodate the
large number of survivors requiring housing assistance, FEMA developed
a new Direct Lease program. This program facilitated survivor access to
property not typically used for temporary housing, such as corporate
lodging or vacation rentals. In addition, Direct Lease can be a
potentially safer option for displaced families with access and
functional needs compared to a manufactured housing unit.''
In addition, the AAR provides recommendations to improve service to
all citizens inclusive of survivors with disabilities and other access
and functional needs. For example, page 47 of the AAR mentions that
``State and local governments are best positioned to determine housing
options for their citizens, with support from the Federal Government.''
On page 48, the AAR further recommends that:
``Federal housing assistance can be adapted to build SLTT capacity to
manage disaster housing programs on behalf of their citizens . . .
Changes should offer State, local, Tribal, and territorial partners the
flexibility to provide housing options that work for their citizens.
The goal will include an expeditions and smooth transition for
survivors from immediate to mid- to long-term housing solutions.''
Question 4. How is FEMA carrying out its responsibility for
ensuring that Emergency Support Function No. 8 is carried out in
compliance with disability civil rights obligations throughout disaster
response and recovery?
Answer. FEMA deploys Disability Integration Advisors to each Joint
Field Office to support response and recovery efforts, as well as to
the National Response Coordination Center (NRCC) and Regional Response
Coordination Centers (RRCCs). These advisors provide the Federal
Coordinating Officer, NRCC and RRCC leadership and incident management
organization with situational awareness, advice, and guidance to ensure
people with disabilities have equal access to all programs and services
across the disaster life cycle. FEMA mission assigns the Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS) to lead the Federal Government's
support to public health and medical response during Presidentially-
declared Emergencies and Major Disasters. HHS is the coordinating
agency for Emergency Support Function (ESF)-8, Public Health and
Medical, as well as the Health and Social Services Recovery Support
Function. The Disability Integration Advisors provide ESFs, including
ESF-8, with required support in the form of counsel and advice based on
lessons learned from prior disaster responses. Under its mission
assignment, FEMA delegates decision making authority to HHS on specific
disability civil rights obligations with regard to public health and
medical response and recovery.
Question 5. What is FEMA doing to ensure that Federal funds
expended throughout disaster response and recovery are provided in
compliance with obligations to ensure that disaster-impacted
individuals with disabilities are provided equal access to emergency
services and programs in the most integrated setting appropriate, as
required?
Answer. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the
State, Tribal, or territorial government receiving Federal disaster
assistance (Recipient) enter into a FEMA-State Agreement (FSA) or FEMA-
Tribe Agreement (FTA) that requires the Recipient to comply with non-
discrimination assurances under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Both of these
Acts prohibit discrimination in programs receiving Federal financial
assistance. Section 504 specifically states that `` . . . no person, by
reason of her or his disability, shall be excluded from the
participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to
discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal
financial assistance or under any program or activity conducted by any
Executive agency . . . ''.
In addition to the FSA/FTA, FEMA promotes this non-discrimination
requirement through information provided to disaster survivors with the
opportunity to file a complaint in instances of perceived
discrimination. Fliers and other information posters are published in
all languages related to the demographics of the disaster impacted
area, in multiple accessible formats, and distributed through numerous
media outlets to reach the broadest possible disaster survivor
audience.
The FSA assurances also support FEMA programs guidance to
recipients in providing equal access to all applicants. This guidance
is set forth in the Individuals and Households Program Unified Guidance
(IHPUG) which outlines program delivery considerations for applicants
for assistance with disabilities and other individuals with access and
functional needs, those with LEP, those residing in insular areas, and
Tribal governments.
FEMA ensures equal access to eligible services and programs for all
applicants with disabilities and other individuals with access and
functional needs. FEMA provides all of the following:
Accessible communication for applicants who are deaf, hard
of hearing, or have a speech disability. Applicants should call
800-462-7585 for TTY or 800-621-3362 for 711 or VRS.
Access to DRCs that comply with the Americans with
Disabilities Act and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act,
which include wheelchair ramps, accessible restrooms, and
accessible paths of travel from the parking lot and throughout
the facility, as well as multi-lingual signage and technology
to address a variety of access and functional needs.
Alternative formatted materials in large print and Braille.
American Sign Language interpreters and/or Communication
Access Real-time Translation (CART) at public/community
outreach events and field staff equipped with tablet computers
that can access Video Relay Interpreting (VRI) for applicants
who use American Sign Language.
Assistance for applicants who are having difficulty
understanding the registration process, denial letters, or the
appeal process.
Disaster Recovery Centers:
Disaster survivors may apply for assistance in person at
DRCs in or near their communities. DRCs are usually opened
quickly after a disaster for a limited period of time. They are
accessible and equipped to accommodate disaster survivors who
need disability-related communication aids. FEMA staff can
assist with completing registrations or checking their
application status. FEMA coordinates with the State,
territorial, Tribal, or local government to establish DRC
locations.
The FEMA Office of Equal Rights (OER) monitors recipients providing
assistance to disaster survivors to ensure there are no barriers to
access and participation by persons with disabilities. Where relevant
factors trigger concerns about the effectiveness of non-discriminatory
recipient program delivery and access, OER conducts reviews to assess
the recipient's procedures and offer technical assistance to promote
voluntary compliance as required by the applicable regulations. Also,
OER is responsible for processing complaints of discrimination from
disaster survivors that allege discrimination in participation or
access in the programs receiving Federal disaster assistance.
Question 6. How is FEMA monitoring the use of billions of
preparedness, disaster relief, recovery and hazard mitigation funds it
expends and provides to grantees, sub grantees, contractors, sub-
contractors and other recipients of Federal funds in compliance with
its obligations under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973?
Answer. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the
State, Tribal, or territorial government receiving Federal disaster
assistance (Recipient) enter into a FEMA-State Agreement (FSA) or FEMA-
Tribe Agreement (FTA) that requires the recipient to comply with non-
discrimination assurances under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Both of these
acts prohibit discrimination in programs receiving Federal financial
assistance. Section 504 specifically states that `` . . . no person, by
reason of her or his disability, shall be excluded from the
participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to
discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal
financial assistance or under any program or activity conducted by any
Executive agency . . . ''.
The FEMA Office of Equal Rights (OER) monitors recipients providing
assistance to disaster survivors to ensure there are no barriers to
access and participation by persons with disabilities. Where relevant
factors trigger concerns about the effectiveness of non-discriminatory
recipient program delivery and access, OER conducts reviews to assess
the recipient's procedures and offer technical assistance to promote
voluntary compliance as required by the applicable regulations. Also,
OER is responsible for processing complaints of discrimination from
disaster survivors that allege discrimination in participation or
access in the programs receiving Federal disaster assistance.
The Civil Rights Unit of OER reviews grant applications and grant
awards, conducts site reviews and desk audits of recipients, conducts
compliance reviews where relevant factors determine compliance reviews
should be conducted, and provide technical assistance when recipients
are not providing effective program guidelines and practices that
ensure compliance with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
The Civil Rights Unit also processes complaints of discrimination
against recipients filed by disaster survivors, contractors, or other
persons that allege denial of access and participation in recipient
programs and activities.
FEMA ensures the use of preparedness funds it provides to
recipients are expended in compliance with obligations under Section
504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 by including this as one of the
DHS Standard Terms and Conditions on each award and by requiring that
all grant recipients certify compliance with the Rehabilitation Act of
1973 by submitting Standard Form (SF)-424B, Assurances for Non-
Construction Programs, or SF-424D, Assurances for Construction
Programs, as applicable, before FEMA awards funds to the recipient:
1. The DHS Standard Terms and Conditions for various fiscal years
are available at https://www.dhs.gov/publication/fy15-dhs-
standard-terms-and-conditions require that all recipients
comply with Section 504:
a. Rehabilitation Act of 1973 Recipients must comply with the
requirements of Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of
1973, (29 U.S.C. Sec. 794), as amended, which provides that
no otherwise qualified disabled individuals in the United
States will, solely by reason of the disability, be
excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of,
or be subjected to discrimination under any program or
activity receiving Federal financial assistance.
2. Grant applicants must also certify compliance with Section 504
when signing the standard assurances form(s) of SF-424B (non-
construction programs) or SF-424D (construction programs),
which are available https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-
424-family.html#sortby=1. In SF-424B, compliance with Section
504 is stated in paragraph 6, and in SF-424D, compliance with
Section 504 is stated in paragraph 10. The paragraphs on both
forms require the recipient to comply with all Federal statutes
relating to nondiscrimination, including Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended (29 U.S.C.  794), which
prohibits discrimination on the basis of a disability.
3. Complaints received concerning compliance with Section 504 of
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 are investigated and referred to
OER. Under 44 C.F.R.  13.43 for awards to States, Tribes, and
local governments before December 26, 2014, 2 C.F.R.  215.62
for awards to institutions of higher education, hospitals, and
other nonprofit organizations before December 26, 2014, and 2
C.F.R.  200.338 for awards to all non-Federal entities on or
after December 26, 2014, FEMA has the authority to take certain
enforcement actions for noncompliance with a term and condition
of the award. Such remedies include imposing specific
conditions, withholding payments, withholding further awards,
and disallowing costs.
Questions From Ranking Member Donald M. Payne, Jr. for Daniel M. Cotter
Question 1a. To what extent is S&T working to develop technologies
to address the threat posed by unmanned aerial systems over public
areas?
Answer. DHS is in need of new legislative authority to counter the
growing threats and potential misuse of Unmanned Aircraft Systems
(UAS). The most effective technologies for countering malicious uses of
UAS conflict with Federal laws enacted long before UAS technology was
available for commercial and consumer use. Specifically, DHS needs
Counter-UAS (CUAS) authorities to detect, track, and mitigate threats
from small UAS before further UAS integration actions by the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA). DHS cannot develop and operate many
types of CUAS technologies without these authorities.
Current law prohibits the use of most Counter Unmanned Aircraft
Systems (UAS) technology to detect, track, and mitigate threats. As you
are aware Chairman McCaul recently introduced H.R. 6401 that would
provide DHS and DOJ with narrowly-scoped authorities to counter UAS.
DHS greatly appreciates the Chairman's efforts to close this important
authority gap.
Although we are prohibited from developing kinetic or electronic
mitigation solutions, in the mean time, S&T developed the Counter-Small
UAS Advisory and Review Toolkit (C-SMART), which is a suite of computer
models and analysis tools that can be used to optimize the sensor
layout and overall architecture of a CUAS system being deployed to
protect people and/or critical infrastructure. To date, C-SMART has
been used to support National Special Security Events, such as the
Presidential Inauguration, and others with high Special Event
Assessment Rating, such as the Super Bowl. The C-SMART technology is a
modeling tool and does not violate the problematic statutes. C-SMART
also supports FAA and TSA in assessing the vulnerability of airports to
malicious drones and the associated cost and level of protection by
counter-drone capabilities.
Given the wealth of commercially available off-the-shelf solutions
(COTS), S&T focuses on testing and evaluating COTS in settings that are
relevant to homeland security in order to advise DHS operating
components while guiding industries' development efforts. S&T provides
upgrades to existing capabilities using mature technologies, while
leveraging Department of Defense and Department of Energy investments
to incubate new technologies against future threats, such as advanced
algorithm to reduce false alarms for urban sensors or safe-eye laser
imaging detection and ranging.
S&T is working with a DHS operational component to create an urban
testbed. This testbed will serve both as an interim operational system
and as a testbed to assess the efficacy of various detection, tracking,
identification, and mitigation for CUAS technologies. This effort also
ties into the work NASA Ames is doing for the Federal Aviation
Administration on a UAS Traffic Management system.
Question 1b. Are there statutory obstacles to addressing this
threat?
Answer. DHS is in need of legislative authority to counter the
growing threat posed by unmanned aircraft systems (UAS). Specifically,
DHS needs Counter-UAS (CUAS) authorities to employ certain types of
technology deemed more effective to detect and track small UAS and
mitigate malicious small UAS. Without this mandate, DHS is unable to
develop and operate many types of CUAS technologies. Pending
legislation, S. 2836, the Preventing Emerging Threats Act of 2018,
would provide DHS the ability to develop the necessary technology and
deploy it in support of our identified missions to mitigate the range
of threats from small UAS. With approval of this authority, Congress
would reduce risks to public safety and National security, will help to
accelerate the safe integration of UAS into the National Airspace
System (NAS) and ensure that the United States remains a global leader
in UAS innovation.
In normal security situations, law enforcement personnel can
establish protective measures to protect people and property from
mobile threats--that is simply not the case with drones as they are
able to access areas that people, cars, or other mobile devices cannot.
Moreover, the most effective technologies for countering malicious uses
of UAS conflict with Federal laws, such as the Wiretap Act and the Pen
Trap and Trace Statutes, enacted long before UAS technology was
available for commercial and consumer use. Additionally, State and
local law enforcement are generally responsible for protection of local
events and mass gatherings, but neither has authority to use CUAS
technologies to counter potential threats. A provision included in S.
2836 would allow DHS or DOJ to provide assistance, within available
resources, when requested by the State Governor or Attorney General. We
believe this is an important aspect of our continued coordination with
State and local law enforcement partners
Question 2. How does S&T collaborate with the Small Business
Administration (SBA) to provide support to small businesses in order to
develop quality manufacturing practices and procedures to insure
mission-critical products are placed in the hands of the first
responder community?
Answer. The DHS SBIR Office does not collaborate with SBA in the
area of providing support to small businesses in order to develop
quality manufacturing practices and procedures. However, S&T does
provide small businesses with test and evaluation support at its
laboratories and testbeds through cooperative research and development
agreements (CRADAs) to ensure that their manufactured technologies meet
the technology requirements of DHS components. In addition, S&T
provides access to commercialization support to help small business
performers improve their chances of success in the public sector arena
and ensure that mission-critical products can be manufactured and made
available in the marketplace.
Questions From Ranking Member Donald M. Payne, Jr. for Dereck R. Orr
Question 1. Please describe how NIST is working with FirstNet to
ensure the success of the network.
Answer. NIST's Public Safety Communications Research Division
(PSCR) has benefited from a partnership with FirstNet, beginning in
2012. NIST PSCR and FirstNet have collaborated to identify their
research portfolio. Additionally, prior to 2016 (when spectrum auction
funds became available to NIST), PSCR performed research specifically
for FirstNet. Since the auction funds became available, PSCR regularly
meets with FirstNet to provide information on key research findings;
updates FirstNet leadership on a bi-monthly basis at the Federal
Partners Meeting; utilizes FirstNet's Public Safety Advisory Committee
(PSAC) members as subject-matter experts for research and testing;
funds participation of FirstNet's PSAC members in PSCR's annual
stakeholder meeting; and invites FirstNet participation in grant and
prize challenge development, including serving as judges and selecting
officials.
Additionally, as required by the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job
Creation Act of 2012 (Pub. L. 112-96), NIST ensures the development of
a list of certified devices that meet appropriate protocols and
standards for access to, use of, or compatibility with the Nation-wide
Public Safety Broadband Network (NPSBN) that FirstNet and AT&T build
and maintain. This requirement is carried out by the PSCR of the NIST
Communications Technology Laboratory.
Question 2. How does NIST-PSCR collaborate with the Small Business
Administration (SBA) to provide support to small businesses in order to
develop quality manufacturing practices and procedures to insure
mission-critical products are placed in the hands of the first
responder community?
Answer. NIST PSCR currently does not have any collaboration with
the Small Business Administration to provide support in developing
quality manufacturing practices. PSCR works with the first responder
community to advance public safety communications technologies by
accelerating the adoption and implementation of the most critical
communications capabilities. NIST PSCR also works to ensure that the
public safety community can more effectively carry out their mission to
protect lives and property during day-to-day operations, large-scale
events, and emergencies.
Question 3a. Have prototypes of the ``network-in-a-box'' device
shown operational ability in water trials similar to that of a flood
scenario where individuals are isolated in their communities?
Question 3b. If so, what were the results?
Question 3c. If not, are plans under way to conduct such trials and
provide results?
Answer. The ``network-in-a-box'' prototype is an early stage
research project and has not been deployed in any operational or trial
situations. PSCR is still performing laboratory tests to understand
applications and capabilities. However, our vision is that the network-
in-a-box will be a useful tool for many natural disaster scenarios such
as fire grounds, flood areas, and earthquake zones.
Questions From Ranking Member Donald M. Payne, Jr. for John V. Kelly
Question 1a. By FEMA's own staffing models, they are roughly 4,000
staff members short of their target staffing number for incident
workforce personnel. Your office has reviewed FEMA's workforce
challenges multiple times.
Beyond some of the more obvious issues with personnel shortages
(staff exhaustion, low morale, etc.) what are some of the other issues
associated with low staffing?
Answer. In September 2016, we reported the following reasons
contributed to poor performance and low morale in FEMA:
FEMA does not adequately assess Reservist performance
following each deployment;
FEMA does not consistently provide all Reservists with job-
related training opportunities between deployments;
FEMA does not adequately communicate with Reservists;
FEMA does not adequately manage its Reservists' performance
and professional development; and
FEMA does not offer its Reservists employment protection
(longevity), which limits FEMA's recruitment pool of employees.
We made 4 recommendations to FEMA in our September 2016 report
(OIG-16-127-D). Of the 4 recommendations, 1 is closed, 2 remain
resolved pending corrective actions, and the recommendation to develop
and implement a workforce readiness strategy remains unresolved.
Question 1b. Have you looked at or are you reviewing FEMA's current
initiatives to recruit and retain incident response staff?
Answer. Our office is currently conducting an on-going audit to
determine if FEMA's deployment and management of the DHS Surge Capacity
Force (SCF) is effective in accomplishing its mission during disaster
operations. The SCF is a voluntary program to supplement FEMA's
disaster workforce. Following a large-scale disaster, with approval
from the DHS Secretary, FEMA deploys designated non-FEMA Federal
employees from every department or agency in the Federal Government to
support its response and recovery efforts. The SCF volunteers leave
their regular agency and job to deploy for up to 45 days to a disaster
location with severe conditions. We estimate the audit to be final in
spring of 2019.
We also understand that GAO is currently conducting a broad review
into FEMA's Workforce Management.
[all]