[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.A.S.C. No. 115-106]
HEARING
ON
NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
AND
OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND FORCES HEARING
ON
GROUND FORCE MODERNIZATION BUDGET REQUEST FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
__________
HEARING HELD
APRIL 18, 2018
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-693
WASHINGTON : 2019
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND FORCES
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio, Chairman
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey
NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
PAUL COOK, California, Vice Chair
JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
SAM GRAVES, Missouri
JIM COOPER, Tennessee
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
MATT GAETZ, Florida
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
DON BACON, Nebraska
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland
JIM BANKS, Indiana
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
ROB BISHOP, Utah
JIMMY PANETTA, California
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
MO BROOKS, Alabama
Jesse Tolleson, Professional Staff Member
Doug Bush, Professional Staff Member
Neve Schadler, Clerk
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
Tsongas, Hon. Niki, a Representative from Massachusetts, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces...........
3
Turner, Hon. Michael R., a Representative from Ohio, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces...................
1
WITNESSES
Murray, LTG John M., USA, Deputy Chief of Staff, G-8, Office of
the U.S. Army Deputy Chief of Staff; and LTG Paul Ostrowski,
USA, Military Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of the Army for
Acquisition, Logistics and Technology..........................
4
Walsh, LtGen Robert S., USMC, Commanding General, Marine Corps
Combat Development Command, and Deputy Commandant, Combat
Development and Integration, Headquarters, U.S. Marine Corps;
and BGen Joseph Shrader, USMC, Commanding General, Marine Corps
Systems Command................................................
5
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Murray, LTG John M., joint with LTG Paul Ostrowski...........
32
Turner, Hon. Michael R.......................................
29
Walsh, LtGen Robert S., joint with BGen Joseph Shrader.......
43
Documents Submitted for the Record:
[There were no Documents submitted.]
Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:
Mr. Gallego..................................................
61
Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:
Mr. Bishop...................................................
67
Mr. Carbajal.................................................
67
Mr. Cook.....................................................
66
Mr. Turner...................................................
65
.
GROUND FORCE MODERNIZATION BUDGET REQUEST FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
----------
House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, April 18, 2018.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:01 p.m., in
Room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Michael R.
Turner (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL R. TURNER, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
OHIO, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND FORCES
Mr. Turner. The committee will come to order. The
subcommittee meets today to review the Army and Marine Corps
ground force modernization program for the fiscal year [FY]
2019 budget request.
I would like to welcome our guests: General John Murray,
Deputy Chief of Staff, G-8, principal military financial
advisor for Army program development; Lieutenant General Paul
Ostrowski, Military Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of the
Army for Acquisition, Logistics and Technology; Lieutenant
General Robert Walsh, Deputy Commandant for the Marine Corps
for Combat Integration; and Brigadier General Joseph Shrader,
Commanding General, Marine Corps Systems Command--you all need
longer titles.
[Laughter.]
Thank you for--each of you for your service to our Nation.
Today the subcommittee will review a broad portfolio of ground
force equipment modernization programs that are associated with
acquisition strategies covering over $40 billion in budget
authority.
Our focus today is to conduct oversight on how the budget
requests for these modernization programs and acquisition
strategies are aligned with the new National Defense Strategy
and how they will begin to restore full-spectrum operational
readiness.
Last year, during a similar subcommittee hearing, General
Murray testified that ``the Army has nearly half of the funding
for modernization [and] equipment that it had just 8 years
ago.'' And the Marine Corps said that between fiscal year 2012
through year 2016, ``Marine Corps spending on ground
procurement decreased by 48 percent in its base budget.''
Essentially, the Army was both ``outranged, outgunned and
outdated,'' end quote. And the Marine Corps was out of balance
and requiring accelerated modernization to maintain [overmatch
capabilities]. The National Defense Authorization Act [NDAA]
for Fiscal Year 2018 and the balanced budget agreement for
fiscal year 2018 and 2019 sets the necessary conditions to
start the long process of repairing the damage resulting from
years of combat operations compounded with deferred
modernization.
We all acknowledge this damage did not occur in a single
year and it will take consistent levels of long-term increased
investment to rebuild. The Army's modernization budget request
for this year represents a 22 percent increase over last year's
modernization budget request.
I am pleased to see the Army is requesting enough funding
to modernize one and a half armored brigade combat teams
[ABCTs] as opposed to last year's plan to modernize only half
of the requirements for one complete ABCT.
The Marine Corps procurement request for ground equipment
this year is $2.9 billion which if enacted would be 80 percent
increase over last year's budget request of $1.6 billion.
So, it does appear that the Army and Marine Corps are
taking the necessary steps to accelerate modernization and
mitigate existing capacity shortfalls and capability gaps.
For example, the Army has identified six modernization
priorities that include long-range precision fires, next-
generation combat vehicles [NGCVs], future vertical lift, Army
network, air and missile defense, and soldier lethality. To
help streamline procurement of these capabilities, I understand
the Army has also established eight cross-functional team pilot
programs to expedite the requirements process and accelerate
these priorities.
The subcommittee expects to hear how the fiscal year 2019
request is addressing these modernization priorities and better
understand program schedules and fielding timelines that will
enable acceleration of these capabilities to the soldier.
As a follow-up to the subcommittee's hearing from last
September on Army tactical network modernization, we expect our
witnesses to provide additional details and justifications
underpinning this new strategy and ask how the fiscal year 2019
request enables it.
The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018
also directed the Army to develop a long-term modernization
strategy. Today is a good opportunity for the witnesses to
provide us with an update on where the Army is with developing
this strategy.
From a Marine Corps perspective, this year and next will
represent critical milestones for the amphibious combat vehicle
[ACV] program, the CH-53K heavy lift helicopter program, as
well as accelerated ground-based air defense initiatives. We
expect to receive updates on all of these issues today.
In summary, we cannot dig ourselves out of this readiness
and modernization hole in just a couple of years or NDAA
cycles. I want to again place emphasis on what I said at last
week's committee hearing: we are experiencing a crisis in
military readiness.
Over the last 3\1/2\ weeks, we have witnessed a series of
aviation accidents where 16 service members have tragically
lost their lives. Many of these tragic events are a result of
lack of training hours due to constrained resources and/or the
current state of aging equipment, all of which resulted from
years of underfunding our military and clearly shows the
magnitude of the problem we are all dealing with.
This increase in modernization funding is absolutely
required to maintain our competitive advantage against
strategic competitors and improve overall readiness. However,
with the increased funding comes additional responsibility. If
we are to sustain higher topline defense budgets, we need to be
assured that the military services and the industrial base can
execute the funds that Congress has authorizes and
appropriates.
The bottom line is, we have to get this right and we have
to do it now.
Before I begin, I would like to recognize my colleague and
good friend from Massachusetts, Ms. Niki Tsongas, for any
comments she would like to make.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Turner can be found in the
Appendix on page 29.]
STATEMENT OF HON. NIKI TSONGAS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MASSACHUSETTS, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND
LAND FORCES
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon.
I would like to thank our witnesses for being here today to
discuss Army and Marine Corps modernization budgets for fiscal
year 2019. Good to have you with us.
Based on an initial review of the budget request, both the
Army and Marine Corps appear to have received significant
funding increases in most areas. This has enabled in several
cases both services to accelerate procurement of needed items,
hopefully providing stability while also leading to lower costs
through buying in bulk.
For example, the Army has increased its procurements of
armored combat vehicles of several types to approximately one
and a half brigades per year, a dramatic increase from the half
a brigade per year or less of recent budgets.
The Marine Corps has been able to simultaneously buy more
Joint Light Tactical Vehicles [JLTVs] while also pursuing
healthy production rates of other vehicle upgrade programs.
As our witnesses will recall, this subcommittee had a
hearing last year focused on the Army's new plans in the area
of communications networks and associated programs. At the
time, I was very concerned that the Army might be making hasty
decisions regarding eliminating current programs in favor of
chasing new and potentially unproven technology.
Now, after reviewing the Army's updated budget request in
detail, I am cautiously optimistic that the Army is pursuing a
more conservative plan that realigns some funding for current
effort, but maintains or even expands funding for the majority
of programs.
The Army also plans to do a significant amount of
experiments and prototype efforts to explore new technologies.
These efforts are intended to inform a new tactical network for
the future. Furthermore, the Army intends to maintain
competition in most of its radio programs, which is good to
see.
Finally, there is one major question mark and that regards
the path forward for providing better on-the-move
communications capability to armored brigade combat teams.
These units were going to receive WIN-T [Warfighter Information
Network-Tactical] Increment [Inc] 2 for this purpose. But that
aspect of the WIN-T program has been terminated. It remains to
be seen what the Army's plans are for providing this
capability. I hope to hear more today about the way forward.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back and I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses.
Mr. Turner. Thank you.
I understand General Murray will provide opening remarks
for the Army followed by General Walsh who will provide opening
remarks for the Marine Corps. Without objections, the
witnesses' prepared statements will be included in the record.
General Murray, please begin.
STATEMENT OF LTG JOHN M. MURRAY, USA, DEPUTY CHIEF OF STAFF, G-
8, OFFICE OF THE U.S. ARMY DEPUTY CHIEF OF STAFF; AND LTG PAUL
OSTROWSKI, USA, MILITARY DEPUTY TO THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
THE ARMY FOR ACQUISITION, LOGISTICS AND TECHNOLOGY
General Murray. Thank you, sir. Chairman Turner--that is a
nice short title, sir--Ranking Member Tsongas, distinguished
members of the subcommittee, on behalf of our Army Secretary,
the Honorable Mark Esper, and our Chief of Staff, General Mark
Milley, General Ostrowski and I look forward to discussing Army
modernization with you.
Last year, I told you that we were approaching an
inflection point; this year I would tell you that based upon
everything you have just talked about, we are at an inflection
point. We can no longer afford to choose between near-term
readiness and modernization, and, specific to modernization, we
can no longer afford to choose between improving existing
systems and developing new ones. We must be able to do both,
and I think you will see some of that in the 2019 budget and
then specifically when we bring the 2020 budget across in about
a year, you will see that.
The Army's focus on the demands of ongoing campaigns
combined with constrained resources and an industrial age
organizational model have slowed, deferred, and in some cases
halted the development of new capabilities. Meanwhile, our
adversaries have, or are quickly attaining, a competitive
advantage.
Building on the fiscal year 2018 President's budget, we
believe the FY 2019 budget request aligns with the National
Defense Strategy, continues to reverse the downward trend that
has stifled Army modernization, and serves as an important step
toward expanding and maintaining overmatch.
However, we must stress that a major increase in
modernization this year will not in itself reverse the trend.
We must have sustained, predictable, and adequate funding over
the long term to allow us to develop an effective plan to
reduce future risk while making the most effective use of the
valuable resources we are entrusted with.
In fiscal year 2019, we plan to selectively upgrade the
equipment that is critical to near-term readiness and focus our
science and technology and our research, development, test, and
evaluation [RDT&E] funding on the six Army modernization
priorities, those areas crucial to combat which have eroded in
the restricted budget environment.
This includes as you mentioned, Chairman, long-range
precision fires, next-generation combat vehicle, future
vertical lift, the network, air and missile defense, and
soldier lethality. The American people expect their Army to win
and meeting this expectation requires the Army to maintain
overmatch against the near-peer threat.
We urge Congress to provide fiscal stability so we can
maintain our current warfighting readiness while simultaneously
building a more modern, more capable, and more lethal force for
the future.
I would like to thank you and the entire committee for your
unwavering support of the men and women of the United States
Army, our Army civilians, and our Army families. Thank you and
we look forward to your questions.
[The joint prepared statement of General Murray and General
Ostrowski can be found in the Appendix on page 32.]
Mr. Turner. Thank you.
General Walsh.
STATEMENT OF LTGEN ROBERT S. WALSH, USMC, COMMANDING GENERAL,
MARINE CORPS COMBAT DEVELOPMENT COMMAND, AND DEPUTY COMMANDANT,
COMBAT DEVELOPMENT AND INTEGRATION, HEADQUARTERS, U.S. MARINE
CORPS; AND BGEN JOSEPH SHRADER, USMC, COMMANDING GENERAL,
MARINE CORPS SYSTEMS COMMAND
General Walsh. Thank you, Chairman Turner, Ranking Member
Tsongas, distinguished members of the subcommittee, for the
opportunity to testify before you today with my teammates,
General Murray, General Ostrowski, and also my partner, General
Shrader.
The Marine Corps ability to serve as our Nation's crisis
response force is due largely in part to this subcommittee's
continuing strong support and we appreciate that on behalf of
all the Marines.
Additionally, the Bipartisan Budget Act is going to go a
long way to give us the stability we really need to be able to
continue to develop the capabilities we have. Across the Marine
Corps Combat Development Command, we have got over 18,000 men
and women sailors, Marines, civilians that are operating as the
capability developers for the Marine Corps and integrating this
across the Marine force.
Over the past year, the Marine Corps has been focused on
deterring conflict by providing combined arms teams to theaters
either already in crisis or at the risk of crisis to meet the
Congress' mandate to be ``ready to suppress or contain
international disturbances short of large-scale war.''
We operate--you talked about the National Defense
Strategy--within three of the four areas described in the
National Defense Strategy of the contact, blunt, and surge
forces. Our forward-deployed Marines and sailors operate daily
as part of that contact layer.
Today, they are vulnerable to--they are vulnerable to
attacks in ways we haven't seen in decades. To operate within
the contact and blunt layers, Marines foster--need to foster
the lethal combat forces to be a credible deterrence force.
During the last several budget cycles, we have been focused
heavily on improving readiness to improve the force and
increase our ability, but with the stability that you have
given the budget, with a 7 percent increase in the total
obligating authority with the Marine Corps, we have been able
to push money into our modernization accounts at a rate of 32
percent. This increase in modernization spending is a signal,
it is a sense of urgency that we will be prepared to address
the threats in the National Defense Strategy.
Like the Army, in the Marine Corps 2019 budget we aligned
ourselves with five priorities: information warfare, long-range
precision fires, air defense, command and control in a degraded
environment, and protective mobility and enhanced maneuver
along with the Secretary of Defense direction to increase
lethality, resilience, agility, and build a flexible, dynamic
force.
Additionally, I would like to emphasize to this
subcommittee our close coordination and in many cases full
alignment with the United States Army and their programs. Our
work with the Army provides more efficient use of taxpayer
dollars and ensures the end product provides the best
capability to our Marines, soldiers, and the operating forces.
Thank you for allowing General Shrader and I to testify
before you today.
[The joint prepared statement of General Walsh and General
Shrader can be found in the Appendix on page 43.]
Mr. Turner. Thank you, gentlemen. I have a couple of
questions before I pass it on to my ranking member. General
Murray, thank you for accompanying me when we visited the
Holston Army Ammunition Plant, that was very illuminating, got
to get a firsthand view of both the state of the facilities,
the demand issues, and production. Holston and Radford are both
government-owned contractor-operated facilities and both are in
the process of expanding their production capability of
critical materials needed for ramping up production of high-
demand munitions.
I would like for you to update us on the facilities, where
they are at expanding production, any additional information
you would like to give us. You gave us an effective
understanding of the issues when we were there together at
Holston. And in your opinion, are there ways to accelerate
these projects? I would like to also know what near-term
actions are being considered, the things that we need to be
considering as we put the NDAA together and, I know, are you
considering stockpiling TNT [explosive]?
General Murray. Yes, Mr. Chairman, thank you for that
question. As you know at Holston, in 2018, it is really a
multiyear effort, so it really goes even before fiscal year
2018. But in 2018, we put $105 million and then $100 million in
2019 to expand the capacity. That is about a 6 million pound
increase in RDX [explosive] and about a 2 million pound
increase in IMX [explosive].
And that work continues. It is probably not any different
than the schedule we showed you when we were down there. We
have looked for opportunities to accelerate and taken those
opportunities where we could, but as you know it is--until it
becomes an insensitive munition, it is in fact a sensitive
munition.
So chances for acceleration are probably not great, but we
remain on track and we have looked at the issue of storing TNT
and we continue to explore that option. The demand for the
insensitive munitions in theater right now is dropping
slightly, so we have been able to catch up on some of the
backlog, but we will continue to look for opportunities to
expand the use of TNT, and then also add additional investments
in those two critical facilities.
Mr. Turner. General Walsh, we are aware that the Marine
ground units are almost wholly without an effective organic air
defense system. We are also aware on the subcommittee that the
Marine Corps has plans to develop a family of systems that can
develop--excuse me--that can defend against airborne threats.
Can you please update on the Marine Corps plans and how do
these coordinate with other service branches?
General Walsh. Thank you, Chairman. We have got really what
I would say is a two-phased approach to this. In near term, we
had been looking at the counter-UAS [unmanned aerial system]
capabilities, but now with the National Defense Strategy to
increase that, we have kind of looked at longer range
capabilities. So within the--the near term, we have been
developing on--as a light capability on our MRZRs which are our
ATV [all-terrain vehicle] capability and also on the M-ATV
[mine-resistant ambush protected ATV] that we have.
And on that capability, we have got integrating Stinger
missiles for rotary wing and fixed wing, a counter-UAS Coyote
capability, an EW [electronic warfare] capability we call Modi,
and also integrating a laser capability that we are working
very closely with the Army on--with the counter-laser weapon
system along with the sensors that go with that.
That is the near-term capability and it is kind of a spiral
ability that we are going to integrate into the JLTV that
goes--as it goes forward. And as that goes forward we are
working very closely with the Army on a longer range
capability.
In the interim we also have $4.5 million that we have got
in 2018 that we are working to develop and integrate a COTS
[commercial off-the-shelf] system that we could demonstrate
near term as we develop more money into the future that we have
got for R&D [research and development] with the Army to
integrate in with their IFPC [Indirect Fire Protection
Capability] Block 2. And I will ask General Shrader if he would
like to add anything from the acquisition side.
General Shrader. Sir, I would just echo really the work
that we have done on the lightweight system that--that General
Walsh talked about, we call it the--the Lightweight Marine Air
Defense System that we would put on the RZR. We have--we have
to date fielded 14 of those within a 12-month period from
identifying the requirement to fielding. So we are happy with
that. We want to continue on that effort.
And that--on that vehicle, it is two vehicles where you
have a command and control vehicle and then you have another
vehicle that has the radar and the--the capability to compute
the firing data and then engage with--we will just say EW Modi
system. And we have done that in a 14-month period and we--we
use that as the base and then spiral, what General Walsh said,
spiral more capability into that. Not only that system, but
also into the M-ATV and the JLTV as that comes onboard and also
working with the laser, the 2-kilowatt laser. That is--that is
all I would add, sir.
Mr. Turner. Thank you. Ms. Tsongas.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Since the start of
the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, DOD [Department of Defense]
developed various systems for quickly addressing urgent needs
for equipment. These efforts understandably started as urgent
needs directly tied to ongoing combat operations.
Recently, however, the use of the term ``urgent'' has
migrated to other more routine requirements often tied to need
statements from Army or Marine Corps units that in many cases
are not deploying into a combat zone in the near future. Of
course, the entire Army and Marine Corps exist to be prepared
for possible combat in the future, so expansion of the label of
urgent--urgent need to include anything plausibly related to a
future combat operation could obviously include almost
anything.
While I support as many on this--we all in this committee
do, support filling such urgent needs for units in combat or
about to deploy to combat, I would like to explore what looks
like an expanding definition of urgent need.
So with that, General Murray and General Walsh, can you
talk about and explain how the Army and Marine Corps currently
categorize urgent needs? And can you also explain in detail
where such urgent need statements come from and how are they
reviewed? So I will start with you, General Murray.
General Murray. Yes, ma'am, thank you. So it is--it is hard
to know when you are going to deploy into combat, so we have
had predictability over the last 16 years, I understand that
with path charts and BCTs can prepare the year out. But it is
hard to predict the world's situation. So most of the urgent
requirements that we are seeing are coming from division
commanders, they are--they are funneled up through corps
commanders, prioritized, and racked and stacked if you will.
They go to the forces command commander if they are within
FORSCOM [U.S. Army Forces Command]. If they are within the
Pacific they go through the four-star in the Pacific. If they
are in Europe, they go through the three-star Army commander in
Europe.
And then they come back to the building. The G3 [operations
staff] racks and stacks them from an Army-wide priority look.
We have lawyers look at them to make sure that there is a
compelling reason why it is an urgent requirement and normally
either the vice or the chief are briefed on them that this is
an emerging requirement, this is the way we would like to do.
Ms. Tsongas. And what would the standard be for that, that
the lawyer is--is employing to decide that?
General Murray. It is just probably no--there is probably
no piece of law I can point to and say. Now, there are Army
regulations and there are DODIs, DOD instructions, that talk
about urgent and compelling, but they don't--they don't point
to a specific, it has to be A, B, C, D, and E to be qualified
as urgent.
So it is based up--it is really based upon the world
situation. I mean what is going on in--in Korea at this
particular point in time has--has led to most of the DRs,
directed requirements, here recently, and then it is always for
a limited quantity and it is not an acquisition strategy. It is
just naming the requirements for the piece of equipment that we
are after if it doesn't currently already exist in our
inventory.
Ms. Tsongas. Is there any process in place to make sure
that these decisions aren't inappropriately influenced by non-
government actors such as industry representatives?
General Murray. For my perspective, yes, because the
directed requirements that I have seen and I have personally
signed do not--it is a requirements document, that this is the
requirements for a capability that we would like--the
acquisition community to either find, buy, or produce. And that
is about the limit. Now, I do put into some of those, you know,
the--the timeframes we are talking about because urgent implies
fairly rapidly, but I have never seen or signed a directed
requirement that specifies an acquisition strategy.
And from my personal experience, from my perspective, there
has been no contractor influence on the solution.
Ms. Tsongas. General Walsh.
General Walsh. Congresswoman Tsongas, so I am just going
to--I think our process is parallel very much with what General
Murray said. What I will say is our urgent requests come in
from our operating forces the same way, they come into our
capability development directorate down there at Quantico. We
assess them pretty much the same way. We also have deliberate
operational needs that come in from the operating force
commanders. So the ones that are urgent are coming in generally
from the operating forces that are in combat areas that have
urgent needs, maybe loss of life or capability in that sense.
They come in, we rack and stack them, and then we send them
up to our Marine Corps--Marine Requirements Oversight Council
that is up with all the deputy commandants and the Assistant
Commandant of the Marine Corps and eventually up to the
Commandant. So that is the process we go through.
We have been doing this a lot as you well know throughout
Iraq and Afghanistan, so we have gotten fairly good at this. I
think where--where the questions start to lie I think with
Congress is the desire to go fast is starting to maybe
sometimes look like it is getting outside the operational needs
process in, for example, where we developed our rapid
capabilities office that we have developed and all the services
have developed those.
And so now we are spinning technology out fairly quickly at
the lower end, not major acquisition development programs, but
smaller. And I think the key part with that is trying to work
with Congress and I think in this last year we have been very
successful to work with Congress to show the areas that we have
been working in that we would be wanting to demonstrate
capabilities and experiment with that, and then continue to
come back and engage with Congress on what actual programs that
we are using to experiment with to be able to try to rapidly
prototype those capabilities.
So I think some of it looks like this rapid capability
development is merging into the urgent operational needs
process, but we keep these completely separate from a process
standpoint.
Ms. Tsongas. And are you comfortable that these decisions
aren't being inappropriately influenced by, as I said, non-
government actors such as industry representatives? And what do
you have in place to be assured of that?
General Walsh. Yes, Congresswoman, I think--to be honest
with you, I don't see us getting involved with the industry at
that point when those capabilities come in. They come in, we
look at what the best capability would be out there. We do do
some demonstration capabilities when we try to bring in vendors
to kind of see what opportunities are out there, but we kind of
look at it from more of a capability standpoint than looking at
a specific vendor's capability.
And let me ask if General Shrader wants to--because he
works very closely with me on this process.
General Shrader. Ma'am, I would say that there is, on the
acquisition side, the material development side, there is a
process that we have in place where a vendor can introduce
something and it is a non, unsolicited proposal type of process
that we have. But as far as industry partners trying to come in
and influence, try to generate an urgent need, no, ma'am, I
don't--I am not aware of anything like that going on, ma'am.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Cook.
Mr. Cook. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank our
guests for being here today. And I am going to start with the
Army and I want to talk about the Strykers. And I am big fan of
the Strykers. I notice I guess the request is what, for three
Stryker upgrades, is that correct right now?
General Murray. As it stands right now, yes, sir.
Mr. Cook. And we are pretty well straightened down on the--
the V-hull even though it is heavy and everything else. The
folks on the Strykers over in Europe, they--they seem to really
like that a lot, at least that was what came back to me. Any--
any problems with that other than the weight?
General Murray. No, sir. So the Europe unit, the 2d Stryker
Cavalry Regiment is in fact flat-bottom Stryker. What I think
you are referring to is the 30-millimeter cannon.
Mr. Cook. No, no, I am talking about the hull.
General Murray. Yes, sir, those--those are all----
Mr. Cook. No, no, the 30-millimeter I am happy with, no
problem at all. But--so I am more worried about, you know,
mines and things of that nature. The other thing I--when I was
over there and we were at Grafenwoehr, a place where--you know
where I am talking about, and we are talking--they had four or
five different variants. We had a CODEL [congressional
delegation] there and they had the different systems.
And I guess I didn't realize that--are they going to change
that with the mortar or some of the variants in the future or
have they pretty well standardized what is going to be
available to that? And I don't have it all in front of me, but
I was pretty impressed with the versatility of that weapon
system.
General Murray. Yes, sir. I think the actual number is nine
different variants and I may be wrong, but it is--it is more
than five. But in terms of the--the numbers of variants on the
Stryker chassis, I think we stabilized it. As a matter of fact,
we are adding to it, so that will be the platform for our
mobile SHORAD [short-range air defense] solution.
Mr. Cook. And we are going forward with the reactive armor,
the variations of the Trophy systems? I think it is my
understanding both services are--are committed to that talking.
We are not going to--we are OK on that because I am a big
supporter of that, by the way.
General Murray. So, Trophy, yes. Between 2018 and 2019, it
is about four brigades' worth that will go on the Abrams tank.
We have finished the characterization of Iron Curtain which we
were trying on the Stryker. There was a decision to come on
that this summer and then we're in the process of
characterizing Iron Fist on the Bradley right now down at
Redstone Arsenal.
Mr. Cook. Yes. Did--did you happen to look at the system
that the Dutch are using for their armored personnel carriers?
It is very--the big thing about it is it is very lightweight
supposedly. I haven't seen it. I did want to try and get over
there and see what it looked like, but read a little bit on it,
but not much.
General Murray. I am not familiar with what the Dutch are
using. We have looked at the German system, I believe it is
called ADS [Active Defence System]. So we have had some folks
in Germany to look at it. It is a very similar concept,
different--different design, but a very similar concept to an
intercept very close to the vehicle as the Artis system called
Iron Curtain.
Mr. Cook. Okay, I am going to get off script a little bit
and I want to ask you about line charges. In fact, the last
time I saw line charges about a year ago out at Fort Irwin and
I got to tell you it is remarkably similar to the same line
charge in terms of 51 years ago in 1967 in Vietnam where it
shoots out again, when we did it, it was from an AMTRAC
[assault amphibious vehicle]. And everybody holds their breath
and of course it didn't work.
And it just--I have always been sketchy about that. I think
everybody is sketchy about it because of the dangers involved
with it, particularly to the ground troops, you know, when it
ruptures. Is there anything to improve that, because this is
the enemy that we are probably going to encounter with
minefields or mines or something like that. And to be able to
do something expeditiously to blow up whatever it is, it just
seemed almost archaic and that was--I don't know, maybe anybody
can answer that?
General Murray. Yes, sir. It is, probably is; there are
only so many ways you can pack C4 [explosive] into a tube. But
I--what I can tell you is I know of no requirements being
worked in the Army system to replace the MICLIC [Mine Clearing
Line Charge], the mine charge.
Mr. Cook. Yeah. I asked that question and he said no, and I
was sarcastic and I said, we are going to use the same one that
I used 51 years ago. And they said, yeah, pretty much so.
Anyway, I yield back.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank our
witnesses for your testimony today, most especially thank you
for your service to the country. So I understand that, and we
have touched this with the chairman's question, but I
understand that one of the Army's ongoing priorities is to
develop systems in order to counter short-range air defense
threats such as drones and in so doing has been experimenting
with high energy lasers. As a proponent of directed energy
technologies I am encouraged to hear that the Army is pursuing
these advanced technology solutions such as the mobile
experimental high energy laser, or MEHEL, to supplement its
current ground force capabilities.
And so can you discuss your--your progress on these efforts
so far, as well as how you are training soldiers to actually
operate the systems?
General Ostrowski. Sir, I will just tell you that in
addition to the one that you mentioned, we are also very much
engaged in 2018 with respect to a technology maturity
initiative. This is taking a Stryker vehicle and putting a 50-
kilowatt laser on that platform in order to get to a TR
[technology readiness] level 7 by the first quarter of 2021. So
it will be integral on both the--the IFPC program in terms of a
Block 2 IFPC, as well as mobile SHORAD. So the intent is to
bring that on as fast as we possibly can because as you know it
is cheaper per round in terms of a shot in order to use that
particular laser technology against both RAM [rocket,
artillery, and mortar], as well as UAS threats.
Mr. Langevin. And progress on the--the one I mentioned, the
MEHEL laser, is that--that is different than the one that is on
the Stryker, right?
General Ostrowski. Can you repeat the question, sir?
Mr. Langevin. Yes. I just want to know the mobile
experimental high energy laser or the MEHEL, is that--that is
not the same one you are putting on the Stryker, is it?
General Ostrowski. Sir, I believe you are talking about the
100-Kw [kilowatt] one as opposed to the one that we are putting
on the Stryker which is a 50-kilowatt. Again, we moved from 2
kilowatts to 5 kilowatts as we continue to improve the maturity
of the technology. And so the next one for us right now in
terms of the Stryker based is the 50-kilowatt laser.
Mr. Langevin. Okay, thank you, gentlemen. So with further
developments in artificial intelligence [AI], would you agree
that using AI to help control swarms of drones during offensive
operations or to provide logistics to forward units much like
commercial companies that are experimenting within the United
States has potential to be game changing? And how are you
incorporating these ideas into your modernization strategy?
General Walsh. I would say yes to all, sir, and I would say
that it is probably fundamentally the technology that has the--
the chance to be most--to changing the character of war as we
move forward. So yes, we are very interested in artificial
intelligence incorporation into weapon systems. Of course there
are policy issues that go along with that that we will have to
deal with as that--as that technology develops.
We are very closely watching what is going on in industry
and the other services. We are trying to capitalize off
investments that OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense] is
making and the other services are making. We see this not
necessarily as the--as the right place to invest a tremendous
amount of money right now. We think this is a--this is a
technology that industry will develop much faster than we will,
and the opportunity to sprint will come and we just need to be
in a position to sprint to catch up with industry when it is
mature.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. And--and how are both your
services building cyber and electronic warfare resiliency into
your modernization efforts to ensure our new platforms and
systems will continue to function in a contested environment?
General Ostrowski. Sir, I will just tell you that for every
one of our programs and during our testing we go up against
cyber threats, as well as EW, and that is across the board. Not
only the systems that we are currently in the process of
developing, but also systems that we already have in the field
such as the Abrams tank for instance, or Apache helicopters,
not only from an outsider threat, but also from an insider
threat.
We are spending a lot of money on a lot of initiatives. We
have red teams that go at these particular systems whether they
are out at NTC [National Training Center] or other places in
order to ensure that whatever we are doing across the board, we
are consistent with the EW threat and cyber threat on both--
both our ground, as well as our air platforms, as well as our
IT [information technology] efforts.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. General Walsh.
General Walsh. If I could, Congressman. When we wrote our
Marine Corps Operating Concept, the--one of the priorities we
saw was being able to operate in the information warfare area.
And from that we did our Marine Corps Force 2025, it was about
a year-and-a-half-long force structure review. And what came
out of that was developing our MEF [Marine expeditionary force]
information groups. Within those information groups they are
focused on cyber, EW, signals intelligence, information
operations.
Just now this summer we are standing up defensive counter
operations cyber companies that are down inside the MIG [MEF
information group], so we are now pushing that capability all
the way down in small detachments, all the way down to the
company level. So we are pushing the capability down in
structure first with the capabilities and material solutions,
some of which we have in a lot of ways in the electronic
warfare, we have had that in our radio battalions and also in
our electronic warfare Prowler squadrons, our EA-6Bs, but
pushing that capability down to the lowest level, the first
thing was get the structure in place and then the material
solutions will follow.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you all. I would say this is important
because as much as we are making progress on these
technologies, our enemies and adversaries have invested heavily
in being able to disrupt our activities in a contested
environment, and what we can do to build resiliency, then the
better off we are. So thank you, gentlemen, for your testimony
and again, thank you for your service. And I yield back.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Wittman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Gentlemen, thanks so
much for joining us. Thanks again for your service.
General Ostrowski, I wanted to touch base on where the
modern operational systems for the soldier are going. We know
that a soldier can carry about a third of their body weight and
as it gets higher, it affects their mobility.
We know sometimes they can carry as much as 100 pounds of
gear which does impact their ability to carry out the mission.
I do understand though that there is some new technology out
there, the squad multipurpose equipment transport, better known
as SMET, that is able to carry equipment, munitions, help in
that, even carry a wounded soldier. So an addition to that
element at the squad level for tactical flexibility and
additional capacity.
We all know the benefits of that to me are pretty clear.
The Chief of Staff of the Army placed some emphasis and said,
listen, we are going to use more of these ground unmanned
robotic systems to achieve mission.
Give me a perspective, are there any plans in place to
expedite the acquisition of a system like the SMET? Are there
things that maybe you could do in the technology demonstration
timelines to compress those to get more quickly to acquisition?
Give us your perspective on how that's coming together.
General Ostrowski. Yes, sir. I will tell you this is
basically a modern acquisition success story in terms of the
way we are doing business today. Number one, the ability to go
out with an other transactional authority [OTA] announcement to
an industry that normally would never participate in Department
of Defense type initiatives.
So going out to an industry that typically has not had any
kind of a contact with us and saying we need your help. The
OTAs allow us to do this. That is what we did in July of last
year. And we had numerous candidates bring in systems as well
as proposals.
We downselected to four of those systems. We are currently
at that point right now. We are waiting on the money to come in
from the 2018 budget, so thank you very much for getting that
through. And so now, as a new start, we can begin that work.
So, the bottom line is going forward, we will have another--the
intent is to buy 20 systems per vendor of the four vendors that
we downselected to.
We will then put those in the field with soldiers to gain
soldier feedback. And by first quarter 2019, so at the end of
this calendar year, the intent is to downselect to one.
Mr. Wittman. Oh, good.
General Ostrowski. From there, we are going to buy
approximately 60 systems. And we are going to put those out
either at either Fort--I would say--hang on, just half a
second--yes, bottom line is we are going to put that out at
Fort Drumm or Fort Campbell.
Mr. Wittman. Yes, yes.
General Ostrowski. And the intent there is to have those in
the field for approximately one year during which time soldiers
will be able to get feedback on them. We will get feedback on
them and then have the opportunity to then make a downselect
decision to whether or not it is good enough as it is or
whether we want to improve it with intention of award right
after that.
So, again, the opportunity to go faster and get the
capability that we know soldiers will want at the end of the
day. And that is just the ground side. There is other
opportunities as well through aerial vehicles and the rest that
we are looking into because it is all about reducing soldier
load.
Mr. Wittman. Okay.
General Murray. Sir, if I could add.
Mr. Wittman. Sure. Yes.
General Murray. Just really under--all right, just really
quickly and I think the time--I agree with him, I think the
timing is really part of the good-news story. So and this was
in the case of--for developmental activity, this is was a
directed requirement, because we knew what we wanted. We knew
what was available industrywise from technology standpoint.
So instead of going through a 5-year requirements process,
we just wrote the requirement, got it out to industry, and 16
months later, 6 months of that being the CR [continuing
resolution] that we couldn't get started.
Mr. Wittman. Yes.
General Murray. I mean we are ready to field capability to
our soldiers right now.
Mr. Wittman. That is great. That is great.
Lieutenant General Walsh, I wanted to talk a little bit
about the modernization efforts in the Marine Corps. About 29
percent of the resources for modernization are being utilized
by the ground combat and tactical vehicle strategy. And the
investment priority there is with the ACV.
And we know that you are at Milestone C now looking for a
downselect to be able to get that vehicle operationalized. So
it looks like ACV is on the near horizon. As you know in the
whole tactical back and forth about forceful entry, speed and
surprise are important elements of that as you are looking at
that.
And we know that there are some technologies out there that
allow for greater resolution in early detection of things that
may be coming to shore. We know even groups, even non-state
actors like Hezbollah now have pretty sophisticated radar-
guided missiles out there. So that all creates a little more of
a challenge in the contested environment there. There is always
tradeoffs as you--the Marine Corps has been through in looking
at speed and capability with those vehicles and mobility,
obviously on land. So how do you have the right combination of
both?
Are you concerned as you look at this right mixture of ACV
range and speed within that highly contested environment, do
you think you have the mix right? And how have the ACV
prototypes performed so far in this particular environment? Are
you satisfied where things are when you get to the downselect?
General Walsh. Thank you, Congressman. I will start with
the last part of it is so far we have been very pleased with
the two vendors in what we are getting out of those
capabilities. The ACV 1.1 capability was supposed to be just a
ship-to-shore capability from a threshold requirement. And we
see the vendors, both vendors meeting the objective
capabilities.
So, in many ways they are exceeding what we already have in
our AAV [amphibious assault vehicle] capabilities. Now, with
the tradeoffs of the capabilities you talked about as you are
well familiar with is trying to go fast. We weren't willing to
trade off a lot of those capabilities to be able to be
protected, maneuver, and have lethal firepower when we get
ashore.
So we have developed through a non-developmental program
with the two vendors. We are looking forward to the Milestone C
decision in June. But the larger part of your earlier question
is what we have really been working on in this contested
environment is we are going to have to operate differently.
It is not all about AMTRACs on line coming ashore. It is
much more into what you were just talking about, sensing the
battle space, deception, jammers in that area. And we have been
doing a lot of work in that area.
Last year, we had our advanced naval technology experiment
that was focused completely on ship-to-shore maneuver. And in
that ship-to-shore maneuver, the majority of the first parts of
the landing operations were all unmanned systems, whether they
were in the air, on the surface, and under the surface.
Many of the capabilities that we saw we learned from, as
you are very familiar with the Naval Undersea Warfare Center up
in Rhode Island. We got capabilities from them that now a lot
of our reconnaissance forces that we have rapidly prototyped
that we are now using for swarming hydrographic capabilities to
be able to sense as we come ashore.
So I think this unmanned area is going to take us into many
different areas to be able to do deception, but the key part is
not conducting operations the way we have in the past.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Gallego.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Mr. Chair. The budget request is
going to be an increase of over 82 percent for long-range
precision fires capable of up to 400-kilometer shots. The
development of such technology is critical as we build the
next-generation conventional deterrence, especially when
looking at Korea and Europe.
What is the expected timeline for R&D and fielding of this
technology to the best of your ability?
General Ostrowski. Yes, sir. The bottom line is the
precision strike missile which it is now being called as
opposed to the long-range precision fires, is in OTA as well.
So we have two competitors, both Lockheed Martin as well as
Raytheon, that are competing for this.
The first time we will have an opportunity to see where we
are at is the fourth quarter of 2019 when each of the vendors
will provide four missiles to us of which we will fire three.
Depending on the results of that, again, where the intent is to
fire those at max range, so the 499.
Depending on the results of that we intend to expedite the
delivery of the system much faster. Originally, it was 2025. We
are thinking more like 2022. But it will all depend on the
fourth quarter 2019, when we get the results of the test.
Mr. Gallego. Anything to add, gentlemen?
General Walsh. The only thing I would add on that, working
very closely with the Army on how to increase longer range
capabilities coming out of our HIMARS [High Mobility Artillery
Rocket System] capability. But the other piece too is we have
got about $20 million of RDT&E in 2019 to be able to look at
how we can integrate a much quicker capability, commercial off-
the-shelf capability for an anti-ship missile capability that
in the long term working very closely with the Army in 2020 and
beyond in the long-range fires capability for anti-ship that is
also capable of on-land capabilities.
Mr. Gallego. Excellent. So to kind of latch on to that
theme. I understand some of the testing for these systems will
go on in Arizona, good choice, at the Yuma Proving Grounds. Is
there adequate space to test the long-range shots both at Yuma
and at White Sands Missile considering we are dealing with some
rather long distances?
General Murray. Yes, sir. There is more than sufficient
range at both those locations to test this.
Mr. Gallego. Okay. Let me move on into the tactical network
modernization. The Army is requesting nearly $500 million in
new--again, tactical network technology modification line. What
is the intent of this line? And in other words what does it
buy? What is it bringing us?
General Murray. So you--thank you, sir. I believe you were
briefed last fall on the network modernization. You were very
familiar with the halt, the fix, and the pivot. So the network
modernization modification line really does two things for us.
Number one is that it is primarily focused on fix. So we
have halted three specific programs, which you are very aware
of and then the fix piece is to fix the current baseline. Our
current baseline is WIN-T Inc 1b in some of the force fielded
with WIN-T Inc 2 on-the-move capability.
So it is to finish the fielding of the Inc 2 stuff that we
have already purchased that will go on through 2018, so it is
fielding the light gear to the light infantry units primarily.
Cascade of heavier equipment to some Strykers and not all of
them into the ABCTs is to accelerate the common platform we are
going to use across all formations to include the ABCTs, the
Joint Battle Command-P, the JBC-P.
And then it is also to do some experimentation with the CFT
[cross-functional team] looking at what we are calling the
integrated tactical network. And I think the thing that is
exciting about this is when we developed networks in the past,
we start at the top and make it fit, small units, companies,
platoons, battalions.
And we are starting at the bottom and scaling up in this
case. We are making sure it works at the platoon, company,
battalion level. And right now, in 2018, if the money is made
available, we intend to look at an IBCT [infantry brigade
combat team] and ABCT and SBCT [Stryker brigade combat team]
and do the scalability up.
And this is mostly--it is almost solely modified commercial
off-the-shelf gear or SOCOM [Special Operations Command] gear
that has already been purchased and proven.
Mr. Gallego. Let us go a little deeper. What are the plans
in terms of when it comes to Stryker, are we talking--you said
some Stryker, are we talking full brigades or what is the plan
in terms of----
General Murray. There is not enough of the light gear to go
to every SBCT and--a Stryker brigade, we are peer fleeted and
some of them will have all have a lighter gear, a few of them
and that is one or two I believe, but I have to get back to you
on that, will have the older, heavier gear just like the ABCTs
do.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 61.]
Mr. Gallego. Okay. I yield back.
Mr. Turner. Thank you. Gentlemen, I am going to have to
apologize, both my ranking member and I had conflicts to the
end of this. I didn't want you to think that it was you. My
ranking member had a memorial service for Member Slaughter. And
I have a meeting with the chairman of the committee. So I am
going to pass the gavel over to Mr. Banks and call on Mr.
Brown. But I appreciate your testimony and your service.
Mr. Brown.
Mr. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to ask the
Army and probably General Ostrowski about the future of
vertical lift. And future vertical lift, I know that it is I
think number three on the priority list, the six priorities for
Army modernization according to General Milley. Recently
General Tate described the development in a way that the Army
is going to spend more time kind of working through issues,
identifying requirements during the prototype phase more so
than in past fieldings and--or development, and so that this
way when you get to the program of record, we are able to
deliver an aircraft that is much more adaptable to the changing
environment, future requirements, upgrades in technology, et
cetera.
If I have mischaracterized, please correct me, but the
question is can you give us an update and what is the plan for
rapid prototype development? And are there ways to accelerate
the ongoing analysis of the alternatives that you are currently
considering?
General Ostrowski. Yes, sir. I would say that the tech
demonstration I believe is what you are talking about right
now. It's called the Joint Multi-Role. And, again, this is the
way that we should be doing acquisition in terms of being able
to inform our requirements.
And we are having industry buy-in. So industries bought in
both with respect to Boeing, as well as Sikorsky, and then Bell
is a different partner. Each of these particular companies have
come forward with their platforms to the tune of about $450
million worth of spend in terms of industry to the Army's $90
million per vendor in order to get at a demonstration of these
technologies, whether it would be tiltrotor or whether it would
be compound coaxial which each of these vendors are providing.
The intent is to have those fly. We have had the Bell
flying already. And it continues to fly with respect to its
prototype or its experimental version. And then now, we are
looking very forward to the summer as we get the Sikorsky-
Boeing's compound coaxial up in the air.
From there, sir, the intent is to finish off our analysis
of alternatives by the second quarter of 2019, which helps us
further refine our requirements and determine what else is out
there.
And that allows us to then move into a TMRR, a tech
maturity risk reduction, phase of the program in 2021.
Depending on what we get and what we see from these two
demonstrators, it allows us to make better decisions, better
choices with respect to how far the technology really is. Are
these experimental or are they more prototypes? We hope for the
latter, but we are concerned that we might not get there in
terms of that.
So, again, they might be just experimental as opposed to
prototypes. In conjunction with that we have to work with the
Marines. We want to work with the Marines in terms of getting
our capabilities sets. We need their money as they need ours in
order to pull this together. Again, that is going to be
requirements tradeoffs between the two services. So exciting
program, the way we should be doing business.
Mr. Brown. [inaudible] that you're experiencing with regard
to your rotor-wing fleet. I didn't have the mic [microphone]
on. Did you hear me?
General Walsh. Yes, I did. On the rotary-wing side, I think
the most challenging ones, we have actually been bringing in
new programs with our Yankee Zulu on our H-1s. Obviously, we
are still in the last of multiyear for our MV-22s.
Probably the big challenge that we have got, exciting
challenge is bringing in our CH-53 Kilo which is the largest,
most capability to lift the most of any helicopter that is
made. So that right now is in the systems development stage,
transitioning those helos up to Pax River for further testing.
But I think that is probably the most--the leading thing
that we have got going, we continue to buy out the last 25 AH-1
Zulus this year and 2019. Continue with the MV-22 as the Navy
takes on the carrier onboard delivery. We are shifting some of
that procurement over to them and then really the CH-53 Kilo is
our large aircraft, bringing that in and trying to make sure
that that program moves forward.
Mr. Brown. Thank you. We like more work at Pax River in
Maryland. Back to the Army, you may not be able to answer this
in the time I have remaining. Futures Command, and I understand
that there is currently no budget item specifically requested
or allocated for Futures Command, which expects to be stood up
by this summer or at least the initial phase. Are you going to
reprogram money from other accounts to fund this command?
General Murray. We are going to try, sir. And so it's the
same thing with the CFTs, when you look at cross-functional
teams, when you look at the funding for the CFTs and timing was
very much against us on this. If you remember it was last
October that the Army announced number one, Futures Command and
number two, the eight cross-functional teams in support of the
six Army modernization priorities.
And it was December before the cross-functional teams'
charters were approved and what it was they were going to work
on. So this was last December. We turned in our budget on the
second week of January.
So we got into the 2019 budget what we possibly could. And
we are really focused on the 2020 budget for both Futures
Command, which will go FOC [full operational capability] in
that budget, just an IOC [initial operational] capability in
2019 and the cross-functional teams to get after it. And we
were very much constrained by time with the 2019 budget.
Mr. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Banks [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired. I
yield the next 5 minutes to myself.
General Ostrowski and General Murray, I wonder if you can
give us a quick status update on the Army's plan to replace the
transmissions in the Bradley family vehicles and armored
multipurpose vehicle programs.
General Ostrowski. Yes, sir. The intent there with respect
to your--you are talking about the Bradley A4.
Mr. Banks. Yes.
General Ostrowski. And again, as we make continual upgrades
to the Bradley fleet of vehicles, the A3 being the last, which
is to currently field the capability, those were suspension
upgrades.
And so, we are moving forward now. We have done the
research and development and we are now in the process of
negotiating the production contract for the upgraded A4 version
of the Bradley.
A4 Bradley has an upgraded transmission as well as engine,
as well as additional electric power in order to run the
systems that we continue to load on to the Bradley in terms of
the overall electrical power piece.
So, we are in the process of finishing off those
negotiations with BAE [BAE Systems]. And the intent there is to
award that contract in the very near future.
Mr. Banks. Okay. Anything you would like to add?
General Murray. No, sir. But I think you said, I mean,
there is some confusion about a replacement transmission. Right
now, I mean there has been no decisions on anything other than
General Ostrowski just mentioned. The upgraded transmission we
are working under the A4 contract.
Mr. Banks. Okay. My next question is for both of you as
well. I noticed that in the fiscal year 2019 budget there is a
request for Humvee ambulance modernization funding for the
second year in a row.
However, there aren't any funds also requested for non-
armored Humvee modernization. So I wonder if you can comment on
both of those and in your professional military opinion if that
is the best way forward.
General Murray. So, yes, sir. And thanks to Congress we
have been very successful at upgrading this very specific
version of our Humvee, the up-armored ambulance and thanks to
the graciousness of Congress, the National Guard and the United
States Army Reserve are complete with that modernization.
We began a program last year. Congress added some money to
it, do the Active Component, the Regular Army ambulance fleet
that we're about 10 percent through and then we have asked more
money in 2019. About 6 months ago, we had the decision meeting
on the upgrading the Humvee fleet.
In my mind, that is not a question of will we upgrade the
Humvee fleet, it is just a question when because as you know
the JLTV fleet only replaces about 50 percent of our light
tactical vehicle needs. So Humvees will be with us for a long
time into the future.
We talked about upgrading, starting with the unarmored
Humvee fleet first because that is the oldest fleet, that is
about 9 years of fleet age. We like to keep it below about 12
years, so we are approaching that.
That decision will go to the chief sometime within the next
2 to 3 months and then we expect to quickly follow that on with
what we want to do with the up-armored, the armored fleet
Humvees. And then, again, in my opinion it is going to be just
a question of when, not necessarily if.
General Ostrowski. Sir, I will just add that we are poised
from an industrial base perspective, with our public/private
partnership with AM General as well as Red River in Rock Island
in order to press forward should the decision be made to get
after the recap [recapitalization] of the Humvees.
Mr. Banks. Okay. Thank you. My last question for all four
of you, could you maybe address or talk for a moment about how
you are addressing the systematic challenges of the
redistribution of equipment overcoming the growing capability
gap between the Active Component and Reserve Component?
You talked a moment ago about the Reserve Component in my
previous question, but as the Reserve Component becomes--units
become more of a pit stop for divestiture, what are we doing to
address those types of issues if that make sense?
General Murray. Yes, I think there is really two pieces of
that, sir, if I could. So equipment on hand is the amount of
equipment, actually there are three. The equipment on hand is
the equipment they have. We call it the UH rating.
We have made great strides during the course of the war to
where the National Guard and United States Army Reserve are
almost at parity with the Regular Army in terms of the
equipment that they need on hand.
The piece as you refer it, and there is also the dual-use
equipment. So in their State mission and their Federal mission,
we are in very good shape on that. Where the U.S. Army Reserve
and the Army National Guard are lagging somewhat, although we
have started--we have closed this gap over the last 10 years--
is in the most modern equipment available. And that is
primarily because we have focused our most modern equipment on
the next deploying units.
So regardless of component, whether it was a Reserve unit,
a Guard unit or an Active Component unit, we put the equipment
in the hands of that deploying unit, which often got left in
theater for follow-on forces and become theater-provided
equipment which has set us back a bit. But we are very focused
on closing that gap to modernize equipment and there are three
components.
Mr. Banks. I have 7 seconds left. Would anybody from the
Marines like to comment on that?
General Walsh. Very quick. Congressman, I would say we look
at it from a total force perspective. We deploy our Reserve
units all the time to fill for Active units, so we try to
maintain the same capabilities across both the Active and
Reserve force.
Mr. Banks. Okay. My time has expired. I yield to Mr.
Carbajal.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you all for
being here today.
The budget request for fiscal year 2019 includes an Army
request for $47 million to procure 133 ground mobility vehicles
[GMVs], which are fairly small, unarmored Jeep-like trucks, for
a unit cost of $271,000 each. Twice what a typical Humvee
costs. Fiscal year 2018 budget included a request for 100
vehicles of the same type for $260,000 each. For these
procurements the Army has proposed doing a sole source contract
award to procure a modified version of the Special Operations
Command vehicle.
The Army, based on an urgent needs statement, plans to
procure 5 brigade sets totaling about 300 vehicles via the sole
source contract with the plan for a competition in the future
to buy more.
General Murray, do you think the cost per vehicle for more
than $270,000 each is warranted? I ask because there appear to
be several commercially available vehicles on the market for
much less.
And the Army already has large numbers of unarmed Humvees
that meet most of the requirements for this vehicle. Simply
put, are we going to spend more than we should?
General Murray. Sir, on the GMV and if you don't mind, I
will start with the sole source contract. So, in our opinion
that is not true. We bought off an existing SOCOM contract, so
the SOCOM was buying this vehicle.
They had headspace in their contract. This contract was
competed prior to us buying off this contract. So we leveraged
the SOCOM specifications. We leveraged the SOCOM open
competition that this vehicle went through before we bought off
the headspace in their contract.
So in our opinion it is not a sole source contract, that we
are buying off the SOCOM contract. The primary consideration
for this vehicle when the decision was made to go with the
SOCOM contract was speed for, as you stated, five airborne
IBCTs.
The full and open competition which has funding in 2019 to
complete is for 30 IBCTs. Is the 270 high? It is higher than
some of the options on the market. But this was the fastest way
to get this requirement to the field because the competition
was done, the EMD [engineering & manufacturing development]
phase was done. The downselect was done, so a lot of the things
that takes up those years to get to a--what it is you are going
to buy was done by SOCOM before we opted to buy off that
contract.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you very much.
General Ostrowski, is there detailed records about the
decision-making process that led to what was articulated by
General Murray?
General Ostrowski. Yes, sir. We certainly documented that.
I do have the SOCOM contract. I do have the modifications to
the SOCOM contract that we can certainly make available to you.
How it was competitively awarded. How we modified that
contract in order to reduce the cost of vehicle because we
didn't need all of the components that SOCOM had on that
vehicle. All the bells and whistles we didn't need because
again, what we needed was a capability to move in a period of
darkness from a drop zone to a landing strip at the speed that
is faster than the boot. And so hence, the five airborne
brigades to start with.
The key thing here, sir, is that the competitive piece of
this is going to be where industry is going to have the
opportunity to really get after. Right now, we are going to
have vehicles in the field in 2018 going off the SOCOM
contract. Otherwise, we would not have had vehicles in the
field until 2020. The intent is with the award of the
competitive contract, as General Murray alluded to, the intent
is to bring that forward and have the ability for the other 30
brigades to have a capability, again, competitively awarded,
but we hope at a much cheaper price.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you very much. I look forward to
getting that from you in writing if possible.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Banks. The gentleman yields. And being in the chair has
its privileges, so I am going to yield another 5 minutes to
myself. And back to you, General Murray and General Ostrowski.
I wonder if you could talk--there has been some confusion about
the objective of the next-generation combat vehicle program.
And I wonder if you can talk about that for a moment. How
the Army is balancing its investments in incremental upgrades
for current vehicle systems versus next-generation
capabilities.
So, General Murray.
General Murray. So that is the fundamental dilemma, sir. I
mean you just hit it right on the head right there. And it is
beyond next-generation combat vehicle. I mean that is the
inflection point that I talked about or the decision point
where the Army is.
It is not so much stress in 2019 because of the newness of
the CFTs at that point, but in 2020 as we build it, it is how
you balance that investment between current, the incremental
upgrades for the near term and where you start investing
heavily in future capability because the period in between when
you can start fielding new and when you stop upgrading old is
risk, that you are really saying that the current fleet is good
for X numbers of years, whenever you can cut into that new
system.
Next-generation combat vehicle has been described in a
variety of ways and I go back to the original construct that I
have heard briefed by General Les Brown to both the Chief and
the Secretary and it is really along two paths.
And we really won't know where we are going until we do
some of the experimentation, prototyping, the early evaluation
by soldiers, which is one of the most important aspects of the
CFTs is get equipment into the hands of soldiers early and
often throughout the process, we can get their deliberate
feedback before we write a requirements document. There is no
requirements document written for next-generation combat
vehicle.
But the path we are on right now basically is two
fundamental paths. A manned variant of some size, shape that
would carry probably a couple crewmen and up to five or six
soldiers in the back, that it has to be manned or unmanned at
the commander's call at the point of decision whether you send
a vehicle forward unmanned for instance into a breach. You
probably want to send an unmanned vehicle or you actually crew
that vehicle. And then the second path is remote combat
vehicles that could be tele-operated from the manned version.
And so, one manned vehicle, tele-operated to robotic combat
vehicles. That is fundamentally the two paths that the NGCV
cross-functional team is working down.
General Ostrowski. I will just add, sir, there is really
three sprints as General Murray talked about with respect to
the two different variants. The first sprint is going to take
place between now and the fourth quarter 2019.
And the opportunity there is to gain knowledge from some of
these experimental demonstrators that we have, then to conduct
another sprint. Add in additional technologies between now and
2021, so the second quarter of 2021 will end the second sprint.
Again, with soldiers. Getting feedback. Making use of
existing technologies as well as future technologies. And then
a final sprint, which gets us to the fourth quarter of 2023.
Again, incorporating lessons learned, incorporating the
technologies that come to bear and the rest of it in order to
get to a decision point in 2023 of where we go from there.
General Murray. And if I could just add real quick. So, I
mean one of the key things of this is we won't get everything
we want by whenever it is we field this. So building in the
ability to add more capability as we go to upgrade the vehicle
like we have done with the tank and the Bradley. So building in
the size, the electrical capacity, the ability to add new
technologies to it as we grow this vehicle.
Mr. Banks. Can you elaborate on the cost?
General Murray. In NGCV, I have got it right here. So right
now there is $165 million in 2019 RDT&E.
Mr. Banks. What about through 2023?
General Murray. That--I am sorry, sir. Pushed the wrong
button. It is all pre-decisional. So that is what we are
working right now on the POM [program objective memorandum]
build.
Mr. Banks. Okay. Thank you very much.
Thanks to each of you. This has been very informative just
in the brief time that I have been here today as we near the
NDAA period. So we appreciate your testimony and your
participation.
The hearing has adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:09 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================
A P P E N D I X
April 18, 2018
=======================================================================
PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
April 18, 2018
=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING
THE HEARING
April 18, 2018
=======================================================================
RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. GALLEGO
General Murray. During the Army's holistic network strategy review,
it was clear that Warfighter Information Network-Terrestrial (WIN-T)
Increment (INC) 2 was not adequate to meet the total Army's long-term
network requirements. As such, the Army as part of its Halt, Fix, Pivot
network modernization strategy, made the decision to:
a. Baseline the Active Component Armored Brigade Combat Teams
(ABCT), Fires, Combat Aviation Brigades and all Army National Guard
units, which includes SBCTs, on WIN-T INC 1B (Joint Network Node (JNN),
Satellite Tactical Terminal (STT), Command Post Node (CPN))
b. Complete fielding and modernization of WIN-T INC 2 in the Active
Component Infantry BCTs (IBCT) and Light Divisions:
(1) Replace Family of Medium Tactical Vehicles based Tactical
Communication Node (TCN)/Network Operations Security Center (NOSC)
heavy with the High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle-based
Transportation Control Number (TCN)/Network Operations and Security
Center (NOSC) Lite
(2) Maintain Point of Presence (PoP) and Soldier Network Extension
c. Complete fielding of WIN-T INC 2 to Active Component Stryker
Brigade Combat Teams (SBCT):
(1) Three of seven SBCTS will be fielded as of Fiscal Year 2019
(FY19) (TCN/NOSC Heavy, Point of Presence (PoP), Soldier Network
Extensions (SNEs)
(2) The remaining four Active Component SBCTs will be fielded with
PoPs, SNES and displaced TCN/NOSC Heavy systems from the Active
component IBCTs no later than FY21.
d. Close out the WIN-T INC 2 effort in FY21 Leveraging the Army's
network modernization strategy in this manner allows us to synchronize
capability within the formations across the force, and maintain
interoperability, while providing the time and ability to identify and
implement more appropriate solutions for the future.
[See page 18.]
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING
April 18, 2018
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. TURNER
Mr. Turner. As we work to modernize both small arms and all our key
assets in the battle space one of the key elements is increasing
connectivity--while improving both efficiency and lethality. I
understand that you are in the process of developing the next
generation of squad weapons and that in the near future we will see
technological advances that dramatically upgrade both energy efficiency
and secure communications through inductive rail technology. Could you
please provide me with a status report re: acquisition of these new
``smart'' small arms platforms?
General Murray. The smart rail capability that you have identified
is included as a requirement in the approved Next Generation Squad
Weapon (NGSW) Initial Capabilities Development Documents (ICD). The
requirement specifies the need for a Data Transfer Rail (power and
data). This rail will be capable of transferring both data and power
and will integrate with various fire control components and other
enablers mounted on the weapon system. The Army will begin soliciting
industry to provide prototype weapon systems that incorporate smart
rail technologies. The test and evaluation effort for this capability
is scheduled to begin in early FY 2020.
Mr. Turner. I'd like to know your opinion on the Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) program. Do you think that the program is
useful for ensuring the innovation and diversification of our
industrial base? In what ways can we develop the program to be more
advantages for both the DOD and industry. The health of our industrial
base is essential for our future national defense, I look forward to
continuing to encourage innovation through these programs with you.
General Murray and General Ostrowski. The Small Business Innovative
Research (SBIR) Program is useful in ensuring the innovation and
diversification of our industrial base. Some ways that we can develop
the program are to reinstate 3% administrative funds; waiving the
requirement for Phase II awardees to have a DCAA-approved cost
accounting system; permit consecutive Phase II awards; and fund/provide
additional transition assistance. Administrative funds help provide
additional outreach, especially to underrepresented states in DOD's
SBIR investment, and it provides funds to establish dedicated
contracting personnel who are experienced, knowledgeable and efficient
in awarding SBIR contracts. Dedicated contracting personnel can shorten
the time between the Phase I and Phase II awards, which is often a time
of cash flow challenge for small businesses. The time from completion
of the Phase II work--development of the working prototype--to
commercialization is called ``the valley of death'' because it can take
up to 10-12 years for a small business to realize commercialization of
their innovative technology. Funding and providing additional
transition assistance may be able to shorten that time to realize
commercialization. Army will continue to expand opportunities for these
small businesses to engage with Army labs to foster transition from
Phase I to Phase II.
Mr. Turner. In what ways has NATO standardization proven
advantageous for your service? Do you believe that we should continue
to seek NATO standardization in our procurement/research/development
programs?
General Murray and General Ostrowski. NATO standardization has been
extraordinarily beneficial. It is the foundation of interoperability in
materiel, doctrine, and operations. We need to continue to improve our
investments in procurement/research/development and continue to promote
the sales of U.S. interoperable capabilities to our NATO partners.
The Army is optimizing for interoperability with our allies and
partners to strengthen alliances and deliver more effective coalition
operations.
Standardization, testing, and compatibility certification of
ammunition to NATO standard Soldier weapons provides a wide range of
small arms ammunition choices that can be confidently used.
Collaborative agreements, such as the Ground-Based Air Defense (GBAD)
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) facilitate information sharing,
exercises, and coordination of these essential command, control, and
deterrent capabilities in peace time. This agreement allows the
warfighter to access information which enables networking of surface-
based air defense capabilities. Another example of how NATO
standardization has supported interoperability is through Artillery
Systems Cooperative Activities (ASCA). ASCA developed a software
interface that allows nations to digitally link and translate between
different field artillery and fire support systems in a faster, more
effective way. This digital link improves the effectiveness and
interoperability of allied artillery systems. The Land Battle Decisive
Munitions Precision Guided Munition MOU provides for common sharing,
storage, and ammunition surveillance for signatory nations.
Standardization is an interoperability force multiplier, which enables
U.S. and allied forces to operate side by side or in support of each
other.
Mr. Turner. As we work to modernize both small arms and all our key
assets in the battle space one of the key elements is increasing
connectivity--while improving both efficiency and lethality. I
understand that you are in the process of developing the next
generation of squad weapons and that in the near future we will see
technological advances that dramatically upgrade both energy efficiency
and secure communications through inductive rail technology. Could you
please provide me with a status report re: acquisition of these new
``smart'' small arms platforms?
General Ostrowski. The smart rail capability that you have
identified is included as a requirement in the draft Next Generation
Squad Weapon (NGSW) Capabilities Development Documents (CDD). The
requirement specifies the need for a Data Transfer Rail (power and
data). This rail will be capable of transferring both data and power
and will integrate with various fire control components and other
enablers mounted on the weapon system. The draft NGSW CDDs are
currently in staffing at the Headquarters, Department of the Army, and
are expected to be validated by the Army Requirements Oversight Council
this Fiscal Year (FY) 2018. Once the requirements have been validated,
the Army will begin soliciting industry to provide prototype weapon
systems that incorporate smart rail technologies. The test and
evaluation effort for this capability is scheduled to begin in early FY
2020.
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. COOK
Mr. Cook. The Army and Marine Corps have a varied history of
working together on developing and fielding platforms. While both are
essentially ground forces with their own vehicle and aircraft fleets,
they have sometimes pursued modernization in a truly joint nature (like
the JLTV) or in a common nature (like the Abrams tank). On other
occasions they have chosen to go down completely different roads while
pursuing similar capabilities (like the USMC's Huey and Cobra vs the
Army's Black Hawk and Apache). One of the next big opportunities for
collaboration is on the evolving Future Vertical Lift program that is
structured to replace Hueys and Black Hawks. Do you see this playing
out more like the JLTV where both Services make concessions to achieve
commonality or do you see it being more like the Huey and Black Hawk
where service-unique needs outweigh the benefits of jointness?
General Murray and General Ostrowski. The Future Vertical Lift Long
Range Assault Aircraft (FLRAA or Capability Set 3) is an Army led
multi-service initiative with joint participation from the USMC. A
Joint Analysis of Alternatives (AoA) is currently being conducted to
assess both the service unique requirements and opportunities for
commonality. A critical component of the AoA is the Joint Trades
Analysis to be conducted after the service unique requirements have
been identified. The Joint Trades Analysis is a three pronged effort
focusing efforts to determine if benefits of service concessions can
lead to an identical aircraft, a common dynamics system, or if benefits
are not realized then components (seats, cockpits, special tools, etc)
with high probability of commonality between the Army and USMC
aircraft.
Mr. Cook. I saw that the FY19 request was only for three Stryker
upgrades at a price of $21 million. Is that enough to keep the upgrade
production line open? What is the Army's plan to upgrade Strykers to
the most modern A1 configuration?
General Ostrowski. The minimum efficient production rate is
approximately one third of a Stryker brigade per year (120 vehicles)
which has been met through a combination of vehicles going through an
upgrade process and vehicles going through a modification process
utilizing different funding lines.
In March 2018, the Army approved replacing the flat bottom Stryker
brigades with Stryker Double V-Hull (DVHA1s). The Army submitted an
FY18 Above Threshold Reprogramming request and a request to shift FY19
funding within Stryker funding lines that when combined with the
current FY19 budget request will procure approximately one-half of a
Stryker brigade (168 vehicles). The Army would like to continue the
DVHA1 production rate at approximately one-half Stryker brigade per
year until all flat bottom Strykers have been replaced with DVHA1s.
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. CARBAJAL
Mr. Carbajal. General Ostrowski and General Murray, we understand
the urgent need for Counter Unmanned Aerial Systems (C-UAS) and
Maneuver Short Range Air Defense (M-SHORAD) capabilities, and we
appreciate the Army working quickly to provide soldiers this necessary
equipment. Do you believe there are synergies between the two missions
that the Army can leverage and field a common capability that meets
both missions requirements? Would you consider this approach if it was
proven to reduce costs and accelerate fielding?
General Murray and General Ostrowski. Yes, we have identified some
synergies already, including fire control and command and control.
Those synergies led us to use a common turret and common command and
control system, which reduced cost and accelerated fielding. We will
continue to assess the opportunity to integrate the two systems into a
common capability.
Yes, we will continue to assess the opportunity to field common
capability in the future, especially if it reduces costs and
accelerates fielding.
Mr. Carbajal. General Walsh and General Shrader, we understand that
the Marine Corps may be looking to utilize common requirements for
developing the weapon system that will be integrated onto ground
vehicles against unmanned aerial systems and for mobile short-range air
defense. Can you please tell the committee today what the benefits are
with taking on this approach? For example, would you plan to see
considerable cost savings and quicker fielding of systems if you had
one weapon system to meet both missions?
General Walsh and General Shrader. The Marine Corps is applying
lessons learned from Joint Urgent Operational Need (JUON) CC-0558 and
Joint Emergent Operational Need (JEON) ST-008 Counter UAS (CUAS)
efforts into the Ground Based Air Defense (GBAD) Program of Record,
Marine Air Defense Integrated System (MADIS). MADIS is the integration
of enhanced anti-air warfare capabilities onto JLTVs to provide our Low
Altitude Air Defense Battalions contemporary proficiency against
current & future air threats from near-peer to non-state actors. The
MADIS enhancements incorporate state-of-the-art radar, optics and C2
with kinetic/non-kinetic surface to air weapons which will provide the
MAGTF a truly mobile & adaptable short range air defense capability to
detect, track, ID and defeat threat UASs as well as fixed wing/rotary
wing threats. There are significant benefits to this approach
including:
Rapid fielding Expeditionary MADIS (E-MADIS) & Light
MADIS (L-MADIS) activities began in 3QFY17 with fielding of systems
starting in 2QFY18 in response to JUON-0558. These initial efforts are
now informing the MADIS Program of Record, which meets its Initial
Operating Capability in FY21.
Cost and time savings through integrating new
capabilities, as well as repurposing existing capabilities onto the
JLTV. The MADIS is being designed with the idea that future air defense
upgrades and advancements will occur, and this system can be rapidly
upgraded with little to no modification to the JLTV. This will be
accomplished with the use of slide-on & slide-off air defense
components to MADIS' ``Picatinny Rail'' configured turret.
UNITY OF EFFORT. Employing many of the same short range
air-defense (SHORAD) capabilities the Army intends to employ on their
Maneuver SHORAD Stryker.
ECONOMY OF FORCE.
In short order, MADIS can be mission configured based
on the threat (UAS, FW, RW or all of the above).
Multiple mission capability provides not only force
protection for the forward deployed MAGTF, but can also be
easily employed at critical fixed sites including both OCONUS &
CONUS bases & stations.
All R&D efforts are in close coordination/cooperation
with the Army's PEO Missile & Space--the two services testing &
selecting ``best of breed'' M-SHORAD capabilities for both the
USMC's JLTV (MADIS) & the Army's Stryker.
SIMPLICITY. Standardized M-SHORAD operation, maintenance
& training for both the Marine Corps & Army.
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BISHOP
Mr. Bishop. We understand the urgent need for Counter Unmanned
Aerial Systems (C-UAS) and Maneuver Short Range Air Defense (M-SHORAD)
capabilities, and we appreciate the Army working quickly to provide
soldiers this necessary equipment. Do you believe there are synergies
between the two missions that the Army can leverage and field a common
capability that meets both missions requirements? Would you consider
this approach if it was proven to reduce costs and accelerate fielding?
General Murray and General Ostrowski. Yes, we have identified some
synergies already, including fire control and command and control.
Those synergies led us to use a common turret and common command and
control system, which reduced cost and accelerated fielding. We will
continue to assess the opportunity to integrate the two systems into a
common capability.
Yes, we will continue to assess the opportunity to field common
capability in the future, especially if it reduces costs and
accelerates fielding.
Mr. Bishop. We understand the Marine Corps may be looking to
utilize common requirements for developing the weapon system that will
be integrated onto ground vehicles against unmanned aerial systems and
for mobile short-range air defense. Can you please tell the Committee
today what the benefits are with taking on this approach? For example,
would you plan to see considerable cost savings and quicker fielding of
systems if you had one weapon system to meet both missions?
General Walsh and General Shrader. The Marine Corps is applying
lessons learned from Joint Urgent Operational Need (JUON) CC-0558 and
Joint Emergent Operational Need (JEON) ST-008 Counter UAS (CUAS)
efforts into the Ground Based Air Defense (GBAD) Program of Record,
Marine Air Defense Integrated System (MADIS). MADIS is the integration
of enhanced anti-air warfare capabilities onto JLTVs to provide our Low
Altitude Air Defense Battalions contemporary proficiency against
current & future air threats from near-peer to non-state actors. The
MADIS enhancements incorporate state-of-the-art radar, optics and C2
with kinetic/non-kinetic surface to air weapons which will provide the
MAGTF a truly mobile & adaptable short range air defense capability to
detect, track, ID and defeat threat UASs as well as fixed wing/rotary
wing threats. There are significant benefits to this approach
including:
Rapid fielding Expeditionary MADIS (E-MADIS) & Light
MADIS (L-MADIS) activities began in 3QFY17 with fielding of systems
starting in 2QFY18 in response to JUON-0558. These initial efforts are
now informing the MADIS Program of Record, which meets its Initial
Operating Capability in FY21.
Cost and time savings through integrating new
capabilities, as well as repurposing existing capabilities onto the
JLTV. The MADIS is being designed with the idea that future air defense
upgrades and advancements will occur, and this system can be rapidly
upgraded with little to no modification to the JLTV. This will be
accomplished with the use of slide-on & slide-off air defense
components to MADIS' ``Picatinny Rail'' configured turret.
UNITY OF EFFORT. Employing many of the same short range
air-defense (SHORAD) capabilities the Army intends to employ on their
Maneuver SHORAD Stryker.
ECONOMY OF FORCE.
In short order, MADIS can be mission configured based on
the threat (UAS, FW, RW or all of the above).
Multiple mission capability provides not only force
protection for the forward deployed MAGTF, but can also be easily
employed at critical fixed sites including both OCONUS & CONUS bases &
stations.
All R&D efforts are in close coordination/cooperation
with the Army's PEO Missile & Space--the two services testing &
selecting ``best of breed'' M-SHORAD capabilities for both the USMC's
JLTV (MADIS) & the Army's Stryker.
SIMPLICITY. Standardized M-SHORAD operation, maintenance
& training for both the Marine Corps & Army.
[all]