- THE CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION BUREAU'S SEMIANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS
[Senate Hearing 116-112]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-112
THE CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION BUREAU'S SEMIANNUAL REPORT TO
CONGRESS
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON
BANKING,HOUSING,AND URBAN AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
ON
A REVIEW OF THE CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION BUREAU'S SEMIANNUAL
REPORT TO CONGRESS
__________
OCTOBER 17, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available at: https: //www.govinfo.gov/
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-390 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON BANKING, HOUSING, AND URBAN AFFAIRS
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho, Chairman
RICHARD C. SHELBY, Alabama
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
PATRICK J. TOOMEY, Pennsylvania
JACK REED, Rhode Island
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
BEN SASSE, Nebraska
JON TESTER, Montana
TOM COTTON, Arkansas
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
THOM TILLIS, North Carolina
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
JOHN KENNEDY, Louisiana
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
MARTHA MCSALLY, Arizona
DOUG JONES, Alabama
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
Gregg Richard, Staff Director
Laura Swanson, Democratic Staff Director
Catherine Fuchs, Counsel
Sarah Brown, Professional Staff Member
Jan Singelmann, Democratic Counsel
Cameron Ricker, Chief Clerk
Shelvin Simmons, IT Director
Charles J. Moffat, Hearing Clerk
Jim Crowell, Editor
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 17, 2019
Page
Opening statement of Chairman Crapo..............................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
27
Opening statements, comments, or prepared statements of:
Senator Brown................................................
3
Prepared statement.......................................
28
WITNESS
Kathy Kraninger, Director, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau..
4
Prepared statement...........................................
29
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Brown............................................
40
Senator Toomey...........................................
52
Senator Scott............................................
53
Senator Moran............................................
54
Senator Menendez.........................................
58
Senator Warren...........................................
59
Senator Cortez Masto.....................................
76
Senator Jones............................................
85
Senator Smith............................................
87
Senator Sinema...........................................
90
Additional Material Supplied for the Record
Semiannual Report of the Bureau of Consumer Financial
Protection--Spring 2019........................................
92
Letter submitted by the Consumer Banker's Association............
154
Letter submitted by the Credit Union National Association........
163
Letter submitted by the National Association of Federally-Insured
Credit Unions..................................................
169
(iii)
THE CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION
BUREAU'S SEMIANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS
----------
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 17, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met 10 at a.m., in room SD-538, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Mike Crapo, Chairman of the
Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN MIKE CRAPO
Chairman Crapo. This hearing will come to order.
Today we will receive testimony from CFPB Director Kathy
Kraninger on the CFPB's semiannual report.
On October 7, the CFPB issued its Spring 2019 Semiannual
Report, which outlines the Bureau's significant work between
October 2018 and March 2019, including rulemakings and
supervisory and regulatory activities.
The report also provides insight into what the CFPB plans
to undertake in the coming work period.
Since stepping into her role last December, Director
Kraninger has demonstrated a commitment to ensuring that
consumers have access to a wide range of financial products and
services that meet their individual needs, fostering innovation
and vigorously protecting consumers.
Reflecting this commitment to the CFPB's mission, Director
Kraninger conducted an extensive cross-country listening tour
with the full spectrum of CFPB stakeholders during her first
months on the job.
Director Kraninger's conversations with consumers,
industry, and fellow Federal and State regulators have improved
CFPB engagement, informed their supervision and regulatory
processes, and improved agency transparency.
In the Semiannual Report, Director Kraninger also
highlighted that the CFPB has taken steps to ``[strengthen] the
consumer marketplace by providing financial institutions clear
`rules of the road' that allow them to offer consumers a range
of high-quality, innovative financial services and products.''
On September 10, the CFPB issued three new policies to
promote innovation and reduce regulatory uncertainty. These
policies include the Trial Disclosure Program Policy, the
Compliance Assistance Sandbox Policy, and the No-Action Letter
Policy.
Each of these policies are intended to contribute to an
environment that allows innovation to flourish safely and
ensure that consumer needs are met in increasingly efficient
and effective ways.
Earlier this year, the CFPB announced a proposal to update
the mandatory underwriting provisions of its 2017 small dollar
lending rule.
Updating this rule is an important step toward ensuring the
availability of credit that is essential to so many consumers
who struggle to access or qualify for other options and basing
rules on solid evidence and legal support.
As the CFPB continues to move forward on this rulemaking
process, I encourage the CFPB to coordinate with the other
financial regulators on an approach to small dollar lending to
create a consistent framework across all institutions in order
to promote and expand small dollar lending and credit options.
In July, the CFPB released an advance notice of proposed
rulemaking seeking stakeholder comment on potential amendments
to its Ability to Repay/Qualified Mortgage Rule.
FHFA Director Calabria and CFPB Director Kraninger noted
the QM patch ``exacerbates an unlevel playing field'' and that
``Fannie and Freddie should play by the same rules as everyone
else.''
The CFPB's actions are a positive step, and I continue to
encourage the Bureau's efforts to find a permanent solution to
the Qualified Mortgage standard that provides certainty to
consumers, lenders, and investors alike.
Last week, the CFPB announced the formation of a task force
that will be devoted to examining ways to modernize and
harmonize Federal consumer financial laws, especially those
pertaining to consumer credit.
The Banking Committee has spent significant time this
Congress evaluating how the Fair Credit Reporting Act, or FCRA,
should operate in an increasingly digital economy, and other
firms who function similar to the original consumer reporting
agencies.
I look forward to reviewing the CFPB's Task Force on
Federal Consumer Financial Law's recommendations on how to
update the FCRA so that it continues to function as originally
intended in a digital world.
Though I am greatly encouraged by many of the changes and
initiatives at the CFPB under Director Kraninger's leadership,
it remains clear that the fundamental structure of the CFPB
must be reconsidered to make it more transparent and
accountable.
I continue to support transitioning the CFPB to a
bipartisan commission from a single director, subjecting the
CFPB to appropriations, and providing a safety and soundness
check for prudential regulators.
On September 17, 2019, the CFPB and the Department of
Justice filed a brief in the U.S. Supreme Court, urging the
Court in the case of Seila Law v. CFPB to review the
constitutionality of the Bureau's leadership structure.
I have long argued that the CFPB's current structure lacks
sufficient accountability and look forward to the Supreme Court
taking up a review of this case.
During this hearing, I look forward to hearing more about
key initiatives at the CFPB in the last year, Director
Kraninger's priorities for the CFPB in the upcoming work
period, and additional legislative or regulatory opportunities
to provide widespread access to financial products and
services.
Director Kraninger, again I thank you for joining the
Committee this morning to discuss the CFPB's activities and
plans.
Senator Brown.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SHERROD BROWN
Senator Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Director
Kraninger. Nice to see you.
We created the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau to
stand up for students, servicemembers, and hardworking
Americans to protect them from big banks and crooked
corporations that rob them of their homes and their jobs and
their savings.
After 10 months on the job, it is clear why President Trump
selected you to head the CFPB. We know he can count on you to
protect Wall Street banks and payday lenders and shady debt
collectors and other companies that prey on hardworking
Americans.
Under your leadership, under President Trump's leadership,
this agency has chosen corporations over workers over and over
again, has chosen big banks over consumers over and over again.
Since you took over, you and your appointees have overruled
the recommendations of consumer experts and allowed crooked
companies to lie, to cheat, and to steal from hardworking
Americans, and then you have let them get away with it.
The Consumer Protection Bureau is supposed to protect
consumers. That is your entire job, to protect consumers from
predatory loans, from predatory payday loans that lead to
endless cycles of debt.
You instead chose to protect the interests of President
Trump and his payday lending patrons.
Consumers pay the price. Since August, when the payday loan
rule was scheduled to go into effect, Americans have paid more
than $1 billion in fees to payday loan sharks. That is $1
billion out of the pockets of consumers, and it is consumers
without a lot of money. They are using payday lending,
obviously. A billion dollars out of the pockets of consumers
because the agency that was supposed to look out for them
decided to instead look out for payday lenders.
You also could have protected servicemembers and their
families.
But instead the Trump administration betrayed them when you
stopped making sure companies followed the protections for
servicemembers and their families.
You also could have strengthened the Bureau's enforcement
of fair lending laws that returned hundreds of millions of
dollars to victims of discrimination in the agency's first 7
years.
Instead, you continued President Trump's attacks on fair
lending laws. In fact, instead of protecting consumers, you
have dismantled the Bureau's Office of Fair Lending; you put a
Trump political appointee with a history of racist and sexist
writings--and we have explored those in this Committee before--
in charge of fair lending; you are now trying to repeal a 2015
rule that required lenders to report basic loan information to
ensure they are not discriminating.
What are the results?
Since you took over, the Bureau has not brought a single
case against a company for discriminatory lending practices.
Not one single case against a company for discriminatory
lending practices. Last that I checked, discrimination has not
ended in this country in Trump's America.
Under the Trump administration, you have turned your backs
on student loan borrowers.
The Bureau could have helped protect the 44 million
Americans with student loans from the widespread mistakes,
errors, and mismanagement by the companies that handle their
loans and that have cost them thousands of dollars.
But, again, you betrayed the people the President promised
to look out for. You are hearing that word ``betrayed'' these
days used a lot, how the President has betrayed workers in the
Midwest, auto workers in the Midwest, how the President has
betrayed our allies in the Mideast, and day after day betrayed
workers in this country. You sided with Education Secretary
DeVos and refused to examine Federal student loan servicers to
make sure they are not cheating people with student loans.
The GAO and the Department of Education's Inspector General
reported that the company that manages Federal student loans
wrongly denied tens of thousands of teachers, nurses,
firefighters, servicemembers, and other dedicated public
servants the loan forgiveness they earned. And this is not my
opinion. This is GAO and the Department of Education's
Inspector General.
You have protected those companies while hardworking
American families paid the price.
I guess I should expect nothing less from an Administration
that consistently looks like a retreat for Wall Street
executives.
Under your leadership, crooked corporations have no real
incentive to follow the law. If they get caught, they know the
Bureau will hit them with nothing more than a slight slap on
the wrist for ripping off consumers.
Director Kraninger, how in the world do you explain to
these hardworking Americans why the Bureau is not protecting
them?
To be sure, you have done the role asked of you by the
President of the United States. You have protected companies,
not workers, not consumers, and that is indefensible.
Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Director Kraninger, it is now your opportunity to make your
initial statement. The floor is yours. Please proceed.
STATEMENT OF KATHY KRANINGER, DIRECTOR, CONSUMER FINANCIAL
PROTECTION BUREAU
Ms. Kraninger. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown,
Members of the Committee thank you for the opportunity to
provide an update on the Bureau's important work.
Preventing harm to consumers is the top priority of the
CFPB. We prevent harm by educating consumers to protect
themselves. We prevent harm by having clear rules of the road
for regulated entities. We prevent harm by using supervision
and enforcement to promote compliance with the law. And we
prevent harm by supporting dynamic and competitive markets that
provide for consumer choice.
While prevention is not always possible, it is the right
goal, saving consumers from financial headaches, setbacks, and
devastation. The Semiannual Report and my written testimony
provide a rundown of our activities in the first half of fiscal
year 2019 and a preview of more recent initiatives, some of
which I will take the opportunity to highlight now.
First, our efforts to provide clear rules of the road so
that companies and consumers know what is lawful and what is
not.
Just last week, the Bureau finalized a rule that provides
needed relief to smaller lenders from collecting and reporting
data under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act, or HMDA, and
codifies a key provision of the Economic Growth, Regulatory
Relief, and Consumer Protection Act.
Additionally, last month, the Bureau announced policies to
facilitate innovation, reduce regulatory uncertainty, and
enhance consumer choice. The Bureau also announced its first
no-action letter under the new policies. It is designed to help
keep funding streams open for our Nation's housing counselors
who have assisted millions of Americans attain the dream of
owning a home.
Second, where we cannot prevent harm to consumers, we use
our enforcement tool to hold bad actors accountable. Every case
is managed by Bureau attorneys seeking justice in the public
interest. In fiscal year 2019, we announced 22 public
enforcement actions and settled six previously filed lawsuits,
including in a public fair lending enforcement action the
Bureau settled with one of the Nation's largest HMDA reporters
for violating HMDA and Regulation C. We took action against an
individual who brokered contracts offering high-interest credit
to veterans, and we took action against a student loan
servicing company that engaged in unfair practices that
violated the Consumer Financial Protection Act.
Further, the Bureau's actions in fiscal year 2019 resulted
in orders requiring a total of over $777 million in consumer
relief and nearly $186 million in civil money penalties. I note
these figures not as a measure of accomplishment, but to
underscore the fact that the Bureau continues to appropriately
utilize its enforcement tool.
Third, we continue to promote a culture of compliance
through our supervisory tool and empower consumers through
education. Earlier this year, we launched an initiative--Start
Small, Save Up--to help prepare Americans to handle an
unexpected financial event. As part of this initiative, we
released a new savings booklet to help individuals create their
path to reach their savings goals. And we are looking at other
innovative ways to move the needle on savings in America.
For example, the Bureau partnered with H&R Block to study
savings of tax refunds. The study showed that encouragement
through a simple email or a small incentive increased the
consumer's likelihood of saving a portion of their tax refund.
It also found that one in five consumers who took advantage of
the specific savings feature continued to save 8 months later.
We will continue to engage in research about what works to
promote a habit of savings and overall financial well-being.
Fourth, I have a few recent announcements to demonstrate
the Bureau is committed to using the tools Congress gave us as
effectively and efficiently as possible. Just last week, the
Bureau handled its 2 millionth consumer complaint. To ensure
that the Bureau's work continues to be informed by this input,
I announced last month that we will continue the publication of
the Consumer Complaint Data base. In addition, we will be
enhancing the data base by providing new tools and graphics to
analyze consumer submissions and put that data into context.
Also last week, I announced the establishment of a task
force to examine the existing legal and regulatory framework.
The task force will make recommendations for improving consumer
financial laws and regulations as well as enhancing consumer
understanding of markets and products. We are currently
accepting applications from individuals who are interested in
serving on the task force and welcome recommendations from
members of Congress.
Just 2 days ago, I was proud to announce that the new
private education loan ombudsman met an important congressional
mandate given specifically to that position by issuing his
first annual report. The report covers 2 years and analyzes
complaints submitted by consumers. The Bureau also sent a
signed memorandum of understanding to the Department of
Education consistent with its statutory responsibility to share
consumer complaint information with the Department of
Education.
Before I close, I would like to touch on one final issue:
clarity around the constitutionality of the Bureau's structure.
As you are aware, I joined the Government's recent brief in the
Supreme Court to hear the case CFPB v. Seila Law. This matter
is in litigation, so consistent with longstanding Bureau
practice, I am not going to discuss it at length, but I do want
to highlight a few key points.
From the Bureau's earliest days, the constitutionality of
the Director's removal provision has been raised to challenge
legal actions by the Bureau in pursuit of our mission.
Litigation over this question continues to cause significant
delays in some of our enforcement and regulatory actions. I
believe this dynamic will not change until the constitutional
question is resolved, either by Congress or by the Supreme
Court. My position on this question will not stop the Bureau
from fulfilling our statutory responsibilities. We will
continue to defend the actions that the Bureau is taking now
and has taken in the past.
Again, I thank you for this opportunity to discuss the
Bureau's work and look forward to your questions.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Director Kraninger.
My first question is related to access to credit, and I ask
it in this context. It has already been expressed by Senator
Brown, a concern about the level of enforcement activity, and I
appreciated your reviewing that the agency is enforcing the
law. It seems to me that, in addition to stopping bad actors
from harming consumers, an important thing to do to protect and
strengthen consumers is to increase their access to safe
credit.
Could you discuss, first of all, whether that is one of the
important objectives that you have and how you would seek to
achieve that?
Ms. Kraninger. Thank you, Senator. Access to credit is part
of the mission of the Bureau. It comes into play in Dodd-Frank
under innovation in particular, facilitating innovation and
access. It is an important part of what we do. We do have to be
thoughtful and judicious and deliberate in our rulemaking
activities to consider the implications on access to credit of
the actions that we take. There are certainly a number of areas
where we are being thoughtful about that.
I would highlight the innovation policies because that
clearly is an area where we are seeking more innovation from
the industry, from financial technology companies, from others
who have ideas about how we can reach those underbanked and
unbanked individuals in our society and bring them into
financial services that are going to help them build their
financial well-being. And so that opportunity is something that
we have held symposia on. We are engaged in some work on that,
and we look forward to providers of products and services
continuing to come forward to talk to us about how they can do
that.
Chairman Crapo. Well, thank you. And I guess we have
already both discussed this a little bit, but I would just like
you to highlight it again. One of the most important things we
can do for those who are not banked and who find it difficult
to access credit is to make sure that the credit system that
they can participate in is safe and that it is strong and
robust, available to them.
Could you just comment a little further on the importance
of that?
Ms. Kraninger. Yes, Senator. Certainly that is an important
part of our job, that competitive, fair, transparent markets do
promote that for consumers, and that is part of the mission
that we are giving to more specifically.
I think one of the things that I can talk a little bit more
about is alternative data and the opportunity to look at that
in underwriting. The Bureau did issue one no-action letter
under its prior policy to a company called ``Upstart''. We have
since had a lot of information on how Upstart has used
alternative data, both employment and education information, to
make credit determinations and provide greater access to
credit. We did issue a blog recently. Our head of Fair Lending
and our head of Innovation talked about the opportunity that
companies like Upstart are providing to individuals who are
unbanked and underbanked to bring them in to safer products,
and that is something that we will continue to do.
Chairman Crapo. All right. Thank you.
The adoption of innovative technologies and processes by
regulated financial entities has the clear potential to improve
the ease, efficiency, and the cost of providing financial
services to a wider spectrum of consumers, as we have been
discussing. But a lack of regulatory certainty and clear
guidance regarding the use of new financial technology and
methods of consumer engagement can stifle the development and
the integration of innovative practices by firms.
Can you describe how the CFPB's recent policy guidance
regarding its Disclosure Sandbox Program and the compliance--
the no-action letter, the Compliance Sandbox Program, can help
our firms that do provide services get greater regulatory
clarity and enhance financial innovation?
Ms. Kraninger. Well, one of the premises of those policies
is certainly encouraging some of these innovative companies and
entities to come forward with their ideas. It is something that
is challenging to do. A company entering this space does not
have the same history of regulatory engagement as traditional
institutions do, and so coming forward to ask questions, to
look for ways to be compliant with consumer financial
protection laws, that is what they are trying to do, and that
is what we are trying to promote, that conversation with those
entities.
There is a real opportunity with the trial disclosure
policy, I believe, to get better information to consumers,
simple information to consumers at the right time so that they
have what they need to make the best decision for themselves,
and I am really looking forward to even traditional financial
institutions coming forward with some great ideas in that
space. For the sandbox as well, there is going to be a lot of
back and forth over how effective the products are and what the
opportunities are that are beneficial to consumers.
Part of the application process is raising both the
benefits and the risks to consumers, and that is what the
applicants will have to articulate to us and go back and forth
on.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Brown.
Senator Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Is it reasonable to consider a payday loan rule that allows
consumers who get into financial trouble to pay back as little
as 1 percent of a loan?
Ms. Kraninger. I am sorry. Are you asking about an interest
rate on----
Senator Brown. Well, I ask that because I think the answer
is sort of self-evident. But this chart shows that you have let
scammers and shady debt collectors pay just 1 percent or even
less of the amounts they owe. CFLA paid 1.1 percent of the
amount they owed to consumers. Howard Law paid 0.07 of a
percent of the debt they owed, the scam they made. And McKinnon
paid two-tenths of 1 percent. So you gave these corporations
and these scammers a huge discount of what they owed to
hardworking Americans whom they cheated. Why is it that you
think scammers that take advantage of servicemembers or seniors
or students deserve debt forgiveness but working families do
not deserve the same treatment?
Ms. Kraninger. Thank you for giving me a little more
context on that question, Senator. As you know, every case is
fact- and circumstance-specific. Cases are led by Bureau
attorneys in terms of the opening decision of the case, the
closing decision of the case, and the recommendation and the
discourse that we have inside the agency over whether to sue or
settle. There are certainly opportunity costs there with our
decisions to sue, which we have taken in many cases under my
leadership and prior leadership.
Senator Brown. You can answer this for the next 5 minutes.
But when the settlement is--when it is consumers who are hurt
and scammers that benefit, the little bit of money they get,
what message does this send? It is not only these consumers get
nothing close to restitution. It is the message it sends to
other scammers that they have a friend in the White House and
they have a friend in the CFPB.
Let me move to another. During your confirmation, I raised
concerns as Director you would side with 9/11 scammers and
other corporations that argue that the CFPB is
unconstitutional. Do you remember that conversation?
Ms. Kraninger. I do, sir.
Senator Brown. OK. Good. Thank you. When I asked you about
the constitutionality of the CFPB, you testified as Director it
was not your position to decide whether CFPB was
constitutional. You said, and I am quoting, ``I am aware of the
constitutional questions, Senator. I think they are important.
But they are not for me in this position to answer. The
Director has the responsibility to carry out the law as it is
written, run the agency that is established now, and that is my
focus.''
Based on this testimony, I was surprised when a few weeks
ago you sent a letter to Congress stating, ``I have decided
that the Bureau should adopt the Department of Justice's view
that the for-cause removal provision is unconstitutional.''
So if someone comes to Congress, commits to do one thing,
and then does another, is that just lying to Congress?
Ms. Kraninger. Senator, I was aware, obviously, of the
constitutional question from the moment of my nomination. We
discussed it at the hearing during my confirmation process, and
it certainly was not a decision that I had to take at that
time. I still firmly believe that in terms of settling this
question, as I said in my opening statement, it is for the
Supreme Court and Congress to settle it.
At the same time, the executive branch and all of us as
executive branch officials have a responsibility to uphold the
Constitution. In the face of this cert petition to the Supreme
Court in this particular case, it did come to me for a decision
on my position and the position the Bureau would take, and that
is the decision that is outlined in our----
Senator Brown. I think it speaks to your credibility as a
public official that came into this Committee and said that you
would not speak on issues of constitutionality and then you
did, which to me reflects on some other things you may have
said over time.
I want to turn back to the public service loan forgiveness.
Congress designed the program to help hardworking Americans who
take jobs that we hope they take to serve this country and to
serve their communities. It is clear the management of this
program under the company PHEAA has been a complete train
wreck. Fewer than 1 percent of workers have received the loan
forgiveness they earned. The CFPB has done nothing for more
than 2 years about it.
Will you commit to the public that you will open an
enforcement investigation of PHEAA, the company that is
supposed to manage these Americans' student loans?
Ms. Kraninger. Senator, I can tell you I take very
seriously the responsibilities we have to all consumers and
particularly to students. We do have that responsibility. I
hired, as I said I would, a private education loan ombudsman
who has already issued his first annual report. We have engaged
the Department of Education to work through what I think is
hopefully going to be the best outcome for consumers, and that
is to have the Federal Government agencies united in the
understanding of our respective responsibilities and how we are
going to move forward. So we are moving forward on the MOU that
is statutorily required and moving forward in other areas
including how we will carry out our responsibilities under the
larger participant rule.
Senator Brown. I hope so, but nothing fundamental has
happened, that still 1 percent of workers receive the loan
forgiveness they have earned, as they serve the public as we
asked them to do. And keep in mind PHEAA is a Federal
contractor using taxpayer dollars to manage Federal student
loans. So I will just ask you again: Will you protect people
trying to pay off their student loans, or are you going to
protect Secretary DeVos and this company?
Ms. Kraninger. I will carry out my statutory
responsibilities to protect consumers.
Senator Brown. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Shelby [presiding]. Senator Crapo had to go to the
Judiciary Committee, so I will recognize myself.
Director Kraninger, since you were sworn in, I believe that
the Bureau has done an impressive job of putting forward
policies that not only provide important consumer protections,
which is in the forefront here, but also certainty and clarity
to regulated entities. We need both. I believe that under your
leadership you have made a lot of significant strides in
becoming more efficient and transparent, and I want to commend
you for that.
Now, during your time as Director, in what areas of the
Bureau's operations have you seen the most improvement? And
what areas do you feel continue to be addressed? Along those
lines, the CFPB has announced that it is looking at potential
ways to modernize Federal consumer financial laws. And as more
consumers--that is all of us--move to utilize digital
technology, what are some of the challenges that you are
facing? What road are you going down, and how do you get there?
Ms. Kraninger. Thank you, Senator. I am particularly proud
of, again, our commitment to transparency and to promote the
discourse. Reasonable people will disagree over a number of
topics, and trying to push forward advance notice of proposed
rulemakings and requests for information to bring the public
into the discussion as we are considering rulemaking actions
has been important, as had holding symposia to talk through
some of the more challenging topics. We had one on the
definition of abusiveness. We had one on economic analysis
factors. We have another one coming up actually on small
business lending and our responsibilities under section 1071 of
the Dodd-Frank Act.
Those are all things that I think we are doing very well,
and we are going to continue to engage in that kind of
discourse and work with all of the stakeholders in this area to
move forward.
You mentioned the task force, and I am also excited about
that opportunity to provide both the Bureau and the Congress
perhaps some ideas from experts in this area as to where we
should go to help modernize the laws and the regulations to
address the digital age that we find ourselves in. That is also
a positive thing, and I think in terms of our modernization
efforts, we are looking at how this applies in a number of
contexts, particularly to electronic disclosures.
The fall rulemaking agenda has not been released yet, but
we are going to be looking at the credit card arena. We are
tackling some of this in the debt collection rule, just
thinking about how we can get simpler, clearer information to
consumers in what is a complex set of laws. So that
modernization----
Senator Shelby. The more transparency you have, the better
the consumer is going to be. Isn't that----
Ms. Kraninger. Yes, Senator, I agree.
Senator Shelby. How important is it for the financial
regulators to create a regulatory environment that is conducive
to innovation? And also what impact do you foresee through your
job here proposed policies that would have on firms offering
new products and services? That is very important to the
marketplace.
Ms. Kraninger. I am excited about the innovation policies,
and as I just spoke a little bit about disclosures with the
trial disclosure policy bringing information to consumers at
the right time, having it be simple and clear, providing clear
direction to industry, as you have noted, that is what we are
trying to do both through the innovation policies and our other
rulemaking efforts and guidance efforts.
With those clear rules everyone understands and can
innovate and can grow and can provide the services that
consumers need and want. That is something that we are going to
continue to work our way through.
Senator Shelby. Isn't it very important to have an informed
consumer, in other words, that they understand what they are
doing when they make a decision?
Ms. Kraninger. Yes, Senator, and that is a key part of our
responsibility as an agency. Education is part of our purview,
and it is something that we are really working hard to build.
Senator Shelby. I want to get into cost-benefit analysis.
The last time you came before this Committee, we discussed
right here the role of cost-benefit analysis at the Bureau and
everywhere else. How can your organization utilize economists
and economic analysis in its overall operations, including in
the rulemaking process--in other words, weigh costs and
benefits for any rule?
Ms. Kraninger. Yes, Senator, as you know, that is something
that is critically important to me, and I think part of this
discussion with the public is to actually outline those costs
and benefits and attempt to quantify them.
Senator Shelby. But that should be important to everybody,
shouldn't it?
Ms. Kraninger. I agree, sir, and it is something we are
committed to. I am excited that I have a new head of the Office
of Research. They have the responsibility currently for doing
that economic analysis to support our rulemaking. And cost-
benefit analysis should be part of all of our processes and
decisions, and that is something that I am working to weigh
into the process. It does not mean that the hard dollar amount
when we can quantify is the only basis for any decision, but
talking about benefits and costs and weighing them and trying
to quantify them is important.
Senator Shelby. Thank you. My time is up.
Senator Menendez.
Senator Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director, last time you were here before the Committee, you
and I discussed the severe problems in the Public Service Loan
Forgiveness Program. This is a program that Congress put in
place to allow public workers like teachers, firefighters, and
military servicemembers to have their student loans forgiven if
they make payments for 10 years. But 99 out of every 100 public
servants who apply for debt forgiveness are rejected.
According to a recent NPR report, in 2018, the CFPB
launched an effort to find out why the program is failing our
public servants, but Secretary DeVos' Department of Education
seems to have successfully stonewalled those efforts.
Is it true that in response to a letter from Senator Warren
and myself you confessed that, ``Since December 2017, student
loans servicers have declined to produce information requested
by the Bureau for supervisory examinations related to loans
held by the Department based on the Department's guidance?
Ms. Kraninger. Yes, Senator, that was in the letter.
Senator Menendez. Is it also true that the Bureau submitted
a supervisory examination request to the Department of
Education in January of 2019, this year, and since then the
Department of Education failed to respond to the CFPB's request
as disclosed by the Department in a June letter to Senator
Murray and Congresswoman DeLauro?
Ms. Kraninger. Senator, yes, if I could give a little
additional context----
Senator Menendez. We will get to additional context in a
moment.
Ms. Kraninger. Thank you.
Senator Menendez. But that is a true statement, correct?
Ms. Kraninger. Yes, Senator.
Senator Menendez. Now, Secretary DeVos, the Secretary of
Education, has made it abundantly clear that she prioritizes
loan servicers over teachers and public workers. But you do not
have to follow her lead. In fact, your predecessor, Mick
Mulvaney, was still able to examine Federal student loan
servicers despite DeVos' opposition. When he faced similar
obstruction by the Department, he followed the recommendation
of career enforcement attorneys and sought a court order to
compel some of the largest student loans servicers to turn over
documents to the Bureau. These actions proved that the CFPB can
still work to protect Federal student borrowers despite the
irresponsible actions of Secretary DeVos.
Why has the Bureau under your leadership thus far failed to
use all the tools at its disposal, including seeking court
orders to conduct proper oversight?
Ms. Kraninger. Senator, I believe that it behooves the
Federal Government to act in a more united manner that is going
to be better for consumers. It is certainly going to be more
consistent. I have met with Secretary DeVos. I hired the
private education loan ombudsman. We are moving forward with
the MOU that is statutorily required to share complaint
information. And we are already discussing how to move forward
in an effective way to make sure that we are overseeing
servicers.
Senator Menendez. Well, I agree that if we can work in
cooperation, that is great. But let me just read to you what
the Department of Education said 48 hours ago, and I quote:
``The Department of Education is charged with overseeing the
Federal student aid portfolio. The CFPB is charged with
oversight of the private student loan industry.''
So if you are waiting for the Department of Education to
give you permission to oversee the Public Service Loan
Forgiveness Program, you are going to be disappointed, and our
public servants are going to pay a price.
Why don't you do what your predecessor did? Why won't you
commit to reinstating the oversight and enforcement of these
loans?
Ms. Kraninger. Senator, we are absolutely doing exams of
private education loans, and we are working with the Department
of Education on the Federal student loan portfolio to make sure
that Federal consumer protection laws, which are the purview of
this agency, are followed. And that is something that we are
going to continue to work through----
Senator Menendez. Well, it has not worked so far. They have
not cooperated with you at all. They have stonewalled you every
step of the way, and they have made it very clear in this
statement 48 hours ago that they only believe that you have
jurisdiction over the private student loan industry and not
theirs. So who is going to get hurt here are public servants
who deserve to have the opportunity to have loan forgiveness as
a part of their service. And I would really urge you to do what
your predecessor did and use the enforcement capabilities that
you have.
Let me quickly ask you on the QM patch, which has provided
over roughly 6 million residential mortgage loans originated in
2018, the Bureau estimates that roughly one-sixth or nearly 1
million loans benefited from the QM patch. I understand that
you are all going to allow it to just lapse. How is it that you
are going to ensure that if you do not take steps to offer the
type of financing that is currently available, how can you
describe the steps that the Bureau is going to take to prevent
the patch's expiration without causing a major disruption to
the housing market and our overall economy?
Ms. Kraninger. Senator, a smooth transition is what I am
committed to. I put that in the advance notice of proposed
rulemaking and recognizing that the patch was set to expire and
is set to expire in January 2021, we are starting this process
very early. We sought comment on how long of an extension would
be necessary to support a transition, and we are looking at the
comments back on that now, and I will be making a decision in
terms of a next step in a proposed rulemaking process to make
that as smooth as possible.
Senator Menendez. Well, let me close. I hope you can commit
that your final rule will provide the same opportunity for
folks to get into a home as currently available, particularly
people of color have experienced the benefit on the patch and
have shown that they are creditworthy borrowers. They should
not be denied simply because we want to end the patch without
the ability to keep that opportunity available.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Shelby. Senator Toomey.
Senator Toomey. Thank you, Mr. Acting Chairman. And,
Director Kraninger, thanks for joining us, and I want to
commend you on some of the very constructive work that I think
you have been doing at the CFPB.
I also want to pursue the line of questioning that Senator
Menendez raised with respect to the QM patch. I always have
been under the view that it has been inappropriate and unfair
for the CFPB to outsource the definition of QM to the GSEs and
their underwriting standards which occur mostly in a black box.
As long as the ability-to-repay rule is on the books, it seems
to me we need a qualified mortgage definition that is simple,
fair, straightforward, and entirely unambiguous.
So one of the ways, it seems to me, we could move in that
direction is to make it clear that a depository institution
that keeps a mortgage on its books has every incentive to make
sure that that is a loan that can be repaid. I am of the view
that banks like to get their money back when they make a loan,
and that aligns the interest of the lender with the interest of
a borrower to have a loan that is affordable to the borrower.
We acknowledged that in the legislation that we passed, S.
2155, and declared that there would be an automatic QM safe
harbor for any financial institution that keeps the loan on
their books, provided that they are less than $10 billion in
size. So I am of the view that an $11 billion bank would also
like to be repaid when it makes a loan, would rather get its
money back than not get its money back.
So my suggestion is one place to look--and I think you have
the discretion and the authority to do this with your
definition of QM--would be to allow the QM patch to apply to
any size institution that keeps a mortgage on its books. And I
am just wondering what your reaction is to that.
Ms. Kraninger. Thank you, Senator, for raising it. In that
advance notice of proposed rulemaking that we issued, we, in
fact, raised this idea and sought comment on it, recognizing
that S. 2155 did include that concept, and that the risk
calculus of the entities that are intending to keep those loans
in portfolio, you would anticipate, as you noted, would be
doing that in a manner that they expect they are going to
actually get their investment back. And so I am very interested
in the comments we get back on that topic.
Senator Toomey. Yes, I would urge you to consider that very
seriously.
You have also done some work on the payday rule, and I
think you are pursuing some constructive changes. One that I am
not sure you are focused on--and it is a question--is the scope
of the rule, and specifically there are financial institutions
that are concerned that the scope may capture products that
were never intended to be captured, including, for instance,
interest-only lines of credit that are backed by securities in
a brokerage account--I do not think anybody really ever thought
of that as a payday loan, but it might be captured under the
old definition--or short-term bridge loans that assist
customers in sequential real estate transactions. Again, I do
not think anybody ever thought of that as a payday loan.
So as you evaluate reforming the payday rule, could you
address the issue of the scope and whether you intend to
tighten up that scope?
Ms. Kraninger. Thank you, Senator. I am familiar with the
concerns that you are raising here now. The Bureau has received
a petition to reconsider or address issues with the payments
provisions of the 2017 rule, in addition to our consideration
of the 2017 underwriting requirements. So that is something
that at least is on our radar. We have a responsibility to
respond to that petition within a year of it being sent to us
so it is on the plate. The priority was the reconsideration of
the underwriting provisions, but we will have to look at and at
least respond to these concerns.
Senator Toomey. Yes, I think that is important to look at
that as well.
Very quickly, a quick compliment on your fiscal management
of the department. There is a cap on spending as a function of
Federal Reserve revenue, which in the past seemed to be viewed
also as a floor, and you have clearly not taken that approach.
I commend you for that.
Last point. Section 1031 of the Dodd-Frank Act gives the
Bureau really unprecedented authority to take enforcement
action against those it deems to be engaged in, and I quote,
``unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts.'' As I am sure you are
aware, ``abusive'' is not defined in the statute, nor am I
aware of any precedent in related law that defines ``abusive.''
And it strikes me as an inherently extremely subjective term.
Do you intend to take steps to provide a clearer definition
of what would constitute ``abusive''?
Ms. Kraninger. Senator, thank you. The definition in the
statute is precisely something that we have talked about. We
had a symposium on this topic and brought experts together to
talk about whether further definition is necessary or useful to
the process. As you noted, the only place that we have really
provided additional definition is in enforcement actions that
have also been quite rare. So this is something that is a
decision before me as to whether we should put more guidance
out there or what next steps we should take. So there will be
news on that in the not-too-distant future.
Senator Toomey. Thank you.
Senator Shelby. Senator Tester.
Senator Tester. Thank you, Senator Shelby. And I want to
thank the Chairman and Ranking Member for this hearing, and I
want to thank you for being here today, Ms. Kraninger.
Going back to the payday situation, are you doing oversight
of payday lenders now? Or are you waiting for the rule to be
rewritten? Where are you at in that process?
Ms. Kraninger. We absolutely continue to engage in
investigations as well as supervision of payday lenders.
Senator Tester. So how many actions have you brought
against payday lenders in the last year?
Ms. Kraninger. There is at least one, Senator, but I do not
remember off the top of my head. We can get it for the record.
Senator Tester. OK.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Tester. So do you think the agency is adequately
doing its job as far as enforcement on payday lenders at this
moment in time?
Ms. Kraninger. I can assure you that we are vigorously
enforcing the law in many areas, including this one.
Senator Tester. OK. So tell me about the thought behind
eliminating the Office of Students and Young Consumers?
Ms. Kraninger. Senator, we do continue to have a section
for students, and that now has four staff members in it. It is
about to have five, and so we have a continued commitment to
that activity.
Senator Tester. So you still have that office?
Ms. Kraninger. It is called a section. This gets into a
little semantics, but, yes, there is still a group of people
focused on that.
Senator Tester. So it was renamed. Compare this to--how
many people do you have in that office?
Ms. Kraninger. There were five total under the----
Senator Tester. Same number of staffing, basically.
Ms. Kraninger. They were under the private education loan
ombudsman, so right now we have six people actually doing this,
between the ombudsman and the students office.
Senator Tester. And what kind of action are you seeing in
that area as far as protecting students?
Ms. Kraninger. There are a lot of different activities, and
I am getting into the organizational chart, but really the
students office is focused on education activities.
Senator Tester. OK.
Ms. Kraninger. We do have examiners who are examining
student lenders as well.
Senator Tester. So the point is here that the name of your
agency is the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, and we have
student debt coming out, unbelievable amounts. I still get
credit card apps for my kids who are now middle-aged all the
time. So there are people that are out there preying on them.
There is no doubt about it. I just hope that you are very
aggressive in protecting these folks because once they get into
debt as a young person, a lot of them are going to be poor for
the rest of their lives, whether they have a degree or not. So
hopefully you are putting a focus on that. I hope you do.
I want to go back a little bit to Senator Menendez'
question on the Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program.
Secretary DeVos prohibited student loan servicers from sharing
information with you. Correct?
Ms. Kraninger. With respect to the Federal student loan
portfolio.
Senator Tester. And how about with respect to the Public
Service Loan Forgiveness Program? Did she not say you could not
get that information? She did not want the servicers to give
you that information?
Ms. Kraninger. Within that portfolio, yes.
Senator Tester. OK.
Ms. Kraninger. There is a question there that I very much
would like to settle because we do have a rulemaking that gives
the Bureau the ability to supervise larger participants in that
space.
Senator Tester. But if you do not have the information, it
is really hard to do much, isn't it? If you do not have the
information----
Ms. Kraninger. It is hard to engage in our exams, which I
think is really about promoting compliance.
Senator Tester. So the point is--and you told Senator
Menendez that you wanted to--you would rather work together
than--use the carrot instead of the stick, so to speak. But the
fact is if you do not have that information, you cannot do
anything, right?
Ms. Kraninger. There are other actions that we can take.
Senator Tester. But the big one is the servicers. If you do
not have that information from the services, you can take other
action, but the truth is if you really want to get to the
point, you have to have that information. Correct?
Ms. Kraninger. To engage in what are productive
examinations----
Senator Tester. Right, you do.
Ms. Kraninger. Yes.
Senator Tester. So the question is: There are checks and
balances in Government. This is one of those checks and
balances. You are a law enforcement agency to enforce the law.
We have a program here that, by the way, in rural America is
critically important. It is probably just as important in urban
America where we have public servants who spend 10 years of
their life living up to this program, they make 120 on-time
payments, and we have a Secretary who does not get what is
going on because she has got more money than everybody in this
room combined. So the point is if you do not get after it,
these people sacrifice 10 years of their life, and it is a
real--people will not go into public service. They will not go
into Government service. They will not go into nonprofit
service, which, by the way, plays a really important--I do not
need to tell you this. You know this. So why not go after it
and get it? When you have a situation where 1 percent get
qualified, something out there does not smell right.
Ms. Kraninger. One important distinction I should make,
Senator, is that clearly when it applies to the Public Service
Loan Forgiveness Program, the Bureau's responsibility is
compliance with Federal consumer financial protection law. The
Department of Education rightly is responsible for other
program----
Senator Tester. I got it. But you have the ability through
your agency to put pressure.
One last thing, and then I will be quiet. I think it is
rich for anybody in this Administration to talk about what is
constitutional and what is unconstitutional when we have a
President that publicly invites other countries to influence
our elections.
Thank you.
Senator Shelby. Senator Cortez Masto.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you, Senator Shelby.
Ms. Kraninger, thank you for being here. I do want to thank
you for keeping the Consumer Complaint Data base public. I
appreciate that, and I know it is important not just for us as
policymakers but for what you do for the general public as well
and for so many others out there.
I am looking at your report, and if you look at the
consumer data base, at least the complaints that you identify
here, it shows that in Figure 1, credit or consumer reporting,
debt collection, and mortgages are the most complained about
consumer financial products and services. And you show credit
or consumer reporting 39 percent and debt collection at 24
percent. So I appreciate this because this tells us really, for
purposes of enforcement, where we need to really focus our
resources and efforts.
I do want to talk about one in particular, a debt
collection company. It is known as ``Asset Recovery
Associates'', and I bring that up because I noticed you have a
press release dated August 28, 2019, that the Bureau settled
with Asset Recovery Associates.
Now, let me just put this in perspective. In 2012, I was
the Attorney General of the State of Nevada. In 2012, the State
of Nevada barred this debt collection from operating in our
State and collecting any more debts from Nevada because they
were so egregious. And, in fact, in your settlement agreement,
you highlight really the concerns that we had in Nevada, and
you just Google them, you will see the number of complaints
online. But since at least January 1, 2015, which you identify
in your consent agreement, the company threatened consumers
with legal action, including threats to file lawsuits against
consumers, file liens on consumers' houses, garnish consumers'
bank accounts or wages, and cause consumers to be arrested, all
actions that respondent has no intention of taking. The company
also represented to consumers that company employees are
attorneys when, in fact, they do not even employ attorneys. And
the company threatened that consumers' credit reports will be
negatively affected when respondent or the company does not
even engage in any credit reporting to any consumer reporting
agencies about any consumer accounts. I mean, they are just the
worst of the worst, so egregious.
You entered into a settlement agreement with them. You were
enforcing action against them, and I appreciate that. But here
is my question: I am concerned about the monetary penalty, the
level of restitution for the consumers and the oversight that
needs to follow through. So I have a couple of questions with
respect to that, with your indulgence here.
I noticed that, for purposes of restitution for consumers,
the restitution amount was $36,800, and I am curious how that
came about. Why that amount?
Ms. Kraninger. The amount in that case in particular I
believe represents the number of consumers who have complained
and the funds associated with that. So that is----
Senator Cortez Masto. Complained to who?
Ms. Kraninger. Complained to third party sources and
complained to the Bureau.
Senator Cortez Masto. So you are basing the restitution
amount on the number of people that complained to you, that are
even aware that you existed to complain to, along with those
that may have complained to the company, and you are taking the
company's word for it that they complained to the company. Is
that right?
Ms. Kraninger. This is really about, again, when it comes
to trying to quantify consumer harm and identify consumers who
have been harmed----
Senator Cortez Masto. Believe me, I know. As Attorney
General, we did it all the time. And here is my concern,
because in this settlement agreement stipulation and consent
with the company, you are basically letting the company
determine and tell you the data and actually identify the
affected consumers and tell you who they are, instead of
mandating that the company actually sent a letter to every
consumer that they ever touched or did business with to
identify that the settlement existed and if they had a
complaint, to identify it. Not only that, you allowed the
company itself to be the one that is the arbiter of who decides
the information that is being shared.
Quite honestly, what we have normally done is have
independent administrators or somebody coming in so there is an
independence to it. But you do have an enforcement person. I
understand in this complaint that you have identified somebody
that is particularly responsible for this, and I am trying to
find the consent agreement here. Who is that person that will
have that oversight?
Ms. Kraninger. It is the Director of Enforcement. They are
typically named in the consent orders. I am not sure--at the
time I believe----
Senator Cortez Masto. The Enforcement Director is who?
Ms. Kraninger. The Acting Enforcement Director right now is
Cara Petersen.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK, and so she is the one that will
have the oversight, make the determination, working with this
company.
Ms. Kraninger. Yes, in terms of compliance with the consent
order.
Senator Cortez Masto. Yeah, and so my concern is you are
relying on what they are telling you as the data to identify
affected consumers. That to me does not even make sense as
somebody who enforced and protected consumers. But the second
thing is you have a monetary penalty of $200 as a civil
penalty. Where did that come from? And how did you identify the
200--or, excuse me, the $200,000?
Ms. Kraninger. Senator, as you well know, because you have
done a lot of work in this area as well, when it comes to the
decision whether to sue or settle, when it comes to the fact
that the settlement must be negotiated, there are a lot of
factors that get weighed, including the ability to pay of the
entity. We could certainly have made the decision to litigate
this particular case, but that does not mean that the outcome
would be any better for consumers or for justice if we had 2 or
3 years in litigation with three or four attorneys tied up for
that time period and then we still could not get any money out
of a company that had no money----
Senator Cortez Masto. Actually, typically what we do in law
enforcement is if there is a determination of a civil penalty,
it is based on the number of violations that have occurred
based on the impact with the consumer. I did not hear that from
what you said, actually----
Ms. Kraninger. And mitigated by what the entity can pay.
Senator Cortez Masto. It has nothing to do with that. I
mean, clearly, this is egregious, and your role is to enforce,
is not only to hold them accountable in violation of existing
laws, but at the same time to protect consumers and provide
restitution, and not allowing the individual defendant to
actually make a determination of the rules, who the affected
people are, and continue the conduct without any further
oversight or penalty.
What they have basically done and what you have given them
is the ability to say, OK, I am just going to weigh this cost
of $200,000 as a cost of doing business because I am going to
make so much more and will continue down the same path. That is
my concern. And I think what I am hearing today is the lack of
enforcement and the lack of holding their feet to the fire and
holding them accountable, they are just going to--any business
is going to say, well, this is just a cost of doing business, I
am going to incorporate it in that cost, because I am making
good money so I will take the lumps as they come. And that is a
problem for purposes of enforcement. That is my concern.
Ms. Kraninger. And I agree----
Senator Cortez Masto. And I would love to have further
conversation with your Enforcement Division and talking with
your attorneys as we address this moving forward because it is
an issue across this country. Debt collection, as you identify
in your own public data base, it is a problem for so many
people across this country. So thank you.
Senator Shelby. Thank you.
Senator Cotton.
Senator Cotton. Thank you, Ms. Kraninger, for your
appearance here today. I want to speak about accountability. We
hear a lot about that with companies, but, of course, it runs
both ways, accountability of our Government to our people. The
following is a quote from an official in an Arkansas company
that has dealt with the CFPB. ``Consumer compliance is an
evergreen process and it should be treated as such. Why does
the Bureau not acknowledge issues that are self-identified and
self-corrected that fall outside of an exam period and the
company be given credit for properly managing risk instead of
being treated in their examinations as not even corrected?''
In fact, in one instance the company had made significant
progress, and the onsite examiners were told not to put
anything positive in the report by their supervisors offsite at
the CFPB. I have to say I have heard other reports about
higher-ups at the CFPB telling rank-and-file examiners to
exclude positive information or self-identified problems and
corrections.
Is it the case that examiners inside the Bureau are being
told by supervisors at a higher level not to include positive
information in their reviews and their examination reports?
Ms. Kraninger. Senator, I am not aware of any specific
instances of that, and I can tell you it would be contrary to
my direction. We have empowered the front-line examiners to
conduct exams in accordance with their training, and that would
certainly include a factual providing of what they saw and
observed, positive or negative. And that is something that I
absolutely expect, and if you have specifics on this and
particularly a timeframe, I would absolutely like to pursue it.
Senator Cotton. So it is your direction that your examiners
who are out on the front line of the company should include
positive information in reports as well?
Ms. Kraninger. It is important that they actually report on
their own observations any information that they have observed.
Senator Cotton. What is the Bureau's policy on nonsystemic
self-identified problems that have also been corrected through
self-corrective action?
Ms. Kraninger. That is something I am encouraging. Again,
this is a massive ecosystem with a lot of players in it.
Enforcement should be a last resort, and what we are trying to
do is encourage legitimate financial services providers to
comply with the law. And in so doing, that means they have a
compliance management system that does self-identify issues
where they are providing their own corrective action, and that
is best for consumers, too. They will get restitution much
faster, and we have then again a system that is operating and
functioning properly. That is something I encourage.
We are looking at ways to make sure that these policies are
codified and clear. I have a new head of Supervision,
Enforcement, and Fair Lending who just started this week, and
so knows that many of these things are things that I would like
to see us pursue in the coming months.
Senator Cotton. Thank you. I think there is obviously a big
difference between an isolated problem that an institution
identifies and corrects versus a systemic problem. That is true
in a private company, and that is true in a Government agency.
It reminds me of a story that Bob Gates told about the
early days of the Obama administration when he was something of
a fish out of water, being a holdover from the Bush
administration, and they had the usual tensions that exist
between White House staff and Cabinet Secretaries. They had a
summit at the White House in the early days to resolve them,
and Bob Gates, kind of the wise man of the group, told the
White House staff that they were very important, they
understand the President, some of them went back to his
campaign for the Senate, but they could not implement
decisions, so they needed the Cabinet officials to be involved
in the decisionmaking process so they could get by and
implementing it. He said he heard some laughter behind him, and
he turned around to the Cabinet officials, and he said, ``I do
not know what all of you are laughing about because today, even
though it is a Saturday, someone in your organization somewhere
is doing something that you disapprove of, that is probably
immoral and maybe illegal,'' the point being that in
institutions as large as a Cabinet or the CFPB, there is almost
always the possibility of someone doing something wrong. And as
Bob Gates showed repeatedly in the Department of Defense, you
want to try to stop isolated individual cases of wrongdoing and
certainly have systems in place to stop systemic wrongdoing,
but even more important is when you find those cases of
wrongdoing, that you take corrective action immediately to stop
them.
We want to encourage private institutions to do that. We
also want the CFPB to have an opportunity to do that for any
examiners that are not doing what is consistent with your
guidance as well.
I appreciate your time.
Chairman Crapo [presiding]. Thank you.
Senator Smith.
Senator Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Good
morning. Nice to see you again.
Ms. Kraninger. Good morning.
Senator Smith. I would like to follow up on what I
understand are some questions that some of my colleagues asked
a little earlier on the Public Service Loan Forgiveness
Program, something that I am really concerned about. You know,
there is a Minnesota story that was--she is actually a
plaintiff in the AFT lawsuit against the Department around this
issue. She is a public school teacher in Brainerd, and she,
like so many others, were told by her services that she was on
track in making qualified payments for the PSLF even when that
was not the case, and that incorrect information was provided
her and not addressed until years later. And, of course, she
made all sorts of life decisions based on that bad information.
And so here is what I want to try to understand a little
bit better. So the CFPB and the Department of Education had an
information-sharing agreement. Correct?
Ms. Kraninger. Yes. Yes, on complaints in particular, and
then there was a separate one on--I am forgetting what the
second MOU--we will get back to you specifically on the second
MOU because it did not get precisely to the point that I know
you are asking about. But those were two in the past that are
no more.
Senator Smith. OK.
And are you pursuing efforts to reestablish that
information-sharing agreement with the Department of Education?
Ms. Kraninger. Yes. In fact, 2 days ago, the private
education loan ombudsman sent a signed copy of the complaints
MOU that is in the Dodd-Frank Act. It is a statutory
responsibility that we have that MOU, and he sent that over
signed, and we very much hope to execute that imminently. Then
we are engaged in conversations around how we can work together
in particular to make sure that the Bureau has the ability to
enforce consumer financial protection laws through its larger
participant rule.
Senator Smith. OK, because it is one thing to share
information, and it is another thing for the Bureau to use its
investigative authority and ability to supervise and examine
what is happening in order to put a stop to what we see is, by
some reports, organizations' loan servicers that are denying up
to 99 percent of applications for loan forgiveness. So tell me
how you are pursuing that part of this, not only the
information sharing but also the need for supervision and
examination.
Ms. Kraninger. Yes, I do believe it is important. Again,
the Bureau issued a larger participant rule in the student loan
servicing space, so we do have a responsibility and an ability
to examine both entities engaged in Federal student loans and
private student loans. I believe what is best for consumers is
for the Department of Education and the CFPB to come together
and determine the best way to support the functioning of their
programs and their program management oversight and their
contract management oversight responsibilities and our ability
to enforce consumers financial protection law. Those two things
can coexist, and that is the path that we are on in terms of
our conversations.
Senator Smith. So, really, your role is to be focused on
consumer protection, and their role--I understand what you are
saying, but you also have two different roles, you would agree?
Ms. Kraninger. Yes.
Senator Smith. Yes, and do you see that part of that role
is to go in and try to--just like you might as a bank examiner,
for example, that you would go in and try to ferret out where
things are not working right rather than just waiting to find
out after the fact that something is not working right?
Ms. Kraninger. Absolutely, yes, when it comes to consumer
financial protection law.
Senator Smith. OK. Thank you.
I have a minute more. I would like to follow up on a
question that I think when you were before the Committee in
March I asked about, and I asked you about a proposal that the
Bureau had published in 2017 to directly obtain data from a
variety of entities in the student loan industry from big banks
to the loan service providers. And this went to the OMB for
routine review, and at the time you said you were looking into
that to try to figure out where it stands.
Do you have an update for me on that?
Ms. Kraninger. Yes, Senator, I do. The conditions have
really changed since then in particular because the Department
of Education is engaged in its next-gen modernization. As I
have talked to the staff at the Bureau, they assess that the
data collection as it was submitted to OMB is not really
relevant today given those changes. What we are looking at now
is what makes sense going forward, and we are certainly going
to be talking to the Department of Education about that. But we
have left that data request at OMB just pending our discussion
and decisions about whether to amend it, whether to pull it
back, or what opportunities there are for data collection in
this area.
Senator Smith. So when do you think you will move forward
then?
Ms. Kraninger. I certainly hope by the next time I am back
here that I can have an update for you on specifically where we
are going to go with this.
Senator Smith. OK. Well, I will look forward to that
update. I think it is important. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome,
Director Kraninger.
When you were here in March, you and I had a conversation
about the Trump administration's efforts to weaken the payday
protection rules that were put in place by the Obama
administration to protect consumers against unscrupulous
practices by payday lenders. As you know, that Obama rule had
two components. It had the payments component, the payments
provision, and the other provision on ability to repay. That
whole rule was challenged in court, and the stay has been
imposed by the courts. You followed this, right?
Ms. Kraninger. Yes, sir.
Senator Van Hollen. And as I understand the position of the
Bureau, you do not think there is any reason to maintain the
stay on the payment provisions of the Obama rule. Is that
correct?
Ms. Kraninger. I would tell you, Senator, that our filing
speaks to that point. One of the claims raised by the other
party is the constitutional structure of the Bureau, and so
that is a significant matter that is part of--I would note that
the court knows that as well, and so I think that is part of
the basis for the continued stay.
Senator Van Hollen. But my understanding, I mean, I have
got a document here that you sent to the Committee explaining
the Bureau's position in this case, and essentially the Bureau
said there is no legal basis to stay the compliance date for
the payment provisions. Isn't that right?
Ms. Kraninger. Yes, specifically on the merits.
Senator Van Hollen. So my question is: Given that that is
the position you have taken in court, will you file a motion to
lift the stay in order to allow this important provision to go
forward? Will you do that?
Ms. Kraninger. Senator, I am definitely looking at that and
know that that is an option. I do think the constitutional
structure question is a significant one and one, again, that
has been raised, and was outlined in our filing.
Senator Van Hollen. Again, I am just reading from what you
have written, the Bureau has written, where you disagree about
the need for the stay on the payments provision. So given that
that is your position, why are you still looking at the option
of filing a motion to lift the stay? Why don't you just file
the motion?
Ms. Kraninger. Because, as I said, in that same filing that
you are looking at, we did note that the constitutional
structure question is a significant one in the case, and that
is something that the judge is sensibly weighing, but----
Senator Van Hollen. I understand he is weighing that, but
as I read your own motion, the Bureau does not think there is
any reason for delaying this provision, and so I just do not
know why you are not using your authority and prerogative to
file a motion to lift the stay so we can put at least this
provision in place.
Let me ask you about the ability-to-repay protections. At
the hearing back in March, we looked at the analysis that the
Bureau put forward that sort of proclaimed that the changes
would save the payday lending industry between $7.3 and $7.7
billion on an annual basis, and that that was money that was
now coming out of the pockets of consumers, right? These are
consumers who would have been protected by the Obama era rule,
but are no longer protected. So monies that consumers would
have saved because of protection from unscrupulous practices
are now going to the industry. And as I looked back on how you
went about the revision of the rule, I was struck by the fact
that the Bureau did not present any new research in defense of
the change. That original rule protecting consumers had been
based on research showing the harm done the consumers.
Can you tell us today what new research the Bureau
developed in proposing the change to the rule, a change that
would cause a $7.7 billion loss to consumers?
Ms. Kraninger. Senator, a few things in response. One is
certainly that the full record from the prior rulemaking and
from our current rulemaking, the experiences of the States in
terms of the laws that they have passed and the experience that
they have had, and some newer research that is available will
all be taken into account. This decision is before me now. I
know I will certainly defend our proposal, but at the same time
note that a final decision has not been made in this issue.
With respect to additional data that we took into account
in the proposal, it is fundamentally about the legal and
factual basis that the first rule was based on. Legally we do
have the discretionary ability to undertake rulemaking related
to unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts or practices, so that was
the basis of that rule. It is my judgment that that is
something that we should undertake very thoughtfully and
judiciously because there are other effects on consumers and
other effects on the markets.
So the availability of credit and the question, too, of the
$7 billion, the question for each of those consumers
individually is what their next best alternative actually was,
whether that was the inability to pay a utility bill, the
inability to repair a car, the next order effects that come as
a result of that. Those are the things that I would posit at
least as considerations when that is proposed as merely
something that is a loss to consumers. The question is what
else happened in their lives individually and what did the
access to that credit afford.
I would also note that this is an area of the market where
there are many challenges. We have taken and will continue to
take enforcement actions against entities that are engaged in
illegal activity. That will continue. And that is certainly a
challenge in this space.
Senator Van Hollen. Well, I am listening to your answer,
and I would just note that I do not think you mentioned the new
research that justified the change to this rule to protect
consumers, so I would welcome any information you can present
to this Committee. I am glad you are still reviewing this. I
really hope you will not take the steps that you seem to be
headed to take, which, in my view, would significantly harm
consumers to the tune of $7.7 billion, according to the
estimate of the analysis by the Bureau.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
All right. Then that concludes the questioning for today's
hearing. Again, we want to thank you, Director Kraninger, for
coming today. I know there were a couple of Senators who had
hoped to get back, but their schedules just are not letting
that happen, so I know you are likely to get some additional
questions.
For Senators who wish to submit questions for the record,
those questions are due to the Committee by Thursday, October
24th. We ask, Director, that you respond to those questions as
promptly as you can. And, again, we thank you for being here
and appreciate the good work that you are doing.
Ms. Kraninger. Thank you, Senator.
Chairman Crapo. This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:17 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[Prepared statements, responses to written questions, and
additional material supplied for the record follow:]
PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN MIKE CRAPO
Today, we will receive testimony from CFPB Director Kathy Kraninger
on the CFPB's semiannual report.
On October 07, the CFPB issued its Spring 2019 Semiannual Report,
which outlines the Bureau's significant work between October 2018 and
March 2019, including rulemakings and supervisory and regulatory
activities.
The report also provides insight into what the CFPB plans to
undertake in the coming work period.
Since stepping into her role last December, Director Kraninger has
demonstrated a commitment to ensuring that consumers have access to a
wide range of financial products and services that meet their
individual needs, fostering innovation and vigorously protecting
consumers.
Reflecting this commitment to the CFPB's mission, Director
Kraninger conducted an extensive cross-country listening tour with the
full spectrum of CFPB stakeholders during her first months on the job.
Director Kraninger's conversations with consumers, industry, and
fellow Federal and State regulators have improved CFPB engagement,
informed their supervision and regulatory processes, and improved
agency transparency.
In the Semiannual Report, Director Kraninger also highlighted that
the CFPB has taken steps to ``[strengthen] the consumer marketplace by
providing financial institutions clear `rules of the road' that allow
them to offer consumers a range of high-quality, innovative financial
services and products.''
On September 10, the CFPB issued three new policies to promote
innovation and reduce regulatory uncertainty. Those policies include
the Trial Disclosure Program Policy; the Compliance Assistance Sandbox
Policy; and the No-Action Letter Policy.
Each of these policies are intended to contribute to an environment
that allows innovation to flourish safely, and ensure that consumer
needs are met in increasingly efficient and effective ways.
Earlier this year, the CFPB announced a proposal to update the
mandatory underwriting provisions of its 2017 Small Dollar Lending
rule.
Updating this rule is an important step toward ensuring the
availability of credit that is essential to so many consumers who
struggle to access or qualify for other options, and basing rules on
solid evidence and legal support.
As the CFPB continues to move forward on this rulemaking process, I
encourage the CFPB to coordinate with the other financial regulators on
an approach to small dollar lending to create a consistent framework
across all institutions in order to promote and expand small dollar
lending and credit options.
In July, the CFPB released an advance notice of proposed rulemaking
seeking stakeholder comment on potential amendments to its Ability to
Repay/Qualified Mortgage (ATR/QM) Rule.
FHFA Director Calabria and CFPB Director Kraninger noted the QM
patch ``exacerbates an unlevel playing field'' and that ``Fannie and
Freddie should play by the same rules as everyone else.''
The CFPB's actions are a positive step and I continue to encourage
the Bureau's efforts to find a permanent solution to the Qualified
Mortgage standard that provides certainty to consumers, lenders, and
investors alike.
Last week, the CFPB announced the formation of a task force that
will be devoted to examining ways to modernize and harmonize Federal
consumer financial laws, especially those pertaining to consumer
credit.
The Banking Committee has spent significant time this Congress
evaluating how the Fair Credit Reporting Act, or FCRA, should operate
in an increasingly digital economy, and whether certain data brokers
and other firms serve a function similar to the original consumer
reporting agencies.
I look forward to reviewing the CFPB's Task force on Federal
Consumer Financial Law's recommendations on how to update the FCRA so
that it continues to function as originally intended in a digital
world.
Though I am greatly encouraged by many of the changes and
initiatives at the CFPB under Director Kraninger's leadership, it
remains clear that the fundamental structure of the CFPB must be
reconsidered to make it more transparent and accountable.
I continue to support transitioning the CFPB to a bipartisan
commission from a single director; subjecting the CFPB to
appropriations; and providing a safety and soundness check for the
prudential regulators.
On September 17, 2019, the CFPB and the Department of Justice filed
a brief in the U.S. Supreme Court, urging the Court in the case of
Seila Law LLC v. CFPB to review the constitutionality of the Bureau's
leadership structure.
I have long argued that the CFPB's current structure lacks
sufficient accountability, and look forward to the Supreme Court taking
up a review of this case.
During this hearing, I look forward to hearing more about key
initiatives at the CFPB in the last year; Director Kraninger's
priorities for the CFPB in the upcoming work period; and additional
legislative or regulatory opportunities to provide widespread access to
financial products and services.
Director Kraninger, thank you again for joining the Committee this
morning to discuss the CFPB's activities and plans.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR SHERROD BROWN
Thank you, Chairman Crapo.
We created the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau to stand up for
students, servicemembers, and other hardworking Americans and protect
them from big banks and crooked corporations that rob them of their
homes and their jobs and their savings.
After 10 months on the job, it's clear why President Trump selected
you to head the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau--because he can
count on you to protect Wall Street banks, payday lenders, shady debt
collectors, and other companies that prey on hardworking Americans.
Under your and President Trump's leadership, this agency has chosen
corporations over workers over and over again.
Since you took over, you and your appointees have overruled the
recommendations of consumer experts and allowed crooked companies to
lie, cheat, and steal from hardworking Americans--and get away with it.
The Consumer Protection Bureau is supposed to protect consumers--
that's your entire job. To protect consumers from predatory payday
loans that lead to endless cycles of debt.
But you instead chose to protect the interests of President Trump
and his payday lending patrons.
Consumers are paying the price. Since August, when the payday loan
rule was scheduled to go into effect, Americans have paid more than one
billion dollars in fees to payday loan sharks. That's a billion dollars
out of the pockets of consumers because the agency that was supposed to
look out for them decided to look out for payday lenders instead.
You also could have protected servicemembers and their families.
But instead the Trump administration betrayed them when you stopped
making sure companies followed the protections for servicemembers and
their families.
You also could've continued and even strengthened the Bureau's
enforcement of fair lending laws that returned hundreds of millions of
dollars to victims of discrimination in the agency's first 7 years.
Instead, you continued President Trump's attacks on fair lending
laws. In fact, instead of protecting consumers:
You dismantled the Bureau's Office of Fair Lending.
You put a Trump political appointee with a history of
racist and sexist writings in charge of fair lending.
And you are now trying to repeal a 2015 rule that required
lenders to report basic loan information to ensure they are not
discriminating.
And what are the results?
Since you took over, the Bureau has not brought a single case
against a company for discriminatory lending practices. Last I checked,
discrimination hasn't ended in this country over the past 11 months.
Under the Trump administration, you've also turned your back on
student loan borrowers.
The Bureau could have helped protect the 44 million Americans with
student loans from the widespread mistakes, errors, and mismanagement
by the companies that handle their loans, and that have cost them
thousands of dollars.
But again, you betrayed the people the president promised to look
out for. You sided with Education Secretary DeVos and refused to
examine Federal student loan servicers to make sure they're not
cheating people with student loans.
The GAO and the Department of Education's Inspector General
reported that the company that manages Federal student loans wrongly
denied tens of thousands of teachers, nurses, firefighters,
servicemembers, and other dedicated public servants the loan
forgiveness they earned.
You've protected the companies, while these hardworking American
families paid the price.
But I suppose we should expect nothing less from an Administration
that looks like a Wall Street executive retreat.
Under your leadership, crooked corporations have no real incentive
to follow the law. Even if they get caught, they know that the Bureau
will hit them with nothing more than a slap on the wrist for ripping
off consumers.
Director Kraninger, how do you explain to these hardworking
Americans why the Bureau isn't protecting them? You can't.
You've done the role asked of you by President Trump--you have
protected corporations, not workers and consumers.
And it's indefensible. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF KATHY KRANINGER
Director, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
October 17, 2019
Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and distinguished Members of
the Committee thank you for the opportunity to present the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau's most recent Semiannual Report to
Congress.
The Bureau presents these Semiannual Reports to Congress and the
American people in fulfillment of its statutory responsibility and
commitment to accountability and transparency. The Bureau's Spring 2019
(October 1, 2018, to March 31, 2019) Semiannual Report meets this
mandate. My testimony is intended to highlight the contents of this
Semiannual Report (Report).
1. Significant problems faced by consumers in shopping for or obtaining
consumer financial products or services
In each Report, the Bureau identifies relevant trends affecting
consumers shopping for, or obtaining consumer financial products or
services. In this Report, the Bureau highlights three trends detailed
in two Quarterly Consumer Credit Trends (qCCT) reports and a Research
Brief.
First--Natural disasters can result in substantial property
destruction and personal injury, and tragically, loss of life. They can
also result in negative shocks to household finances, including lost
income and major unexpected expenses. \1\ Many financial institutions
offer financial relief or assistance that often includes payment relief
for customers affected by natural disasters. The qCCT report about
Natural Disasters and Credit Reporting documents current practices for
natural disaster reporting as reflected by comment codes entered in
credit records.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ One recent study of the economic effects of natural disasters
on consumers and households estimates that checking account inflows
fall by 20 percent and outflows fall by more than 30 percent after a
natural disaster. See JPMorgan Chase & Co. Institute (2018),
``Weathering the Storm: The Financial Impacts of Hurricanes Harvey and
Irma on One Million Households''. Available at https://
institute.jpmorganchase.com/institute/research/cities-local-
communities/report-weathering-the-storm. Another study finds a general
increase in consumers' credit utilization after an event and, for some
groups, an increase in bankruptcies. See Tran, B., and T. Sheldon
(2018), ``Same Storm, Different Disasters: Consumer Credit Access,
Income Inequality, and Natural Disaster Recovery''. Available at
https://www.aeaweb.org/conference/2018/preliminary/paper/KaN3Ar6t.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau recognizes the serious impact major disasters or
emergencies have on consumers and the operations of many supervised
entities. Existing laws and regulations provide supervised entities
regulatory flexibility to take certain actions that can benefit
consumers in communities under stress and hasten recovery. The Bureau
will also consider the impact of major disasters or emergencies on
supervised entities themselves when conducting supervisory activities.
In September 2018, the Bureau issued its ``Statement on Supervisory
Practices Regarding Financial Institutions and Consumers Affected by a
Major Disaster or Emergency''. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/bcfp_statement-
on-supervisory-practices_disaster-emergency.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau currently also produces a significant range of
educational material on the financial aspects of preparing for a
disaster. For example, the Bureau recently worked with the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to develop a disaster checklist to
help consumers prepare for a natural disaster. This material is made
available to the public both in print and online.
Second--Understanding Servicemembers options in obtaining a
mortgage is important in determining how the Bureau can best support
Servicemembers and veterans. Servicemembers have a range of options for
obtaining a mortgage. The qCCT report about Mortgages to First-time
Homebuying Servicemembers discusses how loan choices for first-time
homebuyers have evolved from 2006 to 2016. This report shows that
Servicemembers' reliance on VA loans for first time homebuying
increased from 2006 to 2016. The Bureau is also focused on supporting
Servicemembers in the mortgage loan process.
The Bureau's Buying a House tool is a useful guide in helping
Servicemembers and veterans become aware of how to navigate the path to
achieving home ownership.
Third--Bureau research has consistently demonstrated that having
control of personal finances is an important element in financial well-
being. Our Research Brief Consumer Insights on Paying Bills looks at
common challenges related to bill payment. The Brief outlines a range
of steps that consumers can consider to enhance timely debt servicing
and maximize their cash flow.
The Bureau's approach to consumer protection includes five
principles \3\ for effective financial education, and the steps
discussed in this Research Brief flow from the principle of helping
consumers make good decisions and to follow through. This review is
illustrative of the proactive approach we intend to continue in order
to foster the financial well-being of American consumers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/blog/effective-
financial-education-five-principles-and-how-use-them/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Justification of the budget request of the previous year
The Bureau is funded principally by transfers from the Federal
Reserve System, up to the limits set forth in Section 1017 of the Dodd-
Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-
Frank Act) (12 U.S.C. 5497). As of March 31, 2019, the Bureau had
received two transfers for Fiscal Year (FY) 2019 in the amounts of
$172.9 million (October 1, 2018) and $122.8 million (January 2, 2019)
for a total of $295.7 million. Additional information about the
Bureau's finances, including information about the Bureau's Civil
Penalty Fund and the Bureau-Administered Redress programs is, available
in the annual financial reports and the Chief Financial Officer (CFO)
quarterly updates, published online at www.consumerfinance.gov. Copies
of the Bureau's quarterly funds transfer requests are also available
online.
As of March 31, 2019, the end of the second quarter of FY2019, the
Bureau had spent approximately $281.9 million in 2019 funds to carry
out the authorities of the Bureau under Federal financial consumer law.
This includes commitments, obligations, and expenditures. A commitment
is a reservation of funds in anticipation of a future obligation. The
Bureau spent approximately $154.9 million on employee compensation for
the 1,452 employees on board at the end of the second quarter.
3. Significant rules and orders adopted by the Bureau, as well as other
significant initiatives conducted by the Bureau, during the
preceding year and the plan of the Bureau for rules, orders, or
other initiatives to be undertaken during the upcoming period
\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Separate from the Bureau's obligation to include in this
report ``a list of the significant rules and orders adopted by the
Bureau . . . during the preceding year'' 12 U.S.C. 5496(c)(3), the
Bureau is required to ``conduct an assessment of each significant rule
or order adopted by the Bureau'' under Federal consumer financial law
and issue a report of such assessment ``not later than 5 years after
the effective date of the subject rule or order,'' 12 U.S.C. 5512(d).
The Bureau will issue separate notices, as appropriate, for each rule
and order that qualify as significant for assessment purposes; these
notices will seek information required by statute and other information
to assist the Bureau in the assessment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.1--Significant rules: \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ The statutory requirement under 1016(c)(3) calls for the
Bureau to report a list of the significant rules and orders adopted by
the Bureau. This list includes significant notices of proposed
rulemakings.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau did not adopt significant final rules or orders during
the preceding year. The Bureau issued two significant notices of
proposed rulemaking:
Payday, Vehicle Title, and Certain High-Cost Installment
Loans \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/policy-compliance/rulemaking/
rules-under-development/payday-vehicle-title-and-certain-high-cost-
installment-loans/
Payday, Vehicle Title, and Certain High-Cost Installment
Loans; Delay of Compliance Date \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/policy-compliance/rulemaking/
final-rules/payday-vehicle-title-and-certain-high-cost-installment-
loans-delay-compliance-date-correcting-amendments/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.2--Less significant rules: \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ This list includes less significant rules, and it is not
comprehensive. This list may exclude nonmajor rules, proposed rules,
procedural rules, and other miscellaneous routine rules such as annual
threshold adjustments. More information about the Bureau's rulemaking
activities is available in the Unified Agenda at https://
www.reginfo.gov/public/, and on the Bureau's public website at https://
www.consumerfinance.gov/policy-compliance/rulemaking/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Final Rule: Federal Mortgage Disclosure Requirements under
the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) (Regulation Z) \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/policy-compliance/rulemaking/
final-rules/federal-mortgage-disclosure-requirements-under-truth-
lending-act-regulation-z/
Final Rule: Amendment to the Annual Privacy Notice
Requirement Under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (Regulation P)
\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/policy-compliance/rulemaking/
final-rules/amendment-annual-privacy-notice-requirement-under-gramm-
leach-bliley-act/
Final Rule: Partial Exemptions from the Requirements of the
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act under the Economic Growth,
Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (Regulation C)
\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/policy-compliance/rulemaking/
final-rules/partial-exemptions-from-requirements-of-home-mortgage-
disclosure-act-under-regulation-c/
Final Rule: Summaries of Rights under the Fair Credit
Reporting Act (Regulation V) \12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/policy-compliance/rulemaking/
final-rules/summaries-rights-under-fair-credit-reporting-act-
regulation-v/
Final Rule: Home Mortgage Disclosure (Regulation C)
Adjustment to Asset-Size Exemption Threshold \13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/policy-compliance/rulemaking/
final-rules/home-mortgage-disclosure-regulation-c-adjustment-asset-
size-exemption-threshold/
Final Rule: Truth in Lending Act (Regulation Z) Adjustment
to Asset-Size Exemption Threshold \14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/policy-compliance/rulemaking/
final-rules/truth-lending-act-regulation-z-adjustment-asset-size-
exemption-threshold/
Final Rule: Civil Penalty Inflation Adjustments \15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/policy-compliance/rulemaking/
final-rules/civil-penalty-inflation-annual-adjustments/
Final Rule: Technical Specifications for Submissions to the
Prepaid Account Agreements Database \16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/policy-compliance/rulemaking/
final-rules/technical-specifications-submissions-prepaid-account-
agreements-database/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.3--Significant initiatives:
Final Policy Guidance: Disclosure of Loan-Level Home
Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) Data \17\ (December 2018)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/documents/7051/HMDA-
Disclosure-FPG-Final-12.21.2018-for-website-with-date.pdf
Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking: Residential Property
Assessed Clean Energy \18\ (March 2019)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/policy-compliance/notice-
opportunities-comment/archive-closed/advance-notice-proposed-
rulemaking-residential-property-assessed-clean-energy-financing/
Assessments of Significant Rules pursuant to Section
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1022(d) of the Dodd-Frank Act
Remittance Rule assessment report \19\ (October 2018)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/documents/7561/bcfp-
remittance-rule-assessment-report-corrected-2019-03.pdf
Ability to Repay and Qualified Mortgage Rule assessment
report \20\ (January 2019)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb-ability-
to-repay-qualified-mortgage-assessment-report.pdf
2013 Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA)
Mortgage Servicing Rule assessment report \21\ (January 2019)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb-mortgage-
servicing-rule-assessment-report.pdf
Trial Disclosure Proposed Policy \22\ (September 2018)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/policy-compliance/notice-
opportunities-comment/archive-closed/policy-encourage-trial-disclosure-
programs/
No-Action Letters and Product Sandbox Proposed Policies
\23\ (December 2018)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/policy-compliance/notice-
opportunities-comment/archive-closed/policy-no-action-letters-and-bcfp-
product-sandbox/
Start Small, Save Up Initiative \24\ (February 2019)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/start-small-save-up/
Suspicious Activity Reports on Elder Financial Exploitation
\25\ (February 2019)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/data-research/research-
reports/suspicious-activity-reports-elder-financial-exploitation-
issues-and-trends/
Classroom Activities for Teaching the Building Blocks of
Financial Capability \26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/practitioner-resources/youth-
financial-education/teach/activities/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Consumer Education (Ask CFPB) Milestones
Your Money, Your Goals (financial empowerment tools and
resources)
Memorandum of Understanding with the Federal Trade
Commission \27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb-ftc-memo-
of-understanding-2019-02.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Director's Listening Tour (December 2018-March 2019)
CFPB Advisory Committees Enhancements
Guidance Documents \28\ (bulletins and guidance documents
in the last year)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ The Bureau posts many documents relating to compliance and
guidance on its website at https://www.consumerfinance.gov/policy-
compliance/guidance/.
Summer 2018 Supervisory Highlights \29\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ https://consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/bcfp-supervisory-
highlights-issue-17-2018-09.pdf
Winter 2019 Supervisory Highlights \30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb-
supervisory-highlights-issue-18-032019.pdf
Bulletin 2018-01: Changes to Types of Supervisory
Communications \31\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/bcfp--bulletin-
2018-01-changes-to-supervisory-communications.pdf
Statement on Supervisory Practices regarding Financial
Institutions and Consumers Affected by a Major Disaster or
Emergency \32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/bcfp-statement-
on-supervisory-practices-disaster-emergency.pdf
Interagency Statement Clarifying the Role of Supervisory
Guidance \33\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/interagency-
statement-role-of-supervisory-guidance.pdf
Prepaid Account Examination Procedures \34\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb-
supervision-and-examination-manual-prepaid-account-exam-procedures.pdf
Short-Term, Small-Dollar Lending Examination Procedures
\35\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb-payday-
manual-revisions.pdf
TILA Examination Procedures \36\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb-
supervision-and-examination-manual-tila-exam-procedures-2019-03.pdf
Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA) Examination
Procedures \37\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb-
supervision-and-examination-manual-efta-exam-procedures-incl-
remittances-2019-03.pdf
CFPB Supervision and Examination Process \38\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\38\ https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb-
examination-process-section.pdf
Examination Report Template \39\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb-
examination-report-template.pdf
Supervisory Letter Template \40\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\40\ https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb-
supervision-and-examination-manual-supervisory-letter-template.pdf
Examination Scope Summary Template \41\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\41\ https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/201703-cfpb-
Scope-Summary-Template.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.4--Plan for upcoming initiatives:
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act Data Release \42\ (August
2019)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\42\ Additional activity has occurred with this matter since the
end of this reporting period. On August 30, 2019, the Bureau released
the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data along with two Data Point
articles. One Data Point article is the second in an annual series of
Bureau articles describing mortgage market activity over time. It
summarizes the historical data points in the 2018 HMDA data, as well as
recent trends in mortgage and housing markets. The other Data Point
article introduces the new and revised data points in the 2018 HMDA
data and provides some initial observations about the Nation's mortgage
market in 2018 based on those new or revised data points. More
information can be found here: https://www.consumerfinance.gov/data-
research/research-reports/data-point-2018-mortgage-market-activity-and-
trends/ and https://www.consumerfinance.gov/data-research/research-
reports/introducing-new-revised-data-points-hmda/.
Credit Card Market Report \43\ (August 2019)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\43\ Additional activity has occurred with this matter since the
end of this reporting period. More information can be found here:
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb-consumer-credit-
card-market-report-2019.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Start Small, Save Up Initiative (ongoing)
Consumer Complaint Database \44\ (ongoing)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\44\ Additional activity has occurred with this matter since the
end of this reporting period. More information can be found here:
https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom/director-kraningers-
speech-national-consumer-empowerment-conference/.
Misadventures in Money Management (MiMM) for Active Duty
Servicemembers \45\ (ongoing)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\45\ Additional activity has occurred with this matter since the
end of this reporting period. Misadventures in Money Management (MiMM)
became available for all active duty Servicemembers on May 23, 2019.
Savings Booklet \46\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\46\ Additional activity has occurred with this matter since the
end of this reporting period. More information can be found here:
https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/blog/start-saving-today-our-
new-savings-booklet-and-email-boot-camp/.
Director Stakeholder Engagement \47\ (ongoing)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\47\ More than 700 meetings with consumers, staff, and
stakeholders have occurred. Remarks provided to the Bipartisan Policy
Center, Washington, DC, on April 17, 2019, are provided through this
link: https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom/kathleen-
kraninger-director-consumer-financial-protection-bureau-bipartisan-
policy-center-speech/ and https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/
newsroom/kathleen-kraninger-director-consumer-financial-protection-
bureau-bipartisan-policy-center-speech/.
Bureau Symposia Series \48\ (ongoing)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\48\ Additional activity has occurred with this matter since the
end of this reporting period. More information can be found here:
https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom/bureau-announces-
symposia-series/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Guidance Documents (ongoing)
Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) Baseline Review
Examination Procedures \49\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\49\ Additional activity has occurred with this matter since the
end of this reporting period. More information can be found here:
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb-supervision-and-
examination-manual-ecoa-baseline-exam-procedures-2019-04.pdf.
HMDA Examination Procedures \50\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\50\ Additional activity has occurred with this matter since the
end of this reporting period. More information can be found here:
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb-supervision-and-
examination-manual-hmda-exam-procedures-2019-04.pdf.
Statement on Collection of Demographic Information by
Community Development Financial Institutions \51\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\51\ Additional activity has occurred with this matter since the
end of this reporting period. More information can be found here:
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/20190627-cfpb-statement-
on-collection-demographic-information.pdf.
Automobile Finance Examination Procedures \52\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\52\ Additional activity has occurred with this matter since the
end of this reporting period. More information can be found here:
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/201908-cfpb-automobile-
finance-examination-procedures.pdf.
Summer 2019 Supervisory Highlights \53\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\53\ Additional activity has occurred with this matter since the
end of this reporting period. More information can be found here:
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb-supervisory-
highlights-issue-19-092019.pdf.
Annual Report to Congress on TILA, the Electronic Fund
Transfer Act (EFTA), and the Credit Card Accountability
Responsibility and Disclosure (CARD Act) \54\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\54\ In production at the time of publishing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.5--Plan for upcoming rules:
The Bureau published its Spring 2019 Rulemaking Agenda as part of
the Spring 2019 Unified Agenda of Federal Regulatory and Deregulatory
Actions, which is coordinated by the Office of Management and Budget.
\55\ As an independent regulatory agency, the Bureau voluntarily
participates in the Unified Agenda. The Unified Agenda lists the
regulatory matters that the Bureau reasonably anticipates having under
consideration during the period from May 1, 2019, to April 30, 2020.
\56\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\55\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/blog/spring-2019-
rulemaking-agenda/
\56\ https://www.reginfo.gov/public/do/
eAgendaMain?operation=OPERATION-GET-AGENCY-RULE-
LIST&currentPub=true&showStage=active&agencyCd=3170
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau is considering further prioritization and planning of
the Bureau's rulemaking activities, both with regard to substantive
projects and modifications to the processes that the Bureau uses to
develop and review regulations. The Bureau expects the Fall 2019 Agenda
to issue a more comprehensive statement of priorities to reflect
ongoing statutorily mandated market monitoring and the Bureau's other
activities discussed in the Report.
During the reporting period, the Bureau was engaged in a number of
rulemakings to implement directives mandated in the Economic Growth,
Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act of 2018 (EGRRCPA), the
Dodd-Frank Act, and other statutes. As part of these rulemakings, the
Bureau is working to achieve the consumer protection objectives of the
statutes while minimizing regulatory burden on financial services
providers, including through facilitating industry compliance with
rules.
Prerulemaking initiatives, as reflected in the Bureau's Spring 2019
Unified Agenda:
Equal Credit Opportunity Act (Regulation B) Business
Lending Data Collection and Reporting Requirements
Remittance Transfers \57\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\57\ Additional activity has occurred with this matter since the
end of this reporting period. In April, the Bureau issued a Request for
Information (RFI) on the Remittance Rule seeking comments on measures
to consider adopting to address the expiration in July 2020 of the
Rule's temporary exception. More information can be found here: https:/
/www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom/cfpb-issues-request-
information-remittance-rule/.
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (Regulation C) Data Collection
and Reporting Requirements \58\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\58\ Additional activity has occurred with this matter since the
end of this reporting period. In May 2019, the Bureau issued an Advance
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) that solicits comments about the
costs and benefits of collecting and reporting the data points the 2015
HMDA Rule added to Regulation C and certain preexisting data points
that the 2015 HMDA Rule revised. In June, the Bureau extended the
comment period. More information can be found here: https://
www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom/bureau-proposes-changes-hmda-
rules/ and https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom/bureau-
extends-comment-period-anpr-hmda-data-points/.
Proposed rules for the upcoming period, as reflected in the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bureau's Spring 2019 Unified Agenda:
Debt Collection Rule \59\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\59\ Additional activity has occurred with this matter since the
end of this reporting period. In May 2019, the Bureau issued a Notice
of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) to address such issues as communication
practices and consumer disclosures. More information can be found here:
https://www.consumerfinance.gov/policy-compliance/rulemaking/rules-
under-development/debt-collection-practices-regulation-f/. Additional
Note: The NPRM provided a 90-day comment period that was set to close
on August 19, 2019. To allow interested persons more time to consider
and submit their comments, the Bureau determined that an extension of
the comment period until September 18, 2019, was appropriate.
Home Mortgage Disclosure Rule (Regulation C) \60\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\60\ Additional activity has occurred with this matter since the
end of this reporting period. In May 2019, the Bureau issued a Notice
of Proposed Rulemaking to increase the thresholds for reporting data
about closed-end mortgage loans and open-end lines of credit. More
information can be found here: https://www.consumerfinance.gov/policy-
compliance/rulemaking/rules-under-development/home-mortgage-disclosure-
regulation-c/.
Public Release of Home Mortgage Disclosure Act Data \61\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\61\ Policy guidance was issued in December 2018. The Bureau
announced in that guidance its intention to conduct a notice-and-
comment rulemaking to seek input on the public release of data going
forward; that proposal has not yet been issued.
Final rules for the upcoming period as reflected in the Bureau's
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Spring 2019 Unified Agenda:
Payday, Vehicle Title, and Certain High-Cost Installment
Loans; Delay of Compliance Date \62\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\62\ Additional activity has occurred with this matter since the
end of this reporting period. https://www.consumerfinance.gov/policy-
compliance/rulemaking/final-rules/payday-vehicle-title-and-certain-
high-cost-installment-loans-delay-compliance-date-correcting-
amendments/.
The Expedited Funds Availability Act (Regulation CC) (EFA
Act) \63\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\63\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom/agencies-
issue-final-amendments-regulation-cc-regarding-funds-availability/.
This Rule was finalized after the reporting period (June 2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. Analysis of complaints about consumer financial products or services
that the Bureau has received and collected in its central
database on complaints during the preceding year
The Bureau's Office of Consumer Response analyzes consumer
complaints, company responses, and consumer feedback to assess the
accuracy, completeness, and timeliness of company responses. The Bureau
uses insights gathered from complaint data to scope and prioritize
examinations and ask targeted questions when examining companies'
records and practices to help understand problems consumers are
experiencing in the marketplace, to provide access to information about
financial topics and opportunities to build skills in money management
that can help consumers avoid future problems, and to inform
enforcement investigations to help stop unfair, deceptive, or abusive
practices.
During the period April 1, 2018, through March 31, 2019, the Bureau
received approximately 321,200 consumer complaints. \64\ This was an
approximate 2 percent decrease from the prior reporting period. \65\
Consumers submitted approximately 82 percent of these complaints
through the Bureau's website and 5 percent via telephone calls.
Referrals from other State and Federal agencies accounted for 8 percent
of complaints. Consumers submitted the remainder of complaints by mail,
email, and fax. The Bureau does not verify all of the facts alleged in
complaints but takes steps to confirm a commercial relationship between
the consumer and the company. During this time period the Bureau sent
approximately 257,300 (or 80 percent) of complaints received to
companies for review and response. \66\ Companies responded to
approximately 95 percent of complaints that the Bureau sent to them for
response during the period. The remaining complaints were either
pending response from the company at the end of the period or did not
receive a response.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\64\ All data are current through March 31, 2019. This analysis
excludes multiple complaints submitted by a given consumer on the same
issue and whistleblower tips. The Bureau does not verify all the facts
alleged in complaints, but takes steps to confirm a commercial
relationship between the consumer and the company. For more information
on our complaint process, please refer to the Bureau's website, https:/
/www.consumerfinance.gov/complaint/process.
\65\ The prior reporting period--which spanned October 1, 2017, to
September 30, 2018--reported 329,000 consumer complaints. See Consumer
Fin. Prot. Bureau, ``Semiannual Report Fall 2018'' (Feb. 2019),
available at https://www.consumerfinance.gov/documents/7266/cfpb-semi-
annual-report-to-congress-fall-2018.pdf.
\66\ The Bureau referred 14 percent of the complaints it received
to other regulatory agencies and found 4 percent to be incomplete. At
the end of this period, 0.5 percent of complaints were pending with the
consumer and 0.6 percent were pending with the Bureau. Note:
Percentages in this section of the report may not sum to 100 percent
due to rounding.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau also publishes the Consumer Response Annual Report, \67\
which provides a more detailed analysis of complaints. A detailed chart
breaking down the complaints received by type is included in that
Report, along with a discussion about how we use and apply the data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\67\ These reports can be viewed at: https://
www.consumerfinance.gov/data-research/research-reports/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
5. Public supervisory and enforcement actions to which the Bureau was a
party during the preceding year
The Bureau's supervisory activities with respect to individual
institutions are nonpublic. The Bureau has, however, issued numerous
supervisory guidance documents and bulletins as described in the
Report.
The Report also outlines a range of public enforcement actions from
April 1, 2018, through March 31, 2019, detailed in descending
chronological order by filing or issue date. This section also
identifies those actions involving Office of Administrative
Adjudication Orders with respect to covered persons that are not credit
unions or depository institutions.
6. Actions taken regarding rules, orders, and supervisory actions with
respect to covered persons which are not credit unions or
depository institutions
The Bureau's Supervisory Highlights publications provide general
information about the Bureau's supervisory activities at banks and
nonbanks without identifying specific companies. Between April 1, 2018,
and March 31, 2019, the Bureau published two issues of Supervisory
Highlights. All public enforcement actions are listed in Section 5.2 of
the Report, and actions taken with respect to covered persons which are
not credit unions or depository institutions are noted with the summary
of the action.
7. Assessment of significant actions by State attorneys general or
State regulators relating to Federal consumer financial law
For purposes of Dodd-Frank Section 1016(c)(7) reporting
requirement, the Bureau has determined that any actions asserting
claims pursuant to Section 1042 of the Dodd-Frank Act are
``significant.'' The Bureau is unaware of any State actions asserting
Dodd-Frank Act claims that were initiated during the April 1, 2018,
through March 31, 2019, reporting period.
8. Analysis of the efforts of the Bureau to fulfill the fair lending
mission of the Bureau
The Report provides an update on the Bureau's work to fulfill
requirements mandated by the Dodd-Frank Act related to fair lending,
noting highlights from the Bureau's fair lending enforcement \68\ and
rulemaking \69\ activities from April 1, 2018, through March 31, 2019.
We continued our efforts to fulfill the fair lending mission of the
Bureau through supervision, interagency coordination, and outreach in
the period October 1, 2018, through March 31, 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\68\ Dodd-Frank Act 1016(c)(5).
\69\ Dodd-Frank 1016(c)(3). The Bureau's fair lending rulemaking
activity pertaining to HMDA and Regulation C is discussed in Section 3
of the Report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.1--Fair lending supervision:
The Bureau's Fair Lending Supervision program assesses compliance
with Federal fair lending consumer financial laws and regulations at
banks and nonbanks over which the Bureau has supervisory authority. As
a result of the Bureau's efforts to fulfill its fair lending mission in
this reporting period, the Bureau's Fair Lending Supervision program
initiated 10 supervisory events at financial institutions under the
Bureau's jurisdiction to determine compliance with Federal laws
intended to ensure the fair, equitable, and nondiscriminatory access to
credit for both individuals and communities, including the ECOA and
HMDA. For exam reports issued by Supervision during the reporting
period, the most frequently cited violations were:
Section 1003.4(a): Failure by a financial institution to
collect and accurately report data regarding applications for
covered loans that it receives, originates, or purchases in a
calendar year, or, failure to collect and accurately report
data regarding certain requests under a preapproval program in
a calendar year; and
Section 1002.12(b)(1)(i): Failure to create and preserve
records and other documents required by the regulation.
In the current reporting period, the Bureau initiated 10
supervisory events, which is fewer than the 13 fair lending supervisory
events reported as initiated during the reporting period reflected in
the ``Fall 2018 Semiannual Report''. \70\ In the current reporting
period, the Bureau issued fewer matters requiring attention (MRAs) or
memoranda of understanding (MOUs) than in the prior period. MRAs and
MOUs direct entities to take corrective actions and are monitored by
the Bureau through follow-up supervisory events. Consistent with BCFP
Bulletin 2018-01, \71\ the Bureau issues Supervisory Recommendations
(SRs) to address supervisory concerns related to financial
institutions' compliance management systems. SRs do not include
provisions for periodic reporting nor expected timelines for
implementation. During the current reporting period, the Bureau
provided SRs relating to supervisory concerns related to weak or
nonexistent fair lending risk assessments and/or fair lending training.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\70\ The Bureau is using a new measure to identify the number of
on-site supervision exams or reviews. See Fiscal Year (FY) 2019 Annual
Performance Plan (February 2019). The ``Spring 2019 Semiannual Report''
update complies with this new measure. Therefore, the number of
initiated examination events reported here is not comparable to the
number of events reported in the Fall 2018 Semiannual Report. For
comparison purposes, had the Bureau employed this new measure for
initiated supervisory exams for the reporting period reflected in the
Fall 2018 Semiannual Report, which indicated that the Bureau initiated
13 fair lending supervisory events, would instead have indicated that
the Bureau had initiated 12 fair lending supervisory events.
\71\ https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/bcfp-bulletin-
2018-01-changes-to-supervisory-communications.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.2--Fair lending enforcement: \72\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\72\ Section 1016(c)(5) of the Dodd-Frank Act requires the Bureau
to include in the semiannual report public enforcement actions the
Bureau was a party to during the preceding year, which is April 1,
2018, through March 31, 2019, for this report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau has the statutory authority to bring actions to enforce
the requirements of HMDA and ECOA. In this regard, the Bureau has the
authority to engage in research, conduct investigations, file
administrative complaints, hold hearings, and adjudicate claims through
the Bureau's administrative enforcement process. The Bureau also has
independent litigating authority and can file cases in Federal court
alleging violations of fair lending laws under the Bureau's
jurisdiction. Like other Federal bank regulators, the Bureau is
required to refer matters to the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) when
it has reason to believe that a creditor has engaged in a pattern or
practice of lending discrimination. \73\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\73\ See 15 U.S.C. 1691e(h) and 15 U.S.C 1691e(g) and (h).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
During the reporting period, the Bureau did not initiate or
complete any fair lending public enforcement actions. In addition,
during this reporting period, \74\ the Bureau did not refer any matters
to the DOJ with regard to discrimination pursuant to Section 706(g) of
ECOA. During the reporting period, the Bureau continued to implement
and oversee compliance with the pending public enforcement orders that
were entered by Federal courts or issued by the Bureau's Director in
prior years.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\74\ April 1, 2018, through March 31, 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.3--Fair lending outreach:
The Bureau is committed to hearing from and communicating directly
with stakeholders. The Bureau regularly engages in outreach with Bureau
stakeholders, including consumer advocates, civil rights organizations,
industry, academia, and other Government agencies, to: (1) educate them
about fair lending compliance and access to credit issues, and (2) hear
their views on the Bureau's work to inform the Bureau's policy
decisions. Outreach is accomplished through meetings and the delivery
of speeches and presentations addressing fair lending and access to
credit issues as well as issuance of Reports to Congress, Interagency
Statements, Supervisory Highlights, Compliance Bulletins, letters and
blog posts, as well as through meetings and the delivery of speeches
and presentations addressing fair lending and access to credit issues.
During the reporting period, Bureau staff participated in twenty-one
(21) outreach events involving fair lending and access to credit
issues.
8.4--Fair lending coordination:
The Bureau's fair lending activity involves regular coordination
with other Federal and State regulatory and enforcement partners.
During the reporting period, Office of Fair Lending and Equal
Opportunity (OFLEO) staff continued to lead the Bureau's fair lending
interagency coordination and collaboration efforts by working with
partners on the Interagency Working Group on Fair Lending Enforcement,
and chairing the Interagency Task Force on Fair Lending and the Federal
Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) HMDA Data Collection
Subcommittee.
9. Analysis of the efforts of the Bureau to increase workforce and
contracting diversity consistent with the procedures
established by the Office of Minority and Women Inclusion
(OMWI)
The Bureau issued the Annual Report of OMWI activities on April 3,
2019. \75\ Throughout the reporting period the Bureau continued
executing on objectives and strategies outlined in the Bureau of
Consumer Financial Protection Strategic Plan FY2018-2022, \76\ which
complements and reinforces the Diversity and Inclusion Strategic Plan
2016-2020. The Bureau began developing a Diversity and Inclusion
Strategic Plan Update in March, which was published in July. \77\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\75\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/data-research/research-
reports/fy-2018-office-minority-and-women-inclusion-annual-report-
congress/
\76\ www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/budget-strategy/strategic-
plan
\77\ Additional activity has occurred with this matter since the
end of this reporting period. More information can be found here:
https://www.consumerfinance.gov/data-research/research-reports/cfpb-
diversity-and-inclusion-strategic-plan-update-2019-2022/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As of March 2019, an analysis of the Bureau's current workforce
reveals the following key points:
Women represent 49 percent of the Bureau's 2019 workforce
with no change from 2018;
Minorities (Hispanic, Black, Asian, Native Hawaiian/Other
Pacific Islander (NH/OPI), American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/
AN) and employees of two or more races) represent 40 percent of
the Bureau workforce in 2019 with no change from 2018; and
As of March 31, 2019, 12.7 percent of Bureau employees on
permanent appointments identified as an individual with a
disability. Out of the permanent workforce, 3.4 percent of
employees identified as an individual with a targeted
disability. As a result, the Bureau continues to exceed the 12
percent workforce goals for employees with disabilities and 2.0
percent for employees with targeted disabilities--in both
salary categories, as required in the EEOC's Section 501
regulations.
The Bureau seeks to increase diversity through efforts in
recruiting and workforce engagement. During the reporting period, the
Bureau was under a hiring freeze. \78\ However, the Bureau onboarded
nine (9) hiring exceptions, including six (6) women and four (4)
minorities. The Bureau also utilized the student volunteer internship
program, other professional development programs, and recruitment
efforts directed to reach veterans and applicants with disabilities. To
promote an inclusive work environment, the Bureau focuses on strong
engagement with employees and utilizes an integrated approach to
education, training, and engagement programs that ensures diversity and
inclusion from nondiscrimination concepts are part of the learning
curriculum and work environment. Employee resource groups, cultural
education programs, and diversity and inclusion training are key
components of this effort.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\78\ Additional activity has occurred with this matter since the
end of this reporting period. The hiring freeze was lifted in August
2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau's Diversity and Inclusion Strategic Plan describes our
efforts to increase contracting opportunities for diverse businesses
including Minority-owned and Women-Owned Businesses (MWOBs). The
Bureau's OMWI and Procurement offices collectively work to increase
opportunities for participation by MWOBs. These efforts include
actively engaging Bureau business units with MWOB contractors
throughout the acquisition cycle, developing a ``How To Do Business
with the CFPB'' series and a supplier diversity guide. These resources
are available on the Bureau's website.
Additionally, in the reporting period, the Bureau participated in
four (4) national supplier diversity conferences that help to foster
business partnerships between the Federal Government, its U.S. prime
contractors, minority-owned businesses, and advocacy for women business
owners and entrepreneurs. As a result of these efforts, 36.7 percent of
the $49 million in contracts that the Bureau awarded or obligated
during the reporting period went to MWOBs. In accordance with the
mandates in Section 342(c)(2) OMWI has developed Good Faith Effort
(GFE) standards for the collection and assessment of documentation of
contractor's workforce and subcontractor diversity practices. These
standards were updated in FY2019 to better align with Federal
Acquisition Regulations. The GFE clause has been included in all CFPB
contracts since FY2018.
Legislative Reform
In the invitation letter to testify before the House Financial
Services Committee, the Committee requested that I identify any
legislative reforms needed to better protect consumers. I know that
Servicemembers and military families matter greatly to all of you just
as they do to me. Earlier this year, the Bureau requested that Congress
provide us with clear legal authority to supervise financial
institutions for MLA compliance, and we transmitted proposed
legislative language that would achieve this goal. I stand ready to
work with Members of this Committee to provide us with this authority
to assist the Bureau's ongoing efforts to prevent harm to our
servicemembers and their families.
Task Force on Federal Consumer Financial Law
Last week the Bureau announced the will establish a task force to
examine ways to harmonize and modernize Federal consumer financial
laws. The Task Force on Federal Consumer Financial Law will produce new
research and legal analysis of consumer financial laws in the United
States, focusing specifically on harmonizing, modernizing, and updating
the enumerated consumer credit laws--and their implementing
regulations--and identifying gaps in knowledge that should be addressed
through research, ways to improve consumer understanding of markets and
products, and potential conflicts or inconsistencies in existing
regulations and guidance. I believe that a logical and important part
of the Bureau's maturation is to evaluate how best to harmonize these
laws to ensure their efficient operation for the benefit of consumers.
The Bureau is currently accepting applications from individuals who are
interested in serving on the task force. The members will have a broad
range of expertise in the areas of consumer protection and consumer
financial products or services; significant expertise in analyzing
consumer financial markets, laws, and regulations; and a demonstrated
record of senior public or academic service.
Conclusion
Since my confirmation, I have met with more than 800 stakeholders
in the realm of consumer protection. This outreach is exceptionally
valuable in building productive relationships and to hear the fullest
possible range of insight and perspective. Building on my March
testimony, I remain committed to strengthening the Bureau's ability to
use all of the tools provided by Congress to protect consumers.
Factoring in all of the input and counsel that I have received, I
remain resolved that the most productive use of Bureau resources is to
be focused on preventing harm to consumers. Empowering consumers to
protect and further their own interests must be at the core of our
mission. I have established and communicated clear priorities to Bureau
staff for our work using the authorities provided by Congress. The
Bureau's mission is to ensure access to fair, transparent, and
competitive markets for consumers. We will work to execute this mandate
through: (1) providing ``clear rules of the road'' to make clear what
is lawful and unlawful behavior; and, (2) using supervision to foster a
``culture of compliance'' and as an opportunity to prevent violations:
(3) vigorous enforcement; and (4) robust education efforts that empower
consumers to make the best possible financial decisions.
Thank you again for the opportunity to present this Semiannual
Report of the Bureau's work in support of American consumers.
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR BROWN
FROM KATHY KRANINGER
Q.1. During the October 17, 2019, hearing, Director Kraninger
testified that the Bureau is in the process of attempting to
reestablish the Memorandum of Understanding with the Department
of Education. Please provide the following information:
When did the Bureau send the Department a draft MOU?
A.1. On October 15, 2019, the Bureau sent the Department of
Education a copy of a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
intended to ensure coordination in providing assistance to
borrowers seeking to resolve student loan complaints. The
Department of Education responded and discussions are ongoing.
Q.2. Has the Department responded to the Bureau's draft MOU,
and if so, on what date?
A.2. On October 15, 2019, the Bureau sent to the Department of
Education a copy of a MOU intended to ensure coordination in
providing assistance to borrowers seeking to resolve student
loan complaints. The Department of Education responded and
discussions are ongoing.
Q.3. What is the expected timeline to finalize the MOU?
A.3. On October 15, 2019, the Bureau sent to the Department of
Education a copy of a MOU intended to ensure coordination in
providing assistance to borrowers seeking to resolve student
loan complaints. The Department of Education responded and
discussions are ongoing. The Bureau hopes to reach an agreement
as soon as possible.
Q.4. In December 2017, the Department issued guidance
prohibiting Federal student loan servicers from providing
access to student borrower loan information, including to the
Bureau and State regulators. In your April 2019 letter, you
stated that, because the Department had cut off access to this
information, the Bureau had not conducted full, complete
examinations of Federal student loan servicers, including of
the Public Service Loan Forgiveness (PSLF) program. Please
provide the following information:
What is the most recent date that the Bureau conducted a
full, complete examination of a Federal student loan servicer?
A.4. Since December 2017, student loan servicers have declined
to produce information requested by the Bureau for supervisory
examinations related to Direct Loans and Federal Family
Education Loan Program (FFELP) loans held by the Department of
Education based on the Department of Education's guidance.
Additional information responsive to this request is
Confidential Supervisory Information.
Q.5. What is the most recent date of the Bureau's full,
complete examination of a Federal student loan servicer's
management of the PSLF program?
A.5. See response above. To be clear, the Bureau examines
Federal student loan servicers for compliance with Federal
consumer financial laws pursuant to its regulation on larger
participants in the student loan servicer market.
Q.6. What steps has the Bureau has taken to regain access from
the Department to student borrower information necessary for
the Bureau to conduct examinations of Federal student loan
servicers? Please include in your response a description of any
letters you have sent, the dates of those letters, and your
expectation if, or when, the Bureau expects to regain access to
this information. Please also provide any responses from the
Department to letters sent by the Bureau.
A.6. The Bureau is engaged in discussions with the Department
of Education to reestablish a MOU regarding supervision of
student loan servicing, and those discussions are ongoing.
Q.7. Explain the legal reason why the Bureau has not requested
to lift the stay and implement the payment provisions of the
2017 Payday, Vehicle Title, and Certain High-Cost Installment
Loans (Payday Rule) in Consumer Financial Services Association
of America v. CFPB, Case No. 1: 18-cv-295 (W.D. TX). In your
August 19, 2019, letter, you explained that the Bureau has not
lifted the stay because of a separate challenge to the CFPB's
constitutionality in CFPB v. All American Check Cashing, Inc.,
which was pending a decision before the Fifth Circuit. That is
a separate case, however, and does not require the Bureau to
stay the payment provisions of the Payday Rule. Please provide
answers to the following requests:
Is the Bureau legally required to stay the CFSA action in
the Western District of Texas, or could the Bureau seek to lift
the stay but is choosing not to? Please provide legal authority
to support your response.
A.7. The Bureau is considering its options and has stated its
position in public filings to the Court. The Bureau generally
does not comment on ongoing litigation beyond what the Bureau
states in its court filings.
Q.8. Identify each Bureau case that is currently in litigation,
including the court in which the case is pending, and whether
the case is stayed because of a constitutional challenge to the
Bureau.
A.8. Community Financial Services Association of America v.
CFPB, No. 1:18-cv-295 (W.D. Tex.), is the only case against the
Bureau currently in litigation in which the plaintiff has
raised a constitutional challenge to the Bureau. That case is
currently stayed. In other cases against the Bureau, the
plaintiffs have not raised a constitutional challenge. There
are also cases currently in litigation in which the Bureau is
the plaintiff. These include enforcement actions and petitions
to enforce civil investigative demands. In some cases where the
defendants have raised the constitutional argument, the court
has stayed the litigation. In other cases, litigation has not
been stayed. The Bureau's position on a stay in any given case
depends on the circumstances of that case.
The following list includes civil actions in which the
Bureau is a party (and, if it is party defendant, in which it
has been served) pending as of December 2, 2019. Cases which
have been stayed or otherwise delayed for reasons the Bureau
understands to be related to the Supreme Court's grant of
certiorari in Seila Law v. CFPB are noted with an asterisk.
CFPB v. Access Funding, LLC, No. 1-16-03759 (D. Md.)
*CFPB v. All American Check Cashing, Inc., No. 3:16-cv-356
(S.D. Miss.), stayed pending appeal \1\ on
constitutional issue, No. 18-60302 (5th Cir.), pet'n
for cert. filed, No. 19-431 (S. Ct.)
\1\ While this litigation is stayed in district court pending
appeal, appellate proceedings have not been stayed
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Allied Progress v. CFPB, No. 19-cv-582 (D.D.C.)
American Oversight v. CFPB et al., No. 1:19-cv-3435 (D.D.C.)
Baker v. CFPB, No. 18-cv-2403 (D.D.C.)
Burke et al. v. Ocwen Financial et al., No. 19-13015 (11th
Cir.)
California Reinvestment Coalition v. Kraninger, No. 4:19-cv-
02572 (N.D. Cal.)
*CFPB v. CashCall, Inc., Nos. 18-55407, 18-55479 (9th Cir.)
BCFP v. Center for Higher Excellence in Higher Education, No.
2:19-cv-877 (D. Utah)
BCFP v. Certified Forensic Loan Auditors, LLC, et al., No.
2:19-cv-07722 (C.D. Cal.)
CFPB v. Global Financial Support, Inc., No. 3:15-cv-2440 (S.D.
Cal.)
*Community Financial Services Association v. CFPB, No. 1:18-cv-
00295 (W.D. Tex.), stayed.
BCFP v. Consumer Advocacy Center, Inc., et al., No. 8:19-cv-
1998 (C.D. Cal.)
Democracy Forward Found. v. CFPB, No. 19-cv-1515 (D.D.C.)
Democracy Forward Found. v. CFPB, No. 19-cv-270 (D.D.C.)
Democracy Forward Found. v. CFPB, No. 19-cv-3370 (D.D.C.)
BCFP v. Fair Collections & Outsourcing, Inc., et al., No. 8:19-
cv-2817 (D. Md.)
*BCPF v. Forster & Garbus, LLP, No. 2:19-cv-2928 (E.D.N.Y.)
Frank, LLP v. CFPB, No. 19-cv-1197 (D.D.C.)
BCFP v. Future Income Payments, LLC, No. 6:19-cv-2950 (D.S.C.)
Jones v. Kraninger, 18-cv-2132 (D.D.C.)
CFPB v. Klopp, No. 18-1694 (4th Cir.)
Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law v. CFPB, No.
1:19-cv-1981 (D.D.C.)
BCFP v. Progrexion Marketing, No. 2:19-cv-00298 (D. Utah)
CFPB v. National Collegiate Student Loan Trust, et al., No.
1:17-cv-1323 (D. Del.)
CFPB v. Nationwide Biweekly Admin., Inc., Nos. 18-15431, 18-
15887 (9th Cir.)
CFPB v. Navient Corp., et al. No. 3:17-101 (M.D. Penn.)
CFPB v. Nexus Services, Inc., No. 17-2238 (D.D.C.)
CFPB v. Ocwen Financial Corp., No. 9:17-cv-80495 (S.D. Fla.)
BCFP v. Premier Student Loan Center, et al., No. 8:19-cv-01998
(C.D. Cal.)
*CFPB v. RD Legal Funding, No. 18-2743 (2d Cir.)
Seila Law LLC v. CFPB, No. 19-7 (S. Ct.)
Shepherd v. CFPB, No. 18-cv-2004 (D.D.C.)
BCFP v. Snyder, No. 6:19-cv-2794 (D.S.C.)
Student Debt Crisis v. CFPB, No. 2:19-cv-10048 (C.D. Cal.)
CFPB v. The Mortgage Law Group, LLP, et al., No. 14-cv-513
(W.D. Wis.)
CFPB v. Think Finance, No. 4:17-cv-127 (D. Mont.), stayed
pending related bankruptcy proceedings.
CFPB v. Universal Debt & Payment Solutions, LLC, et al., No.
1:15-cv-859 (N.D. Ga.)
Q.9. On October 11, 2019, the CFPB announced the formation of
the Task Force on Federal Consumer Financial Law.
How many members does the CFPB expect to include in the
task force?
A.9. The Taskforce will have approximately five members. The
Bureau is currently finalizing membership selection and the
number of members.
Q.10. What are the criteria for selection to the task force?
A.10. The Bureau plans to select members with demonstrated
records of both senior public service and expertise in consumer
finance, including: expertise in consumer protection and
consumer financial products or services, significant experience
researching and analyzing consumer financial markets, laws, and
regulations, record of senior public or academic service, and
recognition for professional achievements in economics,
econometrics, or law.
Q.11. What is the expected allocation of representatives from
consumer advocacy organizations, civil rights organizations,
academia, and industry?
A.11. The Bureau will be seeking to fill the Taskforce with
members possessing a broad range of expertise in the areas of
consumer protection and consumer financial products or
services, significant expertise in analyzing consumer financial
markets, laws, and regulations, and a demonstrated record of
senior public or academic service.
Q.12. The Bureau's investigation of Enova, an online payday
lender, found that the company had illegally withdrawn millions
of dollars from consumers' bank accounts. According to
documents that were recently made public:
Career staff in the Bureau's Office of Enforcement
recommended that the Bureau require Enova to refund to
consumers approximately $2.16 million that Enova had illegally
withdrawn from consumers' accounts. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See ``Settling for Nothing: How Kraninger's CFPB Leaves
Consumers High and Dry'', Report Prepared by Majority Staff of the
Committee on Financial Services, Oct. 2019, at 10-11, available at
https://financialservices.house.gov/uploadedfiles/cfpb-report-settling-
for-nothing.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
During settlement negotiations, Enova offered to provide
$1,367,567 in refunds to impacted consumers. \3\ Eric
Blankenstein, one of your political appointees, raised
questions about the legal basis for the Bureau to order Enova
to refund amounts it illegally withdrew back to consumers. \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Id. at 11.
\4\ Id. at 11-12.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In response, the Bureau's Legal Division researched the
matter and concluded in a 39-page memorandum that it would be
``legally appropriate'' to require Enova to refund consumers
the amounts debited from their accounts with their
authorization. \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Id. at 12-13.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Blankenstein directed Enforcement to not seek refunds
of the amounts illegally debited despite: (i) the Bureau's
Legal Divisions opinion that it would be ``legally
appropriate'' to seek this restitution; and (ii) Enova's offer
to pay $1,367,567 in restitution. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Id. at 13-15.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
You ratified Mr. Blankenstein's decision and on January 22,
2019, signed a consent order with Enova that lacked any redress
for consumers. \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Id. at 15.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In light of these facts, please respond to the following:
Enforcement and the Legal Division provided a legal basis
to support requiring Enova to refund amounts it had illegally
withdrawn from consumers' bank accounts. Please provide the
legal support, including case law or other legal precedent, to
support your decision to forego requiring Enova to provide
restitution (refund amounts it had illegally withdrawn from
consumers' bank accounts.).
A.12. The Bureau is committed to seeking all appropriate relief
for consumers and considers whether redress or restitution may
be appropriate in each case on the facts presented and in light
of applicable law. The Consumer Financial Protection Act
authorizes the Bureau to seek redress for consumers in
appropriate cases as a matter of discretion. Particularly in
the context of a negotiated settlement, the Bureau may choose
to pursue the relief it determines best serves the public
interest. In the Enova matter, the Bureau determined that the
appropriate resolution in light of the company's conduct
included imposition of a $3.2 million civil money penalty and
injunctive relief to benefit consumers.
Q.13. The Bureau's summary of the Enova case stated that the
Bureau decided not to pursue restitution for harmed consumers
because ``the amount of fees and penalties for each consumer
could not be calculated with certainty.'' Identify all case law
and other legal precedent, including all consent orders entered
into by the Bureau or FTC, that support this legal standard for
restitution.
A.13. See the response above.
Q.14. To the extent your decision was based on concerns that
consumers may have lawfully owed the amounts to Enova that were
illegally withdrawn from their accounts, did you consider
requiring Enova to refund the amounts it had illegally
withdrawn, but allowing Enova to then seek to collect any
amounts lawfully owed (as set forth in the Legal Division memo
and proposed by career staff in a prior enforcement action
against American Express)? \8\ Why did you not pursue this
alternative?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Id. at 13.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A.14. See the response above.
Q.15. Is it the CFPB's position under Director Kraninger that
companies do not have to provide restitution to consumers if
they violate the law and withdraw money from consumer's bank
accounts without their authorization if the consumer owes the
money?
A.15. As I have testified before Congress, under my leadership,
the Bureau will seek the appropriate relief based on the facts
and circumstances of each particular matter.
Q.16. On August 28, 2019, the Bureau announced a settlement
with Asset Recovery Associates (ARA) for violations of the
Consumer Financial Protection Act (CFPA) and Fair Debt
collection Practice Act (FDCPA). \9\ In the consent order, the
Bureau found that Asset Recovery Associates had regularly
engaged in unlawful debt collection practices, including
threatening consumers since at least January 1, 2015. \10\ Yet,
the Bureau decided to limit restitution to just $36,800 for
only those consumers who affirmatively complained about a false
threat or misrepresentation by Asset Recovery Associates. \11\
In your October 11, 2019, letter to me, you explained that
``the available evidence made it infeasible to determine the
complete set of consumers who received verbal false threats.''
Please provide the following information:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ See ``Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Settles With Asset
Recovery Associates'', news release, Aug. 28, 2019, available at
https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom/bureau-settles-asset-
recovery-associates/.
\10\ In the Matter of: Financial Credit Services, Inc., d/b/a
Asset Recovery Associates, File No. 2019-BCFP-009 (Aug. 28, 2019)
available at https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb-asset-
recovery-associates-consent-order-2019-08.pdf.
\11\ Id. 3.a.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
State the legal standard that the Bureau applied to
determine who would receive restitution (consumers who
complained) and the total amount of restitution.
Identify all case law and other legal precedent, including
all consent orders entered into by the Bureau or FTC, that
support the legal standard the Bureau applied for restitution.
Identify all case law and other legal precedent that
require the Bureau identify ``with certainty'' the impacted
consumers or calculate the amount of harm ``with certainty'' in
order to provide restitution to those consumers.
Explain why the Bureau chose not to attempt to establish
either a defendant-administered or Bureau-administered redress
process that could have been used to identify consumers harmed
by ARA's unlawful collection practices. \12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ In prior cases where the Bureau could not specifically
identify all harmed consumers, it established defendant-administered
and Bureau-administered redress processes to identify and compensate
harmed consumers. For example, in the Bureau's settlement with debt
relief provider Morgan Drexen, Inc., the Bureau affirmatively contacted
potential impacted consumers, set up a website, and established a
claims process for victims to receive compensation for their harm. See
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/201708-cfpb-morgan-
drexen-victim-compensation.pdf.
A.16. The Bureau weighs many factors to determine the precise
mix of restitution, penalties, and injunctive relief
appropriate in each case. Generally, when analyzing
remediation, the Bureau considers all relevant facts and
circumstances and seeks to make consumers whole for losses
caused by a party's illegal conduct. While the Bureau is
committed to seeking all appropriate relief for consumers, not
every case lends itself to restitution for all potentially
affected consumers, particularly in the context of a negotiated
settlement. Given the evidence available to identify consumers
who were subject to the verbal false threats, this resolution
reflects the Bureau's assessment of what is an appropriate
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
outcome under the circumstances and consistent with the law.
Q.17. In April, eight of my Senate colleagues and I wrote to
you about the termination of the Bureau's existing Home
Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) Explorer and associated Public
Data Platform Application Programming Interface (API) and the
transfer of these data display functions to a new platform on
the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC)
website. We are particularly concerned about the ability of
individuals and organizations without sophisticated software to
access and interpret HMDA data through the new portal. During a
staff briefing pursuant to that letter, CFPB staff indicated
that, based on their conversations in developing the new HMDA
disclosure tool, 80 percent of HMDA data users wanted to be
able to access data in Microsoft Excel format. While the
functions on the new HMDA data website have improved since its
launch, it remains impossible to download certain filtered data
in a usable Excel format, filtering functions remain limited,
and aggregate reports are no longer provided.
Please provide responses to the following:
What outreach has the Bureau done over the past 6 months to
consumer advocates and local organizations to receive feedback
on the new HMDA data tool?
A.17. The Bureau undertook efforts to engage with stakeholders
in Summer 2018 when staff conducted user research with nine
community groups to determine how HMDA data was being used and
whether HMDA aggregate and disclosure (A/D) reports were
useful. The results of this engagement created the key
requirements for changes to HMDA data publications in 2019, and
led to changes in A/D reports and the development of the HMDA
Data Browser. These organizations included the National
Community Reinvestment Coalition, Reinvestment Partners, Unidos
US, National Consumer Law Center, Empire Justice Center,
National Fair Housing Alliance, Association for Neighborhood
Housing Development, Woodstock Institute, and Chattanooga
Organized for Action.
As the HMDA Data Browser was being developed, structured
usability testing was conducted in July 2019 in order to test
designs and data outputs. The structured usability testing was
conducted with both internal and external users and allowed the
Bureau to learn about our end users' behavior, needs, and
expectations.
The following community groups participated in the user
testing sessions in July 2019: Association for Neighborhood and
Housing Development, Empire Justice Center, Woodstock
Institute, Illinois Peoples Action, National Community
Reinvestment Coalition, National Consumer Law Center, National
Fair Housing Alliance, Prosperity Now, and Unidos US.
Most recently, on November 6, 2019, Bureau staff held a
call with approximately 10 local community organizations, who
are members of the National Reinvestment Coalition (NCRC), to
discuss their concerns and to solicit feedback with the
availability of certain A/D reports. The feedback provided
during the Summer 2018 and 2019 and November 2019 engagements
provided important feedback to the Bureau for helping to
identify further refinements to HMDA usability.
Q.18. What feedback has the Bureau incorporated, and what
feedback has the CFPB been unable to incorporate?
A.18. User testing identified an opportunity to provide clearer
descriptions and instructions. Additionally, feedback revealed
participants wanted columns in the data to be reordered so that
similar data would be grouped together. Groups also requested
easy access to a data dictionary in order to better understand
the definitions of filters and individual data elements in the
CSV download. These features were all incorporated into the
released version of the HMDA Data Browser.
Comments from the user testing sessions not only informed
the current version of the HMDA Data Browser but also provided
us with a set of additional features that will be developed in
the future. This includes, but is not limited to, the ability
to filter by more than two variables and the addition of
predefined, presentation-ready visualizations based on common
queries.
Q.19. What updates does the Bureau intend to make in the coming
months that will make HMDA data more accessible for individuals
and small- and medium-sized organizations that depend on HMDA
data to analyze market access trends?
A.19. The HMDA Data Browser is being developed in an iterative
fashion. The Bureau will provide additional functionalities and
plans to gather user feedback and suggestions for improvements
to the HMDA Data Browser on a regular basis. In the next
updates to the HMDA Data Browser, the Bureau will provide the
ability to create custom tables and datasets on a particular
HMDA reporter and will allow for filtering the data by county,
in addition to current MSA and State filters. Before the end of
this year, the Bureau will also provide on the HMDA Platform
additional documentation for the HMDA Data Browser that will
assist users to isolate particular data within custom datasets
that the Browser produces. The Bureau will continue its
outreach to community groups to inform the development of
resources to aid users in obtaining the data they need via the
HMDA Data Browser.
Q.20. Has the Bureau conducted or received any additional
research as part of its decision to delay the implementation or
repeal certain portions of the Payday, Vehicle Title, and
Certain High-Cost Installment Loans? If so, please identify the
research, including the name of the researcher, and where the
research is available to the public.
A.20. The Bureau decided to delay the implementation date of
the mandatory underwriting provisions of the 2017 Payday,
Vehicle Title, and Certain High-Cost Installment Loans final
rule in order to allow the Bureau to consider whether to
rescind those provisions as the Bureau has proposed. The basis
for the delay is set out in the preamble to the Bureau's June
2019 rule, 84 FR 27907 (June 17, 2019). The Bureau is currently
considering approximately 190,000 comments regarding its
proposal to rescind the mandatory underwriting provisions. The
Bureau has made these comments available in the public
rulemaking docket at https://www.regulations.gov/
docketBrowser?rpp-25&so-DESC&sb-commentDueDate&po-0&D-CFPB-
2019-0006. As the Bureau stated in its June 2019 delay rule,
the Bureau remains open to the possibility that those comments
may reveal other data, research, or arguments to confirm or
refute the Bureau's proposed rescission of the mandatory
underwriting provisions.
Q.21. Director Kraninger completed the reorganization of the
Office of Fair Lending and Equal Opportunity that began under
Acting Director Mulvaney, which included stripping OFLEO of its
supervisory and enforcement authority. Under your and Mr.
Mulvaney's leadership, the Bureau has not brought a single
enforcement actions alleging violations of the Equal Credit
Opportunity Act (ECOA). Please provide responses to the
following:
How many enforcement investigations into potential
violations of ECOA did the Bureau open in 2018 and 2019?
A.21. The Bureau's specific supervisory and investigatory
enforcement activity is confidential. In 2018 and 2019, the
Bureau had a number of ongoing fair lending investigations of
institutions involving a variety of consumer financial
products. One key area on which the Bureau has focused its fair
lending enforcement efforts is addressing potential
discrimination in mortgage lending, including the unlawful
practice of redlining. At the end of Fiscal Year 2019, the
Bureau had a number of pending investigations in this and other
areas.
Q.22. Describe in detail the resources, if any, that the Bureau
has dedicated to the enforcement of fair lending laws.
A.22. The Office of Enforcement is responsible for the
enforcement of fair lending laws. As of September 2019,
Enforcement has an allotted headcount of 150 full time
employees. All Enforcement attorneys can participate in the
investigation of any potential violation of Federal consumer
financial law, including those focused on fair lending. The
resources the Office of Enforcement deploys on fair lending
matters is dependent on a number of factors, including the
facts and circumstances of particular investigations.
The Office of Supervision Examinations is responsible for
supervising entities for compliance with fair lending laws.
Every Bureau examiner is trained to conduct fair lending
examinations. During the course of a fair lending examination,
the assigned team of examiners reviews the institution's books
and records for compliance with fair lending laws using the
Bureau's fair lending examination procedures. In addition, the
Office of Supervision Examinations operates a National Fair
Lending Examination Team, which includes a representative from
each of the four regions, in addition to a senior examination
manager, who are fully dedicated to fair lending examination
work. This national team creates fair lending job aids and
serves as an expert resource on fair lending matters for
examiners across the country as they engage in fair lending
work. The Office of Supervision Policy's fair lending team
currently includes five attorneys and two analysts who are
devoted to fair lending supervision matters.
Q.23. Describe the Bureau's fair lending goals, how it intends
to achieve those goals, and how it will measure success.
A.23. The Bureau is committed to fair lending and will continue
to vigorously enforce fair lending laws within our
jurisdiction. By utilizing the tools of education, regulation,
supervision, and enforcement, the Bureau can focus on
preventing harm to consumers, which includes protecting
consumers from unfair, deceptive, and abusive acts or practices
as well as from discrimination. The Bureau's purpose is to
ensure all consumers have access to consumer financial products
and we will continue that purpose while exploring ways to
increase access to credit for all, especially those in the
unbanked and underbanked communities.
Q.24. The Bureau's proposed rule to implement the Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act (FDCPA) would allow debt collectors to
send unlimited text messages to consumers. But as the Bureau
recognizes, millions of consumers do not have unlimited text
messaging plans and would incur a charge for text messages from
debt collectors. \13\ The Bureau also recognizes that
``receiving a text message from a debt collector may be similar
to accepting a collect call from a debt collector,'' which is
expressly prohibited by the Section 808(5) of the FDCPA. Please
provide answers to the following:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ See Notice of Proposed Rulemaking at 114 and at n. 255,
available at https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb-debt-
collection-NPRM.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Has the Bureau conducted a cost-benefit analysis to
quantify the amount of potential charges to consumers text
messages from consumers? If so, please provide the results of
that analysis.
A.24. The Bureau's proposed debt collection rule does not allow
for unlimited text messaging. Since 1977, the FDCPA has
prohibited debt collectors from engaging in harassment, abuse,
and unfair practices regardless of method of communication,
including text messages. Debt collectors would continue to be
prohibited from engaging in such conduct if the proposed rule
were made final. In particular, even though the proposed rule
does not include a specific limit on the number of texts a debt
collector could send, if the rule were adopted a debt collector
who sends too many texts would still violate the FDCPA.
Further, the proposed rule would give consumers the power to
stop future texts or emails as soon as they receive the first
message. The proposed rule sought comment on the issue of text
messages, and the Bureau is carefully reviewing and considering
all comments.
The Bureau is not aware of representative data that could
be used to quantify the amount of potential charges to
consumers who receive text messages from debt collectors,
either today or under the proposed rule. As part of the process
of seeking public comment on the proposed rule, the Bureau
asked for data or studies that could help quantify the costs
and benefits to consumers of the proposed rule's provisions,
including those related to communication attempts, but did not
receive representative data that could quantify costs to
consumers from receiving text messages. While the absence of
representative data means that the Bureau is not currently able
to quantify potential costs to consumers, the Bureau notes that
under the proposal these costs would be limited in part by
consumers exercising their option under the proposal to opt out
of text messages if they do not wish to receive them because
they would incur a charge to receive them.
Q.25. Did the Bureau consider whether consumers could opt-in to
receiving text messages so that, among other things, they could
avoid text messaging charges? If it did, please explain why the
Bureau did not include it in the proposed rule.
A.25. The FDCPA does not explicitly prohibit debt collectors
from sending text messages to consumers, nor does it require
consumers to opt-in to such communications. Consequently, debt
collectors may currently be sending text messages to consumers
without offering them any opportunity to opt-out. In contrast,
proposed 1006.6(e) would require debt collectors to notify
consumers how to opt out of receiving electronic debt
collection communications or communication attempts directed at
a specific email address, telephone number for text messages,
or other electronic-medium address. This proposal would enhance
the ability of consumers to not receive electronic debt
collection communications, for example, if they believe they
receive too many such communications or if they are incurring
charges from them.
Proposed 1006.6(e) also would require a debt collector who
communicates or attempts to communicate with a consumer
electronically in connection with the collection of a debt
using a specific email address, telephone number for text
messages, or other electronic-medium address to include in each
such communication or attempt to communicate a clear and
conspicuous statement describing one or more ways the consumer
can opt out of further electronic communications or attempts to
communicate by the debt collector to that address or telephone
number. Proposed 1006.6(e) also would prohibit a debt
collector from requiring, directly or indirectly, that the
consumer, in order to opt out, pay any fee or provide any
information other than the email address, telephone number for
text messages, or other electronic-medium address subject to
the opt-out. The proposed rule sought comment on issues related
to text messages and the Bureau is carefully reviewing and
considering all comments.
Q.26. The Bureau's proposed FDCPA rule would allow debt
collectors to send consumers emails or direct messages that
contain hyperlinks with required disclosures under Section
1692g(a). But the FTC has spent years educating consumers about
the dangers of clicking on links from unfamiliar sources
because they can lead to phishing attacks or malware downloaded
onto consumers' computers or devices. \14\ The FBI's Internet
Crime Complaint Center reported that consumers lost $30 million
to phishing schemes in a year. \15\ Please providing the
answers to the following:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ See, e.g., https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/articles/how-
recognize-and-avoid-phishing-scams.
\15\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Did the Bureau conduct or receive any studies or analyses
to determine whether the proposed rule would increase the
incidents of phishing or other attacks by consumers clicking on
harmful hyperlinks? If so, please provide the studies and
analyses.
A.26. The Bureau is aware of concerns about consumers accessing
disclosures through hyperlinks; the proposed rule states that
``[f]ederal agencies have advised consumers against clicking on
hyperlinks provided by unfamiliar senders'' and cites to two
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) articles and a Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation (FDIC) publication on this topic. \16\
Because of these concerns, proposed 1006.42(c)(2)(ii) and
1006.42(d) describe consumer notice-and-opt-out processes meant
to ensure that, before a debt collector sends a required
disclosure by hyperlink, the consumer expects to receive it and
does not object to such receipt. By helping the consumer
identify the sender in advance, a notice-and-opt-out process
may also reduce the risk that the consumer will treat an email
containing a hyperlink as spam.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Debt Collection Practices (Regulation F), 84 FR 23274, 23363
(May 21, 2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau is not aware of representative data that could
be used to predict how the proposed rule's provisions related
to providing disclosures via an emailed hyperlink would affect
incidents of phishing.
Q.27. Given the FTC's warnings on the dangers of clicking on
hyperlinks, did the Bureau conduct or receive any studies or
analyses to determine whether consumers would not click on
hyperlinks and therefore not receive the required disclosures
with information on consumers' rights? If so, please provide
the studies and analyses.
A.27. The Bureau is not aware of representative data that could
be used to predict whether or how often consumers would not
click on hyperlinks provided by debt collectors pursuant to the
proposal, or how this would compare with whether or how often
consumers receive required disclosures delivered by other
means. The Bureau has been conducting survey research on debt
collection disclosures, and as part of that research asked
respondents how willing they would be to receive a notice from
a debt collector that was delivered by hyperlink. The Bureau is
in the process of analyzing the data from the survey.
The Bureau is aware of concerns about consumers accessing
disclosures through hyperlinks; the NPRM states that
``[f]ederal agencies have advised consumers against clicking on
hyperlinks provided by unfamiliar senders'' and cites to two
FTC articles and an FDIC publication on this topic. \17\
Because of these concerns, proposed 1006.42(c)(2)(ii) and
1006.42(d) describe consumer notice-and-opt-out processes meant
to ensure that, before a debt collector sends a required
disclosure by hyperlink, the consumer expects to receive it and
does not object to such receipt. By helping the consumer
identify the sender in advance, a notice-and-opt-out process
may also reduce the risk that the consumer will treat an email
containing a hyperlink as spam. The Bureau requested comment on
the use of hyperlinks to deliver disclosures and is reviewing
those comments now. The Bureau will continue to consider
feedback and other information in reviewing the proposed rule's
interventions as it moves forward towards a final rule.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Debt Collection Practices (Regulation F), 84 FR 23274, 23363
(May 21, 2019).
Q.28. Did the Bureau consult with or seek input from the FTC on
the proposal to allow debt collectors to deliver access to
disclosures through hyperlinks? If so, please describe in
detail which Bureau staff consulted with the FTC, with whom
they consulted at the FTC, the dates of such consultation(s),
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
and all feedback from the FTC.
A.28. The Bureau conducted interagency consultations with
relevant Federal agencies, including the FTC, in advance of
releasing the debt collection NPRM. Those interagency
consultations included a discussion of electronic delivery of
required notices. As part of these consultations, the Bureau
received questions and feedback from the FTC on a variety of
topics covered by the NPRM. FTC staff also filed a comment
letter in response to the Bureau's NPRM.
Q.29. The Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals recently ruled that
a debt collector had failed to comply with the FDCPA by sending
emails with links to disclosures required under Section
1692g(a) of the FDCPA. \18\ The court concluded that the emails
did not `` `contain' the statutorily mandated disclosures.
Section 1692g(a). At most the emails provide a means to access
the disclosures via a multistep online process.'' \19\ Based on
this ruling by the Seventh Circuit, has the Bureau reconsidered
whether to permit debt collectors to deliver required
disclosures through hyperlinks?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Lavallee v. Med-1 Solutions, LLC, 932 F.3d 1049 (7th Cir.
2019).
\19\ Id. at 1050.
A.29. The Bureau is closely following case law related to
topics covered by the proposed debt collection rule. The Bureau
is also in the process of reviewing the many public comments
received on the proposed debt collection rule. The Bureau will
continue to consider feedback and other information in
reviewing the proposed rule's interventions as it moves forward
towards a final rule.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR TOOMEY
FROM KATHY KRANINGER
Q.1. Because of the unique legal status of tribes, there
appears to be a frustrating lack of clarity regarding what
constitutes a legitimate tribal lending entity. Bad actors
could seek to exploit this regulatory uncertainty to take
advantage of consumers. Good actors could remain on the
sideline, denying consumers access to credit. What steps have
you taken or are you considering taking to provide clear rules
of the road to tribal lenders?
A.1. The Bureau has not issued any guidance on this topic but
is sensitive to the concerns you are raising and will continue
to consider input from relevant stakeholders on the subject.
The Bureau has investigated tribally affiliated lending
entities in the past and will continue to do so. A few years
ago, the Ninth Circuit held, in the context of a CID
enforcement action, ``that the Consumer Financial Protection
Act, a law of general applicability, applies to tribal
businesses.'' Consumer Fin. Prot. Bureau v. Great Plains
Lending, LLC, 846 F.3d 1049, 1054 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, 138
S. Ct. 555, 199 L. Ed. 2d 436 (2017). In our opposition to the
petition for certiorari the Bureau (through DOJ) maintained our
position that the CFPA applies to tribally owned lenders.
Accordingly, we expect all lenders, including tribally
affiliated lenders to comply with Federal consumer financial
law.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR SCOTT
FROM KATHY KRANINGER
Q.1. On March 12, 2019, when directly asked whether you view
the CFPB as an agency with regulatory authority over insurance
products, Director Kraninger, you testified that ``no, [ . . .
] I do not. Dodd-Frank stipulated in Title X that we [the CFPB]
do not regulate State-regulated insurance.''
Given your testimony and your position that the CFPB has
statutorily limited responsibilities in this space, can the
CFPB explain how it handles the receipt and referral of
consumer complaints received regarding insurance related
products. The CFPB ``Consumer Complaints Database'' contains a
number of consumer complaints that include the term
``insurance.'' As of October 17, 2019, the term ``insurance''
is referenced 22,026 times across the spectrum of complaints
received since the database was established on June 19, 2012
(reflecting an over 1.5 percent share of total complaints).
Specific insurance products are referenced 6,237 times, such as
``life insurance,'' ``credit insurance,'' and various
iterations of homeowners insurance.
Acknowledging that the Bureau may be perceived to have a
jurisdictional nexus on some of these circumstances by the
consumer, with regard to the business of insurance as it
applies to these complaints, how are such complaints handled
and how are consumers notified to file their compliant with a
State insurance regulator? Furthermore, is it the CFPB's
position that it has taken the necessary steps to notify
consumers seeking to file a complaint that the agency has
limited jurisdiction on matters related to the business of
insurance?
A.1. The Bureau's complaint submission process is designed to
centralize the collection of, monitoring, and response to
complaints about consumer financial products and services. \1\
The Bureau's complaint process is not designed to collect
complaints about insurance products and services and it does
not send complaints to bona fide insurance companies for
response. A keyword search of the public, Consumer Complaint
Database for terms related to insurance will return complaints
that the Bureau has sent to financial companies for response,
such as complaints about a mortgage servicer's handling of a
consumer's escrow account or a title insurance agent's handling
of a real estate loan closing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act
of 2010, Pub. L. No. 111-203 (Dodd-Frank Act), Section 1013(b)(3)(A).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
When consumers submit complaints online or over the phone,
the Bureau asks them to identify the consumer financial product
or service with which they have a problem, the type of problem
they are having with that product or service, and the company
about which they are submitting the complaint. This submission
process does not provide consumers with options to submit
complaints about a bona fide insurance company. In 2018, more
than 86 percent of the complaints submitted to the Bureau were
submitted by consumers through the Bureau's website (81.5
percent) and by calling the Bureau's toll-free telephone number
(4.9 percent). If consumers call with questions about insurance
companies or attempt to submit a complaint about an insurance
company over the phone, the Bureau's contact center agents
direct consumers to contact their State insurance commissioner.
The Bureau also receives complaints through referral from the
White House, congressional offices, other Federal and State
agencies (8.1 percent), mail (3.5 percent), fax (1.9 percent),
and email (< 0.1 percent). In the rare instances that the
Bureau receives a complaint about an insurance company through
one of these channels, the Bureau notifies the consumer that it
cannot process the complaint and that the Bureau has added the
complaint to the Consumer Sentinel Network, a secure online
database operated by the Federal Trade Commission for civil and
criminal law enforcement authorities.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR MORAN
FROM KATHY KRANINGER
Q.1. The CFPB is in the midst of sorting through the 12,000
plus comments submitted on the proposed debt collection rule.
There are some concerns by banks that they might be
inadvertently (and inappropriately) subject to the rule due to
UDAAP commentary in the proposal. Can you confirm whether the
rule will explicitly only be for third party debt collection,
and not apply to first party lenders, as the Bureau has
previously indicated?
A.1. The proposed rule applies only to ``debt collectors'' as
defined in the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (FDCPA).
FDCPA section 803(6)'s definition of debt collector does not
typically cover creditors who are engaged in their own
collections. The Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) defines
the term ``debt collector'' by restating FDCPA section 803(6)'s
definition. Consistent with this definition, the preamble to
the proposed rule states repeatedly that the rule would cover
only debt collectors as defined in the FDCPA. Note that the
question as to creditor coverage often arises in connection
with the proposed call caps in the NPRM. The NPRM's preamble
focuses on consumers' experiences with, and complaints about,
telephone calls from FDCPA-covered debt collectors.
Many industry stakeholders have requested increased
clarification surrounding the potential application of the
proposed rule or the reasoning in it (especially its
application of UDAAP principles) to creditor collections.
Creditors in collections may have different incentives than
debt collectors in collection because concerns about
reputational harm may be more of a constraint on the conduct of
creditors, a key consideration underlying Congress' decision
not to include creditor collections within the FDCPA. Moreover,
there may be other facts and circumstances that would warrant
different treatment of creditors and debt collectors when
engaged in collections. The Bureau is carefully considering the
request for clarification that creditor collections are not
covered by any final debt collection rule it issues.
Q.2. Bankers across the country have indicated that supervision
and enforcement teams are ``pushing the envelope'' by exceeding
their mandates, making onerous information requests and
creating their own policy determinations.
At financial institutions, the importance of CEOs setting
the appropriate ``tone from the top'' is often stressed. How is
the Bureau doing so? How is the message delivered and carried
through to the field offices and representatives executing the
exams and enforcement activity?
A.2. As Director, I establish the tone and expect my leadership
team to communicate that tone and my priorities to staff
whenever addressing examiners, supervision staff, and
enforcement staff. Specifically, the tone is set by:
the Director,
the Deputy Director,
the Supervision, Enforcement, and Fair Lending
Associate Director,
the Supervision Assistant Directors, and
the Assistant Director of Enforcement.
The Bureau senior executives convey their intent, goals,
and strategy during regular scheduled meetings and calls, as
well as semiannual conferences with the examiners and staff.
Enforcement also has a Policies and Procedures Manual that is
periodically updated and that sets forth guidance and policies
that govern Enforcement's work. I believe in being visible and
accessible as a leader and including staff interactions in my
travels, walks around headquarters, and open-door office hours.
Q.3. Since there are various regional offices throughout the
country, how do you create consistency to ensure all
institutions are subject to the same interpretations of the
rules and compliance standards and, in turn, consumers have the
same equal consumer protections?
A.3. Supervision senior leaders (including regional directors)
meet monthly in person and weekly via teleconference to discuss
Bureau goals and strategies. Moreover, the Bureau's examination
process is generally centralized. All examination reports and
citations of violations are reviewed by attorneys at our
headquarters to ensure the law is applied and interpreted
consistently across institutions.
Enforcement also has staff across the regional offices. All
Enforcement staff coordinate their work through headquarters in
Enforcement and all Enforcement staff are subject to
Enforcement's Policies and Procedures Manual.
Q.4. The CFPB held a symposium on the ``abusive'' prong of
UDAAP this past summer. The ambiguity that currently exists
creates difficulties and harms for lenders and consumers by
deterring new/beneficial offerings and features. Does the
Bureau plan to define abusive or issue any guidance in this
area?
A.4. Although Congress provided some indication of the meaning
of abusiveness through a definition in the Dodd-Frank Wall
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act),
abusiveness does not have the long and rich history of
unfairness or deception. Substantial concerns have been raised
about the uncertain and indeterminate meaning of abusiveness
under the Dodd-Frank Act, including during the Bureau's June
2019 symposium. The Federal Trade Commission has used its
authority under the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) Act to
address unfair and deceptive acts or practices for over 80
years, and the prudential regulators have also enforced this
prohibition since before the Bureau's existence. Ultimately
this uncertainty is not beneficial to the marketplace:
businesses that want to comply with the law face great
challenges in doing so and these challenges can impose large
costs, including impeding innovation. And consumers ultimately
may lose the benefits of improved products and lower prices if
lack of clarity imposes such costs.
During our symposium, we heard considerable feedback to
help inform the Bureau's path forward regarding the myriad of
complex considerations. The Bureau has a responsibility to
provide greater clarity on how it plans to implement or apply
this standard. At the same time, the Bureau recognizes the need
for the jurisprudential environment to build the common law
around abusiveness. We are looking to do both with a concrete
step in the near future.
Q.5. In your testimony, you stated: ``The Bureau's fair lending
activity involves regular coordination with other Federal and
State regulatory and enforcement partners. During the reporting
period, Office of Fair Lending and Equal Opportunity (OFLEO)
staff continued to lead the Bureau's fair lending interagency
coordination and collaboration efforts by working with partners
on the Interagency Working Group on Fair Lending Enforcement,
and chairing the Interagency Task Force on Fair Lending and the
Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) HMDA
Data Collection Subcommittee.'' Depending upon the financial
sector being evaluated for bad actors, in some cases it seems
that the Bureau appears to be inserting itself in areas where
the FTC, OCC, and FDIC have primary jurisdiction but are still
pursuing enforcement actions.
Can you explain the clear lines of policy, regulatory, and
oversight demarcation where the Bureau and these agencies
differ? Furthermore, please explain which agencies have the
lead in monitoring, oversight and enforcement over such
financial institutions such as community banks, etc.
A.5. The Bureau, the prudential regulators, and the FTC have
separate, distinct, and independent statutory mandates. The
Bureau has exclusive authority to supervise certain
nondepository institutions engaged in certain product markets
to assure compliance with Federal consumer financial law. \1\
While the Bureau's authority to enforce the Federal consumer
financial law with respect to such institutions is generally
exclusive, the Bureau shares authority with the FTC and is
required to (and does) coordinate with the FTC on such matters.
\2\ Pursuant to that statutory requirement, the Bureau recently
renegotiated its coordination MOU with the FTC. Additionally,
the Bureau works closely with State regulators to coordinate
and reduce burden.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 12 U.S.C. 5514(d).
\2\ 12 U.S.C. 5514(c).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With respect to insured banks and credit unions with more
than $10,000,000,000 in total assets, the Bureau has exclusive
supervisory authority to assess their compliance with Federal
consumer financial laws, obtain information about their
activities subject to such laws and associated compliance
systems or procedures, and detect and assess associated risks
to consumers and markets for consumer financial products and
services. \3\ To ensure consistency and minimize regulatory
burden, we coordinate our supervisory activities with the
prudential regulators. Moreover, to the extent the Bureau and
another Federal agency are authorized to enforce a Federal
consumer financial law against such a bank or credit union, the
Bureau has primary enforcement authority. \4\ Similarly, the
Bureau also works closely with State regulators to coordinate
and reduce burden.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ 12 U.S.C. 5515(b)(1).
\4\ 12 U.S.C. 5515(c).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau generally lacks supervisory and enforcement
authority over insured banks and credit unions with
$10,000,000,000 or less in total assets. Instead, the
prudential regulators, and not the Bureau, would have the
relevant supervisory and enforcement authority over these
smaller banks and credit unions.
In keeping with statutory requirements that the Bureau
coordinate with the prudential regulators, the Bureau works
with the Federal prudential regulators on examination planning
and policy considerations, as outlined in a May 2012
interagency MOU. We also meet with the prudential regulators
periodically to coordinate supervisory and other activities.
Bureau supervisory staff and the Federal prudential regulators
also confer on a routine basis to discuss examinations and
other supervisory matters regarding particular institutions.
Overall, I am engaged with the prudential regulators on ways to
ensure consistency, help minimize regulatory burden and
duplication on all supervised institutions, and accomplish our
separate, distinct, and independent statutory mandate.
Q.6. There is some concern that the Bureau's Enforcement
division continues to target businesses, particularly small
businesses in sectors where the Bureau's own data shows that
the number of complaints are small or nonexistent and the
monetary impact on consumers is grossly overshadowed by the
expense that the Bureau incurs in 2-3 year CID process, not to
mention the cost of litigation should the business choose not
to settle. While the cost to the taxpayer for these endeavors
are of concern, the most concerning thing is the tremendous
impact that the CFPB with its $500 million annual operating
budget is having on CIDs for small businesses with annual
operating budgets that are 1-2 percent of that number. Many of
us on the Committee have heard stories where the Bureau's
Enforcement division has exercised its broad CID powers to the
detriment of many small businesses in the pursuit of alleged
violations that are in some cases 5 to 7 years old.
Can you please explain how the Enforcement Bureau and CFPB
leadership is prioritizing cases to invest its time and
taxpayer resources on?
Is there a materiality focus and timeliness prioritization
that focuses on stopping current bad actors and reducing future
consumer harm?
As the Director, what direction are you providing to the
Enforcement staff with respect to the following:
Focusing on matters that effect present day consumers
versus historical and outdated claims;
The impact that the immense power and weight of the Bureau
has on small businesses; and
The amount of consumer harm (dollars and impacted
individuals) that merits a Federal action.
A.6. The Consumer Financial Protection Act (CFPA) specifies the
objectives of the Bureau, which include ensuring that:
Consumers are protected from unfair, deceptive, or
abusive acts and practices and from discrimination;
Consumers are provided timely and understandable
information to make responsible decisions about
financial transactions (i.e., through enforcing the
Truth in Lending Act, Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, Fair
Credit Billing Act, and other enumerated laws with
disclosure obligations); and
Federal consumer financial law is enforced
consistently in order to promote fair competition.
Using these overall objectives, Enforcement regularly
evaluates strategic priorities, and uses a variety of
sources in that process. Some of those sources of
information include:
Consumer complaints--CFPB's Consumer Response and
the FTC's Consumer Sentinel;
The Bureau's whistleblower hotline;
Other agency referrals/leads--including from State
Attorneys General, State regulators, prudential
regulators, and other Federal agencies;
Information gathered from industry or market
developments; and
The results of exams by Supervision.
In addition, if there is a particular group of consumers--
like servicemembers, or older Americans--that are being
targeted or particularly impacted by certain practices, that
may lead Enforcement to prioritize those issues too.
Enforcement actions are intended to get to the bottom of any
misconduct and the impact on consumers and to evaluate the
appropriate amount of civil money penalties that may be
imposed.
Whether to prioritize a particular set of issues can depend
on the level of consumer or market harm as well as an
assessment of the need for specific and general deterrence.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF
SENATOR MENENDEZ FROM KATHY KRANINGER
Q.1. The Court of Appeals for the 7th Circuit recently ruled
that debt collectors using hyperlinked disclosure did not meet
the requirements of the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act. In
light of the ruling, is the CFPB reconsidering allowing debt
collectors to use hyperlinked disclosures as part of the
Bureau's proposed debt collection rule?
A.1. The Bureau is closely following case law related to topics
covered by the proposed debt collection rule. The Bureau is
also in the process of reviewing the many public comments
received on the proposed debt collection rule. The Bureau will
continue to consider feedback and other information in
reviewing the proposed rule's interventions as it moves forward
towards a final rule.
Q.2. There is a significant problem of older consumers being
targeted for financial exploitation. CFPB's own Spring 2019
Semiannual Report found that, from 2013 to 2017, more than
180,000 suspicious activity reports involved senior citizens
being victims of attempted or suspected fraud.
Dodd-Frank's Section 989A(b) gave the CFPB a tool to help
address this problem by requiring the CFPB to establish a grant
program to allow eligible States to identify bad actors,
provide educational materials and training to seniors, and
enhance State law to provide protections for seniors against
misleading or fraudulent marketing.
In order to ensure senior citizens are protected from
financial exploitation and abuse, please provide answers to the
following questions:
Is the CFPB planning on starting its senior grant program,
pursuant to Section 989A(b) of Dodd-Frank?
A.2. Currently, the Bureau does not have plans for the
disbursement of grants or the implementation of Section 989A of
the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act
(Dodd-Frank Act), As previously noted, no appropriations were
provided to implement these grants, nor did Congress mandate
that grants be provided.
Q.3. Under your leadership, what steps has the CFPB taken to
implement Section 989A(b) of Dodd-Frank?
A.3. See previous answer.
Q.4. Can you provide a timeline as to when the CFPB expects to
launch its senior grant program?
A.4. See previous answer.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR WARREN
FROM KATHY KRANINGER
Q.1. Rulemaking--On July 31, 2019, the Bureau released an
Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) that clarifying
its intentions to let the Qualified Mortgage Patch to expire in
January 2021 or after a short extension, if necessary. \1\ The
Bureau's analysis stated ``approximately 957,000 loans--16
percent of all closed-end first-lien residential mortgage
originations in 2018--fell within the Temporary GSE QM loan
definition but not the General QM loan definition.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Federal Register Notice,
``Qualified Mortgage Definition Under the Truth in Lending Act
(Regulation Z)'', July 31, 2019, https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2019/07/31/2019-16298/qualified-mortgage-definition-under-
the-truth-in-lending-act-regulation-z.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In anticipating how the market would respond if the patch
were removed, the notice stated that ``some borrowers who would
have sought High-DTI GSE loans might not obtain loans at all.''
What is the dollar amount and percentage of total loan
origination volume in 2018 that were qualified mortgages only
because of the QM Patch?
A.1. The ANPR states that the Bureau estimates that 16 percent
of all closed-end first-lien residential mortgage origination
volume fell within the Temporary GSE QM loan definition, but
not the General QM loan definition, due to DTI ratios exceeding
43 percent. This estimate does not include Temporary GSE QM
loans which may fall outside the General QM loan definition due
to documentation incompatible with Appendix Q requirements. The
Bureau estimates that the total amount of these loans was
approximately $240 billion. Some of those loans likely could
have been originated as QM loans under other elements of the QM
Rule and of the QM rules promulgated by other governmental
agencies.
Q.2. What is the total number and percentage of total borrowers
in 2018 that were able to obtain qualified mortgages only
because of the QM Patch?
A.2. Given the alternative categories of qualified mortgages
available to High DTI borrowers in 2018, particularly FHA
loans, VA loans, and Small Creditor QMs, the Bureau believes
that most borrowers in 2018 whose loans fell within the
Temporary GSE QM loan definition, but not the General QM loan
definition, would have been able to obtain qualified mortgages.
In addition, some borrowers obtaining High DTI GSE loans would
likely have been able to lower their DTI by, for example,
paying off or restructuring other debts or increasing their
down payment in order to obtain loans within the General QM
loan definition.
Q.3. How many borrowers does the Bureau estimate will no longer
obtain loans once the QM Patch has expired?
How many of these individuals are low-, moderate-, and
middle-income borrowers?
A.3. The number of borrowers who may be unable to obtain loans
once the QM patch expires will depend on a wide range of
factors including the number of consumers seeking to purchase a
home or refinance a mortgage at any given period of time and
the credit standards of Government agencies (including FHA),
the GSEs, and lenders originating non-Government, non-GSE
loans. Also, relevant will be the definition of Qualified
Mortgage when the patch expires, an issue the Bureau has
announced it will be reconsidering. Given all this, the Bureau
cannot estimate with precision the number of consumers who may
no longer be able to obtain loans once the QM patch expires.
Q.4. How many of these individuals are first time home buyers?
A.4. Please see previous answer.
Q.5. How many of these individuals are people of color?
A.5. Please see previous answer.
Q.6. For those borrowers who are currently covered by the QM
Patch and are estimated to still be able to borrow on the
private market or via a loan guaranteed by FHA (Federal Housing
Agency) following the expiration of the patch, will the
borrowing costs for any of these individuals increase?
If so, by how much?
A.6. Whether borrowers who are currently covered by the QM
patch and would still be able to borrow on the private market
or via a loan guaranteed by FHA will pay more than they would
absent the expiration of the patch depends on a number of
factors, including the profile of those consumers (e.g., their
credit score, loan-to-value ratio, assets) and of the
properties they seek to purchase and pricing decisions made by
FHA, the GSEs, and lenders originating non-Government, non-GSE
loans. Also, relevant will be the definition of Qualified
Mortgage when the patch expires, an issue the Bureau has
announced it will be reconsidering. Given all this, the Bureau
cannot estimate with precision whether, and to what extent, the
expiration of the QM patch would increase the cost of credit
for future borrowers. However, based on current and historical
pricing patterns, it is likely borrowing costs would increase
for some borrowers if they cannot obtain a GSE or portfolio
loan and instead take out an FHA loan.
Q.7. The analysis also says that other borrowers who obtained
loans covered by the GSE Patch ``may simply adapt and make
different choices,'' including ``adjusting their borrowing to
result in a lower DTI ratio.''
How many individuals and by what dollar volume will these
individuals be forced to ``adjust'' their borrowing?
A.7. Given the alternative categories of qualified mortgages
available to High DTI borrowers, particularly FHA loans, VA
loans, Small Creditor QMs, and the expanded portfolio QM
amendments created by the 2018 Economic Growth, Regulatory
Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA), the Bureau
believes that, absent changes in those alternative categories,
most borrowers who obtained loans covered by the GSE Patch
would still be able to obtain qualified mortgages at the same
DTI ratio even if the Bureau did not adjust the General QM
definition. The number of borrowers who would be required to
adjust their borrowing upon the expiration of the patch, and
the dollar volume of such adjustments, will depend upon the
same set of factors listed in response to Part C of this
questions as well as any changes in the credit standards of
other Government agencies (including FHA and VA). For the
reasons stated therein the Bureau cannot estimate these numbers
with precision.
Q.8. What are some of the ``other choices'' that these
borrowers might make?
A.8. As noted above, the Bureau believes that most borrowers
who obtained loans covered by the GSE Patch would still be able
to obtain qualified mortgages at the same DTI ratio even if the
Bureau did not adjust the General QM definition under the
current QM standards maintained by the Bureau and other
agencies. To the extent there are borrowers for whom that is
not true, the choices available to them will depend upon the
types of products offered on the market, the underwriting
criteria for those products, borrowers' personal preferences
and financial capabilities, and the parameters of the General
QM definition. For example, if the market did not offer higher
DTI loans, high DTI purchase loan borrowers could most directly
decrease their loan amounts to obtain a General QM loan by
either increasing their down payment, negotiating a lower
purchase price or purchasing a lower-priced home. Cash-out
refinance borrowers would likely be required to extract less
equity from their home. Rate and term refinance borrowers would
likely be required to pay down additional loan principal prior
to refinancing. In each of these cases, borrowers with other
nonmortgage debts could also pay off or restructure these
debts, reducing or eliminating the required payments on these
debts in their DTI ratio.
Q.9. Is it your view that removing a key mechanism for which
many borrowers, particularly low-income borrowers and borrowers
of color, rely on to access credit can appropriately be
characterized as a ``simple'' adaptation?
A.9. The Bureau believes that, absent changes in the
alternative qualified mortgage options described above, most
borrowers would still be able to obtain High-DTI loans through
alternative qualified mortgage options, or through non-QM
mortgage options. For some borrowers with sufficient financial
assets or flexibility, reducing their DTI may require a simple
adjustment whereas for others, including LMI borrowers who are
disproportionately borrowers of color, that would not be true.
The Bureau intends to carefully consider all of the potential
effects of the expiration of the patch in determining what
changes, if any, to propose to the definition of General QM.
Q.10. On May 21, 2019, the CFPB issued a proposed rule that
would amend Regulation F, which implements the Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act (FDCPA). \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Federal Register Notice,
``Debt Collection Practices (Regulation F)'', May 21, 2019, https://
www.federalregister.gov/documents/2019/05/21/2019-09665/debt-
collection-practices-regulation-f.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The proposal does not include an explicit cap on email and
text message contact attempts in the same way that phone
contacts are limited even though many consumers pay their cell
phone providers per message. Is there a certain number of
message attempts within a certain time frame that the CFPB
would consider harassment? If the proposal is enacted as is,
would the Bureau pursue companies that engage in email or text
message harassment under its authority to go after Unfair,
Deceptive, and Abusive Acts of Practices (UDAAP)?
A.10. The Bureau's proposed debt collection rule does not allow
for unlimited emails or text messaging. Since 1977, the FDCPA
has prohibited debt collectors from engaging in harassment,
abuse, and unfair practices regardless of method of
communication, including emails and text messages. Debt
collectors would continue to be prohibited from engaging in
such conduct if the proposed rule were made final. In
particular, even though the proposed rule does not include a
specific limit on the number of emails or texts a debt
collector could send, if the rule were adopted a debt collector
who sends too many would still violate the FDCPA. Further, the
proposed rule would give consumers the power to stop future
texts or emails as soon as they receive the first
communication. The proposed rule sought comment on these issues
and the Bureau is carefully reviewing and considering all
comments. While it is premature to comment on the specifics of
enforcement of a rule that is currently under consideration, as
a general matter, the Bureau expects those covered by a
regulation to comply with it.
Q.11. Under the proposed rule, a debt collector would be
prohibited from contacting an individual on social media if the
contact could be viewed by a third-party, but would still be
allowed to privately contact an individual on social media.
What guardrails are included in the proposal to ensure that
when contacting an individual on social media, the incorrect
individual is not unfairly targeted and harassed?
A.11. The proposed rule makes clear that the FDCPA's long-
standing prohibitions on harassment, abuse, and unfair
practices apply to communications generally. In addition to
this broad safeguard, the proposal would protect consumers as
defined by the proposal, e.g., those who are obligated or
allegedly obligated to pay any debt. Proposed 1006.6(e) would
require a debt collector who communicates or attempts to
communicate with a consumer electronically in connection with
the collection of a debt using a specific email address,
telephone number for text messages, or other electronic-medium
address to include in each such communication or attempt to
communicate a clear and conspicuous statement describing one or
more ways the consumer can opt out of further electronic
communications or attempts to communicate by the debt collector
to that address or telephone number. Proposed 1006.6(e) would
apply to all electronic communications, regardless of whether
they are a medium of communication specified in the rule and
regardless of whether that medium exists now or comes to exist
in the future. Proposed 1006.6(e) also would prohibit a debt
collector from requiring, directly or indirectly, that the
consumer, in order to opt out, pay any fee or provide any
information other than the email address, telephone number for
text messages, or other electronic-medium address subject to
the opt-out. In addition, proposed 1006.14(h)(1) would
prohibit a debt collector from communicating or attempting to
communicate with a consumer through a medium of communication
if the consumer has requested that the debt collector not use
that medium to communicate with the consumer.
Q.12. Section 1071 of the Dodd-Frank Act amended the Equal
Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) to require institutions to
collect small business lending data related to credit
applications made by businesses owned by women and minorities.
In the semiannual report you submitted to Congress, it was
noted that ``the Bureau expects that it will be able to resume
prerulemaking activities on the Section 1071 project within
this next year.'' \3\ After years of delay in implementing this
rule, what further prerulemaking activities are needed and when
does the Bureau anticipate being able to issue a Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, ``Semiannual Report of
the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection'', Spring 2019.
A.12. I remain committed to implementing Section 1071 of the
Dodd-Frank Act. As the Bureau's Unified Agenda reflects, this
is now in prerule status and has been since last Spring when
the Bureau reclassified the Section 1071 project from long-term
status to prerule status. To move forward in this effort and
other challenging issues facing the Bureau, I announced a
symposia series on a variety of topics related to the Bureau's
mission, including Section 1071.
On November 6, 2019, the Bureau held a symposium on Section
1071 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). The 1071 symposium was aimed
at stimulating a proactive and transparent dialogue to assist
the Bureau in its policy development as it works toward
implementation of Section 1071. The symposium consisted of two
panels of leading academic, think tank, consumer advocate,
industry, and Government experts in the small business lending
arena. The first panel focused on the evolution in the
estimated $1.4 trillion small business lending marketplace. The
discussion touched on various policy issues related to small
business lending including new business models, delivery
mechanisms, regulatory burden, new types of partnerships, and
the general availability of credit and potential consumer harm,
as well as emerging concerns in the marketplace. The second
panel included a discussion surrounding the implementation of
Section 1071, including issues raised in response to the
Bureau's Request for Information. It also explored ways to
mitigate potential costs and burdens for reporters. A recording
of the event, along with written statements from the panelists,
is available on the Bureau's website.
In my opening remarks at the symposium, I emphasized that
``small businesses, including those owned by women and
minorities, are critical engines for economic growth,'' that
``Section 1071 would increase public data about small business
lending,'' and that the Section 1071 rulemaking ``needs to be
done with great care and consideration in order that the rule
not impede the ability of small businesses--including minority
and women owned small businesses--to access the credit they
need.'' As part of its rulemaking process, the Bureau is
exploring potential ways to implement Section 1071 in a
balanced manner with a goal of providing small business lending
data that achieves the statutory objectives without
unnecessarily affecting the cost or availability of credit to
small businesses.
In promulgating regulations, the Bureau is required to
follow the procedures set forth in the Regulatory Flexibility
Act (RFA), including the special RFA requirements imposed by
the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act of 1996
(SBREFA), the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) and section
1022 of the Dodd-Frank Act. Accordingly, the next formal phase
in implementing Section 1071 of the Dodd-Frank Act will be the
release of materials in advance of convening a SBREFA panel, in
conjunction with the Office of Management and Budget and the
Small Business Administration's Chief Counsel for Advocacy, to
consult with representatives of small businesses that may be
affected by the rulemaking. Under this plan and consistent with
the Bureau's special statutory obligations, the Bureau intends
to release a detailed SBREFA outline of the proposals it is
considering by November 2020. The outline will describe how the
Bureau is considering implementing Section 1071, discuss other
alternatives the Bureau has considered, and identify the
potential impact that the proposals under consideration might
have on small entities.
Once the SBREFA process concludes, the Bureau intends to
move expeditiously to issue a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
(NPRM) in accordance with APA procedures. At that time, the
Bureau will be better able to identify a target date for the
issuance of a proposed rule.
Q.13. In 2018, the CFPB indicated that it was considering
revising the use of disparate impact under ECOA. In August, the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) proposed a
new disparate impact rule, which, among other things, increased
the amount of evidence needed that must be pleaded in the
complaint, and added new defenses making it nearly impossible
to bring a successful case against a defendant that makes
decisions via algorithm or makes discriminatory decisions that
are more profitable than the nondiscriminatory alternatives.
Cases of discrimination against defendants in mortgage
industry are often brought under both ECOA and the Fair Housing
Act. Does the Bureau intend to make the disparate impact
standards consistent under ECOA and the Fair Housing Act?
A.13. In May 2018, the Bureau stated its intention to reexamine
the application of the disparate impact doctrine under the
Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA). In anticipation, the
Bureau is currently gathering information and discussing this
issue with stakeholders. As part of this effort, the Bureau
continues to closely monitor HUD's proposal to revise its
disparate impact rule under the Fair Housing Act. In April
2019, the Bureau announced that it plans to hold a symposium on
disparate impact and the ECOA. The symposium is part of a
series exploring consumer protections in today's dynamic
financial services marketplace.
Q.14. A number of institutions under the Bureau's supervision
and financial technology companies that the Bureau works with
through its Office of Innovation use algorithms to underwrite
loans. Has there ever been an instance where the Bureau has
found that facially neutral algorithms produced a disparate
impact on a protected class under ECOA?
A.14. In general, the Bureau does not comment publicly on
confidential enforcement investigations or disclose
confidential supervisory information.
Q.15. The HUD disparate impact proposal provides a defense for
companies where the discriminatory activity is more profitable
than the alternative. Throughout its history, the Bureau,
together with the Department of Justice has brought a number of
cases using disparate impact theories. In any of those cases,
was the discriminatory behavior profitable for the company?
A.15. The Bureau cannot comment on any specific matter because,
as noted above, the Bureau does not comment publicly on
confidential enforcement investigations. As a general matter,
the Bureau's enforcement actions under ECOA consider whether a
creditor discriminated on a prohibited basis against any
applicant, with respect to any aspect of a credit transaction,
and not whether such behavior was or is profitable.
Q.16. Supervision and Enforcement--According to the most recent
semiannual report ``the Bureau did not initiate or complete any
fair lending public enforcement actions. In addition, during
this reporting period, the Bureau did not refer any matters to
the DOJ with regard to discrimination pursuant to Section
706(g) of ECOA.'' \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Is the Bureau's position that violations of ECOA are not
taking place?
A.16. No. The law mandates that the Bureau enforce Federal
consumer financial law, including fair lending laws such as
ECOA and Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), and the Bureau
will continue to do that. In 2019, the Bureau has made three
fair lending referrals to the Department of Justice pursuant to
the Equal Credit Opportunity Act.
Q.17. Has the Bureau modified the standards it uses to
determine whether an act constitutes a violation of ECOA,
including under the disparate impact theory?
A.17. The Bureau continues to evaluate the use of disparate
impact under ECOA on a case-by-case basis based on the specific
facts and circumstances of each matter. As noted above, the
Bureau is currently considering reexamining the application of
the disparate impact doctrine under the Equal Credit
Opportunity Act.
Q.18. The Bureau is considering reducing the number of data
points collected under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA).
These data are not only incredibly valuable to outside actors
trying to detect and fight discrimination, but also to the
Bureau in its supervision, enforcement, rulemaking, and market
monitoring functions. Please provide a list of publicly
available Bureau actions, including enforcement actions,
rulemakings, and Bureau reports that relied even partially on
either the new data points collected under Dodd-Frank and or
Bureau rules.
A.18. The Consumer Financial Protection Act (CFPA) amended HMDA
to require the reporting of 13 new data points. The CFPA also
granted the Bureau authority to use its discretion to require
reporting of additional data points, which the Bureau did in
2015 by amending Regulation C, HMDA's implementing regulation,
to include 14 additional data points as well as the 13 required
new data points. Most of the new requirements from the 2015
HMDA Rule took effect on January 1, 2018, and reporting started
in March 2019. There are two publicly available Bureau reports,
both published in August 2019, that rely on this new data:
``Introducing New and Revised Data Points in HMDA'' and ``Data
Point: 2018 Mortgage Market Activity and Trends''.
Q.19. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Consumer Protection Act
requires that the Director of the CFPB holds a seat on the five
member Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC). In your capacity as CFPB Director, you
currently serve on the FDIC Board.
On February 7, 2019, Bank Branching and Trust Corporation
(BB&T) and SunTrust Banks, Inc (SunTrust) announced that they
would merge to form what would become the 8th largest bank
holding company (BHC) by asset size in the United States. \5\
While the merger of the holding companies must be approved by
the Federal Reserve, the Bank Merger Act requires that the FDIC
also approve the merger in their role as the primary regulator
of the newly chartered State nonmember bank owned by the
holding company. \6\ In the future, the question of whether to
approve the merger will come before the FDIC Board.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ SunTrust, ``BB&T and SunTrust To Combine in Merger of Equals
To Create the Premier Financial Institution'', February 07, 2019,http:/
/investors.suntrust.com/news/news-details/2019/BBT-and-SunTrust-to-
Combine-in-Merger-of-Equals-to-Create-the-Premier-Financial-
Institution/default.aspx.
\6\ Congressional Research Service, ``BB&T and SunTrust: Merger
Approval Process and Trends'', July 19, 2019, https://fas.org/sgp/crs/
misc/IN11146.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As of the date of this hearing, what type of data and
analysis related to the proposed merger have you requested from
CFPB career staff?
A.19. As of the date of the hearing, the merger was not before
the FDIC Board for consideration. To the extent I feel it is
appropriate to request data of CFPB staff I do.
Q.20. As of the date of this hearing, have you requested or
been offered any briefings from the FDIC to keep you informed
of the merger process and timeline?
A.20. As of the date of the hearing, the merger was not before
the Board for consideration and the matter was still being
reviewed at the staff level. Once staff work is complete, FDIC
staff offer briefings at the appropriate time.
Q.21. According to a study released earlier this year that
pulled 2018 data from the CFPB's Consumer Complaint Database
and ordered the institutions with the largest number of
complaints weighted by the size of the institution's deposits,
BB&T had the 16th largest number of complaints per dollar of
deposits and SunTrust had the 4th largest number of deposits.
\7\ How will you use the consumer complaint database to inform
your decision making with respect to the proposed merger?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ LendEDU, ``Report: Reviewing CFPB Complaints of U.S. Banks in
2018'', https://lendedu.com/blog/banks-cfpbcomplaints-2018/.
A.21. FDIC staff review bank merger applications based on the
statutory factors prescribed in the Bank Merger Act (BMA) and
any other relevant provisions of the Federal Deposit Insurance
(FDI) Act. The merger application was reviewed in accordance
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
with the statutes.
Q.22. What are the most important factors that you believe
should be considered to determine whether the proposed merger
could potentially harm consumers? For each factor, please
describe the quantitative and qualitative data you plan to use
in your evaluation.
A.22. The most important factors in reviewing bank merger
applications is ensuring that it is reviewed in accordance with
the statute. As discussed above, the bank merger application
was reviewed in accordance with the BMA and relevant provisions
of the FDI Act. These statutes require an analysis that
includes an assessment of the impact on consumers and
communities, as well as a review of their programs with respect
to consumer protection.
Q.23. Has the FDIC or any other regulator requested any
information from the CFPB about the consumer protection or fair
lending records for BB&T or SunTrust to inform the merger
approval process?
A.23. Yes, information regarding BB&T and Suntrust's consumer
protection and fair lending records were shared with FDIC staff
in accordance with the Bureau's normal interagency information
sharing procedures.
Q.24. On September 10, 2019, the CFPB announced the creation of
the American Consumer Financial Innovation Network (ACFIN) to
enhance coordination among Federal and State regulators to
``facilitate financial innovation.'' \8\ However, there are
uncertainties with respect to the ultimate role of ACFIN and
how it could impact consumer protection regulations at the
State level.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, ``American Consumer
Financial Innovation Network'', https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/
documents/cfpb-CFIN-charter-2019-09.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
What is the purpose of ACFIN? How does it fit within the
Bureau's mission to protect consumers? How it could impact
State regulators of States that have and have not opted to join
the network?
A.24. The purpose of AFCIN is to enhance coordination among
Federal and State regulators to facilitate financial innovation
that benefits consumers. The network also seeks to benefit
consumers by keeping pace with market innovations and helping
ensure they are free from fraud, discrimination, and deceptive
practices. As with the Global Financial Innovation Network
(GFIN) led by the U.K.'s Financial Conduct Authority, ACFIN
members seek to accomplish their objectives through
information-sharing and coordinating innovation-related
policies and programs, as appropriate. There is no requirement
that ACFIN members coordinate on no-action letters, Sandbox
trials, or similar programs.
Q.25. The ACFIN charter states that ``none of the actions
undertaken under the auspices of ACFIN will be for the purpose
of preempting State law.'' Is it possible that ACFIN could
still result in the preemption of State law, even if it is not
the intended purpose of the action?
A.25. The purpose of ACFIN is to enhance coordination among
Federal and State regulators. The Bureau participates in ACFIN
because it believes that coordination with our fellow
regulators is a crucial component of facilitating consumer-
friendly innovation. The ACFIN charter provision was intended
to underscore--for current and potential State ACFIN members--
that ACFIN is not intended to preempt State law. The Bureau's
innovation-related activities concern Federal consumer
financial law, not State law, and I do not foresee how our
activities in connection with ACFIN would preempt State law.
Q.26. On August 31, 2017, the Department of Education (ED)
terminated its Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) with the CFPB
regarding the sharing of information in connection with
oversight of Federal student loans. \9\ This decision was
unjustified, unwise, and another way to protect servicers from
real oversight and accountability. The recently released Annual
Report of the Student Loan Ombudsman notes that a new MOU for
data sharing with ED is still not in place as of the close of
the report, on August 31, 2019, \10\ preventing the CFPB from
accessing full information needed to protect student borrowers.
However, the report indicates the agency anticipates that a new
MOU will be established, stating that ``[g]oing forward, when
an MOU is in place, deeper analysis of Federal data is
anticipated.'' \11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Inside Higher Ed, ``Education Dept. Ends Partnership with
CFPB'', Andrew Kreighbaum, September 5, 2017, https://
www.insidehighered.com/news/2017/09/05/education-dept-rebukes-cfpb-
overreach-kills-information-sharing-agreement.
\10\ Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, ``Annual Report of the
CFPB Private Education Loan Ombudsman'', October 2019, p. 6, https://
files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb-annual-report-private-
education-loan-ombudsman-2019.pdf.
\11\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Please provide an update on the status of the negotiations
with ED regarding a new MOU, including when you expect to
finalize a new MOU with ED.
A.26. There are two MOUs that the Bureau is discussing with the
Department of Education: one for complaints and one for
supervisory information. On October 15, 2019, the Bureau sent
to the Department of Education a copy of an MOU intended to
ensure coordination in providing assistance to, and servicing,
borrowers seeking to resolve student loan complaints. The
Department of Education responded and discussions are ongoing.
In addition, the Bureau is engaged in ongoing discussions with
the Department of Education to reestablish an MOU regarding
supervision of student loan servicing.
Q.27. Do you support the terms of the previous MOU? If not,
what changes to the previous MOU is the CFPB advocating for?
A.27. As noted above, the Bureau is engaged in ongoing
discussions. Once those discussions have concluded, the Bureau
will provide a copy of the new MOU.
Q.28. In an April 23, 2019, letter to me, you indicated that
since the Department of Education issued its December 2017
Memorandum regarding the Privacy Act of 1974, ``student loan
servicers have declined to produce information requested by the
Bureau for supervisory examinations related to [Federal
student] loans held by the Department based on the Department's
guidance.'' \12\ This startling revelation means ED's policies
have emboldened servicers to ignore requests from Federal
regulators charged with enforcing consumer protection laws.
Just this week, NPR reported that the CFPB launched an
investigation of student loan servicers' implementation of the
Public Service Loan Forgiveness (PSLF) program in early 2018,
but was unable to obtain needed information after ED instructed
loan servicers not to share information with CFPB
investigators. \13\ Have you been able to complete to original
specifications or otherwise continue conducting the 2018
investigation into the PSLF program?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Letter from CFPB Director Kathleen Kraninger to U.S. Senator
Elizabeth Warren, April 23, 2019.
\13\ NPR, ``Exclusive: Turf War Blocked CFPB From Helping Fix
Student Loan Forgiveness Program'', Chris Arnold, October 15, 2019,
https://www.npr.org/2019/10/15/769326896/exclusive-turf-war-blocked-
cfpb-from-helping-fix-student-loan-forgiveness-program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If so, based on the preliminary findings of CFPB
investigators, what actions do you intend to take to improve
the implementation of the PSLF program?
A.28. The NPR report does not mention any enforcement
investigation instead alluding to supervisory examinations. In
general, the Bureau does not comment publicly on confidential
enforcement investigations or disclose confidential supervisory
information. Since the letter I sent on April 23, 2019, student
loan servicers have continued to decline to produce information
requested by the Bureau for supervisory examinations related to
Federal student loans held by the Department based on the
Department's guidance. To be clear, the Bureau examines Federal
student loan servicers for compliance with Federal consumer
financial laws pursuant to its regulation on larger
participants in the student loan servicer market.
Q.29. If not, what resources or access to information does the
CFPB need in order to complete this investigation?
A.29. The Bureau needs information from Federal student loan
servicers to complete these supervisory reviews.
Q.30. What actions has the agency taken to obtain information
from student loan servicers in order to conduct the agency's
oversight responsibilities? Have student loan servicers fully
cooperated with these efforts?
A.30. The Bureau has sent supervisory requests to certain
Federal student loan servicers. In addition, in the course of
investigations and litigation related to student loan servicing
practices, the Bureau has issued Civil Investigative Demands
(CIDs) and sent Federal court discovery requests; in response
to these demands, the Bureau has received information from
student loan servicers. \14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ See, e.g., Aug. 10, 2018, Order, Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau v. Navient, Case No. 3:17-CV-101 (M.D. Pa. Aug. 10,
2018).
Q.31. Operations--Please provide a list of political appointees
currently employed, including as detailees from other agencies,
at the CFPB, their titles, the date they were hired, and their
salaries.
A.31.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Q.32. Does the CFPB have plans to hire additional political
appointees? If so, please provide position descriptions and
salary ranges for their jobs.
A.32. Section 1013 of the Dodd-Frank Act states, ``The Director
may fix the number of, and appoint and direct, all employees of
the Bureau in accordance with the applicable provisions of
title 5, United States Code.'' This authority includes the
appointment of employees under Schedule C hiring authority.
Schedule C appointees are commonly used throughout the
Federal Government, including at other financial regulatory
agencies. The decision to classify a job as a Schedule C
position is made by the Director of the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM) at the request of an agency head. For all
Schedule C positions at the Bureau, we followed the process
established by OPM, which reviewed and approved all of the
Bureau's Schedule C hires.
OPM recently approved a Schedule C appointment for Jennifer
Stalzer to serve as my Administrative Specialist starting
January 5, 2020. The position is graded as a CN-52 and has a
salary range of $92,166 to $133,640 including locality pay. A
copy of the position description is attached as requested.
Q.33. The Partnership for Public Service produces an annual
ranking of the best place to work using data from the Office of
Personnel Management's Annual Employee Survey about job
satisfaction. From 2017 to 2018, CFPB's ranking dropped 25
points, from 79.9 to 51.7, twice as much the agency with the
next highest drop.
One manifestation of employees' dissatisfaction is
attrition. Please provide quarterly staffing levels for the
Bureau, broken up by Division and if possible, by office from
2017 Q1 to present.
A.33.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Q.34. What is CFPB's plan to improve morale among staff?
A.34. The staff of the Bureau are highly committed to the
Bureau's mission and care deeply about the organization. I
respect them, I take their views and opinions seriously, and
their input is integral to my decision making. Further, I am
committed to leading a diverse, productive, effective
workforce.
After I was sworn in as Director, it was important for me
to hear input from staff directly. I made it a priority during
the first months of my tenure to go on a ``listening tour'' and
visit as many Bureau staff as possible, both at Headquarters
and in all four of our regional locations. I have continued to
engage with employees through Bureau-wide all-hands sessions,
regular meetings with Division and Office teams, and weekly
``office hours'' to provide updates on Bureau priorities,
recognize individual and team efforts and achievements, and
continue to gather staff feedback. The Bureau also regularly
surveys staff, including through our Annual Employee Survey.
Here are specific actions I have taken in response to some
employee feedback as well as initiatives that reflect my
approach to leadership and management:
Early on, I outlined my approach to addressing the
hiring freeze and empowering senior managers to
determine skill and resource needs to address the
Bureau's mission priorities. During the listening tour,
I made clear that I was open to, and had granted, many
exceptions to the hiring freeze in response to requests
by managers who demonstrated a critical mission need.
Subsequent to that, in May 2019, I launched the FY2020
Staffing Plan process with a goal of moving the Bureau
towards a more sustainable and disciplined practice of
identifying and hiring the staff needed to accomplish
the Bureau's mission priorities. In August 2019, I
announced to staff that I had approved an FY2020
Staffing Plan for the Bureau and lifted the hiring
freeze.
As a precursor to the FY2020 Staffing Plan process,
I approved a number of initiatives designed to help
determine optimal staffing levels for the long term.
These initiatives include better aligning resources
with my top policy priorities, improving how cross-
Bureau legal functions are performed, and enhancing how
administrative and operational functions are performed
across the Bureau.
I established a Workforce Effectiveness Committee
to ensure that the Bureau takes a holistic, consistent
approach to considering workforce-related plans and
initiatives with a particular view towards improving
workforce effectiveness, employee engagement, and
diversity and inclusion efforts.
I created a Customer Experience Office to focuses
on improving our internal staff experience through
enhanced operational services enabling the workforce to
be more effective and efficient in meeting the Bureau's
mission.
I have continued to strongly promote diversity and
inclusion by refreshing the Bureau's Diversity and
Inclusion Strategic Plan, enhancing the focus on strong
engagement with employees, and utilizing an integrated
approach to education, training, and engagement
programs that incorporate diversity and inclusion
concepts into the learning curriculum and work
environment. Employee Resource Groups, which are
networks of Bureau employees with similar interests,
backgrounds, or experiences, cultural education
programs, and diversity and inclusion training are key
components of this effort.
I presented the Director's Mission Achievement
Award to recognize staff leadership and team
contributions towards the Bureau's mission. The award
is CFPB's highest honor. In accordance with my
priorities, this year I recognized both leadership
excellence and outstanding team contributions. Twenty
leaders and over 200 team members across 29 teams were
nominated by a joint committee of representatives from
the union and CFPB management.
I promoted the Bureau's focus on data and
information governance and management by creating a new
Office of the Chief Data Officer, combining it with
related functions such as Records, FOIA and Privacy,
and elevating it to report directly to the Chief
Operating Officer.
I opened a regional office in Atlanta, Georgia, so
that the Bureau's Southeast Region can collaborate more
effectively with other partner financial regulators who
also have their regional office in Atlanta; the
Southeast Regional Office will feature a regional
learning and development center for Bureau examiners
and Federal and State partners.
I launched the consolidation of all Washington,
D.C.-based staff from two office buildings into one to
increase the effectiveness of the organization and to
significantly improve the collaboration across all
teams and divisions. Moves are underway and planned to
be completed in January 2020.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF
SENATOR CORTEZ MASTO FROM KATHY KRANINGER
Q.1. Civil Penalty Fund--Please answer the following questions
regarding the Civil Penalty Fund's fiscal status for FY19.
How much money was collected in FY19? Please provide a list
of defendants, the civil penalty imposed, and the civil penalty
that was collected.
A.1. In Fiscal Year 2019, the Bureau collected civil penalties
from 24 defendants totaling $131.2 million. Below is a list of
defendants, the amount of the penalty imposed, and the amount
collected.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Q.2. How much money was spent on victim compensation in FY19?
Please provide a list of cases that had classes of eligible
victims for compensation, how many victims were eligible for
compensation per case, the total amount of uncompensated harm,
how much was provided for compensation per case, and the
average amount of compensation per victim.
A.2. During Fiscal Year (FY) 2019, the Bureau had eight active
Civil Penalty Fund distributions. Below is a list of cases,
amount distributed per case, number of consumers (at the time
of initial distribution) and average payment per consumer.
While eight cases were active during FY19, distributions
related to seven of the cases listed in this table were
initiated prior to FY19.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Q.3. In Fiscal Years (FY) 17 and 18, the Bureau allocated $0
towards consumer education and financial literacy programs. In
Fiscal Year 2019, how much will you allocate from the Civil
Penalty Fund to consumer education and financial literacy
programs?
A.3. No allocations were made to financial literacy from the
Civil Penalty Fund in FY19.
Q.4. How much money was left unallocated and returned to the
fund in FY19?
A.4. Three Civil Penalty Fund matters concluded in FY19 (Global
Client Solutions, Student Loan Processing, and Student Aid
Institute). Total allocated to those three cases was $127.6
million. Of that amount, $127.3 million was mailed to
consumers, 92 percent of issued checks were cashed and $10.6
million is available for return to the fund for future
allocations.
Q.5. How much money is left for future allocation after FY19?
A.5. As of September 30, 2019, the Civil Penalty Fund had an
unallocated balance of $553.2 million.
Q.6. Home Mortgage Disclosure Act--At a hearing before the
Senate Committee on Indian Affairs, one of the witnesses,
Patrice K. Kunesh, presented the results of a report by the
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, The Higher Price of
Mortgage Financing for Native Americans. The report found that
Native Americans were twice as likely to have a high cost
mortgage loan. Native Americans will pay about $107,000 more on
average than other homebuyers. The report also found that about
35 percent of Native Americans who bought homes on reservation
land during the study's timeframe bought a manufactured home. I
am concerned by the Bureau's recent proposals to exempt more
banks and credit unions from reporting Home Mortgage Disclosure
Act (HMDA) data.
The Bureau still collects HMDA data but does not publish it
on the HMDA site. Will the Bureau allow researchers access to
the nonpublic HMDA data? If so, how and which researchers?
A.6. The Bureau continues to release all of the data that was
previously publicly available under HMDA as well as a number of
new data elements added pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Frank Wall
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act)
Amendments to HMDA. The Dodd-Frank Act also directed the Bureau
to develop regulations that modify the information made public
in order to protect the privacy interest of mortgage applicants
or mortgagors. Consistent with the balancing test in the
Bureau's 2015 HMDA Rule and policy statement issued by the
Bureau, for the 2018 data, the Bureau has not made a few of the
new data elements, such as credit scores, available at the
individual applicant or loan level.
Concurrent with the release of the national snapshot and
dynamic loan-level datasets in August 2019, the Bureau also
released two Data Point articles summarizing the 2018 HMDA data
(https://www.consumerfinance.gov/data-research/hmda/). The
first article summarizes trends in historical data points. The
second article is a comprehensive analysis of each of the data
points collected and reported under HMDA for the first time in
2018, including data elements that have not themselves been
publicly released.
The Bureau also is considering other measures to allow
industry, community researchers, and academics to have access
not only to the modified HMDA data discussed above, but also
unmodified HMDA data. As the Bureau discussed in the 2018 final
policy guidance, it believes HMDA's public disclosure purposes
may be furthered by allowing industry and community researchers
and academics to access not only the modified HMDA data that is
publicly released but also to obtain for research purposes the
unmodified HMDA data through what is sometimes referred to as a
``restricted access program.'' The Bureau is continuing to
evaluate that concept, including the options for such a
program, and the risks and costs that may be associated with
such a program. Initiating a restricted access program for
community and industry researchers and academics would require
that the Bureau obtain the approval of the FFIEC Agencies and
the Department of Housing and Urban Development that share
ownership of the HMDA data.
Q.7. What is the Bureau doing to ensure steering in lending for
manufactured housing is not occurring?
A.7. The Bureau recognizes that manufactured housing (MH) is an
important source of affordable housing, in particular for rural
and low-income consumers, and that preserving access to credit
for MH is important to rural and low-income consumers. At the
same time, the Bureau also recognizes that MH customers may be
more likely to belong to groups, such as older or lower-income
families, which include many consumers who might be financially
vulnerable.
Regarding steering, the Bureau's Loan Originator
Compensation rule implements the Dodd-Frank Act's prohibition
on compensating loan originators based on the terms of the
transaction. This prohibition is designed to eliminate steering
incentives such as increased compensation for steering a
consumer into a higher-priced loan. In the Dodd-Frank Act,
Congress excluded from the definition of mortgage originator an
employee of a manufactured home retailer who does not take a
residential mortgage loan application or offer or negotiate
terms of a residential mortgage loan, so long as the employee
does not advise a consumer on loan terms. In promulgating the
above-referenced Rule, the Bureau incorporated this exclusion
into the definition of loan originator.
In the Economic Growth, Regulatory Reform, and Consumer
Protection Act of 2018, Congress expanded the exclusion to
cover a retailer of manufactured or modular homes or an
employee of the retailer so long as the employee does not
receive compensation or gain with respect to a manufactured
home sale for which credit is extended that is in excess of any
compensation or gain received in a comparable cash transaction,
does not directly negotiate with the consumer or lender on loan
terms, and discloses to the consumer, in writing, any corporate
affiliation with any creditor. If the retailer does have a
corporate affiliation with any creditor, the exception would
also require the disclosure of at least one unaffiliated
creditor. If, however, a retailer of manufactured or modular
homes or an employee of the retailer stands to gain
compensation beyond that received in a comparable cash
transaction, that compensation is prohibited from being based
on the terms of the loan, and the prohibition on steering
incentives continues to apply under the Bureau's Rule.
In August 2019, the Bureau, along with our FFIEC partners,
released the 2018 HMDA data, which include two new data points
specific to manufactured housing. Under the 2015 HMDA rule,
institutions now report whether the applicant owned or leased
the land as well as whether the loan was secured by both the
manufactured home and the land or only the manufactured home
(commonly called chattel). The Bureau's accompanying report on
new and revised HMDA data points included an analysis of MH
lending. \1\ As part of our ongoing monitoring, the Bureau will
continue to do research and engage with stakeholders about MH
lending to ensure that consumers have access to credit for MH
and that the market for MH credit operates fairly,
transparently, and competitively.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See https://www.consumerfinance.gov/data-research/research-
reports/introducing-new-revised-data-points-hmda.
Q.8. Enforcement: American Recovery Associates--Was the
decision to levy $36,800 for restitution from American Recovery
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Associates a decision made by the career enforcement staff?
A.8. As has been true throughout the Bureau's history, the
Director authorizes settlement parameters in a public
enforcement action after considering a recommendation from
Bureau staff.
Q.9. Were political staff, including you as the Director,
involved in the decision to levy the restitution amount?
A.9. See response above.
Q.10. Was the recommendation of the career enforcement staff
that restitution be limited to $36,800?
A.10. See response above.
Q.11. Was it the recommendation of the career enforcement staff
that restitution only be provided to people who complained?
A.11. See response above.
Q.12. What other consumer cases limit restitution only to
people who complained to a Government agency?
A.12. The Bureau weighs many factors to determine the precise
mix of restitution, penalties, and injunctive relief
appropriate in each case. Generally, when analyzing
remediation, the Bureau considers all relevant facts and
circumstances and seeks to make consumers whole for losses
caused by a party's illegal conduct. While the Bureau is
committed to seeking all appropriate relief for consumers, not
every case lends itself to restitution for all potentially
affected consumers, particularly in the context of a negotiated
settlement. The evidence available may impact the Bureau's
ability to identify harmed consumers and obtain all appropriate
relief for those harmed consumers.
Q.13. How will the Bureau identify who complained about ARA?
What are your sources to gather complaints?
A.13. The Bureau will identify who complained about ARA based
on complaints made to the Bureau as well as complaints made to
third party sources that report to Consumer Sentinel, which
among other sources includes complaints made to the Federal
Trade Commission.
Q.14. General Questions--In your answers to my question, you
said that ARA identified customers who complained and that the
amount of restitution depended on their ability to pay. A post-
hearing call to my staff corrected your statement to say ARA
was not involved. Have there been enforcement decisions where
the firm identified consumers who were harmed? If so, which
ones? If so, did the firm recommend restitution amounts?
A.14. When resolving public enforcement actions, the Bureau
often requires the company to submit to the Bureau for review
and nonobjection a comprehensive written plan for providing
redress consistent with the requirements of the consent order
or stipulated judgment. The Bureau then has the discretion to
make a determination of nonobjection to the redress plan or to
direct the company to revise it. In some cases, the consent
order or stipulated judgment also requires the company to state
in the redress plan how the company will identify consumers who
will receive restitution required under the order \2\ or to
provide a report after redress is completed showing how the
company identified and provided restitution to consumers. \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ USAA: https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/bcfp_usaa-
federal-savings-bank_consent-order.pdf.
\3\ Santander: https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/
bcfp_santander-consumer-usa_consent-order_2018-11.pdf.
Q.15. Have officials at the White House ever contacted you or a
member of the CFPB staff to recommend an action related to
supervision or enforcement? If so, who and which cases? What
was the Bureau's response to the request for a recommended
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
action?
A.15. I am not aware of any instance in which officials at the
White House have contacted myself or other Bureau staff to
recommend an action related to supervision or enforcement.
Q.16. Have officials at the White House ever contacted you or a
member of the CFPB staff to inquire into an investigation? If
so, who and which cases? What was the Bureau's response to the
request for information?
A.16. I am not aware of any instance in which officials at the
White House have contacted myself or Bureau staff to inquire
into an investigation.
Q.17. Isn't the standard for restitution supposed to be a
``reasonable approximation of the amount lost by consumers or
of illegal profits?''
A.17. The Bureau is committed to seeking all appropriate relief
for consumers and considers whether redress or restitution may
be appropriate in each case on the facts presented and in light
of applicable law. The Consumer Financial Protection Act
authorizes the Bureau to seek redress for consumers in
appropriate cases as a matter of discretion. Particularly in
the context of a negotiated settlement, the Bureau may choose
to pursue the relief it determines best serves the public
interest. Settlements allow the Bureau to avoid expending
significant resources proving claims in court, mitigate trial
risk, achieve speedier results for consumers, and provide
certainty for companies. While the Bureau is committed to
seeking all appropriate relief for consumers, not every case
lends itself to restitution for all potentially affected
consumers, particularly in the context of a negotiated
settlement.
Q.18. Do CFPB guidelines require the company to pay a
``reasonable approximation'' of the harm done?
A.18. While the Bureau is committed to seeking all appropriate
relief for consumers, not every case lends itself to
restitution for all potentially affected consumers,
particularly in the context of a negotiated settlement.
Q.19. Please identify other debt collection settlements when
the CFPB set up processes to identify consumers who might have
been harmed. Has the Bureau appointed a settlement
administrator or put up a website where people can submit a
claim in previous enforcement cases, either debt collection or
other types of financial products? If so, please provide some
examples.
A.19. The Bureau has entered into a number of settlements that
have set up processes to identify harmed consumers, including
through the use of a settlement administrator or public
website. Among these are Bureau of Consumer Financial
Protection v. Equifax, \4\ United States of America and
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau v. BancorpSouth Bank; \5\
United States of America and Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau v. Provident Funding Associates, LP; \6\ and In the
Matter of GE Capital Retail Bank, Care Credit LLC. \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom/cfpb-ftc-
states-announce-settlement-with-equifax-over-2017-data-breach/
\5\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom/consumer-
financial-protection-bureau-and-department-justice-action-requires-
bancorpsouth-pay-106-million-address-discriminatory-mortgage-lending-
practices/
\6\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom/cfpb-and-
department-of-justice-take-action-against-provident-funding-associates-
for-discriminatory-mortgage-pricing/
\7\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom/cfpb-orders-
ge-carecredit-to-refund-34-1-million-for-deceptive-health-care-credit-
card-enrollment/
Q.20. Even if the company cannot pay the full amount, can CFPB
provide restitution to harmed consumers through the Civil
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary Penalties Fund?
A.20. In some circumstances, the Bureau can provide
compensation from the Civil Penalty Fund (Fund) to certain
harmed consumers. When a person or company violates a Federal
consumer financial protection law, the Bureau can bring an
enforcement proceeding against such a person or entity. If that
person or company is found to have violated the law, it may
have to pay a civil money penalty. When the Bureau collects
civil penalties, it deposits them in the Fund. The money in the
Fund is pooled and might be available to compensate eligible
victims who have not received full compensation for their harm
through redress paid by the defendant in the case. The Bureau's
Civil Penalty Fund rule determines whether consumers are
eligible for such compensation. The Bureau hopes to make
payments to all eligible victims, but whether it will be able
to will depend on the amount of money in the Fund and other
factors. Every 6 months, the Fund Administrator will determine
which classes of victims will receive payments from the Fund.
To make that determination, the Fund Administrator assesses how
much money is available in the Fund and reviews closed cases to
determine which victims are eligible to receive payments. As of
September 30, 2019, the Civil Penalty Fund has an unallocated
balance of $553.2 million.
Q.21. Military Lending On August 22, you met with Holly
Petraeus.
Did she share any written materials with you with regards
to your decision to stop supervision for military lending
violations under the Military Lending Act? If so, please
provide those.
A.21. I don't believe Ms. Petraeus produced nor offered any
written materials regarding the supervision for Military
Lending Act violations.
Q.22. Did Ms. Petraeus share her views on your decision to stop
supervision for military lending violations? If so, please
share what she shared with you about her views.
A.22. I have asked Congress to explicitly grant the Bureau
authority to conduct examinations specifically intended to
review compliance with the MLA. The requested authority would
complement the work the Bureau currently does to enforce the
MLA. Ms. Petraeus shared with me her experience as the Bureau's
inaugural Assistant Director for Servicemember Affairs.
Q.23. Consumer and Civil Rights Groups--In July, you met with
consumer and civil rights groups, such as the National Fair
Housing Alliance, the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human
Rights, U.S. PIRO, the NAACP and National Consumer Law Center.
In June, you met with consumer groups such as Center for
Responsible Lending, National Coalition of Asian Pacific
Americans for Community Development and Americans for Financial
Reform.
Will those be regular meetings, such as quarterly?
A.23. As of December 31, 2019, I have met with 238 consumer,
civil rights and nonprofit organizations during my tenure thus
far as Director of the CFPB. I intend to continue meeting and
engaging on a regular basis with consumer, civil rights and
nonprofit groups around the country. These interactions broaden
my views and perspectives, and I know they do the same for my
staff. My External Affairs Division will continue to facilitate
opportunities to meet with consumer, civil rights, and
nonprofit organizations whenever and however we can.
Q.24. Will you continue to meet with representatives of those
groups individually?
A.24. Yes, I will continue to engage with leaders individually
as well as collectively. During my tenure I have held one-on-
one meetings with many consumer and civil rights leaders from
across the Nation, and I am committed to continuing and
maintaining ongoing channels of communication and engagement
with consumer and civil rights representatives, as with any
stakeholders of the Bureau.
Q.25. Are all the financial firms you met with on your
calendar? For example, you met with Bob Broeksmith on July 19th
but your calendar did not note that he was the head of the
Mortgage Bankers Association.
A.25. Yes, all official meetings with external entities are on
my calendars, which are released to the public on the Bureau's
website. Staff are working to ensure consistency and accuracy
of the calendar entries for meetings with external people/
entities, to include name, title/position, and the full name of
the entity.
Q.26. Diversity--Your June calendar noted PRIDE month. Please
note CFPB activities related to Pride.
A.26. Each year the Bureau commemorates PRIDE Month to
recognize the contributions of the LGBTQ+ community. In June
2019, the following Bureau activities were hosted to
commemorate PRIDE Month:
The Office of Minority and Women Inclusion (OMWI)
created posters in honor of PRIDE Month, which were
displayed in CFPB's Washington, D.C., headquarters and
offices along with the Regional offices.
The OMWI Office posted ``Did You Know'' facts on
the Bureau's internal website featuring interesting
facts and information about LGBTQ+ contributions to the
country.
On May 30, 2019, the Bureau's PRIDE Employee
Resource Group (ERG) hosted a happy hour social at the
Bureau Headquarters open to all PRIDE members, to kick
off the commemoration of PRIDE Month.
On June 4, 2019, the OMWI Director issued a Bureau-
wide message commemorating PRIDE Month, giving the
history of the month and why it is observed. The
message also encouraged Bureau employees to participate
in the various events being held to celebrate PRIDE
Month and provided information on ways employees could
participate in external activities in commemoration of
PRIDE Month.
On June 11, 2019, OMWI and the PRIDE ERG
coordinated a photo shoot entitled, ``Raising the
Rainbow Flag'' with the members of LGBTQ+ Bureau
community and allies in the Bureau's building
Courtyard. Approximately 90 employees joined in,
holding up strips of colored fabric to make a human
representation of the PRIDE flag for the photo. The
photo was displayed on the lobby monitors in
headquarters and Bureau-wide in the June edition of the
OMWI Newsletter, Perspectives, to increase awareness
and promote unity around the LGBTQ+ Bureau community.
On June 11, 2019, in a Bureau-wide message
reflecting on my first 6 months at the Bureau, I
highlighted PRIDE Month and encouraged staff to
participate in upcoming Bureau activities commemorating
PRIDE Month and celebrating the LGBTQ+ community.
On June 13, 2019, OMWI and the PRIDE ERG hosted an
internal panel event entitled, ``Making the Difference:
Being Out and Open in the Workplace'' at our 1990 K St.
Washington, D.C., office, which was accessible via Web-
ex to the Bureau's Regional offices and remote workers.
The panel of Bureau staff shared their experiences with
the challenges and rewards of coming out in the
workplace. The PRIDE ERG's Executive Sponsor moderated
the event and my Chief of Staff gave opening remarks.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR JONES
FROM KATHY KRANINGER
Q.1. CFPB Research on Tax Time Savings--Last month, the CFPB
released research, in collaboration with H&R Block, which
attempted to find effective methods to encourage taxpayers to
invest more in their savings. One of the findings is that
recipients of the earned income tax credit (EITC) were more
likely to save than those who used the refund anticipation
check (RAC).
Some banks choose to charge additional large fees on RACs.
Many users of RACs are recipients of the earned income tax
credit. The EITC is essential to keeping families across the
country out of poverty and helps them prepare for emergencies,
not to be used for tax preparers to take additional fees.
Has the CFPB considered taking action to ensure that
financial institutions do not charge exorbitant RAC fees?
A.1. The Bureau continues to monitor the market for Refund
Anticipation Loans and Refund Anticipation Checks to detect
risks to consumers. Under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act), the Bureau seeks to
ensure that consumers have access to consumer financial
products and services, that the markets for those services are
fair, transparent and competitive, and can exercise its
authorities to ensure that consumers are provided with timely
and understandable financial information to make responsible
decisions about financial transactions. The Bureau also is
tasked with ensuring that these markets operate transparently
and efficiently to facilitate access and innovation.
Q.2. CFPB Consumer Counseling--One of my constituents brought
to my attention issues with bank accounts after the death of
her husband. Her husband was the primary account holder and she
was an authorized user.
Although she was involved in the financial dealings of the
household, the bank still closed the account after his death,
forcing her to reapply for credit cards and open new bank
accounts, putting her in financial constraints during a very
vulnerable time.
The CFPB's website acknowledges the importance of closing
financial accounts of passed loved ones but not the
complications that can occur. While I recognize the CFPB cannot
unilaterally close this information gap, I believe it can
better educate consumers about the long-term effects of these
kind of financial decisions.
Have you received complaints from surviving family members
regarding this or similar issues related to account closures,
and what steps will you take to better educate consumers?
A.2. The Bureau is aware of difficulties that can arise
following the death of a spouse. In a 2017 report focused on
older consumers, the Bureau noted:
Consumers reported difficulties navigating and
organizing finances following the death of a spouse or
family member. Consumers must often take specific steps
to take control of financial assets following the death
of a spouse or family member--these steps are dependent
on the unique circumstances of the individual and
financial product. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/
201705_cfpb_Monthly_Complaint_Report.pdf
The Bureau has released two consumer advisories related to
this important topic. The first is a quiz for partners to
complete together about their current household financial
picture. \2\ The second offers tips on classifying digital
assets and making sure to include those items in family
financial planning. \3\ The Bureau also has engaged in research
to help couples prepare each other for the role of family
financial manager. The research assessed what resources are
currently available to surviving spouses and how to address the
gaps that exist. Based upon this research, the Bureau will
continue to explore how to create more robust information on
the topic in the future.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/blog/share-financial-
information-your-spouse-now-avoid-problems-later/
\3\ https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/blog/virtual-
valuables-consider-your-digital-footprint-you-prepare-future/
Q.3. Senior Protections--Seniors usually have limited funds
after they are retired. However, many bad actors target seniors
to convince them to purchase unneeded financial products. The
Dodd-Frank Act attempted to combat this with Section 989A,
which directed the CFPB to establish grants to States to
protect seniors from misleading sales of financial products.
Section 989A was never fully implemented under the
leadership of Former Director Richard Cordray. Are there coming
plans for the disbursement of these grants or the
implementation of Section 989A of the Dodd-Frank Act?
A.3. Currently, the Bureau does not have plans for the
disbursement of grants or the implementation of Section 989A of
the Dodd-Frank Act. As you may be aware, no appropriations were
given to implement these grants, nor did Congress mandate that
grants be provided.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR SMITH
FROM KATHY KRANINGER
Q.1. What and when was the most recent action the CFPB has
taken to establish a consumer complaint information sharing
agreement with the Department of Education?
A.1. On October 15, 2019, the Bureau sent to the Department of
Education a copy of a MOU intended to ensure coordination in
providing assistance to and serving borrowers seeking to
resolve student loan complaints. The Department of Education
responded and discussions are ongoing.
Q.2. What and when was the most recent action the CFPB has
taken to establish an information sharing agreement related to
supervisory examinations and oversight matters with the
Department of Education?
A.2. The Bureau is engaged in discussions with the Department
of Education to reestablish a MOU regarding supervision of
student loan servicing, and those discussions are ongoing.
Q.3. Do you commit to having the CFPB disaggregate complaints
regarding PSLF and TEPSLF from other complaints it receives on
student loan servicers in future student loan reports?
A.3. The Bureau is committed to managing the consumer compliant
system as effectively as possible to meet its intended
purposes. In terms of disaggregating or characterizing
complaints, that can be a challenge. Consumers frequently
reference more than one issue in their complaints. Regarding
PSLF and TEPSLF, the complaint database collects this
information in the narrative portion of the complaint. This
means that such complaints are challenging to aggregate and
disaggregate, and they are even more challenging when there is
more than one issue in the complaint. Further complicating
disaggregation, the terms in the narrative used to describe and
identify PSLF and TEPSLF are provided directly by the consumer.
This means that two consumers may have the exact same issue
with PSLF, but describe the issue differently with different
terms. The result may be that one consumer's complaint is
identified as a PSLF issue, while the other may be identified
as a more general servicing issue.
Q.4. Aside from any efforts to coordinate with the Department
of Education related to establishing information sharing
agreements, what and when was the most recent action the CFPB
has taken to investigate the Public Service Loan Forgiveness
(PSLF) program and the Temporary Expanded PSLF (TEPSLF)?
A.4. The Bureau's specific supervisory and investigatory
enforcement activity is confidential. The Bureau's examination
manual for student loan servicing guides examiners in
conducting examinations, and it provides guidance about a
number of specific issues, including issues that may arise
during examinations focused on non-Federal loans (private
student loans and commercial loans insured under the Family
Federal Education Loan Program (FFELP)). To be clear, the
Bureau examines Federal student loan servicers for compliance
with Federal consumer financial laws pursuant to its regulation
on larger participants in the student loan servicer market.
Q.5. How many oversight examinations of Federal student loan
servicers related to PSLF or TEPSLF has the CFPB conducted
since the TEPSLF program began in May 2018?
A.5. Since December 2017, student loan servicers have declined
to produce information requested by the Bureau for supervisory
examinations related to Direct Loans and Federal Family
Education Loan Program (FFELP) loans held by the Department of
Education based on the Department's guidance. Additional
information responsive to this request is Confidential
Supervisory Information.
Q.6. What process does the CFPB follow for complaints that
specifically mention PSLF or TEPSLF? Does this process differ
in any meaningful way from other complaints related to student
loan servicing?
A.6. The Bureau handles PSLF or TEPSLF complaints in the same
manner as it handles other complaints related to student loan
servicing.
Q.7. To date, how many oversight examinations of private
student loan servicers has the CFPB conducted in calendar year
2019?
A.7. The Bureau's specific supervisory activity is
confidential.
Q.8. In your testimony you referenced the ongoing Next
Generation (Next Gen) Financial Services Environment platform
overhaul for Federal student aid servicing as the reason for
reconsidering CFPB's 2017 data collection request submitted to
OMB. Because of Next Gen, you said ``the data collection as it
was submitted to OMB isn't really relevant today.'' What data
collected through the Next Gen platform will the CFPB use that
makes the previous request to OMB for data collection
irrelevant?
A.8. At present, servicing of federally owned student loans is
handled by nine contract servicers. These accounts are hosted
on four separate technology platforms, maintained by the so-
called Title IV Additional Servicers (TIVAS)--FedLoan
Servicing/PHEAA, Great Lakes, Navient, and Nelnet. The five
small, not-for-profit servicers (NFPs) use either the FedLoan
or Nelnet servicing platform, under remote servicing
agreements. All nine of the servicers maintain their own
customer service centers. The data request would have required
for data to be pulled from each of these platforms by each
servicer.
Under Next Gen, we understand that all federally owned
borrower accounts will be transferred to a single servicing
platform, which will fundamentally change the way servicing
responsibilities are allocated across parties and move all of
the data management to a single platform. Contracts are to be
awarded to companies to provide specific--but not all--
servicing functions, which means that the data request would
need to be retooled to match the contractor's functionality.
Customer service centers may be offered by one or more
contractors. As a result, the new system does not align with
the design of the data request, decreasing the long-term value
of implementing the data collection as originally envisioned.
The Department of Education has not yet announced the
completion of the Next Gen contract awards, the number of
contractors and the scope of each entity's work remain unknown.
Also, the Next Gen system has been structured to handle
some collections activities, which are now handled under a
separate system. The Bureau may consider how to add collections
outcomes to the data request, considering this shift.
Q.9. Is Next Gen data included in the information sharing
agreement you are pursuing with ED?
A.9. The discussions about the information sharing agreement
have not concluded.
Q.10. What actions will the CFPB take should the Department of
Education not agree to share data collected through Next Gen?
A.10. The Bureau has not made a determination about potential
actions the agency might consider should the Department of
Education not agree to share data collected through Next Gen.
Q.11. Because Next Gen only pertains to Federal student loan
servicing and not the private student loan market, what
portions of the CFPB's request to OMB to collect data do you
and your staff believe to be still relevant?
A.11. Next Gen will not, in and of itself, affect the relevance
of the data previously requested but the sources of that data
will or may change. As discussed above, the source(s) of the
data for federally owned loans will undoubtedly change. It is
also possible that the sources of information for private
education loans also could change as a result of the
implementation of Next Gen. The Bureau will reassess the data
request once it has clearer insight into how Next Gen will
affect the collection and maintenance of private student loan
data. In the interim, the Bureau would be able to collect the
requested information for private education loans from the
holders or servicers of those loans in the course of
supervisory exams.
Q.12. What and when was the most recent action you have taken
to revise CFPB's information collection request to OMB?
A.12. The Bureau plans to reconsider the collection request
once the Next Gen contracts are finalized by the Department of
Education.
Q.13. The October 2019 report from the CFPB's student loan
ombudsman recommends ``providing limited exceptions to existing
statutes'' regarding data elements collected in complaints to
better reflect and respond to changing environments. What
statutory language is this recommendation referring to and what
type of exception would be helpful?
A.13. This recommendation refers to the Paperwork Reduction
Act. Exceptions would include limiting statutory requirements
that otherwise lengthen the time periods regarding making
changes to the collection of relevant data as the markets and
issues evolve and change.
Q.14. Please describe the actions that are already underway or
planned ``for more in-depth analysis [of the factors leading
to] the decrease in complaints'' related to Federal student
loan servicers between 2017 and 2019, as reported in the
October 2019 student loan ombudsman report.
A.14. Actions planned for more in-depth analysis include adding
an analyst as part of the office staffing plan; reaching out to
student loan advocacy groups, industry trade associations, and
the Department of Education for their insights and analysis;
and coordinating internally with Research and Markets.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR SINEMA
FROM KATHY KRANINGER
Q.1. In past statements, you have expressed the CFPB's intent
to ensure a smooth transition away from the Government
sponsored enterprise (GSE) patch. There is concern that
allowing the patch to expire will limit access to mortgages for
many low-income borrowers, making home ownership more difficult
to achieve. What kind of market disruption do you anticipate in
2021 when the patch expires? What steps is the CFPB taking to
mitigate market disruption and harm to consumers?
A.1. The Bureau is committed to a smooth transition from the
GSE patch in order to mitigate any disruption to the market and
to limit the potential for harm to consumers. As outlined in
the 2014 Ability-to-Repay/Qualified Mortgage (ATR/QM) Rule, the
patch was intended to be a temporary measure to address
conditions in the mortgage market. The Bureau released an
advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) in July, noting
that it plans to allow the patch to expire in January 2021, or
after an extension to facilitate a smooth and orderly
transition from the patch. In the ANPR, the Bureau requested
comments about possible amendments to the definition of
Qualified Mortgage in the ATR/QM Rule in light of the
expiration of the patch to facilitate a smooth and orderly
transition away from the patch. The Bureau also sought comment
on how long of a transition period would be necessary for the
market to implement changes in response to any such amendments.
The Bureau is currently considering those comments as it
decides what steps to take to promote a smooth transition away
from the patch.
Additional Material Supplied for the Record
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]