- REDUCING HEALTH CARE COSTS: ELIMINATING EXCESS HEALTH CARE SPENDING AND IMPROVING QUALITY AND VALUE FOR PATIENTS
[Senate Hearing 115-828]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-828
REDUCING HEALTH CARE COSTS:
ELIMINATING EXCESS HEALTH CARE
SPENDING AND IMPROVING QUALITY
AND VALUE FOR PATIENTS
=======================================================================
HEARING
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION,
LABOR, AND PENSIONS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
ON
EXAMINING REDUCING HEALTH CARE COSTS, FOCUSING ON ELIMINATING EXCESS
HEALTH CARE SPENDING AND IMPROVING QUALITY AND VALUE FOR PATIENTS
__________
JULY 17, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-887 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION, LABOR, AND PENSIONS
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee, Chairman
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming		PATTY MURRAY, Washington
RICHARD BURR, North Carolina		BERNARD SANDERS (I), Vermont
JOHNNY ISAKSON, Georgia			ROBERT P. CASEY, JR., Pennsylvania
RAND PAUL, Kentucky			MICHAEL F. BENNET, Colorado
SUSAN M. COLLINS, Maine			TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
BILL CASSIDY, M.D., Louisiana		CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
TODD YOUNG, Indiana			ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
ORRIN G. HATCH, Utah			TIM KAINE, Virginia
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas			MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska			TINA SMITH, Minnesota
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina		DOUG JONES, Alabama
David P. Cleary, Republican Staff Director
Lindsey Ward Seidman, Republican Deputy Staff Director
Evan Schatz, Democratic Staff Director
John Righter, Democratic Deputy Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
STATEMENTS
TUESDAY, JULY 17, 2018
Page
Committee Members
Alexander, Hon. Lamar, Chairman, Committee on Health, Education,
Labor, and Pensions, Opening statement.........................
1
Murray, Hon. Patty, Ranking Member, a U.S. Senator from the State
of Washington, Opening statement...............................
3
Witnesses
Balser, Jeff, M.D., Ph.D., President and Chief Executive Officer,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Dean, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN...................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
7
Summary statement............................................
12
Safyer, Steven M., M.D., President and Chief Executive Officer,
Montefiore Health System, Bronx, NY............................
12
Prepared statement...........................................
14
Summary statement............................................
17
Lansky, David, Ph.D., President and Chief Executive Officer,
Pacific Business Group on Health (PBGH), San Francisco, CA.....
17
Prepared statement...........................................
20
Summary statement............................................
25
James, Brent, M.D., M.Stat., Clinical Professor, Department of
Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Member,
National Academy of Medicine, Stanford, CA.....................
26
Prepared statement...........................................
28
Summary statement............................................
34
REDUCING HEALTH CARE COSTS:
ELIMINATING EXCESS HEALTH CARE
SPENDING AND IMPROVING QUALITY
AND VALUE FOR PATIENTS
----------
Tuesday, July 17, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m. in
Room SD-430, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lamar
Alexander, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Alexander [presiding], Collins, Cassidy,
Young, Scott, Murray, Bennet, Baldwin, Warren, Hassan, Kaine,
and Smith.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR ALEXANDER
The Chairman. The Senate Committee on Health, Education,
Labor, and Pensions will please come to order.
Senator Murray and I will each have an opening statement,
and then I will introduce the witnesses. We welcome each of you
and we would ask you to summarize your remarks in 5 minutes,
and then we will have a 5-minute round of questions from
Senators.
A retired engineer in Tennessee, who suffers from a number
of health problems--diabetes, high blood pressure, depression,
and chronic pancreatitis--visited Vanderbilt University Medical
Center's emergency room 11 times last year and had to be
admitted to the hospital 3 times.
At Vanderbilt, a pattern like that is a flag for
Vanderbilt's Familiar Faces program started in 2017 to identify
patients with chronic diseases, who make frequent visits to the
emergency room and clinics, often resulting in hospital stays.
Emergency room visits and hospital stays are expensive for
patients and the health care systems as a whole. So the
Familiar Faces program works to help those patients reduce the
amount of time they spend in the hospital by developing a plan
to help patients better manage their chronic conditions by
receiving regular care and treatment.
After participating in the Vanderbilt Familiar Faces
program since September 2017, the retired engineer has been
able to avoid the emergency room completely, instead only
visiting an outpatient clinic twice.
This is the second in a series of hearings to look at how
to reduce health care costs as they continue to increase for
families, taxpayers, and employers.
Our focus today is on reducing wasted health care spending,
which is important given the estimated amount we spend on
unnecessary services, such as the visits to Vanderbilt's
emergency room I just described, excessive administrative
costs, fraud, and other problems. It is a great, big number
$750 billion in 2009 or as much as 30 percent of our total
health care spending according to the National Academies.
At today's hearing, we will discuss two of these categories
of wasteful spending:
One, unnecessary spending. This is spending that does not
actually help patients get better or was spent on unnecessary
medical tests, services, procedures, or medications.
Two, lack of preventive care. This results in spending
money on health care services that could have been avoided if
the patient had received care earlier.
Unnecessary spending is a burden on the health care system,
and on the patients who undergo tests and procedures that may
not be medically necessary who are then stuck with the bill.
We need to find ways to improve care and maximize the
quality of the health care patients do receive by looking at
what medical tests, services, procedures, or medications are
really necessary. Or, are there more cost-effective
alternatives?
Here is an example of a more cost-effective alternative:
If Sue has minor back pain, instead of her doctor ordering
a CT scan or an MRI, which are expensive, Sue would likely be
better off taking over-the-counter medicine, using heat, and
exercising according to the American Academy of Family
Physicians.
Another example is educating a patient on the cost
difference between a hip replacement surgery at a hospital
where the procedure will cost a lot more than if the patient
had the same procedure, even with the same surgeon, at an
outpatient clinic.
Wasted health care spending can also come from not spending
enough on preventive care. The Cleveland Clinic has said that
if you achieve at least four of six normal measures of good
health in two behaviors, you will avoid chronic disease about
80 percent of the time.
The six indicators are: blood pressure, cholesterol level,
blood sugar, Body Mass Index, smoking status, and the ability
to fulfill the physical requirements of your job.
The two behaviors are: seeing your primary care physician
regularly and keeping immunizations up to date.
This is important because we spend more than 84 percent of
our health care costs, or $2.6 trillion, treating chronic
diseases, according to Dr. Roizen at the Cleveland Clinic, who
testified before our Committee last year.
However, according to the Organization of Economic
Cooperation and Development, the U.S. has the highest obesity
rate in the world at 38 percent. So it seems we are not doing a
very good of taking care of ourselves.
At this second hearing, I hope to learn from our witnesses
specific recommendations on how to start investing more in
preventive care, how to stop spending money on unnecessary
medical tests, services, procedures, or medications.
We have four distinguished witnesses today who are
implementing innovative strategies to encourage better care, as
opposed to just more care, and to encourage patients to live
healthier lives. I look forward to their testimony.
Senator Murray.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR MURRAY
Senator Murray. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Before I begin, I do want to emphasize how important it is
that we all continue to hold the Trump administration
accountable for the chaos and heartbreak it has caused
thousands of children it has cruelly and needlessly separated
from their parents.
We have gotten some updates, but there are still a lot of
questions that have not been answered, a lot of families that
have not been reunited, and therefore a lot of work that has to
be done fast.
I am absolutely not going to let up on holding the Trump
administration accountable on this. I am going to keep asking
questions, and demanding answers, and fighting to make sure
those kids and their families are being treated fairly and
humanely.
Now today, as we continue our discussion on health care
costs I, too, have heard from families across my State of
Washington, who feel overwhelmed by the burden of skyrocketing
prescription drug costs, rising premiums, and surprise medical
bills that they were not expecting. I know families across the
country feel the same way.
Unfortunately, the President has utterly failed to address
the problem of rising health care costs. While drug companies
have raised prices sky high, President Trump has not taken any
meaningful action.
Instead, he has enabled the industry's bad behavior by
touting a drug pricing blueprint so empty it sent
pharmaceutical stocks soaring, and pretending Pfizer's decision
to temporarily delay a price hike is the same as a price cut.
In fact, we confirmed last week that some of the policies
in his blueprint were actually proposed by the pharmaceutical
industry. That is not reform. That is an inside job, and
patients around the country struggling to pay for their
prescriptions know the difference.
When it comes to helping people afford the care that they
need, President Trump's record is worse. Since day one,
President Trump has never wavered in trying to undermine
families' health care and raise their costs.
After families across the country stood up and rejected the
Trumpcare bills that would have spiked premiums and gutted
Medicaid, and put families back at the mercy of the big
insurance companies--who could have priced people with
preexisting conditions out of care--he decided to do everything
he could to sabotage families' health care from the Oval Office
by:
Championing tax cuts that benefitted massive insurers and
drug companies, but were paid for by policies that even his
former Health Secretary admitted would increase premiums for
families;
Slashing investments in helping people understand their
health care options and get covered;
Handing control back to insurance companies, making it
easier for them to sell junk plans that ignore patient
protections--like those for people with preexisting conditions,
women, and seniors--leaving them unable to afford care.
After Justice Kennedy announced his retirement from the
Supreme Court, President Trump took one of the most concerning
steps yet to sabotage health care for families.
As a candidate, President Trump promised he would pick
Supreme Court nominees who would support his efforts to
rollback preexisting condition protections. And last week he
picked Judge Kavanaugh, someone who was vetted by far-right
groups to do just that.
President Trump clearly does not doubt Judge Kavanaugh
would strike down protections for people with preexisting
conditions, so we should not doubt it either.
For patients across the country, the future of the Supreme
Court is not a matter of partisan politics. It is a matter of
life and death.
So I hope Republicans are listening to the people across
the country speaking out about their concerns. I also hope they
will listen to families who want us to work together to reduce
health care costs.
Previously in this Committee, we actually made some
promising progress. We sat down and hammered out a bipartisan
compromise that would have helped bring down health costs for
patients and families facing higher premiums this year. I was
deeply disappointed that Republican leaders blocked our
bipartisan legislation.
But I want you to know, Democrats still are at the table.
We are still interested in finding commonsense solutions to
help reverse some of the damage of President Trump's health
care sabotage, and reduce these skyrocketing costs families
across the country are struggling to pay.
In addition to resuming that bipartisan work to address
those rising health care premiums, I am hopeful we can start
working to find common ground on other challenges families face
when it comes to health care costs.
At our last hearing on this issue, the Chairman and I both
shared stories from patients in our home states who had
struggled with unexpected health care costs due to surprise
balance-billing. Patients who had insurance, but were caught
off guard by large charges from out-of-network care providers,
even if they went to an in-network hospital.
I know other Members of the Committee are interested in
addressing this as well. I am eager to hear their ideas.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all of our
witnesses for joining us today. I look forward to hearing from
all of you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Murray.
Thanks to the witnesses for coming.
The first witness we will hear from--and we will go from
right to left, from our right to left--is Dr. Jeff Balser,
President and Chief Executive of Vanderbilt University Medical
Center and Dean of the Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine.
Under his leadership, Vanderbilt Medical Center has reduced
spending on unnecessary health care, including a $230 million
cost reduction from 2013 to 2014.
Next, we will hear from Dr. Steven Safyer. He is President
and Chief Executive Officer of Montefiore Health System in New
York.
Previously, he held a number of other leadership roles at
the Health System including Senior Vice President and Chief
Medical Officer.
Next, we will hear from Dr. David Lansky. He is President
and Chief Executive Officer of the Pacific Business Group on
Health in California. That is a coalition of 60 private and
public organizations that are looking at ways to promote high
quality and more affordable health care.
Finally, Dr. Brent James, Clinical Professor in the
Department of Medicine at the Stanford University School of
Medicine in California. He is a Member if the National Academy
of Medicine and their Institute of Medicine where he helped
with a 2013 report on how to provide better care at lower cost.
Welcome to each of you.
Dr. Balser, let us begin with you and go down the line.
STATEMENT OF JEFFREY R. BALSER, M.D., PH.D., PRESIDENT AND
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, VANDERBILT UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CENTER,
DEAN, VANDERBILT UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, NASHVILLE,
TENNESSEE
Dr. Balser. Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and
Members of the Committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today about
how we can reduce unnecessary health care spending.
My comments are informed by experiences leading the
Vanderbilt University Medicine Center, a large academic health
center with the honor of serving people nationwide in research,
through training and, of course, clinical care.
We see over 2 million patient visits per year in our
hospitals and over 140 clinics throughout Tennessee and the
surrounding five state region. We impact the care of many more
people in that region through an affiliated health care network
that we have built with over 5,000 clinicians in 60-plus
hospitals.
As Senator Alexander mentioned in his comments, the
trillion dollars of annual waste in health care has many
causes, but an aspect I will highlight today is our inability
to get the right information to clinicians so they can provide
the care that is not only safe, but value-driven; meaning,
informed by both quality and cost.
We are well aware of the challenges related to escalating
drug costs from generics, like epinephrine, to the new cutting
edge precision therapies. The National Institutes of Health's
All of Us Research Program, with its research and data center
based at Vanderbilt, is certain to reveal even more ways to
leverage vital information in our DNA sequences to save lives,
making it all the more important that we become much better at
managing the cost of therapy.
While the escalation in drug costs is remarkable, it is
also true that on the whole, health care delivery has not
systematically managed which drugs we administer to patients to
optimize value.
I am not suggesting that the drugs doctors generally order
are wrong or bad for patients. However, there are many choices
and too often we fail to systematically provide timely
information to help clinicians make value-based choices.
Even in the simplest situation, such as a common infection,
the offending organism may be sensitive to as many as ten
antibiotics that are all effective, yet the range of prices for
those drugs could differ by a factor of 10 or even 100. The
health care team often will have little information on those
details.
At Vanderbilt, our pioneering effort to develop one of the
first health information systems capable of delivering this
kind of information to the bedside dates to the late 1990's.
However, we learned early on that technology alone is not
sufficient to change practice.
Over the years, we have also engaged our clinicians to help
us formulate the best practice, guided by a clinician-led
pharmacy and therapeutics committee. Importantly, our
clinicians can override the electronic decision support based
on their view of the clinical situation.
Does it work? Since 2010, inpatient drug expense, even
corrected for discharge volume and disease severity, has more
than doubled across teaching hospitals in America that, as a
group, perform the Nation's most complex care. Over this time,
Vanderbilt has managed to hold costs well below the national
median, saving about $35 million a year.
Given this success, we have begun to expand the same
practice to diagnostic test ordering, an even larger
opportunity. In one example, genetic testing, we have already
estimated that $1 million in annual costs can be saved and we
are just getting started.
My second example focuses on a different kind of waste.
Studies estimate that approximately 5 percent of patients
account for roughly half of U.S. health care spending. These
exceptionally high utilizers of health care resources are
patients that require distinctive strategies.
For example, children with complex, chronic conditions
require the care of numerous subspecialists. As a result, the
care is often fragmented, lacking an overarching plan. About 1
percent of pediatric patients are considered medically complex
and account for as much as one-third of total child health care
spending.
We have developed a medical home model dedicated to these
patients and their families, ensuring they have a
``quarterback'' to help them coordinate care across different
specialties. The impact has been extraordinary.
For over two years, patients saw an 89 percent reduction in
inpatient hospital days and a 63 percent reduction in emergency
room visits.
For a perspective, according to a 2014 analysis in ``Health
Affairs,'' a nationwide reduction in pediatric inpatient
hospital days of only 10 percent would free up $2.9 billion in
costs to Medicaid. A similar program, that Senator Alexander
mentioned, focuses on adult patients called our Familiar Faces
program and is showing comparable benefits.
Given the magnitude of the cost savings, we should consider
payment models that encourage care coordination. Notably, the
ACE Kids Act has been introduced to address some of these
challenges health systems face including obtaining
reimbursement across state lines for children with complex
chronic conditions.
Thank you, again, for the opportunity to appear before you
today, and I look forward to the Committee's questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Balser follows:]
prepared statement of jeffrey r. balser
Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and Members of the
Committee, thank you for affording me the opportunity to speak with you
today to share thoughts on how we collectively might make inroads in
reducing unnecessary and wasteful spending within our nation's
healthcare system. I applaud the Chairman and this Committee for
embarking on hearings aimed at exploring the drivers of healthcare cost
growth and potential remedies to curtail this growth--for everyone from
patients to payers and provider systems.
My comments are informed by experiences leading the Vanderbilt
University Medical Center (VUMC) as its President and CEO. VUMC, in its
4 campus hospitals, over 140 clinics, and its affiliated clinical
network of over 5000 clinicians and 60 plus hospitals stretching across
5 states, functions as the largest, provider-led, health resource to
patients in the Southeastern portion of the U.S. Based in Nashville TN,
we serve patients locally and nationwide through research, training,
and of course clinical care. In several disease areas, particularly
those requiring high complexity care such as pediatric heart
transplantation, or CAR T-cell therapy, a novel, effective, but
incredibly expensive anti-cancer therapy, we play a unique role as the
essential resource for people living in the mid-southern region of the
US. This regional distinctiveness, and the similar role many other
academic health centers play in their regions, will inform some of my
comments today around allocation of resources for cost effectiveness. I
am also informed by experiences leading large-scale initiatives at
Vanderbilt involving the application of health information technology.
For example, VUMC has taken a leading role in driving nationwide
advances in the integration of health information technology with
genomic medicine, culminating in the decision by the National
Institutes of Health to locate the Data and Research Center for the All
of Us Precision Medicine Initiative at our center.
Nearly all analyses have shown that amid myriad causes for the
rising cost of healthcare, from accelerating technology to inflated
pricing, by far the largest single issue is waste. Most sources,
including Consumer's Union and PricewaterhouseCoopers, find that waste
of all forms consumes about 1 out of every 3 healthcare dollars, or
roughly $1 Trillion of the $3 Trillion the U.S. spends on healthcare.
The waste has many causes. Certainly, the dizzying complexity of our
healthcare payment system, with its administrative--or so-called
``frictional'' expenses--is being addressed in other sessions, and I
will not attempt to address that issue today. The largest sources of
waste are euphemistically termed ``unnecessary services,'' and frankly,
in most other industries would be less generously labeled
``sloppiness.'' The root causes are predominantly system failures in
our ability to effectively communicate - not only in transmitting the
key information about our patients and the care they are receiving, but
also shortcomings in the decision support that clinicians need to
provide care that is timely and cost-effective - within and across our
healthcare systems. The examples are legendary and range from failure
to share simple laboratory or radiological test information between
doctors working across states, across town or even within the same
institution, to utilizing drugs or tests that could be replaced with
less expensive and equally effective alternatives, or in some cases,
eliminated entirely, with no impact on patient outcomes.
I have focused my prepared testimony on highlighting examples that
fall into two buckets: (1) strategies that reduce the variability,
volume and cost of drug and diagnostic test ordering, leveraging health
IT and clinical decision support protocols; and (2) patient-centered
care models focused on the needs of our most complex patients, who
consume a vastly disproportionate amount of healthcare resources. I
will also briefly touch on the potential for us as a society to improve
the dialogue around healthcare choices for individuals and families at
the end of life.
Reducing Variability, Volume, and Cost of Drug and Diagnostic Ordering
We are all well aware of the challenges related to escalating drug
costs. These issues transcend drug class - we've seen it for the
generic drugs we've used for decades, such as epinephrine, as well as
for the new cutting-edge therapies such as the biologics showing
remarkable success in diseases ranging from cancer to common immune
disorders such as inflammatory bowel disease. The FDA approvals for new
molecular entities and new biologic licenses have more than doubled
over the past decade. As efforts to better target therapies to our
individual molecular makeup progress, the cost challenge with new
therapies has the potential to amplify. At VUMC, like the rest of the
country, we've experienced remarkable increases in our cost to purchase
the drugs we administer to patients in our facilities, growing by as
much as 10 percent per year over the last decade.
While the escalation in how much our drugs cost is remarkable, if
we are honest with ourselves, we must also admit that in most
healthcare systems, unlike most businesses, we do not systematically
try to manage what tests we order, and which drugs we administer to
patients in a manner that has the potential to optimize quality and
cost. I am not suggesting that the drugs and tests doctors are
generally ordering are wrong or bad for patients; however, there are
often many alternatives in healthcare, and our system fails to
systematically provide timely information to help clinicians make
value-based choices that consider cost and quality. In even the
simplest situation, such as a common infection, the offending organism
may be sensitive to as many as five or even 10 antibiotics that will
all have acceptable efficacy, yet the range of prices for those drugs
could differ by a factor of 10 - or even 100, and the healthcare team
often will have little or no information on those important details.
Moreover, the recommendations from studies being published showing
that drug A is actually better than drug B in a given clinical
scenario, and the factors impacting the cost of drugs A and B in the
marketplace - both important to optimizing quality and cost - are
changing weekly, and sometimes daily. This kind of information is not
practical for our doctors to access as they care for patients, and even
if it were, the evidence suggests that the number of facts that
clinicians need to consider to make the best possible decision in every
situation already is exceeding human cognitive capacity (William Stead,
Academic Medicine, August 2010).
My point is that we are not providing the best options to our
clinicians in a systematic and useful way, as they order literally
thousands of tests and drugs each year. As such, we are allowing one of
the most expensive features of healthcare practice to proceed at the
discretion of many thousands of qualified individual experts, without
any reasonable systemic feedback or other methods that could allow us
to manage what we know is tremendous variability. While nearly all
hospitals have a ``drug formulary committee'' that determines which
drugs can be accessed by clinicians for patients admitted to the
facility, few such committees have the resources necessary to determine
in real time what the most cost-effective choices are in a wide range
of specific clinical settings, and even fewer have the ability to
provide that information in a useful way to clinicians. Only very large
comprehensive health systems, typically the major academic medical
centers and teaching hospitals, employ the large cohorts of specialist
physicians capable of making these determinations in a manner that
approaches ``real time.'' Further, most health systems in the U.S. do
not employ their clinicians and are therefore far less able to
influence their care decisions. Some of the institutions making the
most visible progress in this arena, such as VUMC, Mayo, The Cleveland
Clinic, and Geisinger do employ most of the clinicians working in their
hospitals, but this remains the exception. As such, health systems
struggle to effectively engage clinicians, particularly those they do
not employ, in ways that are conducive to alignment and consistency in
clinical practice.
At VUMC, implementation of clinical decision support systems to
guide physicians when choosing certain tests or drugs has been a two
decade-long organizational management journey. Our efforts to develop
one of the first state-of-the-art health information technology systems
capable of effecting this kind of clinical decision support at the
bedside dates to the late 1990s, and was a necessary innovation to
allow us to project evidence-based recommendations to many hundreds of
clinicians in daily practice. However, technology alone has by no means
been sufficient to changing practice. Over the years, we have engaged
our clinicians extensively, asking them to help us formulate ``best
practice'' for patient orders discipline-by-discipline, guided by an
active and dynamic clinician-led pharmacy and therapeutics committee.
Importantly, we make it a practice to allow our clinicians to override
the ``recommended option'' from electronic decision support, based on
their view of the clinical situation. We find this approach greatly
improves adoption by our clinicians for reasons that are intuitive. The
vast majority of the waste in drug and test ordering is not conscious
variability - in other words, clinicians are often not driven by
scientific evidence to use drug A over drug B, but instead make these
choices from habit or earlier training. As such, the majority of the
variability we see in drug and test ordering, like many facets of
healthcare, is unconscious and unsupported by evidence. Our goal with
electronic clinical decision support is to eliminate unconscious
variability, leaving conscious decisions to specify care to the
clinician's discretion.
Does it work? We could provide a number of examples, but perhaps
the most compelling data is our trend at VUMC for the drug expenditures
we can most readily control from a process perspective, those related
to inpatients admitted to our adult and children's hospitals. Since
2010, inpatient drug expense per weighted discharge (accounting for the
severity of illness) has more than doubled across teaching hospitals
performing the nation's most complex care, not surprising given the
trends already discussed in drug costs (see Figure). Over the same
period, at VUMC we've managed to hold costs far below this level - at
well below half of the median national trend. Our cost increase from
2010--2016 was 50 percent, versus a median of 134 percent--saving VUMC
approximately $30-35 Million per year compared to the median teaching
hospital.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Given the success of this approach to drug ordering, we've begun to
expand the practice to manage variability and expense in diagnostic
test ordering. In fact, we've renamed our ``Pharmacy and Therapeutics
Committee,'' the standard in nearly every hospital in the country, to
the ``Pharmacy, Therapeutics, and Diagnostics Committee,'' and have
included key experts in laboratory medicine from our Pathology
Department in the program. In one example, genetic testing, we have
eliminated approximately $1 million in costs annually by altering
orders for tests that could be streamlined, reduced, or eliminated by
requiring either on-line or verbal expert consultation prior to
completing the test order. While an even greater departure from
standard practice than decision-supported drug ordering, the potential
for cost savings with diagnostic testing, especially when including
imaging, is vast and very likely exceeds the potential with drug
ordering. A study by PricewaterhouseCoopers almost a decade ago (2009)
estimated waste due to unnecessary testing approached $210 Billion per
year.
To dramatically reduce this kind of waste, we need health systems
and the clinicians working inside these systems to be aligned. As we
work to solve technical challenges with implementing higher quality
clinical decision support, and to overcome the equally challenging
technical barriers to interoperability between vendor-supplied systems
between medical centers, there remain regulatory and legal barriers to
achieving fundamental alignment. At present, under the anti-kickback
and Stark laws, health systems are largely prohibited from creating
financial incentives that would cause physicians, particularly ones
they do not employ, to order drugs or tests differently, even if those
incentives are in the public's best interest. These laws and related
regulations were established to prevent abuse, and protect the public
treasury from paying for unnecessary care. However, they were not
designed for the current era, where hospitals and clinicians must
increasingly develop and use systems of care. Financial incentives that
support more defined networks of clinicians who agree to deploy the
best and most cost-effective clinical practices will support the
effectiveness of our developing systems of care. Without modernization,
these legal constraints will be an impediment to achieving clinical
alignment that can avoid ineffective or unnecessary care.
Improved Management and Care Coordination of High Utilizers of
Healthcare
Waste related to overconsumption of healthcare is widely
disproportionate - studies estimate that approximately 5 percent of
individuals account for roughly half of
U.S. health care spending. While the models just described that
reduce variability in diagnostic test or drug ordering are effective
approaches to address overutilization in most patients, distinctive
strategies are required for patients who are exceptionally high
utilizers of healthcare resources.
The causes of exceptionally high utilization inform distinctive
approaches. Over-utilization of healthcare services due to behavioral
or mental health conditions, or due to social and economic
circumstances such as homelessness, are situations we could discuss in
the Q&A period, as they do respond to focused programs tailored to
these patient populations. However, the largest group of patients
consuming an exceptional number of costly resources have complex, and
often chronic medical conditions.
Medical Homes for Medically Complex Children
Children with medically complex, chronic conditions that affect
multiple organ systems are invariably expensive patients to treat and
require the care of numerous subspecialists. As a result, care is often
highly fragmented, as individual clinicians, including primary care
physicians, struggle to provide the holistic care these children
require. This leads not only to low quality outcomes, but increased
utilization of acute services. About 1 percent of pediatric patients
are considered medically complex, but they account for as much as one
third of total child healthcare spending, one fourth of all hospital
inpatient days and 40 percent of all pediatric hospital deaths.
At the Monroe Carell Jr. Children's Hospital at Vanderbilt, we have
developed a medical home model dedicated to these patients and their
families, ensuring they have a ``quarterback'' to help them navigate
through the health care system and coordinate care across different
clinicians and subspecialties. The impact of this approach has been
extraordinary. After two years, patients followed in the medical home
saw an 89 percent reduction in inpatient hospital days, a 75 percent
reduction in early readmissions and a 63 percent reduction in ED
visits. For perspective, a nationwide reduction in inpatient hospital
days of only 10 percent would free-up $2.9 Billion in cost to Medicaid
programs, according to an analysis published in Health Affairs in
December of 2014. Program aspects include ensuring continuity of care,
coordination of care, shared decision making with parents, and follow
up care by team members between visits to the hospital. Similar models
are being deployed at other children's hospitals around the nation.
However, the implementation cost for these programs is substantial, a
challenge to scaling these models to their full potential without
support from payers. Federal legislation, the ACE Kids Act, has been
introduced to address some of the challenges health systems face with
obtaining reimbursement across state lines for these children with
complex, chronic conditions. Given the magnitude of the cost-savings
associated with these programs, it would also seem prudent to consider
payment models through Medicaid appropriately tailored to the unique
needs of this patient population, including support for care
coordination.
Adults with Chronic Disease
The Vanderbilt Familiar Faces (VFF) program is an analogous
patient-centered medical home model for adults with chronic disease,
piloted using a multidisciplinary team approach to provide intensive
case management. A feature of care for adults with complex disease is
the varied settings where patients interact with the healthcare system
(versus the potential for a more controlled setting in a children's
hospital). The VFF team identifies high utilizers with complex, chronic
disease, and creates a holistic care plan that incorporates strategies
for managing all touch points where these patients interact with our
health system, from the Emergency Department (ED), to the many
inpatient and outpatient venues these patient utilize, engaging them in
each setting with targeted interventions. As such, extensive use of the
electronic health record for both communication across settings, as
well as establishing and adhering to an individual care-plan for each
patient, is essential. In the first 6 months, hospital discharges and
ED visits for this patient population dropped by nearly 35 percent.
VUMC is now working with TN state officials to explore scaling this
model in the Medicaid population.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Decreased number of touches to VUMC system by active VFF patients for
the 6 months after VFF intervention compared to 6 months prior (updated
05/09/2018)
Addressing End-of-Life Care
Finally, I would be remiss if I did not recommend one additional
topic deserving of our attention--the tremendous overutilization of
healthcare resources at the end of life. Both clinicians and health
systems unquestionably have an obligation to help effect positive
change, and there are constructive ways we could support clinicians and
hospitals on this journey in constructive ways without impacting
patient rights.
In the U.S., more than 40 percent of patients who die from cancer
are admitted to an ICU in the last six months of life (Bekelman et al.,
JAMA, 2016). A Kaiser Family Foundation analysis on end-of-life
spending found that Medicare per capita spending in 2014 was nearly
four times higher for those dying the same year, at $34,529 per
patient, compared to survivors, at $9,121 per patient. In fact, more
than 30 percent of Medicare spending goes toward the five percent of
beneficiaries who die each year, and one-third of that cost--billions
of dollars annually--occurs in the last month of life. It seems clear
that this massive expense, among the highest of any developed country
in the world, is a significant factor fueling health care cost growth.
As of 2014, 80 percent of Americans who died were insured by Medicare,
and ``baby-boomer'' aging will continue to expand the percentage of our
population over age 65.
A 2017 report by the National Academy of Medicine found that while
outcomes for patients in hospice consistently show better quality of
life, not only for the person with serious illness but also for their
family, there remain huge geographic variations in the use of and
access to hospice care in the U.S. Moreover, a 2015 Kaiser Family
Foundation survey found that 89 percent of adults say physicians and
patients should discuss end-of-life issues, yet only 17 percent of
survey respondents said they have had such a discussion with their
healthcare provider. Consequently, 44.5 percent of Medicare
beneficiaries see 10 or more different physicians during the last six
months of life.
At VUMC, we are working across a number of fronts to support more
compassionate and effective care for patients and their families at the
end of life.
Among the most compelling and common-sense approaches is to educate
all clinicians and patients, to ensure we systematically initiate the
discussions necessary to understand and document end-of-life
preferences from patients, early in the patient encounter. Pilot
studies at our center indicate that earlier discussion of end-of-life
issues in selected ambulatory settings, such as cancer clinics, can
help redirect pre-terminal care from the hospital to less expensive
care settings. Here again, the electronic medical record plays an
essential role, not only as a vehicle to record this information, but
in making it visible and easy for the clinician to interpret, to
support the wishes of patients and family members at a time we all know
can be extraordinarily difficult. As we consider the vast array of
incentives CMS now provides to health systems related to the care of
Medicare patients, we should consider including incentives to discuss
and document patient preferences for end-of-life care as a
straightforward means to vastly improve the quality and value of care
for all Americans.
[summary statement of jeffery r. balser]
By most estimates, the cost of waste of all forms in US healthcare
exceeds $1 trillion, roughly one third of total healthcare spending.
While these estimates include the cost of overly complex and
inefficient administrative and payment systems, a sizeable opportunity
also rests in ``unnecessary services'' or overutilization. While
widespread, usable and interoperable health information technology is
the essential scaffold to addressing this issue, sustainable
improvements also require better alignment of clinician and health
system incentives, as well as improved decision support at the point of
care driving both quality and value.
Reducing Variability, Volume, and Cost of Drug and Diagnostic Ordering
VUMC has achieved sizeable savings in inpatient drug costs-
approximately $30 or $35 million a year-through strategies targeted at
reducing the variability, volume and cost of drug and diagnostic test
ordering. Based on this success, similar efforts have been extended to
support diagnostic test ordering, where the potential for cost savings
is even greater. The programs leverage electronic medical records and
clinical decision support protocols, and are driven by a dynamic
physician-led drug and diagnostic formulary committee, informed by
advanced pharmacy support and clinician expertise from broad clinical
specialty areas to guide evidence-based and cost-effective practice at
the point of care.
Improved Management and Care Coordination of High Utilizers
Studies suggest that the 5 percent of individuals requiring the
most complex care account for roughly half of all healthcare spending
nationally. Dr. Balser describes examples of patient-centered care
models for highly complex patients, often with chronic disease, who
consume disproportionate amounts of healthcare resources. A model at
Vanderbilt's children's hospital ensures medical complex children and
their families have a ``clinical quarterback'' to help navigate through
the healthcare system and coordinate care across a multitude of
clinical specialists. After two years, patients managed through this
intensive, high-touch approach saw an 89 percent reduction in inpatient
hospital days, a 75 percent reduction in early hospital readmissions,
and a 63 percent reduction in ED visits. Dr. Balser's testimony
concludes with a brief discussion of high resource utilization
associated with care at the end of life, costs which are markedly
higher in the U.S. than other nations.
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Balser.
Dr. Safyer, welcome.
STATEMENT OF STEVEN M. SAFYER, M.D., PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, MONTEFIORE HEALTH SYSTEM, BRONX, NEW YORK
Dr. Safyer. Chairman Alexander, and Ranking Member Murray,
and Members of the Committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss Montefiore's model
for improving quality and managing cost.
Dr. Steven Safyer, I am the President and Chief Executive
Officer of the Montefiore Health System and the Albert Einstein
College of Medicine located in the Bronx, New York.
We serve the Bronx, Westchester, Rockland, and Orange
counties in the State of New York. That geography has just
short of 4 million individuals. The Bronx being more towards
challenged economically and poor, moving up into an arena where
there is more commercial insurance and a better sort of
standard of living.
We are an integrated system that includes 11 hospitals, 250
ambulatory care centers, a nursing home, homecare, and more. As
the ninth largest teaching program in the country, we teach the
most complicated medicine and we do it within an environment of
value-based care teaching young physicians population health
management, which is what we are going to address today.
We are unique as an academic medical center, but not alone.
With a high percentage of Medicaid and Medicare patents--85
percent of our patients are either in Medicare, Medicaid, or
both which is unusual for an academic medical center--we make
the most of every single health care dollar by aligning
financial incentives with payers.
When patients do well, we succeed financially by sharing in
the savings. I believe that is the secret, which is, we are in
sync with the payer, whoever they may be.
In 1995, Montefiore began to negotiate value-based
contracts with health plans before the term was widely used. We
employed a population health management approach identifying
and stratifying at-risk populations.
As a pioneer ACO, Montefiore generated more than $73
million in savings over five years. We began with 21
institutions. We ended with 7. In that period of time, our
quality went to the 95 percentile and our spend was
significantly important, $73 million, which we got to share
with the Federal Government.
The pioneer ACO program was a catalyst for expansion of our
value-based contracts. We now have over 400,000 lives in risk
that has upside and downside components to it.
We now have over 55,000 Medicare beneficiaries in a legacy
program with the Federal Government, which is called Next
Generation ACO, and we are moving forward with that.
Our ACO network now extends beyond the Montefiore Health
System. The network comprises more than 3,800 physicians,
almost 30 percent of whom are in private practice in their
communities. We worked hard to recruit non-employed providers
as partners in the ACO.
Over the years, we have learned that to be successful, an
ACO must promote primary care and efficiently use scarce
financial resources. We shifted many services, like blood
transfusions that traditionally involve several days in the
hospital, to being outpatient procedures.
I like Familiar Faces. We call it diabetes prevention
programs, but these are patients that are identified, most of
them are obese, Type 2 diabetes. By the way, over 50 percent of
the Bronx is obese.
We provide for them a program that goes on for a number of
months, and then we follow them later where we teach them how
to eat, how to exercise, how to think about their health care,
and really take a whole new view. These are not in our program
necessarily. They were just patients that live in our community
that we reach out to.
We have done similar things with congestive heart failure,
End Stage Renal Disease, and all the other big targets that we
need to do better and spend less.
Patients with substance use disorder also have high costs,
about 90 percent more, and we have worked very hard with that
group to support them extensively.
I just have to say, it is important for you all to look at
42 CFR Part 2 regulations to align with the HIPAA standards
because drug use disorders now are segregated in the record,
and you cannot even find it sometimes.
While we have learned a lot over the past 20-plus years
taking risks, stability is the key of success for providers and
patients. The government needs stability in its spending.
Providers need stability in reimbursement.
As a provider that runs on low margins because of our
governmental payer mix, we depend on the programs that account
for caring for low income patients like Disproportionate Share
funding, like 340B, and we depend on Graduate Medical Education
to fund our training programs, which is our pipeline to the
future.
We are confident that learning from our pioneer ACO success
will strengthen the future of health care. In addition, we
believe that organizations such as Montefiore, who care for a
preponderance of Medicaid and Medicare beneficiaries, were
successful in containing costs through value-based programs
should have a different payment structure.
So I will end there and I am looking forward to the
dialogue. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Safyer follows:]
prepared statement of steven m. safyer
Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and Members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss Montefiore's model
for improving quality and value and eliminating excess health care
spending.
My name is Dr. Steven Safyer, and I am the President and Chief
Executive Officer of Montefiore Medicine, the umbrella organization for
Montefiore Health System, one of New York's premier academic health
systems, and Albert Einstein College of Medicine (Einstein), one of the
top medical schools in the country with $175 million annually in NIH
funding. We are the health care anchors in the Bronx, Westchester,
Rockland and Orange counties, a region of close to 4 million people. We
combine nationally recognized clinical excellence with expertise in
accountable, value-based care settings that focus on optimizing
patients' health and well-being, as well as the health of their
families and the community.
Montefiore's mission is to heal, to teach, to discover and to
advance the health of the communities we serve, and this mission
continues a commitment that began over 130 years ago to provide
equitable and socially-just care to all whom we serve. Throughout our
history, Montefiore has modeled its services and research agenda in
partnership with our communities, to address both the underlying
socioeconomic factors that affect health and specific public health
challenges: from the tuberculosis epidemic in the late 19th century, to
infant mortality; from lead poisoning, to the HIV/AIDS epidemic in the
1980s; from the substance abuse epidemic that has never left the Bronx,
to more recently, the high prevalence of diabetes, obesity and asthma.
The majority of the communities for which Montefiore cares are under-
resourced, and have high rates of chronic diseases, influenced by
myriad socioeconomic factors and are significantly hit by the recent
opioid crisis. Montefiore is responsive to both the health and
socioeconomic challenges faced by the communities and serves as an
anchor institution, providing economic stability and serving as the
largest employer in the regions where we are located.
We are unique among safety-net hospitals in that Montefiore
provides its patients the full spectrum of care--from comprehensive
primary and ambulatory specialty care, to the most complex, quaternary
life-saving care. We are an integrated academic health system that
includes 11 hospitals, our innovative Hutchinson Campus (a hospital
without beds), 250 ambulatory centers, 25 school-based health centers,
a nursing home and a home care agency. Several years ago, we integrated
medical and mental health care at all outpatient sites, including our
pediatric clinics. We have a large mental health and substance abuse
program in all our communities.
We are also the 9th largest teaching program in the country, with
1,500 residents and fellows in training, we study and teach the most
complicated medicine in the country and we do it with a unique view
into underserve populations, their needs and their challenges. And we
do it within an environment of value-based care, teaching young
physicians to be leaders and innovators in population health. We also
value the role of primary care and have one of the preeminent social
medicine programs in the country.
We are also unique as an integrated academic health system with a
high percentage of Medicaid and Medicare patients in our care.
Montefiore is one of the largest providers of Medicaid and Medicare
services in New York State, with 1.3 million Medicaid and 433,000
Medicare beneficiaries living in the four counties we serve. Indeed,
Montefiore provided over 2.5 million primary and specialty care visits
to Medicaid recipients in 2016 alone. Fifty-five percent of our
outpatient visits are Medicaid, and an additional 10 percent are the
uninsured. With 85 percent of patients enrolled in either Medicare,
Medicaid or both, we make the most of every single health care dollar
by aligning financial incentives with payers.
For over 2 decades, Montefiore has led the healthcare industry in
rewarding providers based on quality, rather than quantity of care. As
early as 1995, Montefiore's leadership recognized the need for
transformational change in a healthcare delivery system serving a
preponderance of government program beneficiaries and formed the
Montefiore Independent Practice Association (MIPA) to enable it to
negotiate value-based contracts with health plans. An IPA is similar to
an ACO. It is an organized group of providers, with its own governing
body, that come together as an integrated network focused on improving
the quality of care for individuals and a population while lowering
costs. Montefiore Care Management (CMO) was formed to provide the
infrastructure to manage the care of the patients covered by those
contracts. Before the term was widely used, we employed a population
health management approach, focusing on identifying and stratifying the
at-risk population--primarily those with chronic conditions--and
engaging them with targeted care management interventions.
Montefiore was one of ten organizations that participated in NCQA's
beta testing of its accountable care organization accreditation
standards and processes, and we eagerly applied to become a Pioneer ACO
when that initiative was announced by CMS in 2011. As New York State's
only Pioneer Accountable Care Organization (ACO), we refined our core
capabilities in managing the health of beneficiaries.
Montefiore generated over $73 million in savings to Medicare as an
ACO over the 5 years of the program. In its final year, Montefiore's
Pioneer ACO had more than 3,400 providers responsible for almost 54,000
Medicare beneficiaries. Montefiore had an Overall Quality Score of
95.16 percent in the final year, and performed above the mean Pioneer
ACO scores for the way clinicians communicate. It also received top
scores for the way patients rated their providers. Significant gains
were also seen in key measurements such as body mass index and high
blood pressure screening, as well as flu and pneumococcal vaccinations.
Our physician network comprises more than 3,800 primary care and
specialty physicians, almost 30 percent of whom are in private
practices in their communities. We worked hard to recruit non-employed
(private-practicing) providers as partners in the ACO. While expanding
our model was a goal, many were not experienced in quality reporting
and did not initially have electronic medical records. We invested
enormous resources in helping them be successful. The quality scores by
the private practicing MDs, of note, improved by 50 percent attaining a
level on par with our employed physicians.
The Pioneer ACO program was a catalyst for the expansion of ACO and
risk-based programs. It also allowed us to create aggregate-level
population health interventions for the Medicare fee-for-service
population. We are now participating in the Next Generation ACO program
with 55,000 beneficiaries, and we are optimistic that we will continue
to achieve savings for Medicare and reinvest our share of those savings
in our delivery system.
When we applied to become a Pioneer ACO, Montefiore was a four-
hospital system serving primarily Bronx County, one of the nation's
poorest and most disproportionately disease-burdened counties. Today,
the Montefiore ACO's network includes both Montefiore and non-
Montefiore sites with 13 hospitals, scores of primary, specialty and
mental health outpatient sites, including federally qualified health
centers in New York City, Westchester, Rockland, Orange, and Sullivan
counties.
We have learned that to be successful an ACO has to build an
arsenal of interventions and incentives that promote primary and
preventive care to efficiently use scare financial resources. We focus
on the early identification of illnesses and where possible shift care
to lower-cost settings. We shifted many services, such as blood
transfusions, that traditionally involved a hospital stay to being
outpatient procedures when possible. We have increased our focus on the
socioeconomic determinants of health; partnerships with government
agencies, community organizations and businesses to provide the full
range of services our patients require; and special arrangements with
providers such as skilled nursing facilities to ensure that our
patients are ensured the highest quality, most cost-effective care
across the continuum of care.
We reach out to our highest risk patients who have multiple chronic
and acute care problems to conduct comprehensive health assessments
that cover both medical and behavioral problems and socioeconomic
challenges including housing, employment, nutrition and access to
health care. If you have any doubts about the importance of managing
chronic disease for the health of the patients-- as well as the
nation's health system-- consider this: In our experience 5 percent of
the more than 400,000 individuals covered by Montefiore's value-based
contracts, including the 55,000 Medicare beneficiaries currently
attributed to our NextGen ACO, account for 65 percent of the total cost
of care--and that is largely because of chronic conditions.
We support all physicians and other providers in our ACO to develop
with them a comprehensive care plan and to help them coordinate care.
Montefiore has care management teams with expertise in diabetes,
chronic kidney disease, cancer, heart disease, asthma and COPD, and
behavioral health as well as one team that specialize in helping
patients and their families with care transitions and one composed of
pharmacists that assists patients with understanding and adhering to
their medication regimens. The Montefiore's quality improvement and
provider relations staff assist physician practices on quality
improvement and data reporting and transformation of practices into
Patient Centered Medical Homes (PCMHs).
We appreciate that our patients need access to high quality
providers, who understand their language and culture, are available
when needed and are willing to coordinate with the other providers our
patients see. Our patients need information about their conditions,
help in learning self-management skills and linkages to community and
government sponsored social service agencies to resolve their
socioeconomic challenges. If we don't accommodate these needs, we
cannot succeed in accountable care.
For example, we greatly improved management of patients with End
Stage Renal Disease (ESRD). To do so, we partnered with all providers
involved - Nephrology, Dialysis, Interventional Radiologists, and
Device Manufactures. Early identification is crucial to help prevent
unnecessary inpatient utilization. We leveraged technology solutions to
create a registry of ESRD patients in the electronic health record in
order to more easily identify patients upon presentation to the
emergency department. This also included notifications to the entire
care team, the attending nephrologist, and the patient's dialysis
center upon patient presentation to the emergency department. This
resulted in improvement of ESRD spend by 3.9 percent.
Patients with substance use disorder also have disproportionately
high costs. Based on our experience, patients with substance abuse
disorder have 89 percent higher costs. This represented the most
prominent indicator for increased costs to the system. If a provider is
to be held accountable for the health outcomes of its patients, we must
have access to information about substance abuse. Hence, we support
revising the privacy protections included in SAMHSA's 42 CFR Part 2
regulations to align the standards for all personal health information
with HIPAA standards, in particular for those operating in
predominantly accountable care models.
While we've learned much over our twenty-plus years of taking risk,
perhaps the most important lesson is that stability is the key to
success when you are taking risk. Patients need stability in insurance
coverage and access to care. For example, mental health clinics and
school-based health centers are absolutely crucial yet run at a loss
and are constantly at risk due to financial instability.
Providers need stability in reimbursement (with accountability
built in) and prescription drug costs. As a provider that runs on low
margins, we depend on the payments that account for financial
implications of caring for the uninsured, Medicaid patients, and dual-
eligibles (disproportionate share funding and the 340B program) and the
losses that come as a teaching hospital that takes all patients
regardless of ability to pay (direct and indirect graduate medical
education funding). These needs are real.
The government (federal and states) need stability in health care
costs. I believe we can enable greater stability if providers have more
autonomy to thoughtfully deploy resources to patients, with aligned
financial incentives and a high bar for quality and health outcomes.
Accountable care is not a panacea for every market, but it works in
some, and we are proof.
We are confident that learning from Pioneer successes in improving
quality and value and re-deploying health care resources will
strengthen the future of healthcare. In addition, we believe that
organizations such as Montefiore, who care for a preponderance of
Medicaid and Medicare beneficiaries and who are successful in
containing costs through value-based programs, should have a different
payment structure. This is becoming especially important with the loss
of DSH payments. On behalf of the Montefiore, I look forward to working
with you to achieve our shared goal of a better health system for all
Americans.
Thank you. I will be happy to answer any questions you have.
[summary statement of steven m. safyer]
Montefiore Medicine, the umbrella organization for Montefiore
Health System, one of New York's premier academic health systems, and
Albert Einstein College of Medicine (Einstein), one of the top medical
schools in the country. We serve the nearly 4 million people living in
the Bronx, Westchester, Orange, and Rockland counties of New York, a
combination of rural, urban, and suburban communities. Approximately
eighty-five percent of the patients discharged from our hospitals are
enrolled in Medicare, Medicaid, both programs, or are uninsured.
Einstein is among the top medical schools in the country, with $175
million annually in NIH funding.
We are now one of the largest health systems in the country, and we
have more than 400,000 patients in risk arrangements across Medicare,
Medicaid, and commercial insurance. We do this because getting higher
on the premium stream and flexibly deploying those dollars allows us to
deliver the right care to the right patient in the right setting.
For over 2 decades, Montefiore has led the healthcare industry in
rewarding providers based on quality, rather than quantity of care..
Montefiore began its journey into accountable care in 1995, when it
established some of the critical infrastructure necessary to take
risk--first, an Integrated Provider Network, and second, a Care
Management Organization. Both entities have since grown to encompass
much of the administrative and governance backbone of our accountable
care contracting arrangements, including the federal ACO programs. We
have learned that to be successful an ACO has to build an arsenal of
interventions and incentives that promote primary and preventive care
to efficiently use scare financial resources.
The Pioneer ACO program, of which we were proud to be a part,
remains a bright part of our journey. Montefiore generated more than
$73 million in savings to Medicare over the 5 years of the program
while delivering quality care to patients. In its final year,
Montefiore's Pioneer ACO had more than 3,400 providers responsible for
almost 54,000 Medicare beneficiaries. Montefiore had an Overall Quality
Score of 95.16 percent in the final year. Significant gains were also
seen in key measurements such as body mass index and high blood
pressure screening, as well as flu and pneumococcal vaccinations.
Pioneer (and the subsequent broader ACO program) led the way for
commercial health plans to develop ACO and shared savings
opportunities. This increased our value-based opportunities and helped
us acclimate providers to quality reporting and use of electronic
medical records.
We are confident that learning from Pioneer successes in improving
quality and value and re-deploying health care resources will
strengthen the future of healthcare. In addition, we believe that
organizations such as Montefiore, who care for a preponderance of
Medicaid and Medicare beneficiaries and who are successful in
containing costs through value-based programs, should have a different
payment structure. This is becoming especially important with the loss
of DSH payments.
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Safyer.
Dr. Lansky, welcome.
STATEMENT OF DAVID LANSKY, PH.D., PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, PACIFIC BUSINESS GROUP ON HEALTH, SAN FRANCISCO,
CALIFORNIA
Dr. Lansky. Thank you, Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member
Murray, and Members of the Committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to share the experience of
the large purchasers of health care who are seeking to improve
quality and reduce health care costs as well.
I actually want to begin by sharing one of my personal
experiences over the years. I have been working on reducing
costs and improving quality for about 30 years, and I have been
fortunate to work with three of the great leaders in this field
over that time. There is a common thread that runs through all
those experiences that I have had.
In the 1980's, I worked with Dr. Albert Starr, who invented
the first successful artificial heart valve in 1959, actually.
When he did that, he began a commitment to contact every
patient every year until they died so that he would know the
outcomes of his surgery and be able to continuously improve
what the did. He thought it was part of his professional
obligation to keep track of his patients over time.
In the 1990's, I worked with Paul Ellwood, who was one of
the founders of the Jackson Hole Group and he understood that
he could shape a policy strategy, which we came to call managed
competition, around having health care plans accountable for
the outcomes of care, as well as the total cost of care.
In the last five or six years, I have been working with Dr.
Michael Porter at Harvard Business School, one of our leading
thinkers on strategy and competitiveness, who has argued that
we should move to a model of bundled payments in which the
payment is tied to achieving health outcomes at a known cost.
All three of these leaders have carried forward a thread of
focusing on health outcomes as the goal of our health system
and how we should structure our payment models.
So to your question today of how do we reduce costs in the
American health care system, I say begin by measuring outcomes,
making that data transparent to the public, and insisting that
providers compete on how well they do at achieving health
outcomes for their patients.
As you know, today I lead an organization of health care
purchasers. Together, they spend about $100 billion a year.
They cover about 12 million people. Health care costs are a
huge tax on the productivity and competitiveness of the
American business community. Much of the money comes out of the
pockets of working people, who have not seen wage growth in 20
years.
Despite the growth in costs in health care, our members are
not seeing evidence that their employees are getting better
health care. They are not getting reliable, high quality health
care across the country.
We are not seeing improvements in innovation, or in
quality, or service that we see in other parts of the economy.
Instead, we are finding inertia and resistance to the kind of
transformation that most sectors of our economy have undergone.
Like Drs. Starr, Ellwood, and Porter, our members believe
that we can have an innovative and cost effective health system
if purchasers and individuals are able to choose their
treatments and their providers based on meaningful information
about outcomes and cost.
Our members have tried many strategies to promote higher
value, and they have made very significant investments to
improve the cost and the quality of care. It is actually, to
me, extraordinary and admirable that these companies, whose
main day job is making airplanes and telecommunications
equipment, have actually spent so much time and money trying to
improve the health care system that all of us participate in.
They are trying to reduce costs by improving quality. I will
give you a couple of examples.
Boeing, Intel, Qualcomm, and the Washington State Health
Care Authority in Senator Murray's state, have all engaged in
long term, direct contracts with physicians and hospital
networks under arrangements similar to those in the Medicare
ACO program. These arrangements have significantly improved
quality and patient experience, and also now produce
significant cost savings for both employees and companies.
Wal-Mart and the Lowe's Companies, Lowe's stores, support a
Center of Excellence bundled payment program for employees who
need orthopedic surgery, back surgery, and bariatric surgery.
In this program, patients have zero cost sharing. They pay
nothing if they choose to go to a National Center of Excellence
like Johns Hopkins or Virginia Mason Medical Center.
These centers make sure that:
The surgery is appropriate; that helps save costs.
They agree to collect outcomes data.
They agree to work with each other to identify best
practices and continuously improve.
Most important, because they do superior surgery the first
time through, there are very few complications, very few
admissions to skilled nursing facilities. High quality at the
beginning produces cost savings down the road.
CalPERS and Pacific Gas and Electric Company supported
adoption of a model originally piloted by Boeing in Seattle to
provide advanced primary care for patients with multiple
chronic conditions. These are the same high utilizers we just
heard about that often cost as much as $20,000 per year to care
for.
By paying a care management fee to primary care practices,
and integrating social and health services into primary care,
patients and families reported an increased ability to care for
themselves. They reduced their depression symptoms. They
reduced their emergency room use. They improved their chronic
disease status and they saved about 20 percent in total
spending.
So we take a few key lessons from our members' efforts to
reduce costs:
Excellent care is out there;
Value-based payment models can work;
A strong foundation of primary care is key; and,
Consumer incentives can be helpful.
These are all positive signals, but they come with
cautions. I would suggest several steps for you to consider on
behalf of Congress.
First, the Nation needs to embrace a philosophy of
transparency. Markets cannot work with hidden prices, rebates,
gag clauses, and the like.
Second, we need a substantial national effort to produce
and publicize standardized outcomes data for all major
conditions and procedures.
Third, public and private purchasers must work together to
demand excellence, transparency, and financial stewardship.
Finally, the Federal Government must lead. The buy side is
highly fragmented and lacks the scale or the tools to compel
changes in the behavior of increasingly large health systems,
insurers, and suppliers. Federal policy and purchasing are
vital levers of transformation.
I hope you will continue to stimulate innovation through
programs such as CMMI and value-based purchasing.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Lansky follows:]
prepared statement of david lansky
Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and Members of the
Senate HELP Committee, thank you for the opportunity to share the
experiences of large purchasers of health care in seeking to reduce
health care costs. It is an honor to have been invited to participate
in today's discussion.
My name is David Lansky. I am the President and CEO of the Pacific
Business Group on Health, a coalition of large public and private
purchasers of health care. Together our members spend $100 billion each
year to sponsor health care coverage for about 12 million Americans.
They expect - reasonably - that this enormous investment will assure
that their employees and their families receive high quality,
appropriate and effective care that enables the workforce to be healthy
and productive. Unfortunately, the data needed to judge whether
services are being delivered efficiently and whether optimal health
outcomes are achieved are not available. As a result, neither consumers
nor purchasers can identify and reward high quality care, and
healthcare providers and suppliers are given little incentive to
compete or continuously improve their performance. We believe that the
techniques of value purchasing could drive the evolution of a more
efficient and effective health system, but that these approaches will
not be fully effective until we have meaningful transparency of cost
and outcomes data. Government action will be needed first to create
that information infrastructure and second to use federal purchasing
power to drive value-based competition.
Employers' Understanding of the Problem
Our members share the commitment of Congress and the Administration
to address the cost of health care, in part by accelerating the shift
to value-based health care based on meaningful, transparent outcomes
and pricing information. Because private employers and their employees
pay for about half of US health care, and public programs pay for half,
it is imperative that policymakers collaborate with public and private
purchasers to deploy value of Excellence Network (ECEN) program,
employees of Wal-Mart and Lowes stores, for example, face zero cost-
sharing if they choose to go to a carefully selected, high quality
hospital for surgery. About 25 percent of qualifying patients choose to
use these high performing centers. Employees covered by Safeway stores
and CalPERS face financial disincentives meant to discourage use of
low-value providers: if they choose the high cost provider, they must
pay the full cost of care above a market-set reference price. CalPERS
found that 21 percent of employees switched to a lower cost hospital
when the reference price approach was introduced. \1\ Purchasers
believe there is an appropriate balance of roles between the employer
and the patient: the employer has the expertise to identify high
performing programs and offer modest incentives for their use, and the
patient should have the information and incentives to make the right
decision for themselves. We believe that similar principles could apply
to many public programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\
James C. Robinson and Timothy T. Brown. Increases In Consumer
Cost Sharing Redirect Patient Volumes
Transparency and Performance Information. Most PBGH
members have provided cost and quality transparency information
to their employees, particularly in programs that include high
deductible health plans. There remain significant concerns
about the usefulness of these tools and the level of consumer
engagement, however. To be valuable, such information needs to
fully reflect the cost that the employee will ultimately face,
taking into account such complexities as their own employer's
benefit design, the formulary deployed by their Pharmacy
Benefit Manager, the possibility of out-of-network charges, and
the aggregation of costs across a complex episode of care. The
commonly available tools do not capture all of this
information. Patients also want to know what outcomes they can
expect from care, and whether outcomes vary across providers.
We are strong advocates for the adoption of patient reported
outcome measures across full markets. To demonstrate the value
of this approach, PBGH led the creation of the California Joint
Replacement Registry (now part of the American Joint
Replacement Registry), which captured patients' pain,
functioning and health status following knee and hip surgery
for 41 hospitals. PBGH is now collaborating with the
International Consortium of Health Outcomes Measurement to
implement standard outcome measures in the United States, with
an initial focus on oncology outcome measures throughout
Michigan. In short, purchasers want to see meaningful price
transparency that reflects total cost of care and the
complexities of our payment and cost-sharing systems, and they
want to see widespread availability of meaningful outcome
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
measures.
Implementation of care improvement models: For many
years, purchasers subscribed to the ``managed competition''
model, which held that the purchaser's role was to hold the
health plan or provider system accountable for outcomes and
total cost of care for a population, and then allow providers
to compete for business against those standard metrics. Most of
the contracting approaches described above reflect that
approach: it is not the employer's business to tell the
providers how to deliver care. But this view has changed in
recent years. Many of our members now engage quite vigorously
with their provider partners to ensure conformity to evidence
based guidelines, or even to offer training and improvement
support to the providers. For both large health systems and
small physician practices, we have learned that the expertise
to analyze data, identify opportunities for improvement, and
bring in the necessary training and collaboration resources are
often lacking. As a result, individual employers like Intel and
multi-employer collaboratives are now more prescriptive about
improvement priorities, methods, and measures. PBGH operates
the California Quality Collaborative for this purpose, and has
led implementation of a CMMI-sponsored practice transformation
initiative for 5,000 physicians in California; our colleagues
at the Health Transformation Alliance have recommended specific
diabetes and orthopedics protocols to their contracted
providers; in our centers of excellence network, we convene all
participating hospitals and their surgeons annually to compare
best practices across the network. Our recognition that
purchasers need to engage actively with their provider partners
to ensure that best clinical practices are adopted has a
corollary in federal programs. It will be important to tie
together the federal investments in payment reform, quality
metrics, and improvement support if we want to see significant
transformation in quality, efficiency and accountability.
In addition, I will mention purchasers' increasing interest in
encouraging federal programs to observe and adopt best practices from
successful private sector efforts. Employers and public purchasers have
learned that they are too fragmented and lack the scale to compel
changes in the nation's approach to health care payment or measurement.
They share a vision of a health system in which providers compete for
our business by succeeding at providing high quality care while making
efficient use of resources. But the continuing prevalence of volume-
based payments coupled with a chaotic and burdensome measurement
environment, as well as the persistence of a regulatory regime
originally designed to manage a traditional medical indemnity system
makes it impossible to achieve meaningful competition and the likely
price discipline that could result. For that reason, employers are
enthusiastic about aligning strategies with large state and federal
health care purchasers. PBGH supports a significant public policy
effort, which includes programs to bring employers to Washington to
share lessons learned about emergent purchasing strategies, a
collaborative effort between employers, consumer and patient
organizations to respond to proposed innovation models and rulemaking,
and active participation on advisory bodies at the Congressional Budget
Office, National Quality Forum and similar programs.
Purchasers' Recommendations for Policy Action
We encourage your attention to three main policy approaches that
provide significant opportunities to reduce costs and improve quality:
transparency of health outcomes, strengthening the ACO and bundled
payment programs, and encouraging centers of excellence in Medicare.
Employers also encourage Congress to consider several additional
measures to accelerate the shift to value, addressing primary care,
high drug costs, and competitive markets.
1. Require outcomes-oriented quality measures for priority
conditions: CMS has taken tentative steps towards reducing the burden
of quality measurement by increasing the use of outcomes measures, but
such efforts must be dramatically increased and accelerated. The
federal government can act quickly in three ways:
a. Develop the national infrastructure for
measurement of outcomes across all major conditions
b. Simplify the quality reporting requirements under
MACRA to emphasize standardized outcome measures for each
condition
c. Require the adoption and publication of outcomes
data for all federal payment programs.
2. Strengthen the ACO and bundled payment programs to increase
provider risk for total cost of care: Although accountable care
organizations (ACOs) were initially introduced in the Medicare program,
large employers have aggressively promoted advanced ACO models. For
example, the Boeing Company is contracting directly with accountable
care organizations through its ``Preferred Partnership'' program.
Launched in 2015, Boeing offers direct employer-to-ACO contracts to
more than 60,000 employees and their families in California \2\ ,
Missouri, South Carolina, and Washington. \3\ All of these arrangements
feature two-sided financial risk with shared savings for reduced costs
and improved quality and downside risk if total costs exceed the
targeted trend. Additionally, Boeing negotiates performance standards
for a priority set of metrics, including clinical quality, member
experience and access to care. Furthermore, Boeing expects the ACOs to
offer an intensive outpatient care (IOCP) program to manage the care
for medically complex patients. The experience from ACOs led by large
employers provides lessons that can be applied to Medicare ACOs:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\
Boeing and MemorialCare Partner on Boeing's First California
Customized Health Plan Option Offering Better Benefits and Lower Costs
for Boeing Employees and Their Families. Press Release, June 21, 2016.
https://www.memorialcare.org/about/pressroom/news/boeing-and-
memorialcare-partner-boeing-first-californiacustomized-health-plan.
\3\
M. Stempniak, Will Boeing Change Health Care? (Hospitals &
Health Networks magazine, December 10, 2015) https://www.hhnmag.com/
articles/6709-will-boeing-change-health-care.
a. Patients should be given the opportunity to
actively enroll in ACOs, rather than being passively
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
``attributed'' to health systems.
b. The most successful ACO models include ``two-sided
risk''--that is, they give providers the opportunity to share
in savings if costs go down, as well as the risk of having to
cover costs if total costs go up
c. ACOs should be held accountable to a robust,
standardized and publicly reported set of outcomes-oriented
quality measures that enable consumers to make an informed
choice when choosing to enroll.
3. Enable Medicare beneficiaries to identify and seek care from
high performing centers: In recent years, centers of excellence (CoE)
have become a common feature of commercial insurance and private
purchaser medical care networks. Nearly 90 percent of large employers
expect to use such centers to improve quality of care and
predictability of cost for their employees. \4\ Commercial CoE programs
have primarily been used for common elective procedures and certain
medical conditions with high costs and variability in quality and
price, including hip and knee replacements, spine care, heart surgery,
bariatric surgery, and some oncology services. \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\
National Business Group on Health, Large Employers' 2018
Health Care Strategy and Plan Design Survey.https://
www.businessgrouphealth.org/news/nbgh-news/press-releases/press-
release-details/?ID=334
\5\
The NBGH survey cited above reports 77 percent of employers
using (47 percent) or considering COE for orthopedics; 77 percent for
bariatric; 62 percent for cardiac; 56 percent for cancer.
The Employers Centers of Excellence Network (ECEN)--managed by PBGH
on behalf of our members--has shown significant improvements in health
outcomes and costs. \6\ The ECEN program results demonstrate that it is
possible to save money by reducing unnecessary services, while
improving outcomes and patient experience. Even when factoring in
travel expenses and waived co-pays, negotiated bundled payments for
surgical procedures performed by CoEs cost considerably less, on
average, than what members currently pay for these services. The cost
equation improves even further, since these high quality procedures
produce quality outcomes that can mitigate costly revisions and
infections. Much of the cost reduction comes from avoiding unnecessary
procedures, with top-performing surgeons using evidence-based medicine
to determine surgical appropriateness. Furthermore, 98 percent of
patients recommend the ECEN program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\
Slotkin, Jonathan R., MD, et al. ``Why GE, Boeing, Lowe's, and
Wal-Mart Are Directly Buying Health Care for Employees'', Harvard
Business Review, June 8, 2017. Accessed online 10/9/17 at https://
hbr.org/2017/06/why-geboeing-lowes-and-walmart-are-directly-buying-
health-care-for-employees.
We believe that a well-designed CoE program within traditional
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Medicare would offer:
Better health outcomes than typically achieved by FFS
providers
Lower beneficiary expenses through reduced cost-
sharing
Program cost savings through more appropriate and
higher quality care
System-wide quality and affordability improvements
due to provider competition.Furthermore, the procedures and
conditions that are most commonly included in CoEs--
orthopedics, cardiac care, cancer care, and diabetes--are among
those that affect many Medicare beneficiaries and constitute a
large proportion of Medicare spending.
For a CoE program to be introduced in Medicare, however, several
regulatory, administrative, and political obstacles need to be
addressed. To address these issues, CMMI should consider development of
a voluntary CoE pilot with an appropriate evaluation design to
determine the benefits of CoEs for Medicare beneficiaries. A CoE pilot
would enable CMMI to test bundled payment models as part of a
comprehensive quality improvement program rather than a standalone test
of a new provider payment model. Furthermore, the voluntary nature of a
CoE pilot (for providers as well as beneficiaries) would address CMMI's
concerns about ``mandatory'' bundled payment models. The use of benefit
design under Medicare to reward patients who choose high performing
providers would set an important precedent and be a disruptive force in
the health care system. By setting a high bar and stimulating healthy
competition among providers, a CoE program would be a catalyst for
change that would eventually ``lift all boats'' by improving quality
and affordability system-wide.
These three policy initiatives would send a profound signal to
health care providers, suppliers, and payers. They should be designed
in close alignment with state and private purchasers. Employers also
encourage Congress to consider several additional measures to
accelerate the shift to value, addressing primary care, high drug
costs, and market consolidation.
4. Primary Care
The decisions made in primary care practices have outsize influence
on downstream medical care. A Stanford University study published last
year showed that high value primary care for a commercially insured
population can lead to spending that is 28 percent lower than average
value primary care. The savings are clustered in four areas:
unnecessary surgical and other specialty procedures (41 percent), low
value prescribing (26 percent), avoidable hospitalizations and ED
visits (17 percent), and unnecessary testing (8 percent). The high
value primary care practices did see their patients more often,
resulting in higher spending on office visits, but only by 2 percent.
Rebalancing spending away from specialists and the hospital setting and
towards primary care in the community is important. Employers encourage
their employees and dependents to affiliate with effective primary care
practices, but we are concerned that the national imbalance between
primary and specialty care can only be corrected with strong signals
from the Medicare program. Three policy changes would significantly
strengthen the primary care foundation of our health care system:
1. Develop and implement alternative payment models
that support advanced primary care delivery. For example, the
American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP) has proposed a
payment model for comprehensive care management and
coordination, including payments for services not traditionally
covered by Medicare (e.g., non-face-to-face services), with
financial accountability for quality outcomes and total cost of
care.
2. Increase payment rates for advanced primary care
models that achieve high quality outcomes and reduce total cost
of care. The Medicare Payment Advisory Committee (MedPAC) and
other experts have observed that certain procedures and
specialty services are overpriced, based on the relative value
units (RVUs) used to calculate payment rates to physicians. It
appears that the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS) has relied too heavily on recommendations from the AMA/
Specialty Society Relative Value Scale Update Committee (RUC),
resulting in underpayment for critical primary care services.
Congress and CMS should consider structural and process changes
to correct this imbalance.
3. Promote the uptake of direct primary care (DPC),
which would allow patients to use their HSA dollars to pay the
fixed fees charged by DPC practices. Several bill under
consideration in Congress, including S. 1358--Primary Care
Enhancement Act, would address this need.
5. Drug Costs
The cost of drugs is an increasingly serious problem for employers
and their employees. Growth in drug spending is expected to exceed the
growth in total health care spending in future years, driven largely by
increases in prices for specialty drugs. \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\
Kaiser Family Foundation analysis of National Health
Expenditure (NHE) Historical (1960-2016) and Projected (2017-2026) data
from Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Office of the Actuary,
National Health Statistics Group. https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/
chart-collection/recent-forecasted-trends-prescriptiondrug-spending/?--
sf--s=recent+trends#item-growth-prescription-spending-slowed-2016-
increasing-rapidly-20142015--2016 (accessed 7/14/18).
Large employers are struggling with this cost burden, and they are
in a weak position to negotiate prices with drug manufacturers and
pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs). They recognize that public policy
changes are needed to address the fundamental problems driving high
drug prices, and they support policies that would improve transparency,
increase healthy market competition, and make use of value-based
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
payment models.
One serious problem that employers are trying to address is the
distortion introduced by rebates. Rebates distort the market by
encouraging drug companies to increase list prices to allow for higher
rebates for PBM/PDPs. Because patient cost sharing is typically
calculated based on the list price, a higher list price causes patient
cost sharing to increase. Because drugs with higher list prices
generate higher rebates for PBMs, they are likely to include them on
the formularies in a favorable tier. One example of this waste is
having a branded, expensive drug on the formulary when there are
cheaper generics available. Rebates may also provide an incentive for
the PBM to favor less clinically effective branded drugs over
competitors with lower rebates. Finally, the rebates encourage more
drug use because the rebates are based on volume. We can see these
inefficiencies by looking at the existing formularies and seeing that
nearly all PBM/PDPs include branded drugs on their formularies when
generics are available. We estimate that a ``waste free'' formulary--
based on clinical evidence and rigorous benefit/cost analysis--would
reduce drug spending by between 8 percent and 15 percent with no
adverse effects on patient outcomes. Large employers are beginning to
develop and test the use of a ``waste-free'' formulary, and the lessons
from these initiatives will be relevant to Medicare drug pricing
policy.
A second approach to address the problem is being initiated by
large employers: inclusion of drug costs in accountable care
arrangements. Instead of financing drug benefits separately from other
health care services, these arrangements integrate drug cost management
into the comprehensive quality and cost management of health care.
Specifically, this means that the health systems and provider groups
accept responsibility and accountability for the total cost of care--
including drugs--as well as quality outcomes. The provider systems are
in a better position to evaluate the benefits of drugs and make the
appropriate decisions regarding drug treatment vs. other treatments.
This puts the accountability for clinical and cost decisions in the
right place, and it is more likely to result in lower overall costs and
improved quality. Applying this approach in Medicare is challenging due
to the separation of Part D from Parts A and B, but we encourage CMS to
experiment with integrated payment arrangements, which may point the
way for legislative changes to integrate drugs with other health
benefits under Medicare.
6. Competitive Markets
In addition to these four specific areas, there is a systemic
problem that needs to be addressed the effect of market consolidation
on prices. We know the following:
Market power has enabled providers, drug companies
and others to raise prices, and it is largely the result of
market concentration. According to a recent paper, ``Hospital
prices are positively associated with indicators of hospital
market power. Even after conditioning on many demand and cost
factors, hospital prices in monopoly markets are 15.3 percent
higher than those in markets with four or more hospitals.'' \8\
A recent Kaiser Health News article commented specifically on
the problem of high hospital prices in California. \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\
Zack Cooper, Stuart V. Craig, Martin Gaynor, John Van Reenen,
``The Price Ain't Right? Hospital Prices and Health Spending on the
Privately Insured''. NBER Working Paper No. 21815. Issues in December
2015, Revised in May 2018. http://www.nber.org/papers/w21815
\9\
Chad Terhune, ``As Hospital Chains Grow, So Do Their Prices
for Care'', Kaiser Health News, June 13, 2016. https://khn.org/news/as-
hospital-chains-grow-so-do-their-prices-for-care/
Market concentration has been growing in recent
years. Most hospital markets are already highly concentrated,
and hospitals have also been buying up physician practices. The
trends in consolidation are documented in a recent Health
Affairs article. \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\
Brent Fulton, ``Health Care Market Concentration Trends in
the United States: Evidence and Policy Responses''. Health Affairs 36,
no.9 (2017):1530-1538. https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/10.1377/
hlthaff.2017.0556
Most employers believe that the best way to improve value (improved
quality and patient experience, at lower cost) is through market
forces, i.e., healthy competition among providers, but real competition
no longer exists in many markets. Government action may be needed to
ensure that competition works in a way that benefits consumers and
purchasers. Anti-trust enforcement is one policy lever, but its
effectiveness is limited, especially in addressing markets that are
already concentrated. Other actions to address anti-competitive
practices are needed. Several recent articles and reports describe
potential policy solutions.\11\,\12\,\13\,\14\ Among the potential
policy steps, the following appear to be the most promising and
feasible.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\
Thomas L. Greaney, ``Coping With Concentration'', Health
Affairs 36, no.9 (2017):1564-1571. https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/
10.1377/hlthaff.2017.0558
\12\
National Academy of Social Insurance, ``Addressing Pricing
Power in Health Care Markets: Principles and Policy Options to
Strengthen and Shape Markets'', April 2015. https://www.nasi.org/sites/
default/files/research/Addressing--Pricing--Power--in--Health--Care--
Markets.pdf
\13\
Leemore S. Dafny and Thomas H. Lee, MD., ``Health Care Needs
Real Competition'', Harvard Business Review, December 2016, pp. 76-87.
https://hbr.org/2016/12/health-care-needs-real-competition
\14\
Martin Gaynor, Farzad Mostashari, and Paul Ginsburg, ``Making
health care markets work: Competition policy for health care.''
Brookings Institution, April 13, 2017. https://www.brookings.edu/
research/making-health-caremarkets-work-competition-policy-for-health-
care/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Site-neutral payments
Transparency and standardized provider performance
reporting
Promotion of entry of new competitors/reduction of
barriers to entry
Prohibition of anti-competitive practices, e.g.,
anti-tiering, anti-steering, and gag clauses.
[summary statement of david lansky]
The Pacific Business Group on Health represents over 60 large
health care purchasers who collectively spend $100 billion each year to
provide health coverage for 12 million Americans. Our members--large
employers and public agencies--are deeply concerned about the growth in
health care costs. Purchasers believe that aggressive implementation of
value based purchasing approaches by both public and private sectors
would both reduce health care spending and improve quality. Meaningful,
accessible information about prices and health outcomes would provide
the foundation for real competition between providers and allow
patients and employers to make informed decisions about where to seek
care. We look forward to constructive competition between provider
organizations based on common, transparent definitions of episodes of
care and accountability for population health, so that providers are
motivated to continuously seek better ways to use technology,
workforce, and expensive care resources to achieve health outcomes.
The Congress and Federal agencies must lead this process by
accelerating the adoption of the necessary standards, infrastructure,
and purchasing models. Key actions include:
1. Develop the national infrastructure for measurement of
outcomes across all major conditions
2. Simplify the quality reporting requirements under MACRA to
emphasize standardized outcome measures for each condition
3. Require the adoption and publication of outcomes data for
all federal payment programs
4. Strengthen the ACO and bundled payment programs to
increase provider risk for total cost of care
5. Enable Medicare beneficiaries to identify and seek care
from high performing centers.
The Medicare, state Medicaid and employee programs, and private
purchasers must act in concert to convey a consistent expectation to
providers and suppliers. Together they can deploy a portfolio of high-
leverage tools that can reduce health care spending while also assuring
that more Americans receive high quality care. Implementation of these
and other methods will take time and inflict some pain on important
stakeholders. Yet the vitality of our economy, the solvency of our
treasury, and the welfare of all Americans depend upon our aligned
efforts.
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Lansky.
Dr. James.
STATEMENT OF BRENT JAMES, M.D., M.STAT., CLINICAL PROFESSOR,
DEPARTMENT OF MEDICINE, STANFORD UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE;
MEMBER, NATIONAL ACADEMY OF MEDICINE, STANFORD, CALIFORNIA
Dr. James. Thank you, Senator Alexander, Senator Murray,
and Members of the Committee.
Dr. W. Edwards Deming was the father of quality improvement
theory. Quality improvement is the science of process
management that applies to any productive human activity
whatsoever. It also supplies a set of tools that very broadly
identify waste. The value opportunity is to reduce total cost
by improving quality of finished outputs.
In 2010, the Institute of Medicine convened a large panel
of experts around this topic to identify and categorize waste
in health care delivery. Our actual conclusion was that a
minimum of 30 percent, and probably over 50 percent, of all
spending in the United States on health care delivery is waste
on value adding from a patient's perspective.
Now, I plan this field a bit when I model it. I get
somewhere north of 60 percent waste estimates, credible,
actionable areas. I think your estimates are low, Senator
Alexander.
This year, we will spend approaching $3.6 trillion as a
country on health care delivery in total. At a midpoint of 50
percent, I make about a $1.8 trillion waste opportunity in that
particular bucket.
Now, any time you are talking about costs, it breaks into
two pieces and that is a fairly critical distinction.
Imagine I wanted to run a program to put a chicken in every
pot and I wanted to be able to fund it. Well, with two pieces,
I need to know what I am going to spend per chicken; we call
that unit costing. But I also have to know how many chickens;
that is called utilization rates.
These models give us the ability to assign categories of
waste. The thing you need to know when analyzing health care
waste, about 95 percent of value recovery opportunity links
back to utilization rates, not to unit costing.
Now, 5 percent of $1.8 trillion is $90 billion a year. That
is real money. But if you are not attacking utilization rates,
very explicitly, you are nibbling around the edges. So it is
something to think about. In fact, as I listened to the
colleagues on the panel, they were all talking about
utilization rates down the line. Just as a thought.
The primary cause of the waste, we now know, is complexity.
Fraud and abuse makes, say, a relatively small contribution,
almost trivially small, frankly.
Stanford's Dr. David Eddy invented the term evidence based
medicine some years ago, first published in 1990, and he
developed most of the formal methods we use for performing that
body of science. He says it this way, ``The complexity of
modern medicine exceeds the capacity of the unaided expert
mind.'' I put examples of that too from the other peoples'
testimony.
The problem gets worse every day. The rate of medical
evidence production is increasing exponentially, a challenge
not just for today, but for tomorrow.
Now, most successful waste elimination strategies have
worked by addressing complexity down at the level where
physicians, nurses, and other health professional interact with
patients on a daily basis. It is a common thread that runs
through these activities. In fact, two separate IOM committees
addressed exactly this.
We produced a far more effective definition of
transparency, transparency down at the level of a physician
interacting with a patient. That is where the rubber hits the
road, if you are interested in taking waste out of the system.
You need to know these approaches work. For many examples,
I worked in a system in Utah, a relatively small system, 22
hospitals, about 200 outpatient clinics. We set a goal to keep
our health care cost increases at less than the Consumer Price
Index, inflation plus 1 percent, in terms of total cost. We
wanted our care to be affordable to the people that we served
in our state.
Five big Q.I. projects across four years reduced our total
costs of operations by 13 percent. We are small. It was only
about $700 million across that time. You have heard from others
here, too. This is not at all unique to Utah. This stuff works.
It works by taking waste out of the system.
Now, I say 13 percent. I really believe that the waste
opportunity is somewhere north of 60 percent and 13 percent is
a good start. We have not begun to tap out what is available.
Here is the funny thing, though. From a financial
perspective, opportunities for waste elimination dramatically
exceed other opportunities for traditional revenue enhancement
that most health care delivery systems rely upon for their
financial well-being, orders of magnitude more opportunity.
You would think that in a health care market, people would
be going after that value vigorously. Why not? Why do we have
to hold hearings on it? Why are we having these conversations?
Two primary causes.
The first is traditional methods. It is often baked-in to
management systems, the way we have thought about it in the
past.
The second is more profound. It turns out that waste
elimination is not financially aligned in most instances. If I
am paid in a fee for service system, well, there is always an
investment. You have to make an investment to take the waste
out, investment in your systems, investment in change
strategies.
The trouble is, is when I make the investment that
investment nearly always happens down at the level of a care
delivery group. Most often, the waste savings do not go to the
care delivery group who made the investment. It goes to someone
else, a payer, to David and his people, for example, you see.
That misalignment means that it is a paved road to
financial disaster. Even if you are committed to it
philosophically, you do not have the resources to do the next
project that comes up.
If I expand it from fee for service, the financial
alignment expands to about 55 percent. But if I want the whole
pie, if I want to pick up that last 45 percent, I have to have
provider or financial risk, financial arrangements.
This has actually been a topic that came up as part of the
ACA, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Intervention focused
on what we call pay for value, a shift in payment modes to
align financial incentives. The current Administration has been
following it as well.
I think from a policy standpoint, it is a very important
idea.
Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Dr. James follows:]
prepared statement of brent james
A. Health care delivery ``waste'' describes any consumption of
resources that does not provide optimal benefit to a patient.
Dr. W. Edwards Deming is the father of quality improvement theory.
Quality improvement is the science of process management. Deming based
his work on 3 foundational principles. The first 2 of Deming's 3
premises were:
(1) Premise 1--All productive human work, of any sort
whatsoever, can be described as a process. The definition of a
process: ``A series of linked steps, usually but not always
sequential, designed to create a product, transform an input
into and output, produce an experience, generate information,
or in some other way add value.''
On that foundation, Deming argued that any enterprise should
organize literally everything around ``value-added front line work
processes,'' where ``value-added'' is defined by a customer.
(2) Premise 2--Every process produces 3 parallel classes of
outcomes:
a. A ``physical outcome'' is the product or service that
the process was designed to create. In clinical care delivery,
we call these medical or clinical outcomes.
b. A ``service outcome'' describes the interaction that
takes place between the producer of a product or service and
the consumer of that product or service, as the transaction
takes place, as experienced by the consumer. This is patient
satisfaction--the care delivery experience.
c. A ``cost outcome'' represents the resources consumed to
operate the process. Treating cost as the outcome of a process,
rather than as an input, made Deming's approach unique. It
fundamentally redefined the concept of value, defined as the
ratio of the quality of a product divided by its cost.
The term ``quality'' describes the relative attributes of any
outcome. Thus people speak of ``clinical outcome quality'' or ``service
quality.'' From a theoretic perspective, it is similarly appropriate to
consider the ``quality'' of cost outcomes.
The fact that every process always produces all 3 categories of
outcomes means that the 3 classes of outcomes are intertwined. It is
impossible to functionally separate them, from an operational
perspective. For example, a physician may make a change to a treatment
process with an aim to improve a clinical outcome. That will, by
definition, also change the process's cost outcomes. Alternatively, an
administrator may change that same process with an aim reduce costs.
That will, unavoidably, change the process's clinical outcomes.
Deming next began to explore the interactive relationships between
physical and cost outcomes. A surprising finding emerged: The linkages
between physical and cost outcomes were not always negative. To that
point, everyone had always assumed that higher quality always meant
higher cost. Deming showed that some major classes of process changes,
when introduced to improve physical outcome quality, caused costs to
fall. He identified 3 causal mechanisms by which physical and cost
outcomes interact. The first 2 interactions form the basis for all
quality-based definitions of ``waste'' (James, 1989):
a. Quality waste--A step in a process fails. Some proportion of the
time (it doesn't have to be 100 percent), that process failure causes a
physical outcome failure--a ``quality'' failure. When that occurs, the
process operator has only 2 options:
1. The process operator can repair the low quality product.
This is called ``rework'' in quality theory. The problem:
Rework--repairing the failed product--always involves
additional time and resources. In other words, it always costs
more.
When a process operator detects a failure, the best response is
to ``move upstream'' into the process, figure out where and how
it failed, then fix the process so that it will not fail again.
It is always cheaper to ``do it right the first time'' than to
``fail then repair.''
For example, Reiss- Brennan et al. created a 3rd generation
primary care medical home called Team-Based Care (TBC) (Brennan
et al., 2016). They deployed chronic disease management, mental
health integration, and care coordinators into primary care
practices. As patients received better clinical management in a
primary care setting, specialty visit rates fell by 21 percent,
and hospitalization rates fell by 22 percent. Overall,
deploying TBC cost $22 per person per year (a not-insignificant
investment), but total medical expense fell by $115 per person
per year (a five-times savings, compared to the investment).
Seen through the lens of quality improvement, specialty
referrals and hospitalizations represented failures of upstream
primary care processes.
Similarly, preventable care-associated patient injuries
(patient safety) represent quality waste. It is nearly always
much cheaper to avoid patient injuries from the start, than to
treat them after they occur.
2. If the failed outcome does not involve a human life, then
the process operator could simply discard it. This is called
``scrap'' in quality theory. Obviously, all of the time and
resources consumed to create the scrapped product are wasted.
For example, a hospital clerk runs and prints a large report,
only to discover that the date range used in the report was
wrong. That wastes not just the discarded paper, but the human
and computer time consumed to produce the report.
b. Inefficiency waste--2 parallel processes produce identical
outputs. One of those processes use significantly more resources to
achieve that goal. The unnecessary use of resources represents waste.
In the late 1980s, clinical research teams at Intermountain
Healthcare examined treatment details for common conditions routinely
managed in hospitals (transurethral prostatectomy (TURP),
cholecystectomy (gallbladder removal), total hip arthroplasty
(artificial hip joint implantation), coronary artery bypass graft
surgery (CABG), community-acquired pneumonia, and implantation of
permanent cardiac pacemakers) (James, 1995). For statistically
identical patients with statistically identical clinical outcomes, they
found about
a 2-fold difference in resources consumed. For example, when
performing a TURP on a standard patient, one urologic surgeon
consumed on average 1184 hospital dollars to achieve a good
outcome (these were 1986 dollars--medical inflation has greatly
increased those numbers across the years). Another surgeon in
the same hospital averaged $2233 for an equivalent patient with
the same good clinical outcome.
For both quality waste and inefficiency waste, process management
offered an opportunity to reduce operating costs by producing better
physical outcomes. Deming proved that better quality could drive lower
costs.
There is a third way in which physical and cost outcomes interact,
that fall outside Deming's ``waste'' mechanisms:
c. Cost effectiveness--In some circumstances, clinicians find a
treatment process that produces better outcomes, but the new
process appropriately consumes more resources to produce that
result. When that happens, those who both stand to benefit and
to compensate the required higher resource consumption face a
choice: Does the amount of quality gained by using the new
process justify its additional expenses. Obviously, this is a
choice that health care consumers must ultimately make.
Under Deming's quality improvement theory, higher quality can
eliminate waste and reduce costs. This defines ``value''--the best
quality result at the lowest necessary cost. Deming's theories
initially transformed manufacturing around the world. Any company that
could not master his process management methods to produce higher
value--better quality at lower costs--could not compete with companies
that could. It became a litmus test for survival in many industries,
and produced a maxim: Do Deming or die.
Starting in the late 1980s, clinical investigators demonstrated
that Deming's theories apply in health care delivery. They realized
that Deming's approach took concepts found in preventive medicine, and
generalized them.
Clinical quality improvement's prevention-based approach raises 2
questions:
How much quality and inefficiency waste exists in
health care delivery?
While theory is useful, it does not always accurately
reflect implementable reality. Do these principles apply and
produce expected results in real care delivery experience?
B. In 2010, an Institute of Medicine (IOM) expert panel
conducted an evidence review (IOM 2010). They estimated that a
minimum of 30 percent, and probably over 50 percent, of all
money spent on health care delivery is waste recoverable
through higher quality. Some analyses suggest that waste levels
may be much higher.
C. In 2018, total expenditures on health care delivery in the
United States will approach $3.6 trillion. Midpoint estimates
suggest as much as $1.8 trillion in recoverable waste. More
than half of health care spending, and associated waste, is
funded through government.
D. Most research on health care waste comes from the United
States. However, evidence from other countries (e.g., Canada,
Australia, and European democracies) suggests that health care
waste levels are similar across the world.
The 2010 IOM report is currently the best published citation for
waste in health care delivery. Subsequent reports derive from it. It
started with Deming's ideas of quality waste and inefficiency waste,
then catalogued specific examples of care delivery waste that various
researchers had documented.
Outside the U.S., most countries lack the detailed financial data
that make direct waste estimates possible. However, care delivery
systems in other countries have studied clinical process failures and
generated estimates of failure rates. That is the basis for asserting
that financial waste rates in other countries mirror those seen in the
United States. The waste results from the process failures. While the
U.S. invests much more heavily in health services research than other
countries, there is sufficient evidence to support the conclusion that
care delivery process performance, and process failures, are similar.
Several years later, James & Poulsen published a financial model
that aligns Deming's waste categories to health care delivery
operations (James & Poulsen, 2016). That approach included additional
categories of waste that did not appear in the 2010 IOM report, and so
produced higher estimates of the amount of waste that currently exists
in care delivery operations.
The James/Poulsen financial model has 3 tiers:
Tier 1 waste (the base)--A ``unit of care'' is any granular service
or supply provided to a patient during a care delivery encounter.
Examples of ``units of care'' include things like a single dose of a
specific medications; a single specific type of imaging exam; a lab
test; an acuity-adjusted hour of nursing time; a 6-minute block of
physician time, adjusted by specialty; an acuity-adjusted minute in a
procedure room (such as an operating theater); a bedpan; a box of
tissue (Kleenex). U.S. hospitals maintain master lists of all possible
``units of care'' that they could possibly supply to a patient.
Depending on other internal features, these lists are called ``charge
masters'' or ``cost masters.'' As a patient receives care during a
clinical encounter, the treating facility records each unit of care
consumed. Mapped through the charge or cost master, this allows the
treating facility to create a detailed bill for all services provided
during a clinical encounter.
One can usefully think of a care facility as a business that
obtains, creates, maintains, and supplies these ``units of care.'' In
Tier 1, ``waste'' refers to any costs associated with any ``unit of
care'' in excess of an absolute necessary minimum. The associated
organizational function is called ``supply chain.'' It is that part of
a care delivery organization that obtains, assembles, and supplies to
the point of actual care delivery all necessary supplies, including
equipment and personnel.
Figure 1 labels Tier 1 ``Efficiency (cost per unit of care)''.
Tier 2 waste--During a clinical encounter physicians, nurses, and
other clinicians select and apply different units of care, including
their own time, to address patients' health care needs. ``Within-case
utilization'' refers to the specific type and number of ``units of
care'' used during a care delivery episode. Detailed studies of
variation in care delivery typically focus at this level. Such studies
identify cohorts of similar patients being treated for the same
clinical problem, then track the type and number of units of care used.
They break total health care costs into two parts: The type and number
of units of care consumed (utilization), and the true cost of
acquisition of each unit of care (cost per unit).
Tier 3 waste pushes the idea of utilization a level higher. ``Case-
rate utilization'' describes how often specific treatments are used in
defined population.
Percentage of total
Waste rate within
health care costs
Percentage of total
Remaining value
category (1 percent
to which this
cost recoverable w/
(Percent)
of all cases)
category applies
in category
3. Case-rate utilization (# of cases within a population)
100.0
Inappropriate care
20 percent
100 percent
100 percent
80.0
Care patients would not have selected if given a fair choice
40 percent
15 percent
100 percent
75.2
Avoidable care
15 percent
100 percent
80 percent
65.6
2. Within case utilization (# & type of units per case)
Initial misdiagnosis, delayed diagnosis
15 percent
100 percent
25 percent
63.1
Avoidable care-associated patient injuries
26 percent
10 percent
70 percent
62.0
Variation in care delivery not driven by patient need
33 percent
100 percent
80 percent
45.6
Operational inefficiency for health professionals
35 percent
40 percent
50 percent
42.4
Avoidable administrative overhead
30 percent
15 percent
50 percent
41.5
Excess insurance company profits
50 percent
20 percent
70 percent
38.6
1. Efficiency (cost per unit of care)
5 percent
60 percent
100 percent
37.4
Proportion waste in care delivery:
62.6
Figure 1. Breakdown of total health care delivery costs into 3
tiers, that build one on top of another.
Figure 1 adds specific subcategories within each tier, cataloguing
known classes of waste in health care delivery. The columns to the
right summarize data from the published literature regarding measured
within-class rates of waste; the proportion of total health care costs
to which that category of waste apply; and estimates of how much of
that waste should be amenable to extraction using current technologies.
The table correctly adjusts--for example, it applies waste savings that
could be obtained by eliminating ``within case utilization'' only after
all inappropriate care and avoidable care have been removed. Many of
the estimates in the table are just that--the author's own estimates--
and will be modified as better data and expert opinion become
available.
Figure 1 adds one important category that other studies of health
care waste did not include. Wallace and Savitz adapted Toyota
Production System (TPS) Lean Observation to a health care setting
(Wallace & Savitz, 2008). They tracked work performed within more than
60 different health profession roles, such a pharmacists, nurses of
various specialties, hospitalist physicians, and central supply staff
workers. They directly assessed those roles in 4 integrated care
delivery systems (Intermountain Healthcare, Providence Health Systems,
University of North Carolina Health Care, and University of Virginia).
Every task performed was classified as ``value adding'' or ``non-value
adding'' (waste) by expert observers, in real time.
The proportion of health worker's time judged ``waste'' ranged from
20 percent to over 70 percent. Overall, non-value adding activities--
waste--comprised on average more than 35 percent of all health
professional work time. Extrapolating to the entire health care
workforce, their findings are summarized as ``Operational inefficiency
for health professionals'' in Figure 1. By way of illustration, waste
levels were placed at 35 percent (column 1), as estimated in the study.
Worker salaries are estimated to comprise about 40 percent of all
health care costs (column 2). Based on experience gained while
addressing associated processes, the model estimates that 50 percent of
such waste could be recovered with current technologies.
This model, while extending beyond those included in the 2010 IOM
report, still leaves some sources of waste unaccounted. For example, it
does not include estimates of clinician inefficiencies that track back
to the structure of current electronic medical record (EMR) systems
(Sinsky et al. found that physicians spend about 2 hours performing
EMR-based administrative tasks for every hour they spend with
patients--Sinsky et al. 2016).
This model and associated argument is the source, in conclusion (B)
above, of the statement that ``some analyses suggest that waste levels
may be much higher''
E. The primary drivers of waste are (1) care delivery
execution that still relies primarily on personal expertise and
human memory (the ``craft of medicine''); (2) in the face of
high and rapidly increasing complexity of clinical practice,
that ``exceeds the capacity of the unaided expert mind'';
framed within (3) legal structures, cultural expectations, and
payment methods that actively encourage utilization. Waste
estimates include healthcare fraud and abuse. However, these
factors are small compared to other sources.
Arguments supporting this assertion are beyond the scope of this
testimony. The author refers interested parties to James & Savitz, 2011
and James & Lazar, 2007; or invites those parties to contact the author
directly.
F. A series of at-scale projects have shown that quality-based
waste recovery is achievable using available tools. For example, one
Utah-based health system improved patient outcomes and thus reduced
total operating costs 13 percent across 4 years ($688 million, through
2015). Other examples abound.
A great many examples of clinical projects that show lower costs
associated with better clinical quality are present available in the
peer-reviewed medical literature. For purposes of this testimony,
however, a recently published experience at Intermountain Healthcare
provides a solid ``at scale'' example (James & Poulsen, 2016--op.
cit.):
Intermountain Healthcare is a non-profit system of 22 hospitals,
more than 190 outpatient clinics, and an associated HMO-model health
plan. It supplies more than half of all health care services in Utah
and some areas in surrounding states.
In 2010, Intermountain's Chief Financial Officer set a goal: In
order to keep health services affordable, and thus accessible, to the
patients Intermountain served, he asked the care delivery system to
limit total health care costs increases to consumer price index
inflation plus 1 percent (CPI+1). Intermountain's Finance department
modeled that goal using ``best estimates'' of prior consumer price
index inflation and health care total cost growth rates. Their
estimates are shown in Figure 2. It required that Intermountain reduce
its total operating costs by 13 percent across the next 5 years,
through the end of 2016.
To achieve that goal, Intermountain's clinical leadership launched
5 major quality improvement projects, with an aim to control health
care costs through better clinical outcomes. The heavy green line shows
results for the first 4 years of the project. Across those 4 years,
operating costs fell by $688 million--a 13 percent reduction in the
system's expected total operating costs.
Figure 2. Financial consequences of waste elimination at
Intermountain Healthcare from 2011 to 2015, achieved through clinical
quality improvement. The solid blue line shows expected total health
care costs for Intermountain's service population, taking into account
general population growth, aging of the population and other
population-based epidemics (e.g., Baby Boom entering chronic disease
years, the obesity epidemic), and introduction of new treatment
technologies. The solid black line shows `allowable' growth in health
care costs needed to achieve CPI+1--a 13 percent reduction in total
operating costs through 2016. The green line show actual total costs.
These results echo findings of waste elimination and cost savings
demonstrated by a long list of other projects, at Intermountain and
many other U.S.-based care delivery systems. They demonstrate, using
current tools, it should be possible to dramatically reduce growth
rates in health care costs.
G. Waste elimination through higher quality offers health
care providers financial opportunities that dramatically exceed
other sources. However, most care providers are not actively
pursuing broad quality-based waste elimination. That is
primarily because payment mechanisms create misaligned
financial incentives.
As noted above, this year the U.S. will spend almost $3.6 trillion
on health care delivery services. A midpoint estimate that about 50
percent of that spending is waste suggests a value opportunity of about
$1.6 trillion. That dwarfs, by at least a factor of 100, any other
opportunities for health care provider income growth. Return on
investment for waste elimination projects are typically significantly
larger than those for traditional service expansion approaches, as well
(as above, the details of this analysis are left for another settings).
Why, then, do such levels of waste continue? Why aren't health care
markets driving care providers to very vigorously address and remove
waste in the health care delivery system?
The reason: Financial incentives for waste elimination do not
align. Figure 3 shows how the tiered classes of health care waste,
defined in Figure 1, align with payment mechanisms.
Figure 3. Association of tiered waste categories with payment
mechanisms. ``FFS'' stands for ``fee for service'' payment--still the
most common method used to reimburse care delivery. Waste elimination
always requires substantial investment, nearly always by care
providers. The triangles in the table show who gets the savings when a
waste-elimination project succeeds. Red triangles indicate that the
savings go to payers, leaving those who must invest--the care
providers--with no recompense for their initial investment.
Improving quality to eliminate waste always requires that care
delivery groups invest in new systems and change leadership. Under
current payment mechanisms, the resulting waste savings often go to
someone other than those who must make that investment. That can leave
care delivery groups under financial stress, without resources to fund
future projects. Under fee-for-service (FFS) payment only about 5
percent of quality-based waste elimination generates compensatory
savings back to the care delivery group that must invest and make the
change. Adding per case payment (DRGs) increases alignment to about 55
percent. The final 45 percent of potential savings requires that care
providers bear financial risk--various forms of shared savings or
directly capitated compensation.
Figure 3 also summarizes the waste tiers in Figure 1, noting the
total proportion of all waste opportunities associated with each tier.
For example, about 45 percent of cost reduction opportunities function
at the level of population health (Tier 3). Another 50 percent aligns
to addressing variation in clinical practice, improving patient safety,
and eliminating administrative overhead (Tier 2). Figure 3 assigns only
5 percent of total waste elimination opportunities to unit costs (Tier
1).
Health care delivery in the United States costs significantly more
per person, and consumes more of total national wealth (as measured by
percentage of Gross Domestic Product), than does health care delivery
in other modern democracies. Papanicolas , Woskie, & Jha (Papanicolas,
2018) correctly note that unit costs, by themselves, explain the 2-fold
difference health care spending seen in the United States as compared
to other countries.
The reason that Figure 3 assigns only 5 percent of total waste
elimination opportunities to unit costs (Tier 1) is because so many of
the elements that drive higher unit costs are outside of the control of
health care providers. We arrived at the 5 percent estimate based on
observations of the gains achieved by successful supply chain
operations in leading care delivery systems. We also note that, given
the size of the U.S. health system, even a 5 gain is consequential.
H. One person's waste is another person's income. Thus, health care
waste vigorously defends itself--through traditional health management
methods and, often, through political mechanisms.
This argument, too, is left for further discussion beyond this
document.
References
James, B.C. Quality Management for Health Care Delivery
(monograph). Chicago, IL: Hospital Research and Educational Trust
(American Hospital Association), 1989.
Reiss-Brennan B, Brunisholz KD, Dredge C, Briot P, Grazier K,
Wilcox A, Savitz L, and James B. Association of integrated team-based
care with health care quality, utilization, and cost. JAMA 2016;
316(8):826-34 (Aug 23/30).
James, Brent C. What is a TURP? controlling variation in the
performance of clinical processes. Improving Clinical Practice: Total
Quality Management & the Physician (ed: D.B. Blumenthal and A.C.
Scheck). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers, 1995 (Chapter 7).
Institute of Medicine Roundtable on Value and Science-Driven
Healthcare. The Healthcare Imperative: Lowering Costs and Improving
Outcomes. Yong, Pierre L., Saunders, Robert S., and Olsen, LeighAnne,
editors. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2010.
James Brent C and Poulsen Gregory P. The case for capitation: It's
the only way to cut waste while improving quality. Harv Bus Rev 2016;
94(7-8):102-11, 134 (Jul-Aug).
Wallace, C. Jane and Savitz, Lucy. Estimating waste in frontline
health care worker activities. J Eval Clin Pract 2008; 14(1):178-80
(Jan).
Sinsky et al. Allocation of physician time in ambulatory practice:
A time and motion study in 4 specialties. Ann Intern Med 2016;
165(11):753-60 (6 Dec).
James Brent C and Savitz Lucy A. How Intermountain trimmed health
care costs through robust quality improvement efforts. Health Affairs
2011; 30(6):1185-91 (June).
James Brent C and Lazar Joel S. Sustaining and extending clinical
improvements: A health system's use of Clinical Programs to build
quality infrastructure. Practice-Based Learning and Improvement: The
Clinical Improvement Action Guide, 2nd Edition. Nelson Eugene C. and
Batalden Paul, editors. Chicago, IL: Joint Commission Press, 2007.
Papanicolas Irene, Woskie Liana R., Jha Ashish K. Health care
spending in the United States and other high-income countries. JAMA.
2018; 319(10):1024-1039 (Mar 13).
[summary statement of brent james]
Health care delivery ``waste'' describes any consumption
of resources that does not provide optimal benefit to a patient. Under
Deming's quality improvement theory, higher quality eliminates waste.
This defines ``value''--the best quality result at the lowest necessary
cost. Deming's theories initially transformed manufacturing around the
world. Starting in the late 1980s, clinical investigators demonstrated
that Deming's theories apply in health care delivery.
In 2010, an Institute of Medicine (IOM) expert panel
conducted an evidence review. They estimated that a minimum of 30
percent, and probably over 50 percent, of all money spent on health
care delivery is waste recoverable through higher quality. Some
analyses suggest that waste levels may be much higher.
This year, total expenditures on health care delivery in
the United States will approach $3.6 trillion. Midpoint estimates
suggest as much as $1.8 trillion in recoverable waste. More than half
of health care spending, and associated waste, is funded through
government.
Most research on health care waste comes from the United
States. However, evidence from other countries (e.g., Canada,
Australia, and European democracies) suggests thathealth care waste
levels are similar across the world.
The primary drivers of waste are (1) care delivery
execution that still relies primarily on personal expertise and human
memory (the ``craft of medicine''); (2) in the face of high and rapidly
increasing complexity of clinical practice, that ``exceeds the capacity
of the unaided expert mind''; framed within (3) legal structures,
cultural expectations, and payment methods that actively encourage
utilization. Waste estimates include healthcare fraud and abuse.
However, these factors are small compared to other sources.
A series of at-scale projects have shown that quality-
based waste recovery is achievable using available tools. For example,
one Utah-based health system improved patient outcomes and thus reduced
total operating costs 13 percent across 4 years ($688 million, through
2015). Other examples abound.
Waste elimination through higher quality offers health
care providers financial opportunities that dramatically exceed other
sources. However, most care providers are not actively pursuing broad
quality-based waste elimination. That is primarily because payment
mechanisms create misaligned financial incentives.
Improving quality to eliminate waste always requires that care
delivery groups invest in new systems and change leadership. Under
current payment mechanisms, the resulting waste savings often go to
someone else. That can place the care delivery group under financial
stress and leave them without resources for future projects. Under fee-
for-service (FFS) payment only about 5 percent of quality-based waste
elimination generates compensatory savings back to the care delivery
group that must invest and make the change. Adding per case payment
(DRGs) increases alignment to about 55 percent. The final 45 percent of
potential savings requires that care providers bear financial risk--
various forms of shared savings or directly capitated compensation.
One person's waste is another person's income. Thus,
health care waste vigorously defends itself--through traditional health
management methods and, often, through political mechanisms.
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. James.
Well, this is fascinating and thanks to each of you. We
will now begin a 5 minute round of questions.
This is a bipartisan hearing, which means Senator Murray
and I have agreed on the witnesses and the subject, and I hope
to devote most of the time to looking ahead to the subject she
talked about.
Senator Murray raised the issue of health insurance.
Everyone knows my respect for her and how well we have worked
together on most issues to get a result. I have a little
different view than she does, which I think I have to state.
If you are looking for why health insurance costs are so
high in our state, I would suggest to my Democratic friends,
they need to look in the mirror because they voted for
Obamacare, and prices are up 158 percent since then.
Number two, so far as a Trump administration sabotage, if
there was one, apparently it did not work because the predicted
prices for 2019 are down by 10 percent.
Three, it could have been down by 40 percent if we could
have agreed on the Alexander-Murray negotiation that we had in
which Democrats pulled the rug out from under it at the last
minute by refusing to vote for the Hyde Amendment compromise
that they voted for a hundred times in the same bill, and have
voted for every since 1976.
So each has our different points of view on that, and I did
not one to be mentioned without the other.
Let me go to looking ahead now at health care costs.
Dr. James, that is an astonishing testimony. According to
some estimates, 18 percent of our Gross Domestic Product in the
United States goes to health care. And, of course, our Gross
Domestic Product is almost one-fourth of the world's gross
domestic product. That is a massive amount of money. You are
suggesting that half of that is wasted.
Let us say you are right, even though it is an astonishing
number, and you were a United States Senator, where would you
start to bring that number down? What would Step 1 and 2 be?
Dr. James. My first step would be to align financial
incentives. There is so much detail in it, that you cannot do
it from a central planning function.
The Chairman. Now, boil that down a little bit more.
Dr. James. Continue to shift payment for health care to a
pay for value.
The Chairman. Which we are beginning to do, right?
Dr. James. That is correct. We need to continue that
initiative vigorously.
At the extreme is capitated care, frankly. There are seven
or eight different models for doing it, but as we shift those
financial incentives, I think, the science is back behind it.
What you will see is the whole industry stepping up, then, to
help us solve this problem.
The Chairman. What would be Step 1 or 2 to deal with
complexity, which you say is the number one cause of all this?
Dr. James. I personally believe that the current crop of
Electronic Medical Records is intellectually dead. They are
very poorly structured for dealing with complexity in health
care. There are a batch of new ones that are just nascent,
starting to form that offer wonderful opportunities.
I think that we, as a country, leading the world need to
start to think about a new generation of health I.T. that is
focused on what is called ``clinical decision support'' rather
than primarily financial performance.
The Chairman. Dr. Balser, you mentioned that Vanderbilt has
an electronic support system to make the provision of
medications more effective. I visited with your Electronic
Medical Records team.
What do you think about what Dr. James said about
Electronic Medical Records? What about your experience with
prescribing medications in a more effective and cheaper way?
Two different questions, really.
Dr. Balser. Yes, so I agree with what Dr. James said. I
would emphasize, though, that providing the information at the
point of care that doctors need is both people and process, as
well as technology.
What most health care in the United States does not have,
that some of the large academic centers do have, is a very
robust interaction between the physicians--particularly the
specialists who are capable of deciding on any given week what
is the best antibiotic based on the evidence, and which one is
the cheapest based on the market-- and having that transmit to
the doctors through the Electronic Health Record and through
the decision support.
I agree the technology needs to improve, but having those
really robust processes inside health systems that connect the
doctors and their best evidence to what is happening out on the
line is key.
The Chairman. But your folks at Vanderbilt experienced the
complexity of Meaningful Use 3. They said one was helpful, two
was okay, and three was terrifying.
Dr. Balser. Yes, I agree with that.
The Chairman. They have been looking at it for years.
Dr. Balser. Yes, so I certainly would love to see some of
the things we are talking about around supporting on the line
decision support in Meaningful Use 3, propelling the right kind
of information to the clinicians, as opposed to some of the
things that were originally conceived in Meaningful Use 3.
The Chairman. Dr. Lansky, do you agree that 30, 40, 50
percent of what we spend on health care is wasted? And if so,
what would be the one or two things Senator Murray or I could
do about it?
Dr. Lansky. These estimates are very sound and we certainly
see it directly.
Senator Murray's state, Washington Health Alliance, did a
study of low cost services in Washington, and I think 46
percent of them were considered unnecessary, which is a huge
amount of spending and burden for the patient. So I think those
numbers are right.
In terms of what to do about it, obviously, I would
emphasize the importance of simplifying the measurement
environment to focus on outcomes.
As Brent said, moving toward value-based payment much more
rapidly than we are. So that health care organizations like
these have the responsibility to manage within a budget,
essentially, and root out costs that they can by giving
attention to the waste that exists in their systems.
I think standardizing the products, if you like, so that
when we say ``a knee replacement'' or ``an episode of diabetes
care,'' we have a standard concept that we can begin to have
competition around it. Right now, we really do not have
competition for performance, and therefore, we are not having
any pressure to reduce waste.
The Chairman. I would like to hear what Dr. Safyer said,
but I am out of time, so we will get back to you.
Senator Murray.
Senator Murray. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for your testimony today. Dr. Lansky, let me
start with you.
One of the problems you talked about in your testimony is
the high and rising cost of prescription drugs. Yesterday, we
saw a data release by Bloomberg that shows that prices for 40
of the most commonly used drugs to treat diabetes, cancer, HIV,
M.S., asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, and others have been
increasing.
I released a similar report today showing that list prices
for many of the most prescribed and most expensive drugs
continue to rise.
You proposed one solution, Dr. Lansky, including the cost
of drugs and payment reforms like Accountable Care
Organizations.
How would that proposal help control spending on
prescription drugs?
Dr. Lansky. Well, I think we, as employers, are fairly far
downstream from the pricing strategy of the drug companies and
the P.B.M.'s. So we tend to look at solutions we can execute
within our purview as a purchaser.
One of those is to say the accountability for total
spending is in the hands of an accountable organization like
one of these organizations.
If they have the responsibility for total cost of care,
including the cost of drugs, then they will be very thoughtful
about designing a formulary or selecting from alternative
medications based on the ultimate cost of administering those
medications.
I know in one of Senator Cassidy's proposals, he refers to
some ``me too'' drugs where we see a lot of drugs being created
now, which are actually combinations of fairly inexpensive
drugs which become expensive when they are combined.
Those formularies are then constructed to reward
intermediaries who make money by the use of those unnecessarily
expensive drugs.
An Accountable Care Organization would be very aggressive
in understanding how they can choose medications to minimize
cost and maximize clinical benefit.
Senator Murray. One of your recommendations is to
strengthen the Accountable Care Organization and bundled
payment programs run by Medicare.
Medicare's programs to improve the way we pay for health
care complements similar reforms you referred to in your
testimony like Boeing's Accountable Care Organization that is
working well.
Until recently, these Medicare reforms were contributing to
the Obama administration's objective to move at least half of
Medicare payments away from traditional volume-based payments
by 2018. Traditional volume-based payments create incentives
for providers to give more care instead of the right care.
At our last hearing, witnesses said these types of
overarching objectives build momentum towards a health care
system that delivers more efficient, better quality care for
patients.
I was disappointed the Trump administration backed away
from that commitment and I was disappointed that CMS ended the
requirement to bundle payments for joint replacements and
cardiac rehab at certain facilities.
I wanted to ask you. Why are these Medicare reforms
important? How do they help large employers enact similar
reforms in the private sector that bring down costs for our
workers?
Dr. Lansky. Thank you. Our purchaser members are very much
committed to the same strategies you just summarized. However,
they are relatively small.
Even a very large organization like Comcast or Wal-Mart may
have one million employees with covered lives, but they are
scattered across every state. They do not have the influence to
alter the behavior of their provider organizations, and their
markets, and their communities.
Frankly, the Federal Government and the state governments
have the biggest buying power and if they do not act in concert
with the strategies of a value-based payment, then providers
will have conflicting and mixed incentives.
Typically, what we are seeing now in the market is many
hospitals, for example, are going back to pursuing fee for
service reimbursement because it is a very successful model for
them and they know how to do it.
The momentum toward transformation that you described is
beginning to slow because they are not getting a consistent
economic signal.
Senator Murray. Dr. Safyer, your organization, is it
Montefiore?
Dr. Safyer. Yes.
Senator Murray. Is managing to save Medicare money and
improve quality, and that is despite the many challenges that
your patient population faces.
You noted that many of your patients struggle to find
housing, employment, pay for healthy food. Those are the so-
called social determinants of health.
In my home state, our Medicaid program is now working to
address those same challenges to try and keep patients healthy,
and make sure Medicaid is on a sustainable financial footing.
Talk to us about why addressing the social determinants of
health care is so critical to keeping your patient population
healthy?
Dr. Safyer. Well, I think everybody here could understand
easily that the social determinants of health have a huge
impact on someone's well-being.
The Bronx is somewhat exaggerated in terms of its
challenges. We have areas where there are no pharmacies. We
have areas where the walkups are five storys. We have areas
where the air conditioning and/or the infrastructure of a
building is toxic.
We have areas where there are food swamps and food deserts,
and they are different, and you can conjure what that means.
And those are just a few of the examples. I would also add that
sometimes just exercising is difficult for young people. What
we need to do is begin to change how communities exist to boost
well-being.
Something like 50 percent of the Bronx is overweight.
Senator Murray. You said that. That is astonishing.
Dr. Safyer. Yes, and an amazing amount of our population
have actual diabetes, and that is something that is multi-
factorial and you have to go after that.
So I think that health care systems should be leaders in
making change, but they cannot make it all on their own. Just
give you one example.
We go to bodegas in neighborhoods that have the highest
levels of obesity. It is a food store. You cannot find food in
that store. You would not identify it as food. It is filled
with beer, and liquor, and soda waters.
Those bodegas get rewarded for keeping the companies, the
soda companies buy the equipment to keep the soda cool, but
they have to put it in the front, and you have to leave your
vegetables in the back, and they are not seen. They are not
gone after.
So these things are very complicated, very complex and they
have a huge effect.
Senator Murray. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Murray.
Senator Cassidy.
Senator Cassidy. Gentlemen, loved all your testimony. At
one point, I told my aide, ``Be still, my heart.'' I was so
excited about what you were saying.
We have something online, which some of you have said
things and perhaps have directly referenced, a white paper as
to how to address and how to lower health care costs. We would
love you to go on our Website and give us a review because we
are trying to implement some of this.
I am going to speak quickly and ask you too. I have limited
time.
Dr. Safyer, you have mentioned that you do an intervention
where you counsel people on diet to hopefully address the
epidemic of obesity.
Do you have longitudinal data? Does counseling on diet
actually make a difference or not?
Dr. Safyer. We have made a large impact. I want to make one
thing clear, which is that we open all of these programs to
more of the community.
Senator Cassidy. But you have actually seen merely
counseling because it does seem multi-factorial, but
nonetheless, just by counseling, you have been able to get
folks to lose weight?
Dr. Safyer. Yes, and counseling includes other members of
the group bonding with each other, and working, and being
competitive, and learning how to do it.
Senator Cassidy. Got it. Let me move on. I am sorry, not to
be rude.
Dr. Safyer. Sure.
Senator Cassidy. Dr. Lansky, you mentioned the direct
primary care model in your testimony.
For those not familiar with it, I call it ``the blue collar
concierge'' in which you pay a monthly fee and the doctor takes
care of your primary care needs. Senator Cantwell and I have a
bill out there for that.
In your experience, just because I am trying to socialize
the idea, how could greater use of direct, primary care reduce
administrative costs to the system?
Dr. Lansky. Right now, we have, in the fee for service
system, we have a lot of billing and insurance policies going
on that are very confusing and generate an enormous amount of
administrative work.
Direct primary care, I think, produces essentially a
version of the capitation for the primary care physician, which
reduces the transactional data around the individual episodes
and fee for service payment.
Senator Cassidy. I know that you know this, but just for
everyone else to understand, if you look at the percent of a
primary care doctor's billing that relates to administrative
costs as it relates to billing, it is much higher than for a
surgeon.
Dr. Lansky. Right.
Senator Cassidy. A surgeon might be 2 percent; for a
primary care doctor, it might be 25 percent. And so therefore,
that is where you have the most impact of this.
Dr. Lansky. Yes.
Senator Cassidy. We would like to expand that.
Dr. James, you mentioned that a way to get waste in the
system is to do something like a DRG. I compare it to an Uber
driver.
I got brought home from Dulles. I was reading. All of a
sudden, I was on a circuitous route because the taxi driver had
a vested interest in taking me to where it was the biggest
traffic jam. I ended up in Reston. It was just incredible.
Dr. James. A beautiful community.
Senator Cassidy. Beautiful community, but it cost me an arm
and a leg.
[Laughter.]
Senator Cassidy. The Uber driver, he has a vested interest
in getting me home as quickly as possible.
Dr. James. Yes.
Senator Cassidy. I could not help but think there is a
comparison there.
Dr. James. Yes, it is a line financial incentive.
Senator Cassidy. It is a line financial incentive.
Now, what can we do in Congress to better align that? When
I speak to my physician colleagues, there is a great deal of
complexity in coming up with the sort of information system,
the data analysis, et cetera that is needed to be comfortable
taking on two sided risk.
Dr. James. Yes.
Senator Cassidy. What can we do to aid that?
Dr. James. My personal answer would be to continue to
invest in CMMI, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid
Innovation. Again, in both administrations, it received some
pretty good support, but that is their mission to work out
those sorts of things.
At a policy level, I think that is probably one of the
better investments you could make.
The truth is it requires consolidation. It does not require
ownership. So we have grand examples. Northern California, for
example, where an I.P. model physician group, about 1,200
independent physicians, came together and formed that group.
Senator Cassidy. Now IPA's, though, inherently are, or at
least traditionally, have kept the smaller practice model ethos
as opposed to the more corporate of a Kaiser, for example.
Dr. James. That is correct. They evolve over time, though,
and they start to develop the methods by which their members
can benefit from this kind of coordinated care management. They
start to develop information systems. They start to build
better contracting.
Senator Cassidy. So how do we facilitate that? CMMI would
be to kind of reward those successful models and to promulgate?
Dr. James. Well, they test different models for payment.
What we have currently are seven or eight different models
for moving toward capitated payment where you get full risk
alignment, where you get full financial incentive alignment.
I think we need more experimentation, more tests of
different models.
Senator Cassidy. So encourage that testing.
One more thing, here again, I may just hang around for a
second round. Dr. Lansky, I am trying to think.
What do we do about a state like Tennessee, a state like
Iowa or Louisiana where we have maybe one or two or there is no
insurers competing in the individual market, the Obamacare
exchanges.
When I look at Medigap, there is great competition, in part
because those insurance companies do not have to go negotiate
with a provider network. They can take Medicare rates and they
are automatically in business.
Now, I am not saying we would have to take Medicare rates,
but you could take some multiple, 1.2 or 1.5.
What are your thoughts about using reference pricing--which
you referenced in yours, reference pricing being Medicare or it
could be Medicaid but probably Medicare--in which somebody
could go to a Tennessee, Iowa, Louisiana and immediately
compete with the dominant insurer?
Of course, the dominant insurer has the ability to
negotiate a price. With this, the price is negotiated for them,
but that eliminates that administrative cost of that
negotiation and allows someone to step in and compete with
another insurer, which experience shows drives down cost.
Any thoughts on that?
Dr. Lansky. I think you are outside of my expertise on
that, but I think conceptually, that is an interesting
direction to go.
Senator Cassidy. Okay. I am over time. I yield back.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cassidy.
Senator Hassan.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and
Ranking Member Murray for holding this hearing.
Thank you to all the witnesses for being here.
I will echo Senator Murray's comments that I do not want
any of us to lose sight of the fact that there are children who
are still traumatized at our border today because of the
humanitarian crisis created by this Administration.
I just want us, as Members of this Committee in particular,
to continue to push the Administration to reunite families as
quickly and humanely as possible.
As to today's hearing, I thank you all for being here. Dr.
Balser, I will just say I loved your testimony about medical
homes. I am the mom of a medically complex young man and I can
still remember what a difference a medical home made.
I can still remember going to a subspecialist appointment
with my son and trying to explain what the X-ray from another
subspecialist meant. I am sitting in a room thinking, ``Why is
the mom explaining the X-ray to the doctor?'' So it is a really
important thing, not just for cost, but for quality outcomes,
and for peace of mind for families. Thank you for your work on
that.
Dr. Lansky, I wanted to drilldown on the issue of outcomes,
how we measure them, particularly around prescription drugs.
We spend a lot of time in this Committee hearing about how
prescription drug prices are skyrocketing. They are a major
driver of health care costs, and we should be working to rein
them in.
The Trump administration has paid lip service to this
issue, but has not taken any real, meaningful action. I am
worried that this Administration is actually headed in the
wrong direction when it comes to controlling these costs.
Take the recent news about what can only be described as a
sweetheart deal between the giant drug maker, Novartis, and the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Novartis has an innovative new therapy known as CAR-T cell
therapy. Novartis has priced this critical therapy at a
whopping $475,000. It is really amazing therapy. It harnesses
the patient's own immune cells to fight and kill certain kinds
of cancer. We need to make sure the patients can access it.
But it has come to light that CMS and Novartis had a pretty
cozy relationship when it came to working on how CMS would
reimburse for the drug; a relationship that would have set off
any lawyer's alarm bells. In fact, CMS's own lawyers were
reportedly, ``surprised and concerned,'' their words, with
Novartis' interactions with CMS on this reimbursement scheme.
The lawyers also pointed out that the agency was unusually
deferential to Novartis when it came to figuring out
reimbursement.
That deference resulted in an agreement to enter into
performance based reimbursement that rated the drug's
effectiveness based on patients' outcomes, which sounds good.
Except that Novartis convinced CMS to measure the effectiveness
after just one month when experts say patients generally do
their best rather than measuring at a later point where
improvements tend to level off or the patients even may
decline.
So they convinced CMS not to look at an overall assessment
that would be accurate. The result was a reimbursement scheme
that would have amounted to essentially a blank check for
Novartis.
Now, thankfully, this inappropriate relationship between
CMS and Novartis has come to light and the reimbursement scheme
CMS and Novartis cooked up has been halted.
But I raise this issue today because it is not the first
time we have seen troubling ties between the Trump
administration and Big Pharma that put consumers' interests at
risk. I worry about what other kind of backroom or insider
deals with Big Pharma the Trump administration may be pursuing.
We need to make sure that patients have access to these
amazing new drugs like CAR-T cell therapy, and we need to
figure out how to reimburse properly for these groundbreaking
therapies.
But letting the drug company write the reimbursement policy
is like the proverbial fox in the henhouse.
Dr. Lansky, do you have any thoughts on how Congress can
make sure that pharmaceutical companies cannot rig new payment
systems? How can we measure outcomes in a way that is
meaningful, and balanced, and immune from undue influence?
Dr. Lansky. A very important question, of course.
The structure that is being discussed now with creating
outcomes-based payment for drugs is a structure worth
exploring. It makes a lot of sense, as you said.
The outcomes have to be fairly long term, long enough to
capture the meaningful outcome for the patient and it is for a
definitive therapy.
We have, however, not supported as much value-based
assessments as we could. So groups like ICER, which do drug
assessments and PCORI, has a variety of assessments. PCORI, as
you know, is not allowed to look closely at the long term cost
benefit of the therapies they are evaluating.
ICER does look at those and ICER probably would have data
for you to help look at what is the appropriate place to set a
threshold for an outcome measurement.
So I think the Congress can support more value assessment
strategies through a variety of mechanisms that would provide
the data for CMS and others to negotiate with better
information.
Senator Hassan. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Hassan.
Senator Collins.
Senator Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I, too, feel compelled to respond very
briefly to the Ranking Member's comments before turning to my
questions.
In March, the leader kept his commitment to you and to me
to bring, what had been bipartisan bills, to the Senate floor
to fund high risk pools and cost saving reductions.
These bills would have led to a decrease of up to 40
percent in insurance premiums over the next two years, which
would certainly have been welcomed.
It was very unfortunate that the Ranking Member, for whom I
have great respect and with whom I have worked very closely on
many issues, chose to block those bills.
If there has been a change of heart on that, I would
certainly welcome it.
To turn to my questions now, Dr. Balser, there is growing
research that shows that we may be over testing and that can be
part of the problem, part of the waste that all of you have
identified.
For example, a 2014 study of women over 30 found that
nearly two-thirds who had undergone a complete hysterectomy
were still being tested for cervical cancer, were still getting
that screening, which obviously makes no sense whatsoever.
We are also seeing trends of over-diagnosis due to over
testing in certain populations of older adults, who may not
stand to benefit from additional screening. And sometimes the
risks of the screening increase with age.
What changes should we be pursuing in the area of testing
to try to prevent that kind of waste?
Dr. Balser. Thank you for that question.
Divided into two buckets, one is making sure that the
testing we are doing is really evidence-based, to speak to the
area you mentioned around hysterectomies.
Frankly, again, just like physicians have trouble keeping
up with all of the different drugs and in every situation--
which drug is the most cost effective or the most efficacious--
the same thing is true with testing.
Such as, for example, bone marrow tests where it is a very
complicated process of ordering all the various tests on the
bone marrow.
What we are finding is that if we expand the traditional
function of a Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee that every
hospital has to include testing; so a Pharmacy, Therapeutics,
and Diagnosis committee, and then just like driving into the
clinician decision support the right drug to use, we actually
pull information from the Electronic Health Record to guide the
physicians in what test to order and how to interpret those
tests.
Sometimes we have automated support and in other cases, we
actually ensure that the physicians talk to the lab medicine
folks before the tests are ordered. That reduces greatly
unnecessary testing.
On the other side, there will always be areas where we over
test intentionally because the risk to patients, should we miss
something, is enormous, and a good example is prostate cancer.
We will always over-diagnose prostate cancer because the risk
of missing it is high. So I think the key there is to minimize
overtreatment.
Again, really having good support for PCORI and the other
kinds of institutes that are helping us do the outcomes
research.
For example, at Vanderbilt, many patients with prostate
cancer, we now know, do not require surgery. It can be safely
followed with MRI screening. That is saving patients a lot of
morbidity and also saving the health care system a lot of
money.
Senator Collins. Thank you very much.
Dr. Lansky, a September 2017 article that was in ``Managed
Care'' magazine highlighted your organization's strategy in
dealing with Pharmacy Benefit Managers. I have done a lot on
this issue in the Aging Committee in looking at transparency.
You mentioned that you hired an expert consultant to go
over the P.B.M. contracts. You found example after example
where the P.B.M. turned the formulary to its advantage and not
to the customer's advantage.
It seems to me there are perverse conflicts of interest in
the way this whole system works, in addition to a lack of
transparency. One is that the P.B.M. may be paid a percentage
of the cost of the drug. So that is an incentive for the
manufacturer to have a high list price and the manufacturer
wants to please the Pharmacy Benefit Manager in order to have
its drug included on the formulary.
Any comments on that?
Dr. Lansky. Yes, I agree with those points absolutely; very
challenging.
We have been working, as you mentioned, to identify what we
call a formulary where the conflicting incentives that are now
operating in the system would be removed. You would have
transparency of the cost through the patient, who ultimately is
paying for all of this, and is the beneficiary of it.
We have identified a number of areas where that could be
improved. The challenge now is to rebuild the intermediary
layer of payment and financing so that kind of an evidence-
based formulary can be applied.
Senator Collins. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Collins.
Senator Smith.
Senator Smith. Thank you, Chair Alexander and Ranking
Member Murray.
Thank you all very much for being here today. We have a
joke in my office that this is a particularly wonky hearing and
so I am particularly happy. I really appreciate it.
Several of my colleagues have asked some interesting, I
think, really important questions about the skyrocketing
challenges we have with prescription drugs, and I want to just
nod my head to those questions. It is the thing that I hear the
most in Minnesota.
I am doing a whole series of listening sessions on this
around the state, and had one woman in particular who stuck in
my mind, who laid out five examples of insulin pens that she
purchased all around the world: $8, $11, $15; exactly the same
medicine, exactly the same manufacturer, $140 in the United
States. And this is what my constituents and all of our
constituents are grappling with, and it is really a challenge.
But I would like to just actually hone in on something else
that I am quite interested in. Dr. Lansky, you are talking
about how employers, and many of you are talking about, how
employers are playing a more activist role in negotiating
directly with providers to try to control costs and also, I
think, make sure that people are getting the good quality care
that they need.
Could you just talk a little bit more about how that
happens in the world? What I am trying to get at is who ought
to be deciding what care a patient needs? Who is the final
decider?
Sometimes I know when I talk to my friends and colleagues
who are in the provider community, nurses, physicians also,
sometimes they feel like the people who are not providers, the
people who are, in their words, the bean counters are deciding.
Could you help me understand how you see that balance and
how that comes together? Especially as employers play a more
important role and that is roughly half of the people who have
insurance.
Dr. Lansky. So we believe the patient and their physician
or other provider should be deciding, and those parties should
have the right information, incentives, and authority to make
things happen.
We have some opportunity to influence the information and
incentives, and even to delegate the authority to someone.
Because we do have a fiduciary role as the plan sponsor--on
behalf of hundreds of thousands of people and a great deal of
money--to guide the process, to structure the process so that
ultimately that patient and physician can have the information
and incentives to make the right decision.
Senator Smith. One of the big challenges that I hear is
that it is so difficult to get the data and get the
information. It is not at all transparent. In fact, it is
extremely confusing both for patients and often for providers
too.
What do we do to address that problem? Anybody?
Dr. Balser. So one challenge we have is that inside a
healthcare system where the physicians are employed by the
health care system, we have much greater ability to move
information through electronic decision support and guide
physicians in their practice.
Increasingly, we are trying to create ACO-like structures
and affiliated networks around us that let us influence care
out in communities where physicians may be in small groups and
do not actually have the kind of support we have at a
Vanderbilt.
A challenge we face with that relates to the Stark and
Anti-kickback laws, which were designed at a time where they
were well-conceived to try to prevent self-dealing. But today,
the way those laws are written, they actually are preventing us
from providing evidence-based guidance to clinicians that we do
not primarily employ.
I have actually included in my written statement, it would
be wonderful if Congress would look at that. Not eliminate
those laws, but try to modernize them so that we can do the
right things without running into harm's way to support
physicians that we do not employ.
I am not imagining that 100 percent of physicians in this
country are going to be employed by health care systems. We are
always going to be working with doctors that we do not employ.
Senator Smith. Dr. Safyer.
Dr. Safyer. Yes, I agree with everything that Dr. Balser
said.
I would add one component that is underlying here, which is
our information systems, which tend to be in the academic
medical centers, have robust information to give us many
answers. But we could do a lot better if the different systems
spoke to each other, which is not good business for the
providers in the systems.
When we built the railroads in this country, the gauge of
the track that you were on did not change as you came out of
Minnesota into another state.
So our information systems are designed to be proprietary
and to compete with each other, but not share information that
would be readily available.
In the Bronx, we built a rail, which is connecting the
different systems. It is a workaround, but it only has about 25
different items in it. It is not comprehensive. We have the
information. It is not easily accessible.
Senator Smith. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, I know I am out of time, but I want to just
close by saying that I appreciate this. I am struck by all of
your testimony about the amount of experimentation and testing
that we need to be doing.
It is one of the main reasons why I am so concerned about
the Trump administration's recent efforts to undermine the work
of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation. That is
the place where we need to test out ideas on ACO's and others
that you have been discussing. I think that it is a big mistake
to move away from that.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Smith.
Senator Warren.
Senator Warren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We are talking today about how to reduce health spending
and Senator Murray mentioned one approach with a lot of
promise, it is called bundled payments, and I want to follow up
some on that.
Currently, Medicare pays for health care by reimbursing
hospitals for each individual service that they perform. Right
now, if you get a hip replacement, the hospital gets paid in
little chunks, or big chunks, for every piece that they did.
They are paid when the doctor cuts you open. They are paid
when the anesthesiologist puts you to sleep. They are paid for
the operating room. They are paid for the device. They are paid
for follow up visits. And then if things go wrong, they are
paid to treat your infection or for a second surgery to treat
the problem, and on and on.
But the Affordable Care Act let Medicare test using bundled
payments for certain services and it is a pretty simple idea,
just like it sounds. Instead of getting paid for every piece
separately, the hospital gets paid one set price for a whole
bundle of services that go from start to finish.
Dr. Lansky, let me start with you. Why does changing the
way that Medicare pays for procedures to a bundled price have
an impact on the quality of care that the patient receives?
Dr. Lansky. It does not guarantee that it will have an
impact on quality of care, but it creates a platform for the
team to work together. So the team is now convened to manage
against a budget, essentially, across diagnostics, treatment,
rehab, and outcomes entirely.
Unless they also have an incentive to achieve a good
outcome, if anything, there may be a risk. We either do too
many bundles or they will not optimize the spending to achieve
a good outcome.
Once the team is convened, if they are also accountable for
the outcome and their payment is in some way contingent on
outcome----
Senator Warren. When you say ``outcome,'' it is things like
low rates of infection.
Dr. Lansky. Yes, and also if it is a knee replacement, can
they walk?
Senator Warren. Can they actually walk?
Dr. Lansky. Are they returning to normal activities of
daily living six months after the surgery?
For a bundled payment to lead to higher quality care, it
must cover an entire episode from beginning to end. The payment
has to be affected by the patient's outcome. Ideally, the
payment should be prospective, not retrospective. In other
words, the team knows upfront they are getting a certain amount
of money and managing to it. If it is a retrospective payment,
a year later, some accountant figures it out.
Senator Warren. Right, because you are trying to shape
behavior upfront. Okay.
So back to a hypothesis, we think that is what it would do.
Paying a bundled price, if done right, would give hospitals the
incentive to keep patients healthy and managed towards good
outcomes.
Now, Medicare set out to test this hypothesis with some
research projects designed to examine whether costs went down
and whether patients did better.
The first round of research was opt-in. Meaning, the
hospitals that got bundled payments were the ones that signed
up to get paid in this way. They volunteered. The data looked
good, but researchers suspected that the hospitals that signed
up were the ones who were confident that they could do better
under a bundled payment system.
So Medicare tried a more rigorous test which meant
requiring all the hospitals in a certain part of the country to
participate in certain types of care like hip and knee
replacements or bypass surgery.
Now, Dr. Lansky, when President Trump took office in 2017,
his Administration just flat out canceled most of the mandatory
parts of the research agenda. So that raises the question.
Are we getting solid data about how bundled payments work
if we just collect results from the hospitals that chose to
opt-in?
Dr. Lansky. There are two effects I am concerned about. One
is that we do not know whether we are only getting the high
performers or the low performers in the data.
The second is we are not moving toward a competitive market
where we have all the providers in the community revealing
their data for you and me to see and make our own decisions
where we want to go for care. We are only getting a few
spotlights.
Senator Warren. So the Trump administration said they
canceled mandatory participation in this research project
because they said it was just too hard on hospitals. Sometimes
hospitals argue that the older patients or sicker patients are
going to have more problems and the hospital is going to be
penalized if it does not have good outcomes.
Let me ask you, Dr. Safyer. You have a lot of experience
running programs providing outcome-based care to patients in
the Bronx.
Are there ways to design successful programs even for
hospitals serving patients that have a very high degree of
health challenges?
Dr. Safyer. The answer is yes and I believe that the role
of Medicare and Medicaid should move in that direction
aggressively.
I will just make one very important point to your question
which is, and we discussed it earlier, the social determinants
of health are huge and important, and we need to account for
them. So that should be built-in to it.
Quite frankly, I was disappointed in some of the metrics
that we have used in Medicare where that was not included and
it was ignored.
Senator Warren. Okay.
Dr. Safyer. I think we need to get back to that.
Senator Warren. Look, in Massachusetts, we are leading the
way on efforts to reward high quality care, and we are doing it
in our Medicaid program, which cares for many of the most
vulnerable patients.
Here is the bottom line. If we do not stop trying to
improve health care in this country--we do not stop trying to
improve the health care in this country because it is hard or
because it makes people who benefit from a broken system
uncomfortable--if President Trump decides he wants to get
serious about bringing down health care costs in this country,
he can start by reversing his shortsighted decision to cancel
research on one very promising way to do it.
We should make this research better, not take this research
off the table.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Warren.
Senator Kaine.
Senator Kaine. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thanks to our witnesses.
I echo comments made by our Ranking Member at the
beginning.
Also, Senator Hassan, I hope this Committee might take up
the condition of children who are under the jurisdiction of
HHS, the Office of Refugee Resettlement, because I think it is
an important thing we should exercise oversight on.
I appreciate you being here today on this important topic.
My constituents in Virginia are asking me all the time about
health care costs. This Committee is, I think, uniquely suited
because of the folks on the committee--former governors,
physicians, et cetera--to reduce costs.
I was intrigued by the testimony of Dr. James and Dr.
Balser on waste, and I am just going to read a couple of
excerpts from your written testimony.
From Dr. James, ``Higher quality eliminates waste. This
year, total expenditures on health care delivery in the United
States will approach $3.6 trillion. Midpoint estimates suggest
as much as $1.8 trillion in recoverable waste.''
``The primary drivers of waste are, (1), care delivery
execution that still relies primarily on personal expertise and
human memory; (2) in the face of high and rapidly increasing
complexity of clinical practice that, 'exceeds the capacity of
the unaided expert mind' framed within; (3) legal structures,
cultural expectations, and payment methods that actively
encourage utilization. Waste estimates include healthcare fraud
and abuse. However, these factors are small compared to other
sources.''
Dr. Balser, you have similar testimony. ``Nearly all
analyses have shown that amid myriad causes for the rising cost
of healthcare, from accelerating technology to inflated
pricing, by far the largest single issue is waste.''
``The largest sources of waste are euphemistically termed
'unnecessary services,' and frankly, in most other industries
would be less generously labeled 'sloppiness'. The root causes
are predominantly system failures in our ability to effectively
communicate, not only in transmitting the key information about
our patients and the care they are receiving, but also
shortcomings in the decision support that clinicians need to
provide care that is timely and cost-effective.''
I found that testimony fascinating and the timing of our
hearing fascinating.
Yesterday, the Administration shuttered a 20-year Federal
program, the National Guidelines Clearinghouse. This was put in
place 20 years ago in 1998 to collect best practices about a
variety of health conditions and treatment options. Those best
practices are vetted before they are included in this online
clearinghouse.
The online clearinghouse is used 200,000 times a month,
largely by health care providers who are dealing with patients
and then using the online database to try to figure out what is
the best treatment modality for a patient, so they do not
waste. So they do not do something wrong. So that they more
likely provide the high quality, which you suggest, Dr. James,
will drive out waste.
The Administration just closed the program yesterday after
20 years. The American Health Insurance Plans, AHIP, the
Association of Family Physicians begged the Administration not
to shutter this voluntary informational resource to allow
clinicians, and possibly, especially clinicians in small
settings, rural setting family physicians to be able to get the
best information so that they can not direct the wrong
treatment, but the right treatment to help their patients.
High quality drives out waste. High quality should help us
reduce costs.
Can you think of a single good reason why an Administration
would want to shutter a program like this that provides vetted
health quality information to providers?
Dr. James. Senator, I am not here to defend the current
Administration, first of all. I do not know why. I will say
this, the piece that is missing from your model is the last
mile. It is not enough to have a database. You do need the
evidence, so it is a critical piece.
Senator Kaine. Yes.
Dr. James. How do you get it so that it is available in
every patient interaction almost without having to hunt it,
which is what it really takes?
Senator Kaine. But you would assert that we do need the
database.
Dr. James. Well, I need the content, and then I need to get
it down to that interaction.
Senator Kaine. Any other thoughts about why it would be a
good idea to eliminate the National Guidelines Clearinghouse?
Dr. Safyer. Well, there is no good idea for shutting down
an opportunity to learn about why we spend so much and do not
get the quality that we need. I cannot even get close to it.
But just to make a comment about something that has come up
a number of times, which is related.
Senator Kaine. But could I ask either Dr. Lansky or Dr.
Balser first?
Can you see a reason why the Federal Government would
shutdown the National Guidelines Clearinghouse after 20 years?
Dr. Lansky. No.
Senator Kaine. Dr. Lansky, no. Dr. Balser.
Dr. Balser. No.
Senator Kaine. The asserted reason is budget cuts. We just
did a tax bill that increases the national debt by $1.5
trillion. This is a small, in the single digit million dollar
annual allocation program.
The notion that we can increase the debt by $1.5 trillion
over ten years to give tax breaks to big corporations and then
eliminate a best practices Website that produces quality, which
is good for people, and drives out waste and cost is beyond me.
My time is up. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Murray and I need to go to the floor to speak
before the vote at 11:45. I have asked Senator Cassidy to Chair
the hearing, and any second round of questions that Senators
might have, and then conclude the hearing.
Before I leave, I would like to thank the witnesses for
coming. I am struck, as I think any normal person would be, by
the idea that as much as half of what we spend on health care
is wasted. There is always waste in any human enterprise, but
that is a ridiculous amount of money.
As we continue our hearings here, I want to, and I am sure
Senator Murray feels the same way, we want to see if there are
steps we could take here that make a big difference in that. So
we will listen carefully to what you have to say.
I have heard you focus on utilization. You focused on
complexity; we have heard that in our other hearings. At an
earlier hearing, the testimony was that we do not use more
health care than other countries, but that our prices are
higher.
So I guess the trick is for us to listen carefully enough
to figure out, what could we actually do about that here? There
may be one, or two, or three things that would have a big
effect.
When I was a young man and worked in the White House, I was
an impatient person and the wise man I worked for would say to
me, ``Lamar, just a little move here makes a big difference out
there.''
So if we could avoid getting balled up in technical details
here or partisan politics, it could be that toward the end of
the year, that we could begin to work together to see if there
is one, or two, or three things that we might do, which would
set in motion a reduction of complexity, or better utilization,
or whatever step to work on that waste.
We have some very good talent on this committee. We have at
least two physicians, governors, former governors, all sorts of
people who are used to solving problems.
So I would say to my colleagues who are here, and I will
say to the others, that after we get through these four or five
hearings on reducing health care costs, I hope we can sit down
and say, ``Now, what can we actually do about this?''
Your testimony today has been extremely helpful. I hope it
has been worth your time because it has been worth ours.
Senator Cassidy.
Senator Cassidy [presiding]. Let me ask my colleagues, are
either of you interested in a second round? Yes? Okay. Well
then, why do you not go first?
Senator Kaine. Thank you, Senator Cassidy. Mine is just to
be polite to Dr. Safyer. He was about to answer and offer an
opinion, and I cut him off because my time was running out and
I wanted to hear from Dr. Lansky and Dr. Balser.
So, Dr. Safyer, do you remember?
Dr. Safyer. I remember.
I just want to make a very important point, I think, which
is, do not underestimate the Federal Government's power if they
got involved in the price of drugs, the price of insurance, and
all these quality issues along with the price for equipment
that we buy and put into peoples' knees and hips.
It is unregulated. It is the Wild West. I think we are
dangerously going back in that direction.
So I do agree with Brent very strongly, and the other
people here, that the quality is sometimes not the best, but
the providers need to be in a system where other things are in
tune and working in that direction.
If you just look to Europe where there is arguably one
socialist system in terms of health care. The rest have private
insurers, private providers, and so forth, but they discipline
the price of items, the governments. There are rules to the
road and there are not rules to the road in our environment.
I do not think it is very hard to find where the waste is
up and down. And everybody I think, and I do not think Brent
would disagree with me, needs to be involved in that
transformation.
Senator Kaine. If I could say, and I will conclude, Senator
Cassidy, with your comment about the need for rules for the
road and discipline mechanisms, we do not even use market
mechanisms to discipline price.
So we had a recent testimony on drug pricing, and I pointed
out that the cost in the United States of Gleevec, which is an
anti-leukemia drug, is dramatically higher than the cost in
other nations.
I asked our HHS Secretary, ``Do you know what a best price
contract is?'' He said, ``Yes, I kind of know what it is.'' I
said, ``All the time in commercial settings, in a commercial
negotiation, you will say, `I am going to pay you for this, and
because I have such a big market, I am going to pay you at the
price that is the best price you offer to any other nation.'"
If we just use standard commercial practices like best
price contracts, for example, which are market mechanisms, if
we did that, we could dramatically reduce the cost especially
of mature drugs that are past the point where dollars are being
put in to research them.
So discipline does not even have to mean countering the
market. It even means using traditional commercial practices,
which we refuse to use, to discipline costs in the country. I
think we should be exploring how to do that.
Dr. Safyer. My wife and I are physicians. People show up at
our doors.
So recently, I bought the equivalent of Naloxone, which is
miraculous if somebody overdoses, because I am just kind of
waiting for it to happen, even though my neighborhood is not
the Bronx. The inhaled version of it is $400. I mean, it is
incomprehensible. The companies are making money on both ends
of it and nobody has disciplined it.
In addition to that, my wife has allergies, bees, yellow
jackets, wasps. EpiPens now are in that same range. It is just
an old drug that has been around forever and it is
unreasonable.
Senator Kaine. Thank you.
Senator Cassidy. There are several things to follow up on.
Dr. Lansky, when Chairman Alexander mentioned a few things
we could do that could make a big difference--and you echoed in
your testimony, or I echo you--price transparency could be a
big thing. Now, people will pooh-pooh that and say, ``Price
transparency does not work,'' using some experiment out of New
York.
But I like what you did with joint replacement with
reference pricing. Sure, you can go wherever you want, but you
are going to pay the delta between that which we find is high
quality, good price and that which these folks down the road
decide to charge.
Any comments on that?
Dr. Lansky. I think the evidence is good that reference
pricing works. It works for drugs. It works for procedures. The
key is it has to be for a defined product.
So I think in all of the discussions we are having, the
opportunity we have to standardize what the ``it'' is that
people are competing on. What they are pricing. What you and I,
as consumers, can recognize as a fixed object, if you will, in
the marketplace. That is an important part of it.
But the model is very effective, and I think the
opportunity to even within Medicare----
Senator Cassidy. So let me go beyond that because I do not
review the health economics literature as closely as you do.
But I remember reading an article I thought well done, that
if we look at ACO's--really, and the guy like me who is 60
years old, got a little bit of osteoarthritis and takes my
Advil whenever I need it--you do not make your money on me,
managing my health care.
You make it on those who have chronic disease and/or
hearts, hips, knees, joints, joint replacement, hearts. Bundle
payment, just merely focusing on bundle payment for joint
replacement, heart conditions, and perhaps high cost chronic
illness is actually as effective as trying to enroll everybody
into an ACO.
Dr. Balser, you seem to agree with that.
Dr. Balser. I totally agree. I think the ACO experiment has
not been as successful as we would have liked because we tried
to run before we learned to walk. Bundles are learning to walk.
If you say we are going to do a bundle around heart
surgery, it forces about 100 people to get together and figure
out the most cost effective and smooth approach to designing
the system. So from the time the patient shows up at the door
to the time they are out three months, they have the highest
quality outcome and the lowest cost. It really, strongly
incents a health care system to do that hard work.
Senator Cassidy. Just because I am not sure, it may be that
walking is really where we need to be and perhaps a direct
primary care model for the guy like me who has a little bit of
osteoarthritis and whatever happens when you turn to be 60
years old.
Yes, sir.
Dr. Safyer. I agree, but I see it as a first step. No pun
intended. So what we need to do is have those kinds of
programs, but we need to be moving the entire system into one
that is an ACO or risk bearing.
Senator Cassidy. I am not sure I have seen, though, that
ACO's work for people who do not have significant medical
expenditure.
Dr. Safyer. Yes, but people move in and out of different
experiences in the health care system appropriately. So when
the whole system is aligned, I think you get better outcomes.
You also get the demand.
Senator Cassidy. But there is an administrative overhead
associated with ACO's----
Dr. Safyer. Yes.
Senator Cassidy.--Which, if you go to a direct primary care
model, you will eliminate that administrative overhead.
Dr. Safyer. Well, the largest overhead is in the commercial
arena and that is very large.
Senator Cassidy. Let me ask you this, because chronic
disease management, you mentioned in your testimony doing End
Stage Renal Disease. Now, that seems just crying out for a
bundled payment, but it seemed in some regard, we have not been
able to achieve that.
Any thoughts on the successful application of bundled
payments to ESRD?
Dr. Safyer. I agree with you and where you are going, and I
think we should be doing bundles, which is a word that is
commonly used, in many more areas, and we should be aggressive
about it.
But we should have a target about where we are going.
Again, I come back to it. If you are not disciplining the
pharmaceutical companies, the vendors, and the insurers to
something that is reasonable, you will never get towards what
France has or Portugal has, which is not, I am not talking
about the British system.
Senator Cassidy. So that leads into my next question.
Dr. James, we in the Federal Employees Health Benefit
program get a risk-adjusted amount to an insurer to take care
of a Federal employee. These members of CalPERS and other
organizations give a risk-adjusted amount to an insurer to care
for that.
Senator Collins and I had a bill, Cassidy-Collins, which
would have given a risk-adjusted amount to states to care for
those folks who are on the exchanges and of those who are on
Medicaid.
I think it is fair to say that states gain Medicaid to
maximize reimbursement to lower their exposure. And frankly,
providers help states gain because it is cost less contracting.
What are your thoughts conceptually about the Federal
Government on a risk-adjusted basis capitating, if you will,
per patient payment to states for things such as Medicaid and
for, say, the acute care aspect, not long term care, and for
the individual market?
Dr. James. I like the way that you are headed with that,
but I think you stop a step too short.
It is funny. We see it in Medicare Advantage. Currently, we
basically capitate insurance plans, and then they pay the care
providers fee for service, and that is where the whole thing
breaks down right there.
Insurance companies, states, do not deliver any care. They
do not plan or design those care systems and that is where the
alignment has to take place.
Senator Cassidy. So you are saying the payment should go
directly to the insurer or to the patient to choose their plan?
Dr. James. If we could have talked them into it, I would
have preferred that the Federal Government paid us as a system
direct capitated payments for Medicare patients' right to the
care delivery system.
Senator Cassidy. Then what about for Medicaid and for the
individual market?
Dr. James. We had in Utah, led by a fellow named Dan
Liljenquist, who is someone you really ought to look into, with
what he is doing with pharma right now. He was a state Senator.
We had a Medicaid ACO that basically deployed exactly that.
Senator Cassidy. So conceptually, you feel like it is a
valid thing.
Dr. James. Yes.
Senator Cassidy. I can tell you, you are always burning
down the world when we did it, but it seemed like everybody
else was doing it.
Dr. James. Yes. One other little comment on the last
conversation, in the ``Harvard Business Review'' in July 2016,
Mike Porter and Bob Kaplan, me and Greg Poulson debated that
issue about bundled payment.
The way to think about a bundled payment is capitation
light for medical procedures that have clearly defined
boundaries.
Senator Cassidy. Yes.
Dr. James. An awful lot of what we do in medicine does not
have clearly defined boundaries.
I like the way that Dr. Safyer, you were saying, it is a
step before you run, walk before you run. But you are stepping
toward a capitated model.
Senator Cassidy. Let me ask one more thing, because they
just called votes and I have one more thing I wanted to ask.
We have not talked about tort reform, but I will tell you,
my physician colleagues will say, ``The reason I ordered that
MRI is because if I do not, I get sued.'' There has been data
that states that have put in tort reform have lower ordering of
so-called unnecessary tests than states which have not put in
tort reform.
Dr. Balser, do you want to take a shot at that?
Dr. Balser. Yes, there is no question that states that have
put in, not just caps on torts, but committees, expert
committees that actually screen cases for reasonableness have
an enormous impact in reducing this problem.
The states that have very robust screening processes where
frivolous suits are just not carried forward are doing much
better in this regard.
Senator Cassidy. Does anybody disagree with that position?
Dr. Safyer. No. I agree strongly.
Senator Cassidy. One more thing, Dr. Safyer, I do have one
more thing.
Surprise medical bills; New York has apparently done some
stuff. The ACA had three ways to go at surprise medical bills.
I think New York has another method. Any comments on that?
I think we, on this Committee, would be interested in
helping out on issues such as surprise medical bills, which,
for those who are not familiar with what I am speaking, you are
brought to an emergency room. Your physician is out of network
because they contract with the hospital. The hospital is in
your network. You think you are covered, and then you get the
surprise bill.
Doctors do not like it because doctors say, ``The payer
does not negotiate with me because they think they can get a
better price by not negotiating with me.''
Thoughts on that?
Dr. Safyer. I am in favor of disciplining that and I think
New York is moving in the right direction, but we are not quite
there yet.
Senator Cassidy. What about the ACA's provision? I think
that ACA had the greatest of three insurers must pay providers
the plan's average in-network amount, Medicare amount, or so-
called usual, customary, and reasonable. But I think New York
is actually doing something different than that. Again, any
comment?
Dr. Safyer. I do not have the facts in particular, but I
know it is moving in the right direction and something that we
are paying attention to.
Senator Cassidy. Okay.
Dr. Safyer. It is frightening to people and could
potentially keep people out of emergency rooms when they need
them.
Senator Cassidy. Yes.
Thank you all for being here.
The hearing record remains open for 10 days. Members may
submit additional information for the record in that time, if
they would like.
Senator Cassidy. The HELP Committee will meet again
Wednesday, July 25 for an executive session.
Thank you for being here.
The Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:46 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[all]