- THE NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM: RESTORING OUR FOREST INFRASTRUCTURE
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
THE NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM: RESTORING OUR FOREST INFRASTRUCTURE
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
SEPTEMBER 26, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-19
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov
___________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
38-016 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota, Chairman
DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas, Ranking
JIM COSTA, California
Minority Member
MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania
JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
FILEMON VELA, Texas
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD,
STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
Arkansas
ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
Vice Chair
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
ABIGAIL DAVIS SPANBERGER, Virginia
DOUG LaMALFA, California
JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois
ANTONIO DELGADO, New York
TED S. YOHO, Florida
TJ COX, California
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
MIKE BOST, Illinois
ANTHONY BRINDISI, New York
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
JEFFERSON VAN DREW, New Jersey
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
JOSH HARDER, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
KIM SCHRIER, Washington
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
ROGER W. MARSHALL, Kansas
CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
DON BACON, Nebraska
SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
DUSTY JOHNSON, South Dakota
AL LAWSON, Jr., Florida
JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
JIM HAGEDORN, Minnesota
JIMMY PANETTA, California
ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
CYNTHIA AXNE, Iowa
______
Anne Simmons, Staff Director
Matthew S. Schertz, Minority Staff Director
______
Subcommittee on Conservation and Forestry
ABIGAIL DAVIS SPANBERGER, Virginia, Chair
MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
DOUG LaMALFA, California, Ranking
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
Minority Member
CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia
CYNTHIA AXNE, Iowa
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
Felix Muniz, Jr., Subcommittee Staff Director
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
LaMalfa, Hon. Doug, a Representative in Congress from California,
opening statement..............................................
8
Pingree, Hon. Chellie, a Representative in Congress from Maine,
submitted article..............................................
68
Schrier, Hon. Kim, a Representative in Congress from Washington,
submitted letter...............................................
72
Spanberger, Hon. Abigail Davis, a Representative in Congress from
Virginia, opening statement....................................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
2
Submitted news release.......................................
29
Witness
Lago, Lenise, Associate Chief, U.S. Forest Service, U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.....................
3
Prepared statement...........................................
5
Submitted questions..........................................
73
THE NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM: RESTORING OUR FOREST INFRASTRUCTURE
----------
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 26, 2019
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Conservation and Forestry,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
Room 1300 of the Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Abigail
Davis Spanberger [Chair of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Spanberger, Fudge,
O'Halleran, Pingree, Axne, Schrier, Panetta, Peterson (ex
officio), LaMalfa, Allen, Kelly, Johnson, and Thompson.
Staff present: Melinda Cep, Prescott Martin III, Felix
Muniz, Jr., Alison Titus, Ricki Schroeder, Patricia Straughn,
Josh Maxwell, Dana Sandman, and Jennifer Yezak.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ABIGAIL DAVIS SPANBERGER, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM VIRGINIA
The Chair. This hearing of the Subcommittee on Conservation
and Forestry entitled, The National Forest System: Restoring
our Forest Infrastructure, will come to order.
Good morning. I would like to welcome everyone to this
hearing of the Conservation and Forestry Subcommittee on the
National Forest System: restoring our forest infrastructure, a
critically important topic. I would also like to thank Ranking
Member LaMalfa, who will be arriving shortly, for his
engagement on this issue, as well as each Subcommittee Member
for taking part in this hearing today.
The roads, trails, bridges, dams, and other facilities that
make up our National Forest infrastructure help ensure safe and
reliable access to natural resources and serve as an essential
backbone for our economic activity.
More than 140 million Americans visit National Forest lands
every year to camp, hike, fish, hunt, ski, and more. Recreation
on and around Forest Service land contributes more than $10
billion to the U.S. economy every year and supports more than
143,000 full-time and part-time American jobs.
In addition to recreation, 66 million Americans in over
3,000 communities depend on Forest Service infrastructure for
drinking water and wastewater services and many communities
rely on Forest Service roads to drive their children to school;
shop in neighborhood stores; and visit their doctors.
However, as a consequence of deferring maintenance across
the agency's infrastructure portfolio, our forest
infrastructure is in disrepair, and no longer meets the needs
of forest users, local communities, and emergency responders.
As is the case with all Federal land management agencies,
appropriated funds have so far been insufficient.
With the deferred maintenance backlog of $5.2 billion, the
ability of the American public to safely access and benefit
from National Forests is greatly diminished. As many of our
Subcommittee Members know all too well, one contributing factor
to this acute backlog has been soaring fire suppression costs.
The increasing frequency and intensity of wildfires has forced
the agency to make some tough decisions, often pulling funds
from non-fire accounts to address wildfires, and leaving fewer
and fewer resources to support other aspects of the agency's
work, like deferred maintenance. We hope that the fire fix that
goes into effect in Fiscal Year 2020 helps address this part of
the deferred maintenance challenge.
Despite the challenges of aging infrastructure, the
dedicated public servants at the Forest Service have
continually worked to do more with less, and to deliver upon
their mission: to sustain the health, diversity, and
productivity of the nation's forests and grasslands to meet the
needs of present and future generations.
Proper maintenance of our National Forests is a matter of
safety and economic well-being. I hope this hearing will help
us better understand the severity of the deferred maintenance
backlog, its impact on regional economies, and the agency's
future plans for capital improvement.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Spanberger follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Abigail Davis Spanberger, a Representative
in Congress from Virginia
Good morning, I would like to welcome everyone to this hearing of
the Conservation and Forestry Subcommittee on The National Forest
System: Restoring Our Forest Infrastructure, a critically important
topic. I would also like to thank Ranking Member LaMalfa for his
engagement on this issue, as well as each Subcommittee Member for
taking part in this hearing today.
National Forest infrastructure is the physical link to the
outdoors. Its network of roads, trails, bridges, dams, and facilities
helps ensure access to natural resources and secure the economic well-
being of neighboring communities.
Over 140 million Americans visit National Forest lands year-round
to camp, hike, fish, hunt, ski and snowboard, and take part in a wide
range of other recreation. Recreation on and around Forest Service land
contributes more than $10 billion to the U.S. economy every year and
supports more than 143,000 full and part-time jobs.
66 million Americans in over 3,000 communities depend on Forest
Service infrastructure for drinking water and wastewater services.
Similarly, many communities rely on Forest Service roads to drive their
children to school; shop in neighborhood stores; or visit their doctor,
among other routine travel needs. Over the last 2 decades alone,
community development along the Wildland-Urban Interface has expanded
by more than 46 million acres, an area larger than the State of
Washington.
However, as a consequence of deferring maintenance in the agency's
infrastructure portfolio, the state of our forest infrastructure has
fallen far behind what is necessary to meet the needs of forest users,
local communities, and emergency responders. As is the case with all
Federal land management agencies, appropriated funds have been
insufficient to adequately maintain roads, trails, bridges, dams, and
other important structures.
Over the last few decades, fire suppression costs have increased as
the frequency and intensity of wildfires have also increased. These
escalating costs have forced the agency to make some tough decisions,
often pulling funds from non-fire accounts to address wildfires and
leaving fewer and fewer resources to support other aspects of the
agency's work, like deferred maintenance. We hope that the fire budget
fix that goes into effect in FY20 solves that component of this issue.
With a deferred maintenance backlog of $5.2 billion, the ability of the
American public to safely access and benefit from National Forests is
greatly diminished.
Despite the challenges of aging infrastructure, the Forest Service
has continually worked to do more with less and has charged itself to
develop a long-term plan to deliver upon its mission to ``sustain the
health, diversity, and productivity of the nation's forests and
grasslands to meet the needs of present and future generations.''
Proper maintenance of our National Forests is a matter of safety
and economic well-being. I hope this hearing will help us better
understand the severity of the deferred maintenance backlog, its impact
on regional economies, and the agency's future plans for capital
improvement.
This is the important subject of our hearing today, to better
understand the level of deferred maintenance; its impact on economic
opportunity and public use; and to examine agency plans for capital
improvement.
The Chair. With that, I will recognize the Ranking Member
once he has arrived. But in consultation with the Ranking
Member and pursuant to Rule XI(e), I want to make Members of
the Subcommittee aware that other Members of the full Committee
may join us today.
The chair would request that other Members submit their
opening statements for the record so the witness may begin her
testimony, and to ensure there is ample time for questions
today.
I would like to welcome our witness, Ms. Lenise Lago,
Associate Chief for the U.S. Forest Service. In coordination
with the Chief, Ms. Lago helps lead a workforce of more than
28,000 year-round employees, and an additional 12,000 seasonal
employees, and is a steward to 193 million acres of National
Forests and Grasslands.
Ms. Lago worked briefly in the forest products industry
before joining the Forest Service in 1989. She has worked in a
variety of planning, budget, and resource management jobs,
splitting time between Washington, D.C., and the western United
States, including Montana, Washington, and Oregon.
Associate Chief Lago is a native of Athens, Georgia, and a
graduate of the University of Georgia's Warnell School of
Forest Resources.
Ms. Lago, you will have 5 minutes to present your
testimony. The light will turn yellow, signaling when you have
1 minute left to complete your testimony. Please begin when you
are ready.
STATEMENT OF LENISE LAGO, ASSOCIATE CHIEF, U.S. FOREST SERVICE,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
WASHINGTON, D.C.
Ms. Lago. Thank you, Madam Chair, Ranking Member LaMalfa,
and Members of the Committee. Thank you for inviting me to
share the Administration's views on infrastructure within
USDA's Forest Service. I want to thank and acknowledge how
important this opportunity is to testify on this important
topic. I would also like to thank you for the support you have
given us to carry out our programs.
Infrastructure is the physical link between Americans and
their public lands, and Forest Service infrastructure is vital
to rural and urban communities alike. It includes roads,
trails, bridges, visitor centers used by the public, as well as
offices, air tanker bases, employee housing, water and
wastewater systems which we use to manage and protect all of
the other resources. People depend on a safe Forest Service
road network to get to schools, to hospitals, homes, stores.
The road system is also critical to carrying out active
management to improve forest conditions.
Infrastructure drives the economic benefits communities
derive from National Forests. The Forest Service provides the
most diverse recreation opportunities in the nation, across
world-class landscapes that attract, as you mentioned, Madam
Chair, over 140 million visitors annually, contributes $10
billion to the U.S. economy each year, and supports over
140,000 jobs, mostly in gateway and rural communities. Outdoor
recreation and tourism are the single greatest source of jobs
for local economies in the National Forest System.
Perhaps most critically, forest infrastructure provides
fire protection for communities. Firefighters and emergency
responders use forest infrastructure to access forest lands for
firefighting operations, to protect communities, to evacuate
families from areas at risk, and to rescue individuals from
danger.
Of specific interest here today is deferred maintenance,
and my written testimony includes tables listing various assets
the Forest Service owns and maintains, and the deferred
maintenance by asset category. I am not going to cite all that
here, but just to roughly identify the portfolio that we are
talking about, the Forest Service maintains over 370,000 miles
of roads. That includes over 6,000 bridges. We have 158,000
miles of trail, including over 7,000 trail bridges. We have
almost 40,000 buildings of all types, including administrative
buildings, research buildings, employee housing, and recreation
sites.
I think you know; deferred maintenance is scheduled
maintenance that doesn't get done. It has a dollar value, and
the dollar value accumulates over time. As a result of deferred
maintenance, the state of the Forest Service infrastructure has
fallen far behind what is necessary to meet the needs of our
forests and our forest users.
Today, the Forest Service has a deferred maintenance
backlog of more than $5.2 billion. Our capital improvement
budget has not kept up with needed maintenance. The President's
budget request for Fiscal Year 2020 includes a public land
infrastructure fund, which allocates monies for deferred
maintenance in the National Forest System.
Another funding source for Forest Service infrastructure
comes from the Federal Highway Administration Federal Lands
Transportation Program. Interestingly, while the Forest Service
has more miles of publicly accessible road and many times more
bridges than other Federal land management agencies, the Forest
Service receives only about five percent of the funding from
this program.
In addition to funding, the agency is doing its part to
reduce deferred maintenance. We are taking bold steps to
streamline our environmental review process and speed up
important work that could protect communities, livelihoods, and
resources. We are using tools provided by Congress as well. We
have continued to use conveyance authority, which allows us to
sell facilities that are no longer needed, and keep the
proceeds to address other infrastructure needs. We just
proposed a rulemaking for the Powerline Utility Corridor
Authority from the 2018 appropriations bill, and the
Communication Sites Authority from the 2018 Farm Bill, in
addition to the Leasing Authority, which was included in the
2018 Farm Bill.
FLREA, the Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement Act, has
enabled us to keep up with needed maintenance at heavily-used
developed recreation sites across the country.
So, with funding, innovation, efficiency, and partnerships,
those are the keys to taking care of these important assets.
Managing a healthy infrastructure is an important part of our
job, and it supports our ability to carry out our mission.
Again, I am deeply grateful to the Committee for this
opportunity to talk about our infrastructure, to share ideas
about how to improve our backlog of deferred maintenance, and
we appreciate your support. I am happy to answer any questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lago follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lenise Lago, Associate Chief, U.S. Forest
Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Regarding Infrastructure on National Forest System Lands
Madam Chair and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting
me to share the Administration's position on deferred maintenance
within the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Forest Service.
On the National Forest System, infrastructure is the physical link
between Americans and their public lands. It strengthens communities by
giving them safe access to the many ecological, economic, and social
amenities these lands provide. For instance, people use infrastructure
on the National Forest System for ranching, farming, logging, outdoor
recreation, tourism, and municipal water services, all of which support
thriving small businesses, particularly in local communities. People
depend on the Forest Service road network to get to schools, stores,
hospitals, and homes. Perhaps most critically, forest infrastructure
provides fire protection for communities. Firefighters and emergency
responders use forest infrastructure to access forest lands for
firefighting operations to protect communities, evacuate families from
areas at risk, and rescue individuals from danger.
The infrastructure on the National Forest System includes over
370,000 miles of road, 13,400 bridges and trail bridges (see table 1),
158,000 miles of trail, nearly 500 Forest Service owned dams, over
1,100 privately owned dams overseen by the Forest Service, and
facilities for both administration and wildland fire management. The
roads, bridges, facilities, and other infrastructure affect every
aspect of the Forest Service mission and are critical to the effective
management of National Forests and Grasslands on behalf of the American
public.
However, as a consequence of deferring maintenance in our extensive
infrastructure portfolio, the state of the Forest Service's
infrastructure has fallen far behind what is necessary to meet the
needs of our forests and forest users. Today, the Forest Service has a
deferred maintenance \1\ backlog of more than $5.2 billion (table 3--
Deferred Maintenance Backlog; data is also available by state).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``Deferred maintenance'' is the continual delay of maintenance
of Forest Service infrastructure assets. Deferred maintenance prevents
buildings, roads, bridges, and other assets from reaching their
expected useful lifespans. The total dollar value of deferred
maintenance is determined by totaling all of the work items of
components and systems that need to be repaired or replaced. It does
not include unforeseen failures such as a boiler leak, or a wash out of
a road or bridge by a storm, etc.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The President's Budget for Fiscal Year 2020 includes a Public Lands
Infrastructure Fund allocating monies for deferred maintenance on the
National Forest System. USDA welcomes the opportunity for further
discussion with the Subcommittee regarding the proposed fund to meet
the Forest Service's deferred maintenance needs.
Our infrastructure needs are pressing, and neglecting to meet them
only makes the problem worse. Neglecting routine maintenance turns
minor repairs into major-overhaul work. Ultimately, if left unchecked,
it can turn critical infrastructure unusable to the point of requiring
full replacement. Every delay expands deferred maintenance beyond the
Forest Service's ability to maintain our infrastructure and keep up
with vital services such as fire suppression, timber production, and
outdoor recreation.
Infrastructure on the National Forests and Grasslands also supports
a rising demand for outdoor recreation. The Forest Service provides
recreation opportunities in the nation across landscapes that attract
over 149 million visitors annually. According to the National Visitor
Use Monitoring (NVUM) program, through both direct and ripple effects,
National Forest visitor spending contributes over $10 billion to the
U.S. economy each year while supporting about 143,000 jobs, mostly in
gateway and rural communities. Outdoor recreation and tourism are the
single greatest source of jobs on the National Forest System.
Forest roads and bridges are critical for sustaining landscapes
across the 193 million acres of National Forest System lands for the
benefit of visitors and communities; wildland fire management also
requires an extensive system of forest roads and bridges in good
condition. However, the backlog of deferred maintenance for forest
roads and bridges is $3.4 billion--needed maintenance and repairs
delayed until some future time.
One example of deferred maintenance impacts to Forest Service
assets is the Longhouse Scenic Drive road system on the Allegh[e]ny
National Forest in Pennsylvania. Wear and tear on the road is exceeding
the ability for most passenger cars to reasonably travel over it.
Without needed repairs, the road system cannot bring visitors from
across the country to enjoy the National Forest and sustain local
businesses through their spending. Each year, users of the road system
spend about $1.5 million at local businesses.
Table 1.--Roads and bridges on the National Forest System, by type and
measure.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of Asset
Asset Category
Locations
Quantity
Unit of Measure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trail Bridges
N/A
7,156
Each
Bridges
6,245
6,245
Each
Roads
N/A
370,755
Miles
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Forest Service supports outdoor recreation at more than 29,000
recreation sites ranging from highly developed campgrounds, target
ranges, and boating areas to minimally developed trailheads and fishing
areas. Many of these sites, built by the Civilian Conservation Corps,
are more than 75 years old and remain in use far beyond their expected
lifespans. The deterioration of this recreation infrastructure has a
direct impact on all forest users including outfitters and guides who
create jobs in forest communities and utilize recreation infrastructure
for activities such as fishing and river rafting in National Forests.
Unless the Forest Service invests in recreation infrastructure, the
quality of visitor experience will suffer and local businesses who
depend on forest visitors for their livelihoods might fail.
The Forest Service manages over 158,000 miles of trails--the
largest managed system of trails in the country. These trails provide
motorized and nonmotorized access and high-quality recreation
opportunities across the National Forest System, benefiting economies
and human health in communities nationwide while also fostering
extensive volunteerism and citizen stewardship. Only about 25 percent
of these trails meet agency standards for safety and quality. Total
maintenance across the trail system is estimated at over $600 million,
$300 million in deferred maintenance and $300 million in annual
operational maintenance.
The Forest Service uses 40,510 USDA-owned buildings for
administrative and other purposes (table 2). The buildings include
facilities for research and wildland fire management as well as visitor
centers, bathrooms, communications towers, living quarters, and
warehouses. The Forest Service's deferred maintenance backlog for
facilities totals $1.2 billion, about 65 percent of which is for
buildings older than 50 years. Due to both age and deferred
maintenance, only 57 percent of the buildings used by the Forest
Service are up to standard.
The agency is taking a number of actions to help reduce deferred
maintenance. For example, the Forest Service approach to travel
management helps forests plan a road system that best meets community
needs and transfers ownership to local communities, counties, or states
where appropriate. In West Virginia, Monongahela National Forest, Red
Creek Bridge at Laneville accesses 100 structures, including camps,
cabins, permanent residences, mail route, etc. This bridge also
accesses the Dolly Sods Wilderness, an eastern recreation destination
and economic generator. The Red Creek bridge structure has been
identified for much needed, significant, repairs for the past 10 years.
Table 2.--Buildings owned by USDA and used by the Forest Service, by
purpose, number, and square footage.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of Asset
Asset Category
Locations
Quantity
Unit of Measure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Buildings
38,939
27,351,760
GSF
Residence
1,571
2,470,133
GSF
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The agency is doing its part to reduce deferred maintenance. We are
taking bold steps to streamline our environmental review processes and
speed up important work that could help protect communities,
livelihoods and resources. The proposed updates would not only give the
Forest Service the tools and flexibility to manage the land and tackle
critical challenges like wildfire, insects, and disease but also
improve service to the American people. Revising the rules will improve
forest conditions and make it simpler for people to use and enjoy their
National Forests and Grasslands at lower cost to the taxpayer. The
revised rules will also make it easier to maintain and repair the
infrastructure people need to use and enjoy their public lands--the
roads, trails, campgrounds, and other facilities.
The updates will help reduce our maintenance backlog by
implementing a new suite of ``categorical exclusions,'' a
classification under NEPA excluding certain routine activities from
more extensive, time-consuming environmental impact analyses. The
proposed categorical exclusions would be for restoration projects,
roads and trails management, recreation and facility management, as
well as special use authorizations that issue permits for outfitters
and guides, community organizations, civic groups and others who seek
to recreate on our National Forests and Grasslands. The new categorical
exclusions are based on intensive analysis of hundreds of environmental
assessments and related data and, when fully implemented, will reduce
process delays for routine activities by months or years. We are also
streamlining our business practices and implementing new programmatic
agreements for consultation with other agencies.
For example, this agency is specifically streamlining business
practices to reduce deferred maintenance by strategically prioritizing
capital improvement projects. For road projects, the agency uses the
following criteria in order: (a) projects vital for near-term forest-
based economic activity (that is, restoration within the next 5 years);
(b) projects needed for safety; (c) projects that improve access to
recreation sites and trails; and (d) projects that improve wildlife
connectivity, aquatic organism passage, and flood resiliency. Projects
are evaluated based on how they can provide support and infrastructure
necessary to accomplish national Forest Service goals and mission
areas. The goals are better community service and better access to
public lands for emergency response, outdoor recreation, and active
resource management. Projects are also evaluated on how they use
partnerships to achieve mutual conservation goals through combined
efforts.
Primary funding for Forest Service infrastructure comes from both
Forest Service appropriations and from the Federal Highway
Administration's Federal Lands Transportation Program (FLTP). Adjusted
for inflation, appropriated resources have been decreasing over the
past 2 decades, notwithstanding a spike in funding for roads in 2010
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. The Fixing America's
Surface Transportation Act of 2015 authorized a total of $85 million in
FLTP program funding for the agency for Fiscal Years 2016-2020. This
amount derives from the Highway Trust Fund.
With more than $5.2 billion in deferred maintenance, the Forest
Service cannot keep much of its infrastructure on the National Forest
System from deteriorating. A deteriorating infrastructure keeps us from
properly managing the National Forest System. With roads in poor
condition, for example, emergency vehicles have trouble getting to
wildfires, undermining our firefighting and rescue capabilities.
Conversely, by reducing deferred maintenance and improving
infrastructure, the Forest Service would be better able to protect
communities from wildfire, in part through projects to reduce hazardous
fuels through prescribed fire and mechanical treatments. In addition,
visitors would get better access to recreational activities and the
Forest Service would become a better neighbor by offering more
opportunities for jobs and economic activity in rural areas.
The Forest Service is eager to work with the Committee to meet our
infrastructure needs and reduce our deferred maintenance backlog. We
are deeply committed to accomplishing our multiple-use goals for
National Forest System lands, goals enshrined in our mission and in the
laws of the United States, in accordance with the needs and desires of
the people we serve.
Figure 1.--Appropriations for infrastructure on the National Forest
System, in thousands of dollars, Fiscal Years 2001-19.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Adjusted for inflation, appropriations declined, despite a
spike in funding for roads in (CMRD)/(CMLG) in Fiscal Year 2010
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. FY = fiscal
year; CMRD = Capital Improvement and Maintenance-Roads program;
CMLG = Legacy Roads and Trails Restoration program.
Table 3.--Forest Service Deferred Maintenance Backlog
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Current
Facility
Asset
Number of Asset
Quantity
Unit of Measure
Replacement
Deferred
Condition
Category
Locations
Value
Maintenance
Index
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Buildings
38,939
27,351,760
GSF
$7,206,149,429
$1,086,287,917
79
Residence
1,571
2,470,133
GSF
$576,242,605
$132,536,427
76
Trails
N/A
158,726
Miles
N/A
$278,012,495
N/A
Trail
N/A
7,156
Each
N/A
$7,846,506
N/A
Bridges
Heritage
7,046
7,046
Each
N/A
$17,503,549
N/A
Misc.
N/A
18,264
Sites
$3,141,811,123
$85,809,375
91
Recreati
on
Features
Wastewate
4,736
N/A
Each
$162,601,900
$29,988,070
81
r
Systems
Water
4,710
N/A
Each
$321,539,254
$85,840,039
82
Systems
Roads
N/A
370,755
Miles
$36,789,857,403
$3,153,000,000
N/A
Dams
497
497
Each
$3,914,284,327
$79,560,275
98
Bridges
6,245
6,245
Each
$2,336,703,257
$260,505,526
89
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total
63,744
30,390,582
GSF
$54,449,189,297
$5,216,890,180
85
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Figures in the table above represent a snapshot of the Natural Resource Management (NRM) data as of June 2019
and does not represent the end of the fiscal year summary for 2018; numbers may differ slightly from the end
of the fiscal year National Forest System Statistics. See individual asset tabs for more information.
* Residence is defined as residential structures associated with the Employee Housing Program.
+ Roads includes paved and unpaved roadways.
 Not included are towers, as this program is in the midst of reevaluating assets and determining these figures.
The Chair. Thank you for your testimony.
Before proceeding to questions, I recognize Ranking Member
LaMalfa for his opening statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DOUG LaMALFA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM CALIFORNIA
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I have no excuse
for my tardiness, but I did bring a forest green pen today, if
there is any redeeming value to that.
So, thank you, and thank you for joining with us, Associate
Chief Lago.
As we know, the National Forest System created more than
100 years ago, designed--and this is an important key point--
for multiple uses for the surrounding communities. And so, it
is a vast network, 193 million acres of public land, and much
of the infrastructure, like we hear with our National Park
System, is aging and requires regular upkeep, which hasn't been
quite regular. We have budget challenges, such as fire
borrowing, loss of revenue due to declining timber harvests,
all contributing to the backlog we are talking about.
A significant portion of the backlog, nearly 75 percent, is
maintenance of the 370,000 mile road system within our forests,
a lot of that in California, my home state. Of course, the
maintenance of these forest roads cannot be understated, and
they provide access to the public for access to their lands,
recreation, resources. They connect our communities and are
very important for our firefighters, of which we suffer a lot
of fire in the West lately.
Congress has worked to provide several solutions to address
the deferred maintenance, such as providing the fire funding
fix in the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018 to prevent
fire borrowing, something we are all happy about, from other
accounts, including those accounts used for National Forest
roads. The 2018 Farm Bill provided more tools for the Forest
Service, with management of forest lands, and allows more
partners to assist them in these activities. The House-passed
version of the farm bill also contained several provisions that
would have strengthened these goals, including several
categorical exclusions that would have addressed bureaucratic
red tape that has hindered the Forest Service from addressing
many of the maintenance issues we will be talking about today.
Unfortunately, that version did not make it through the
Senate last year. Earlier this year, though, the Forest Service
announced they were working on streamlining environmental
analyses. I believe it is common sense that current facilities
should be able to be improved without wasting significant time
and money due to unnecessary hurdles.
The Forest Service has recently completed a comprehensive
capital improvement plan also that we hope can be a strategy to
help address this maintenance backlog, and get back to a
healthy and sustainable functioning forest system.
Again, Associate Chief Lago, we appreciate your being here
today, and look forward to the dialogue and Q&A.
So, thank you, and I appreciate it, Madam Chair. I yield
back.
The Chair. Members will be recognized for questioning in
order of seniority for Members who were here at the start of
the hearing. After that, Members will be recognized in the
order of their arrival.
I first recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Associate Chief Lago, in your written testimony, you
mention the Forest Service currently has a deferred maintenance
backlog of more than $5.2 billion. Can you speak to the
backlog's impact on local economies, including recreational
outfitters and other small businesses that serve locals and
visitors alike? Additionally, please discuss the impact on
local small businesses that would complete some of the
infrastructure work on projects such as building and
maintaining roads?
Ms. Lago. Certainly. Thank you, Madam Chair.
The condition of deteriorated infrastructure means we can't
provide a full season of use to many users of National Forest
lands. You mentioned outfitter guides, campground operators.
Just to bring it down to the operator level, an outfitter and
guide needs road access, typically some parking lots, uses
campgrounds sometimes, boat launches. When we can't keep those
open or when we have to restrict the season of use, that means
that outfitter and guide has to reduce their season days. It
has a direct economic effect on that outfitter and guide.
It is the same with a campground. A campground operator is
charging a fee, and we can't maintain the water system so we
have to shut the water off to that campground. They can still
have campers, but they have to provide their own water. It
degrades the experience for campers, and they are less likely
to go to that campground. Again, a direct economic hit to a
service provider.
How increasing our maintenance affects local economies is
for the most part, that deferred maintenance is carried out by
contractors, partners, service providers in those local
communities.
The Chair. Thank you, and I do have a second question with
a little bit of a personal bit to it.
I have been a Girl Scout leader for the past 5 years, and I
have seen the importance of scouting and the role that the
outdoors play in the lives of young women and in boys who
participate in Boy Scouts. And events like the upcoming Hike-a-
palooza in George Washington National Forest not only provides
young women with the opportunity to explore the outdoors, but
also promotes environmental stewardship and provides exposure
to careers in conservation.
The Forest Service's ability to maintain its infrastructure
is central to ensuring that the future generations are invested
in conservation and have the opportunity to enjoy our country's
stunning public lands.
On the topic of environmental stewardship, I understand the
Forest Service relies on partnerships and volunteers, in
addition to Federal funding. Can you tell us about some of
these cooperative agreements, and how they help maintain safe,
accessible trails in places like the George Washington National
Forest?
Ms. Lago. Sure. Thank you for that.
Just generally speaking, the total value of our
partnerships and agreements is over $1 billion annually, and
more than half of that is contributed by the partner.
Within the volunteer service hours that we rack up, trails
work represents the majority of that work. We have people
volunteering to do trail maintenance that is more than 1.5
billion hours annually. That is more than 800 full-time
equivalents, and they help us maintain over 30,000 miles of
trail a year.
And in your local forest, the G.W. Jeff, we have more than
50 cooperators on trails projects. I think last year they
helped us maintain almost 5,000 miles of trail. We have
partnerships with student conservation organizations, back
country horsemen, lots of partnerships interested in helping us
maintain that infrastructure.
The Chair. Thank you very much. I appreciate your answering
my questions, and I would now recognize Ranking Member LaMalfa
for his questions.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you again, Assistant Chief.
We are talking about--and you mentioned in your comments a
$5.2 billion maintenance backlog, and that has been a number
that seems to be frozen for quite a few years, going back as
far as 2012. Which if you look at inflation costs alone, but
then obviously we have had some big events there in many of our
forests with large fires, runoff, record levels of snow pack,
and flooding, et cetera. And we know, we hear about it from our
forest people out there about considerable damage to the roads,
trails, et cetera, culverts.
But the dollar figure has stayed the same since 2012, so it
makes me wonder, is there really some type of system as to how
the Forest Service is monitoring, cataloging the damage to the
various pieces of infrastructure in the forests to see that we
are actually keeping up with the real number on the maintenance
backlog that we are talking about.
Again, we know that there is a huge number for our National
Parks, and I am wondering is there a system in place that we
could be improving or one that you are working on to get what
probably needs to be a more accurate number?
Ms. Lago. Yes, sir. So it is, first of all, a big number,
and as I described, our totality of infrastructure is big,
diverse, spread out, and inaccessible.
The way we arrive at that number is we do sampling on an
annual basis. We sample a portion of the roads, and then
calculate an estimate. We sample buildings and dams on a 5 year
cycle, dams on a 2 year cycle.
But in addition, events like fires and floods can take out
bridges. Sometimes we don't replace them, so that removes the
asset and it removes the deferred maintenance along with it.
We are doing lands transactions every year, and we may
convey an asset with a deferred maintenance, and thus reduce
it.
Mr. LaMalfa. So, with the loss of a bridge in a situation
like that, you can take it off the books because it doesn't
exist anymore.
Now on my farm, if one of my tractors catches fire, I don't
get just to write of the asset. I still need that amount of
tractor power to be able to get over the acres I do in a year.
How is this going to be serving the people in the area,
whether it is for firefighters, access, logging, whatever it
is? How can we just write that asset off?
Ms. Lago. It depends on the local area, and a lot of these
assets are legacies from many, many years ago. It might be in a
portion of the forest where access has been terminated or is
seasonally closed, and we may decide not to replace that bridge
in-kind, but do some sort of lower scale, more like a trail
bridge or something like that.
Mr. LaMalfa. Is it done in conjunction with local needs,
with local--whether it is safety officials or logging or
access, or is that decision made in D.C.? Is it made by the
local forester? I mean, that is kind of disturbing to me that
we can just write this off and maybe not have the input. How is
that done?
Ms. Lago. Yes, sir. It is a local decision. It is done with
public input, environmental analysis, and disclosure.
Mr. LaMalfa. Okay. So timber receipts have been down. Back
years ago, we are looking at 1991, we could see that there is
$680 million in timber receipts, of which ten percent goes
directly towards forest roads, and it is also very important,
those receipts, for local schools and roads under what is the
Secure Rural Schools Fund. And so, now you want $680 million in
receipts, and more recently, it is down to $21 million. It
would seem to me we could be going farther if we had the timber
receipts for the road maintenance for that ten percent.
Would you comment upon that?
Ms. Lago. Yes, sir. In recent years, we have been
increasing our timber sales. Those receipts are increasing as a
result of that, and so----
Mr. LaMalfa. Do you know that number now compared to the
$680 million not-inflation-adjusted 1991 number?
Ms. Lago. I don't know the total revenue, but I believe our
timber receipts--I will have to get back to you. No, I don't.
Mr. LaMalfa. Okay, please do.
With them down significantly, and since recreation is a
primary driver of road use; how much is being done to boost
what is coming in on recreation fees, not by just raising the
fees, but actually having more access in order to keep from
losing more roads to deterioration?
Ms. Lago. Our annual recreation fee collection is about
$100 million. Eighty-five percent of that goes back to the site
where it was generated, and the decision about fees for
recreation use is on a site-by-site basis.
Mr. LaMalfa. I mean, as far as boosting the amount of
recreation happening, is that a part of the strategy?
Ms. Lago. On an individual site basis, the local management
can and does suggest a fee increase, or to add an additional
site into the fee revenue program.
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes. I am not angling for fee increases, but
just more access where it is possible.
So, I am over time. I will yield back, Madam Chair.
The Chair. I now recognize the gentlewoman from Ohio, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you, Chief
Lago, for being here this morning.
I want to change the subject a bit to Job Corps, if we
could just talk about that for a bit. The Job Corps Civilian
Conservation Centers in particular.
We know that last year almost 2,000 Job Corps students from
under-served communities contributed more than 100,000 hours to
infrastructure improvements and to maintenance projects. Tell
me what you see as the opportunity to grow that program?
Ms. Lago. Yes, ma'am. Thank you.
Just this week, Secretary of Agriculture Perdue traveled to
Denver, national Job Corps headquarters, and met with our Job
Corps leadership, several center directors, and laid out a plan
for a more formal program between National Forests and the Job
Corps centers where they reside to have more students doing
restoration and maintenance work on Forest Service facilities,
more conservation-related trades at Job Corps centers, and
ultimately, more hiring of Job Corps graduates into Forest
Service jobs.
Ms. Fudge. If I understand you correctly then, USDA is
supportive of the program, wants to keep the program, and is
going to try to broaden the program?
Ms. Lago. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Fudge. Good.
Let me also ask, do the students who participate in this
program have any path toward becoming employed with the Forest
Service or some other land management agency?
Ms. Lago. Yes, ma'am. We currently have an authority called
Public Land Corps Authority, which Job Corps students qualify
for by doing certain number of hours of restoration work on
public land. They are still required to compete for jobs in an
open merit application.
What we would like to do is work with OPM on a direct hire
authority for Job Corps graduates.
Ms. Fudge. Can you tell me just for maybe some of my
colleagues' benefit who are not familiar with the program, how
has this program helped the agency?
Ms. Lago. Well, you said it yourself. More than 2,000
students and 100,000 hours on projects doing restoration work
in National Forests.
In addition to those numbers, we have upwards of 300,000
students annually supporting firefighting, either doing things
like mobile cooking camps, or actually being on the fire line.
About, ten of our 24 centers have conservation trades. You
know, the typical trade at Job Corps is carpentry, masonry,
plumbing, painting, auto mechanics. We have ten centers where
we have forestry-related trades, and we would like to expand
the conservation trades to all of our centers.
Ms. Fudge. Well, I just appreciate the fact that the
program is going to continue. It is an outstanding program. It
gets young people involved at a level that we could never do in
any other way.
I thank you, Assistant Chief, and I yield back, Madam
Chair.
The Chair. Thank you. I now recognize the gentleman from
Mississippi, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I guess, what is the primary purpose of the National
Forests?
Ms. Lago. To have enduring natural resources for the
nation.
Mr. Kelly. And specifically for recreation or for people--I
know there is some money-making, but sometimes we forget the
main thing has got to be the main thing, and it is to provide
opportunities for people who may not have forests of their own
to go enjoy that, the recreation, and also, there is some
financial benefits to the United States as a whole. But it is
to provide those opportunities, recreational and hunting and
other things, for our people.
I just ask that you remember, the main thing has always got
to be the main thing. And so, I ask that we do all that we can
to keep that open and accessible to all those hunters and
recreationers and campers and bikers and cross-country runners
and trail hikers, that we do everything we can. Because that is
the purpose of these National Forests, what it was originally,
is to keep that open.
That being said, the House farm bill last time contained
several categorical exclusions that would have streamlined NEPA
for reconstructing or rehabilitating National Forest
infrastructure, from roads to dams and bridges, even bathroom
and shower facilities at recreational sites. How would these
CEs have been helpful to saving time and money, while
addressing the backlog of deferred maintenance programs?
Ms. Lago. Yes, sir. Thank you, Congressman.
The CEs that did not get included in the farm bill are very
similar to the CEs we have just proposed in our rulemaking for
NEPA for infrastructure for roads, bridges, and facilities. And
we have existing CEs for routine maintenance. But, most of our
facilities need something beyond routine maintenance, major
reconstruction, decommissioning, and so, these CEs in the
footprint of an existing structure allow us to be consistent
with state law, Federal law, documenting a decision, do that
work without going through a longer environmental analysis.
Mr. Kelly. And I just want you to understand, this has
major impacts. I received several calls last year when we
closed some National Forest roads, trails--that cars could go
on--to my squirrel hunters and folks who use those National
Forests to do that. There are significant impacts that maybe
you guys don't always see, but I can assure you, when you start
getting calls at the Congressional office because my squirrel
hunters can't get to where they want to go.
What have we done to do public-private partnerships? Are
you forbidden to do that? You know, because a lot of these
folks would go on and improve those trails, which would also
make them accessible to fight fires. Or are we co-oping with 70
percent of the engineers in the entire United States Army or in
the Guard and Reserves? Camp Shelby is a National Forest which
you have engineers, and they just did a new running trail down
there in the old rail bed system. What opportunities do we use
to use those to help us with the maintenance under the
supervision of the Forest Service?
Ms. Lago. Yes, sir. Thank you.
In a minute and 47 seconds, I won't be able to tell you all
the partnerships that we have, but for example, we have
partnerships with user groups--and I mentioned before Student
Conservation Association, Ducks Unlimited. We also have
partnerships with counties in particular that help us maintain
roads. The Army National Guard has an authority--because they
are largely engineers--they can do major construction,
reconstruction, demolition work on our sites and our
facilities.
The pathway to those things is the instrument that
documents the agreement and what each side needs to do. We can
be bureaucratic about that. We need to instill all of our
workforce with the curiosity and the innovation to use those
partnerships.
Mr. Kelly. What can we in Congress and on this Committee do
to make that process easier?
Ms. Lago. Sir, the attention in this hearing is a
tremendous, tremendous value. I will confer with my staff about
what is limiting in those partnerships and be happy to visit
with your staff.
Mr. Kelly. Please let me know. As an Army engineer who
still serves, I am interested in whatever we can do to make
this easier for you all so that we can serve the main thing,
the public that we are trying to give opportunities, offer
recreation to.
And with that, I yield back, Madam Chair.
The Chair. Thank you. I now recognize the gentlewoman from
Maine, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pingree. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, and thank
you to the Chair and Ranking Member for holding this hearing,
and to Associate Chief Lago, thank you very much for being here
today and for your long career and service in the Forest
Service. That is so important to all of us.
I am also on the House Appropriations Committee, the
Interior Subcommittee, so we had a very interesting and
instructive hearing earlier this year with Chief Christiansen.
We appreciated that very much, and also have spent a lot of
time trying to understand the funding of the Forest Service and
the unique challenges you have been dealing with because of the
wildfires and the challenges out West.
I am going to take a little bit different tact because I am
a Representative from Maine, and in Maine, we know the
importance of our forests. Eighty-six percent of Maine is
forested land. Only six percent of that is public, so very
different from the issues we deal with in the West. I think
that is the highest percentage of any state in the nation. We
have almost 17 million acres of forests, 16 million of which
are privately-owned, and that supports about 30,000 good paying
jobs.
One imminent concern that we feel our forests can help us
with is the issue of climate change, but it also presents a
challenge. Forests are facing rising temperatures, increased
and prolonged drought, extreme weather events, invasive
species, all contributing in many ways to widespread declines
in the forest health.
But on the other hand, forests can be a positive force for
change in the climate debate because of their role as carbon
sinks. Just last week, there was an article in the Portland
Press Herald in Maine that highlights the carbon store capacity
of our Maine forests, and without objection, Madam Chair, I
would like to submit that for the record.
The Chair. Without objection.
[The article referred to is located on p. 68.]
Ms. Pingree. Thank you.
By promoting the value of working forests in the United
States and recognizing the continual cycle of growth,
harvesting, and replanting, our working forests provide a
carbon solution.
Can you tell me a little bit about some of the efforts by
the Forest Service that promote healthy working forests, and
the carbon benefits associated with growing trees and the wood
products they produce?
Ms. Lago. Yes, Congresswoman, thank you.
We have a branch of the Forest Service called State and
Private Forestry. We have authorities under State and Private
Forestry that enable us--and first of all, recognizes there is
800 million acres of forest and land in this country owned by
states and private entities, and it is just as important for
conservation on those lands as on Federal lands. Our State and
Private Forestry authorities allow us to work with State
Foresters, private land owners, industrial corporations on
conservation efforts.
Just this morning, talking about innovation and
partnerships, one of my colleagues sent me an announcement from
the National Forest Foundation, U.S. Endowment for Forests and
Communities, and the Forest Service Partnership Office,
announcing grants for public-private partnerships for forest
stewardship and forest conservation. There is a lot of growing
interest in the importance and the benefits to all of us from a
health standpoint, from a climate change standpoint of keeping
forests healthy.
Finally, in the Southeast and in the Northeast, we have
programs called Keeping Forests Forests. They are big
partnerships between us, state forests, and industrial land
owners.
Ms. Pingree. Just to tack on one of the earlier questions,
I know the Forest Service is trying to streamline the NEPA
review to make it easier for people to manage forests without
significant environmental review. But what will you do if those
management practices aren't actually storing carbon? Are they
considering carbon sequestration in their efforts to streamline
NEPA reviews, or is that not part of the consideration?
Ms. Lago. No, ma'am, I don't see carbon sequestration as a
calculus in those environmental reviews.
Ms. Pingree. Okay. Well, I will follow up on that later.
One other quick thing. I am very familiar with the USDA's
regional climate hubs and have asked other USDA agencies about
their hubs in previous hearings. Based on budget documents that
I have received from USDA, I understand the Forest Service
spent $3.3 million on the climate hubs in 2016, which I think
is great, but the 2019 estimate is $400,000. Given the
challenges that we are dealing with, why is there such a big
drop, and do you see those as a valuable part of what you are
doing?
Ms. Lago. Yes. Our investment and our continued commitment
to climate hubs is significant. I don't have the dollar values
at hand. I can research that with staff and get back to you or
submit it for the record.
Ms. Pingree. Great. Well, I do have great concerns about
that number going down, and I appreciate your talking about the
value of them.
And I am basically out of time, so again, thank you very
much for your answers to the questions.
Ms. Lago. Thank you.
The Chair. I want to recognize the Chair of the full
Committee has joined us. Thank you for being here, Chairman
Peterson, and I now recognize the gentleman from Georgia, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for being
with us today.
In your written testimony, you mentioned that perhaps most
critically, forest infrastructure provides fire protection for
communities, especially by providing access to forest lands and
roads for firefighters and emergency responders during rescue
operations.
Due to the deferred maintenance backlog, how many miles of
Forest Service system roads have been decommissioned over the
past 10 years?
Ms. Lago. I don't have 10 year figures. On an average
basis, I think we decommission somewhere between 300 and 400
miles of road a year. It is not strictly related to deferred
maintenance. There might be restoration management objective
tied, but in any event, I will get you 10 year figures.
Mr. Allen. Okay. All right, and during wildfire
suppression, what percentage of decommissioned roads from
within the fire perimeter are reopened and used for suppression
activities? Do you have any idea?
Ms. Lago. I don't know on a percentage basis.
Mr. Allen. Okay.
Ms. Lago. I know we do do that. The fire line officer has
the call on it.
Mr. Allen. Right, okay.
And then to that, can you further elaborate on the
potential threat the deferred maintenance poses on being able
to respond to wildfires, and as a result, additional damage to
forest infrastructure?
Ms. Lago. I can't quantitatively summarize it, but the
deferred maintenance accumulates not just on roads, but also
our fire guard stations, our air tanker bases, our bunkhouses
where our firefighters are housed over the summer. So, the
accumulated effect of that is our capacity is diminished where
it wouldn't otherwise be.
Mr. Allen. And why is your capacity diminished? I mean, why
would you do that?
Ms. Lago. Well, we are not able to house people in
bunkhouses because of the deteriorating condition.
Mr. Allen. I got you.
Well, then that gets to my next question. The U.S. Forest
Service recently completed its comprehensive Capital
Improvement Plan. Can you further detail how you plan to
implement this strategy, going forward, as far as dealing with
these issues?
Ms. Lago. Yes, sir. Thank you.
Our plan has been released in the last couple of weeks.
What it primarily does is identifies criteria for submitting
projects for the national prioritization, and those criteria
include access to active forest management, access to
recreation facilities, access for fire operations, research and
development, and revenue generating destinations. Those
criteria are applied to the submitted project. It runs through
a model. The model prioritizes projects, and so we have funding
set aside and cut off the funding at the level that----
Mr. Allen. Outside of that, what is your biggest challenge?
Ms. Lago. The level of funding.
Mr. Allen. The level of funding?
Ms. Lago. Yes, sir.
Mr. Allen. You are looking at Members of this Committee who
are Members of the United States Congress, and you need more
funding?
Ms. Lago. That is correct.
Mr. Allen. Okay. All right. Thank you, and I yield back.
The Chair. Thank you. I now recognize the gentleman from
Arizona.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, Madam Chair.
My district contains all or parts of six National Forests,
and the Grand Canyon, and 22 other National Parks and
monuments. I fully understand the conditions that you are
under, because I live in Forest Service country. I also--my
house is located--I take Forest Service roads back to the
house. That road hasn't been touched by a blade in about 20
years, and we even offered at one time to pay for part of it--
well, half of it, and they still didn't--because they only have
one grader for the entire Coconino National Forest. And that
grader has to be borrowed by the Kaibab sometimes in order to
get some roads done over there. And so, this whole concept of--
how many personnel has the Forest Service lost or percentage in
the last decade because of funding?
Ms. Lago. I have heard the figure \1/3\, 33 percent in non-
fire professions. I would have to double check is that the last
10 years or some other time period, but that is the figure that
I am familiar with.
Mr. O'Halleran. And how much more personnel are you going
to be able to hire now that you have been able to get the fire
funding off your books?
Ms. Lago. That is a good question. It is not easy to
answer.
In my own career, we have changed significantly from using
Forest Service employees and equipment doing projects, road
projects, for example, to funding partners or counties or
contract workers. So, the increase in funding may not
necessarily turn around more, let's say, road crews. What we do
need is senior experienced engineers and specialists who can
plan and design the work, and then do contract oversight.
Mr. O'Halleran. Well, let's put it another way. The fire
funding has been taken out. How much has been restored to your
budget in order to meet your other obligations and needs?
Ms. Lago. Okay, I can do that one.
It goes into effect in 2020, and if we had to request the
10 year average for fire suppression, it would--which we don't,
because the fire funding fix froze it at 2015 level, we would
have to increase the request for fire suppression by $270
million.
What that means is we get to add $270 million back to
programs, as long as our cap stays the same.
Mr. O'Halleran. Now, it is also, at least out in the West
and in my district, a lot of the forests were put in place
because of watershed protection. What impact has the lack of
funding had on the ability of us to protect our watersheds, our
wildlife that the hunters love, and our fish that they--and the
streams that impact the quality of our tourists and our
recreational activities in the forest?
Ms. Lago. Yes, sir. The two most important things that
affect water quality and water coming off National Forests is
healthy forest condition and maintaining the road system.
A former long-time Member of the House, Norm Dicks, used to
say, ``You don't fix the roads, you're going to drink the
roads.'' Our inability to maintain the road system contributes
to degraded water. Overcrowded, over-dense forests that
stagnate, lead to insect infestation, wildfire, that
contributes to poor water quality. We need to take care of
those two things.
Mr. O'Halleran. Well, I want to thank the Forest Service
for helping start the 4FRI projects in Arizona. It has been
very important. We are on another step now, and hopefully we
will move forward again.
But the management process that you just talked about is
critical to watershed protection and wildlife and the whole
ecosystem that is there. And I just look at Arizona as an
example. We have millions and millions of acres that are not
managed or haven't been able to be managed, I should say, that
are just going up in fire all the time, and that is throughout
the West. I would kind of like to know the plan of attack,
other than a 4FRI for the other National Forests.
Ms. Lago. Yes, sir.
You might recall, we announced an initiative earlier this
year that we called Shared Stewardship, and we have ten states
now under an agreement where we are partnering with states to
agree on the areas of highest priority treatment, and then we
are working on those areas together. And I think that is a
commitment that is going to build both support for the work
that we need to do, and additional capacity for doing it.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, and I yield back.
The Chair. Thank you. Before moving to recognize Members of
the full Committee, I am going to recognize, for 5 minutes, the
gentlewoman from Iowa, who stepped out. Excuse me. I apologize.
I will now recognize, for 5 minutes, the gentleman from South
Dakota, Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
I know in your line of work you get a fair amount of
criticism, but I just want to start by saying thank you on a
personal basis, ma'am. The Black Hills National Forest is a
ways, we have a very large Congressional district. I suppose I
am probably 4 hours from the National Forest, but I can't tell
you how many hundreds of memories my family has made in that
great national asset that you, throughout your career, and your
people have helped to maintain.
And it is wonderful. I mean, some of the most beautiful,
quiet moments in our lives have been nestled among those Black
Hills ponderosa pine. Some of our most active moments of our
life have been in that forest. And so, thank you for what you
are doing.
Of course, it is not just the Johnson family that enjoys
that resource. Every year, there are millions of South Dakotans
and folks from all over the world who recreate there. I get the
sense that our deferred maintenance backlog is perhaps smaller
there than in many of the forests we have discussed. Perhaps,
because it is such an actively managed, well-maintained forest.
We have some of the highest timber sales of National Forests in
the country. And so, if you are willing to, ma'am, could you
elaborate on the connection, if any, that exists between a
well-maintained, actively managed forest and the impact that
that can have on lower deferred maintenance?
Ms. Lago. Yes, sir. Thank you for the opportunity, and
thank you very much for the compliment. The Black Hills is a
very special place, I agree.
All our forests are similar in the way that people love
them and rely on them. And that said, they are still unique in
their own way. And where a forest is well-maintained, able to
reduce deferred maintenance, my guess is that is a forest with
a lot of thriving partnerships. We don't have the same ability
to partner everywhere. It depends on opportunity and economic
capacity. But it also depends on commitment to partnering.
And so, I would put my finger on partnerships where the
Black Hills are concerned.
Mr. Johnson. Well, I think that is exquisitely well said,
and I do think thriving partnerships are a key part of that
story of a lower deferred maintenance backlog, and higher use
of the forest. Thank you for calling out the importance of
having a USDA commitment to that, and to the extent that that
commitment can even grow in the Black Hills National Forest and
elsewhere, I would certainly love to see more efforts in that
regard.
I hate to bring up such a terrible subject of the mountain
pine beetle, because I know that little fellow has done a lot
of damage in a lot of places. In the Black Hills, we had less
damage from the pine beetle than was feared at the onset of
this round of the epidemic, and frankly, less damage than many
National Forests.
I have attributed that to a more actively managed forest. I
want to give you an opportunity to correct my misconception, if
I have one, and offer any other thoughts you have.
Ms. Lago. Yes, sir.
Definitely, well-maintained forests are in a more vigorous
condition, and a more vigorous condition allows forests to
repel bark beetle attacks. It is a native pest. They have been
around a long time. What has changed is the vitality of forests
and their ability to just naturally withstand them.
I think definitely better maintained forests, active
management such as what we have in the Black Hills, is key to
preventing further spread by that insect.
Mr. Johnson. Well, Madam Chair, I would just close by
trying to highlight some of these great phrases. This
conversation has pulled out the importance of active
management, being well-maintained, and having thriving
partnerships. Those are wonderful phrases, Associate Chief.
Thanks for the work you do, and thanks for your presence here
today.
Ms. Lago. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Johnson. And I yield back.
The Chair. I now recognize Mr. Thompson from Pennsylvania,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks for hosting
this, and Ranking Member, for this hearing.
Assistant Chief, good to see you. Thank you for your
service and your record of service to the nation through the
Forest Service, I greatly appreciate it. Also, special thanks
when you were testifying on the other side of the Capitol in
the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee. You used
Longhouse Drive in the Allegheny National Forest as an example
of the threat of lack of maintenance and roadways
deteriorating. And as you really nicely point out in your
testimony, the users of that road contribute about $1.5 million
a year to the local businesses, local economy. That just speaks
to the importance--the economic importance of this.
You have talked a lot about partnership. I am going to
start out by really--I think one of our best partners--and we
have many great partners, obviously, with the Forest Service--
but one of the best partners are those from the forest products
industry, the timber industry, that bid on contracts, help us
so that we can maintain a healthy forest. We make it so that
they are the largest carbon sinks in the world. Also, as my
friend across the aisle talked about making sure that those
healthy forests are--making sure that we have a great
filtration system for those watersheds that start in our
National Forests.
And so, I am concerned right now. The first thing I have
for you is not really looking for a response on, just a request
to take back. And I am going to follow up in writing; but, the
situation with the tariffs, and specifically the hardwoods
industry, we have a lot of folks, good people that bid and
obtain contracts. Specifically, I am going to speak about
hardwoods, because I have the Allegheny National Forest.
Unfortunately, with the trade wars that are going on, the
bottom just completely dropped out of the price. They bid at a
certain price. They are mandated contracted to pursue that, but
they have lost their market for the time being.
I will say talking with them, they are all behind the
President and they are supportive, and you know, they want to
see fair and free trade, which is what the President wants.
But in the meantime, just two things that we could look at
that and will be sent along in a written request. You know, any
type of trade relief for hardwoods. They were not included in
that package. And I get it. It is different for--it might be
because a part of this is administered--that part of trade is
administered through commerce. I don't know why. Trees are a
crop. It is agriculture. But they need--we are hoping,
actually, just to get resolution to trade agreements. But if
this goes on for any amount of time, those hardwood folks need
this. Because if we lose those industries, then we will not
have that valuable partner to keep our forests healthy. And in
the long run, that would be a deterioration of tremendous
proportions of our National Forests.
The other thing is a request to take back is we need
extension on current contracts, and I would say up to a period
of 2 years at this point, because there is not a business plan
given what the contracts are at and where the pricing has
fallen. That may be a little more difficult, I understand, but
those are just--not really looking for a response on that. If
you could take that back and I will be following back up with
certainly the Secretary and the President on those.
The most pressing maintenance issue that we currently have
in the Allegheny National Forest is the Mayburg Bridge located
in Forest County. There are 128 permanent and seasonal
dwellings in Mayburg and the bridge, which is owned by the
Forest Service, and it is the only really practical year-round
route in and out of that village. Thankfully, we don't have any
kids right now living in that area, so there are no school
buses, because that bridge would not handle a school bus. And I
would be concerned if there is a fire, because an emergency
vehicle is not going to be handled as well.
Unfortunately, that bridge has fallen into disrepair and is
in need of critical repairs. The Forest Service has indicated
that the funding will be coming for the bridge, but there is
still a lot of uncertainty about the future.
Now, currently maintenance for infrastructure like this
must be a priority, yet it is not being completed. So, it is a
simple question. How is the Forest Service prioritizing this
kind of maintenance, especially when it comes down to access
for local residents and public safety?
Ms. Lago. Thank you, Congressman.
I thought we had the funding for that bridge and completed
the environmental analysis, and I thought it was moving
forward. I will double check on that.
Funding for maintenance is part of regional allocations,
and the priorities for maintenance is decided at the local
level. When it exceeds routine maintenance and becomes a
capital investment, then it is going to be subject to that
capital investment strategy and those criteria for
prioritization that I mentioned.
Mr. Thompson. I appreciate it. I also appreciate your
engagement with the community, because it was apparent in the
beginning--I am not sure the Forest Service or whoever was
involved even locally recognized that there was a permanent
village, basically. People live there year-round, and quite
frankly, it was the only way in and out. But, because of how
you all did conduct yourselves, engaging in the community, that
all came to light, and I really appreciate it. And I appreciate
the support with the Mayburg bridge.
Ms. Lago. Thank you.
The Chair. I now recognize the gentlewoman from Washington,
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you, Madam Chair, and Ms. Lago, thank
you for coming today and joining us. It is great to have a
witness with experience in Washington forests, and I would love
to host you back at home, along with the Forest Service Chief,
in the district--which by the way, includes Mount Rainier, the
Mount Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest----
Ms. Lago. Beautiful area.
Ms. Schrier. To raise some of these various issues on
deferred maintenance, and in addition to the deferred
maintenance projects the Forest Service Legacy Roads and Trails
Remediation Program is a critical program that leverages
dollars outside of the Forest Service to address water quality
issues, and I have an appropriations letter for the record that
I would like to submit, outlining the importance of that
program, and the need for it to have a dedicated line item.
The Chair. So noted.
[The letter referred to is located on p. 72.]
Ms. Schrier. The program was created in 2008, because the
general Forest Service road maintenance budget was unable to
address the sheer volume of blocked culverts, landslides, and
washouts, which were impacting water quality and access for
threatened and endangered species. And in Washington State and
other parts of the country, the program is critical to address
water quality issues and habitat, particularly for Chinook
salmon, bull trout, and steelhead. These fish are an important
part of the Northwest culture, heritage, ecosystem, and they
have suffered heavily, as you know. A recent New York Times
report stated that the Chinook salmon may be extinct in 20
years. I will also add that Chinook salmon are the key food
source for the endangered southern resident Orcas, and old
weather-damaged roads and broken culverts are key culprits in
this demise.
Washington State has invested millions, multiple millions
of dollars to address downstream barriers and culverts,
including dams and whatnot, while the Chinook salmon spawning
grounds are located upstream in the National Forest headwaters.
And on page 4 of your testimony, you outline the criteria
for road projects, listing priorities. And unfortunately, the
projects that improve wildlife and aquatic passage are last.
And so, I was just wondering if you could expand on this and
help me understand how projects affecting water quality can be
addressed in a timely manner when the Forest Service is facing
a $5+ billion backlog?
Ms. Lago. Yes, thank you, Congresswoman.
When I was still in the Pacific Northwest, we hosted a
chiefs review, and the theme of the entire review was Save our
Salmon. I really understand the integral role of salmon in the
economy and lifestyle, and that ecosystem.
In addition to the criteria, which includes benefits--the
ability to be an economic driver in water and recreation, there
is an intangible benefit criteria. You know, salmon is a lot
more--and water quality is a lot more than an intangible
benefit certainly, and local managers--also there is a layer
where they put a personal priority on their projects, based on
their knowledge of local issues and what is important to the
local economy, people, community.
So, there is more than just the criteria that I named in my
testimony. It is fair to really think about how we are valuing
water, the economic value of water, as well as the fact that we
all rely on it. I will go back and discuss that.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you, and the way I interpreted economic
was really related to timber; but, if you think about the
recreational economy and salmon and habitat and our Tribes,
that those do weave in economics.
Yes. I appreciate your going back. I think that is it, and
I would just like to reiterate my invitation, and thank you for
paying attention to this issue.
I yield back the rest of my time.
The Chair. Thank you. I now recognize the gentleman from
California, for 5 minutes, Mr. Panetta.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate you
allowing me to sit in on this very important hearing,
especially when it comes to my district on the Central Coast.
Ranking Member LaMalfa, good morning, and good morning,
Chief. Thank you for being here. I appreciate your testimony
and appreciate your service.
I represent the Central Coast of California, Big Sur Los
Padres National Forest, and in 2016, I am sure you know well,
we had a pretty extensive fire there called the Soberanes fire,
which encompassed about 206\2\ miles being burned, and the cost
at the time was the most expensive in our nation's history at
the time, until recently, a cost of about $260 million.
The reason that fire started was because of an illegal
campfire, unfortunately, and we are seeing a lot of that,
especially in Los Padres Forest, in the sense that you have a
number of people out there, despite the numerous signs
everywhere, saying don't do something as stupid as that. But
people continue to conduct themselves in that manner,
unfortunately. Obviously, it would be nice to have staff there,
Forest Service officers there, who actually are on the grounds
and enforcing those types of laws. But unfortunately, we had to
resort to certain volunteers. I say unfortunately because that
shouldn't be their job. They are not armed. They don't have the
right law and the legal background to enforce those types of
laws. But that is what we have had to resort to in order to
ensure that people are out there, making sure that people don't
do these acts that could threaten--the forest could threaten
people.
Obviously staffing is a big issue, and you know that. And
so, I was wondering if you could elaborate on any sort of plans
that you have to address the chronic staffing issues, obviously
not just in Los Padres National Forest, but in other National
Forests across our country?
Ms. Lago. Yes, sir. Thank you.
As I mentioned, and I am not sure if you were in the room
at the time.
Mr. Panetta. And I apologize if I was not. I just came in
late. Thank you.
Ms. Lago. No problem. The result of the fire funding fix is
we have room, if our cap stays the same, to request funding for
other programs that would have had to go to the 10 year average
for fire suppression. And so, we are deeply aware of the
shortages in many programs. Law enforcement and fire prevention
are two of the areas forest protection officers--which is a
designation for people in all kinds of resources--but in
addition to their resource job, they patrol. So, having more
people on the ground is something that we are acutely aware of.
We did get direct hire authority recently for firefighting
jobs, which allows us to more efficiently hire people to be on
the ground. It will last for 1 year while OPM sees how we use
it. There is not unlimited money. We all know that. Being more
efficient with the money that we have and prioritizing these
on-the-ground activities is how we can address those issues.
Mr. Panetta. Got you. Thank you. Thank you. I appreciate
that.
Now, obviously, and I know you have talked about deferred
maintenance, and in Los Padres, our deferred maintenance
exceeds $24 million.
First of all, my question is where does that lie relative
to other National Forests and deferred maintenance?
Ms. Lago. I believe I submitted for the record a deferred
maintenance breakdown by state. I don't have one by forest, but
I am sure it exists and I would be happy to supply it.
Mr. Panetta. Understood.
Obviously, as we approach the start of the new fiscal year,
as the wildfire fix funding becomes available, can you give me
a little bit of light on the priorities, little bit of light on
your priorities, specifically whether you will be prioritizing
deferred maintenance backlog? I would like to hear about Los
Padres, but I would be more than willing to hear about
California.
Ms. Lago. Okay, thank you.
A lot of people will eventually weigh in on what the
priorities are.
Mr. Panetta. Sure.
Ms. Lago. We have had a continuing emphasis on active
management and reducing fuels. I don't see that changing. This
hearing helps us highlight the issue of maintenance and
deferred maintenance for our facilities. It is felt throughout
the Forest Service and throughout the communities that we
serve. I am happy to work with you and your staff and this
Committee's staff on how to prioritize, going forward.
Mr. Panetta. Outstanding. I look forward to that.
I yield back my time. Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chair. Thank you. With the first round of questions
completed and without objection, we will begin a second round
of questions. Members will be recognized for 3 minutes in order
of seniority.
All right. I will begin by recognizing myself for 3
minutes.
Associate Chief Lago, thank you for all of your answers
today, and I would also offer for the hearing record a copy of
the Department of Commerce's news release on outdoor recreation
economy.
[The news release referred to is located on p. 29.]
The Chair. The report released just last week shows that
the outdoor recreation economy accounted for 2.2 percent of GDP
and supported 5.2 million jobs in 2017. This not only includes
conventional activities like camping, hiking, boating, but also
value-added activities such as construction and travel. For the
first time, the report included information on the recreation
industry's contributions by state.
Is data from reports like this considered as the Forest
Service prioritizes maintenance, and does the Forest Service
use data like this to leverage assistance from states and other
partners?
Ms. Lago. Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
First of all with regard to that report, it is interesting
that the statistic of 2.2 percent might sound small, but it is
interesting to note that it is growing almost 50 percent faster
than general GDP. And I can tell you from the communities that
I have lived in, the ones that I hear from that depend on a
recreation economy, it is far more impactful to their economies
than 2.2 percent.
We recognize that 15 states across the country now have
recreation officers, so showing that states recognize the
importance of this recreation economy. It is not right for
every state, but definitely the recognition of the Commerce
Department, our own within USDA, not just our agency, but Rural
Development has an expanding recreation economy interest. So,
it helps us bring partners to the table. It helps us bring
investors to the table.
So, to answer your question in a word, yes.
The Chair. Thank you so much, and coming from the
Commonwealth of Virginia where we have seen recreation continue
to be a strong use of our natural resources and a major
economic driver here, I thank you for your comments.
I now recognize Mr. LaMalfa, for 3 minutes.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you again. I appreciate, again,
Assistant Chief Lago, for your being here.
I wanted to delve a little bit more into, again with the
road maintenance and the issues there where access has been
more difficult over the years. We have wrestled in northern
California with what is being put in travel management plans,
and it seems like it just means less and less access. We are
finding more and more closed gates and less ability for people
during the snow season for snowmobiling or off-road activity,
hunting, anybody to take vehicles in, or without vehicles. We
are finding more and more closed gates.
Does this tie in partly towards a changing view of the
multi-purpose, multi-use forest policy, or is it more about the
backlog we have of maintenance? You are talking about bridges
being removed and no longer counting them as an asset, but you
know, a great amount of frustration by my constituents, and
neighboring districts as well, is that whether you call it the
travel management plan or the maintenance backlog, it is just
meaning less access.
The travel management plan efforts, are they moving in that
direction because of the lack of maintenance, or is it some
other philosophical shift?
Ms. Lago. Thank you, Ranking Member.
We are not walking away from the multiple-use sustained
yield mandate from Congress. It is more the observation that we
want people to have access to their public lands. They don't
need public lands if they don't have access to them. But we
need to maintain the resource in a healthy condition, but we
also need to maintain those roads in a safe condition for
people to use them, roads and trails.
Our effort at travel management is aimed at looking at the
resource from the standpoint of what can we safely provide?
Mr. LaMalfa. Okay. Well, even as Mr. Panetta mentioned
here, he had a six-digit fire in number of acres in his
district. We have multiple six-digit fires in the more northern
part and other western states, and an important component of
being able to do the pre-fire work is this access, and as well
when it does come to fire suppression time, having these roads
available and intact bridges and all that, and not closed gates
and all that.
Can you please comment on the fire aspect of that and how
important it is we step back up on this?
Ms. Lago. Well, yes, sir. Roads are an essential way that
we stop fires before they get large, get people out of harm's
way when there are fires, and we absolutely need a safe,
accessible road system to be able to fulfill that part of our
mission.
Mr. LaMalfa. The multi-use? Okay, thank you. I yield back.
The Chair. I now recognize Mr. Thompson, for 3 minutes.
Mr. Thompson. Madam Chair, thank you.
Chief, I just want to check in. I know in the Forest
Service we use a concessionaire style approach, and
concessionaires play a very important role, obviously. They
help us where we need, it helps supplement the staffing and in
keeping areas open and access. My understanding, it's the
Granger-Thye Act which basically defines a landlord-tenant
relationship where the Forest Service is the landlord
responsible for all behind-the-wall fixes, including the
maintenance, capital improvements. And the tenant, the
concessionaire, just keeps everything clean and operating.
My question for you is would you like to have the authority
actually that has been granted to the Department of Defense and
to the Army Corps of Engineers which allows, basically, where
30 year leases are an option--not mandated, but an option, and
in that 30 years, that longevity, what would be that the
concessionaires are able to take on the responsibility for some
of the capital improvements.
Today, that doesn't occur in the Forest Service with a
concessionaire system. I don't know the timeline on when the
Department of Defense and the Army Corps made that transition.
Just a simple question. Was that something Forest Service would
want to consider getting the authority to do? Obviously, we
would have to provide that through the bill or whatever.
Ms. Lago. Yes, sir. I am not sure what the Army Corps of
Engineers authority is, but in fact, the Forest Service did get
leasing authority in the 2018 Farm Bill. We are developing
rules and directives, but it would enable us to do those kind
of long-term leases. I am not sure of the time period, but also
to enable the leaseholder to do improvements.
I think the Park Service has some kind of authority like
that, too. I can check on that and get back to you.
Mr. Thompson. I appreciate that. It just seems like it is
working well with the Army Corps. I have seen some of the
projects, obviously, in my Congressional district from time to
time with what these folks do, and so, it would be great to be
able--I am glad to hear that we provided at least part of that
authority.
Ms. Lago. Yes, sir.
Mr. Thompson. If we haven't done enough, please let us
know. We want you to have the authority to be successful.
Ms. Lago. Thank you.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
The Chair. And I now recognize Ranking Member LaMalfa for
one more 3 minute question.
Mr. LaMalfa. Just one more. Thank you so much.
Again, when we were talking about the backlog, when we are
seeing the Forest Service absorbing more lands through
donations from maybe NGOs or other instances, or the LWCF has
also introduced more land back into Forest Service control. How
is that contributing to the backlog and your ability to keep
up, and as well as updating this $5.2 billion backlog figure?
Ms. Lago. Well, that is a great question.
I am not sure what the value or the assets that a lot of
the lands that we acquire through Land and Water Conservation
Fund. I am familiar with areas that we prioritize because they
have important wildlife habitat value, water quality value,
that kind of thing, which leads me to think they don't have a
lot of infrastructure on them. But you know, I don't know that
conclusively and I would have to do some checking.
Mr. LaMalfa. I would be really interested in that, how much
that is adding to the burden of an already difficult situation.
So, with that, I appreciate it, Madam Chair, and for your
appearance today, Ms. Lago, and I will yield back.
The Chair. Thank you. I would like to thank Associate Chief
Lago for her comments and for her time here today.
What we have heard today underscores the importance of the
Forest Service's work, and the challenges it faces. I hope we
all leave here with an appreciation for the role that well-
maintained forest infrastructure can have significant impacts
on people's lives, their work, and their play in and around
National Forests, as well as the communities and economies
surrounding our National Forests.
We have also heard loud and clear that dozens of
infrastructure projects are ready for implementation, but
require the necessary funding, and carrying out these much-
needed maintenance projects will support jobs in rural
communities, as soon as the Forest Service receives the funding
to complete them.
I hope that we all leave here with a better sense of what
we can do in the Subcommittee to help the Forest Service carry
out its mission, and again, I thank you, Ms. Lago, for your
time today.
Before we adjourn, I invite the Ranking Member to make any
closing remarks that he may have.
Without any, under the Rules of the Committee, the record
of today's hearing will remain open for 10 calendar days to
receive additional material and supplemental written responses
from the witness to any question posed by a Member.
This hearing of the Subcommittee on Conservation and
Forestry is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:23 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Submitted News Release by Hon. Abigail Davis Spanberger, a
Representative in Congress from Virginia
News Release
Embargoed Until Release At 8:30 A.M. EDT, Friday, September 20, 2019
BEA 19-45
https://www.bea.gov/news/2019/outdoor-recreation-satellite-account-us-
and-prototype-states-2017
Technical: Christian Awuku-Budu (Regional),(301) 278-9235,
[emailprotected]
Connor Franks (Industry), (301) 278-9710
Media: Thomas Dail, (301) 278-9003, [emailprotected]
Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account, U.S. and Prototype for States,
2017
New prototype statistics show state value added, compensation, and
employment
The U.S. outdoor recreation economy accounted for 2.2 percent
($427.2 billion) of current-dollar gross domestic product (GDP) in 2017
(national table 2) according to statistics released today by the Bureau
of Economic Analysis. The Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account (ORSA)
also shows that inflation-adjusted (real) GDP for the outdoor
recreation economy grew by 3.9 percent in 2017, faster than the 2.4
percent growth of the overall U.S. economy. Real gross output,
compensation, and employment all grew faster in outdoor recreation than
for the economy as a whole.
With this release, BEA introduces prototype statistics on outdoor
recreation for all 50 states and the District of Columbia. These new
statistics show that the relative size of the outdoor recreation
economy ranged from 5.4 percent of GDP for Hawaii to 1.2 percent of GDP
for the District of Columbia.
Outdoor Recreation Value-Added: Percent of State GDP, 2017
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Outdoor Recreation by Activity
For the first time, ORSA includes information on the contribution
of outdoor recreation activities to GDP. These data, referred to as
value added by activity statistics, are available at both the national
and state level.
Activities are grouped into three categories: conventional core
activities (such as camping, hiking, boating, and hunting); other core
activities (such as gardening and outdoor concerts); and supporting
activities (such as construction, travel and tourism, local trips, and
government expenditures).
Conventional outdoor recreation accounted for 30.6 percent of the
outdoor recreation economy nationwide in 2017, other recreation
accounted for 19.3 percent, and the remaining 50.1 percent was
supporting activities (national table 2).
Nominal Value-Added for Largest Conventional Outdoor Recreation
Activities, 2017 ($ Billions)
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Other value added by activity highlights include the following:
Boating/fishing was the largest conventional activity for
the nation as a whole at $20.9 billion in current-dollar value
added. At the state level, this was the largest conventional
activity in 29 states and the District of Columbia, led by
Florida ($2.7 billion) and California ($1.8 billion).
RVing was the second-largest conventional activity
nationally with $16.9 billion in current-dollar value added. It
was also the largest conventional activity in nine states, led
by Indiana ($2.9 billion) and Ohio ($599.5 million).
Snow activities was the sixth-largest conventional activity
at the national level with $5.6 billion in current-dollar value
added. At the state level, snow activities was the largest
conventional activity in Colorado ($1.5 billion), Utah ($549.2
million), and Vermont ($175.9 million).
Guided tours/outfitted travel, part of the other core
activities category, accounted for $12.9 billion and was also
one of the fastest growing activities in 2017, growing 11.4
percent.
Outdoor Recreation by Industry
Today's data also show the role that different industries play in
the outdoor recreation economy, including their impact on value added,
gross output, employment, and compensation. The arts, entertainment,
recreation, accommodation, and food services sector was the largest
contributor to the U.S. outdoor recreation economy in 2017, accounting
for $112.9 billion (national table 10). At the state level, this same
sector was the largest contributor to outdoor recreation for 26 states
and the District of Columbia.
Industry Composition of Outdoor Recreation Nominal Value-Added, 2017 ($
Billions)
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Other value added by industry highlights include the following:
Retail trade had the second largest sector contribution to
outdoor recreation nationally, accounting for $95.7 billion of
current-dollar value added. Retail trade was the largest
contributor to outdoor recreation value added in 17 states,
including Texas ($8.5 billion), Washington ($2.8 billion), and
Ohio ($2.7 billion).
Manufacturing contributed $51.7 billion nationally to the
outdoor recreation economy in 2017 and was the third largest
outdoor recreation sector. At the state level, manufacturing
was the largest sector for outdoor recreation value added in
Indiana ($4.7 billion), Wisconsin ($2.0 billion), Louisiana
($1.6 billion), and Kansas ($684.2 million).
Seeking Public Comment
The public is invited to submit comments on the prototype state
statistics by emailing [emailprotected] Comments are due by
March 31, 2020. The feedback will be used to help finalize data sources
and methodology for the state outdoor recreation statistics. Official
state statistics are scheduled for release in the fall of 2020.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Preparing State-Level Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account Estimates
State Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account (ORSA) statistics isolate
the economic activity associated with outdoor recreation spending and
production in a state's economy. The state-level prototype statistics
are an extension of the national industry ORSA statistics. The
concepts, definitions, and methodology used to produce state-level
prototype statistics are consistent with the national industry
concepts, definitions, and methodology. The U.S. ORSA methodology paper
(https://www.bea.gov/resources/methodologies/outdoor-recreation-
satellite-account-methodology) provides more information about these
concepts, definitions, and methodology.
Geography of outdoor recreation
Outdoor recreation is measured by place of production, not residence
of consumer. The value of manufactured goods, such as boats, is
assigned to the state where they are produced, even if the goods are
not ultimately used there. Services, such as sailing lessons, are
assigned to the location where they are consumed. The value of services
provided by retailers, such as boat dealers, is also assigned to the
location of sale. The services of retailers (known as trade margins)
are not measured by sales but are most akin to sales less the cost of
goods sold. The production of imported goods is excluded from ORSA, but
the value of the services of retailers selling the imported goods is
included.
Outdoor recreation spending and production are allocated to states
by applying state-level data to detailed, underlying national values.
The underlying estimates are distributed to states before aggregation
to publication levels to provide the most accurate state values
possible. Prototype statistics are primarily based on time-series data
generated from the Economic Census and Quarterly Census of Employment
and Wages (QCEW). Additional government and nongovernment data sources
are used to supplement the census data and to refine and evaluate the
statistics.
Regional tables
Activity tables show states' total outdoor recreation value-added
contributions to an activity, regardless of the contributing industry.
For example, boating value added by state represents all contributions
by in-state boat manufacturers, marinas, repair shops, etc., to the
boating activity.
Industry tables show states' total outdoor recreation-related value
added, employment, and compensation by industry, regardless of the
outdoor activities the industries support. Outdoor recreation-related
activity is included in the states' industry totals even if the final
consumption occurs outside the state.
A state's total value added across all outdoor recreation activities
will equal the state's total value added across all outdoor recreation
industries.
Definitions
ORSA employment consists of all full-time, part-time, and temporary
wage-and-salary jobs where the workers are engaged in the production of
outdoor recreation goods and services. Self-employed individuals are
excluded from employment totals.
ORSA compensation consists of the pay to employees (including wages
and salaries, and benefits such as employer contributions to pension
and health funds) in return for their outdoor recreation-related work
during a given year. Pay to the self-employed is excluded from
compensation but included in value added.
ORSA value-added (also referred to as GDP) consists of the value of
outdoor recreation goods and services produced less the value of
expenses incurred for their production. The activity of self-employed
individuals is included in value added.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additional Information
Resources
Additional resources available at www.bea.gov:
Find the latest information on the Outdoor Recreation
Satellite Account at BEA's outdoor recreation page (https://
www.bea.gov/data/special-topics/outdoor-recreation).
Stay informed about BEA developments by reading the BEA blog
(https://www.bea.gov/news/blog), signing up for BEA's email
subscription service (https://www.bea.gov/_subscribe/), or
following BEA on Twitter @BEA_News (https://twitter.com/
bea_news).
Access BEA data by registering for BEA's Data application
programming interface (https://apps.bea.gov/API/signup/
index.cfm) (API).
For more on BEA's statistics, see our monthly online
journal, the Survey of Current Business (https://apps.bea.gov/
scb/index.htm).
BEA's news release schedule (https://www.bea.gov/news/
schedule).
NIPA Handbook (https://www.bea.gov/resources/methodologies/
nipa-handbook): Concepts and Methods of the U.S. National
Income and Product Accounts.
Complete information on the sources and methods for the
estimation of BEA's State Personal Income and Employment
(https://www.bea.gov/resources/methodologies/spi2017).
Definitions
Gross domestic product (GDP) or value-added is the value of the
goods and services produced by the nation's economy less the value of
the goods and services used up in production. GDP is also equal to the
sum of personal consumption expenditures, gross private domestic
investment, net exports of goods and services, and government
consumption expenditures and gross investment.
Gross output (GO) is the value of the goods and services produced
by the nation's economy. It is principally measured using industry
sales or receipts, including sales to final users (GDP) and sales to
other industries.
Current-dollar estimates are valued in the prices of the period
when the transactions occurred--that is, at ``market value.'' Also
referred to as ``nominal estimates'' or as ``current-price estimates.''
Chained-dollar estimates are calculated by taking the current-
dollar level of a series in the base period and multiplying it by the
change in the chained-type quantity index number for the series since
the base period. Chained-dollar estimates correctly show growth rates
for a series but are not additive in periods other than the base
period.
ORSA employment consists of all full-time, part-time, and temporary
wage-and-salary jobs where the workers are engaged in the production of
outdoor recreation goods and services. Self-employed individuals are
excluded from employment totals.
ORSA compensation consists of the pay to employees (including wages
and salaries, and benefits such as employer contributions to pension
and health funds) in return for their outdoor recreation-related work
during a given year. Pay to the self-employed is excluded from
compensation but included in value added.
ORSA value-added (also referred to as GDP) consists of the value of
outdoor recreation goods and services produced less the value of
expenses incurred for their production. The activity of self-employed
individuals is included in value added.
Statistical Conventions
Quarter-to-quarter percent changes are calculated from unrounded
data and are annualized. Annualized growth rates show the rate of
change that would have occurred had the pattern been repeated over four
quarters (1 year). Annualized rates of change can be calculated as
follows: (((level of later quarter/level of earlier quarter)-4)^1)*100.
Quarterly estimates are expressed at seasonally adjusted annual rates,
unless otherwise specified. Quarter-to-quarter dollar changes are
differences between published estimates.
List of National Level News Release Tables
Table 1. Real Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Activity
Table 2. Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Activity
Table 3. Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Activity as a Percentage
of Gross Domestic Product
Table 4. Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Activity as a Percentage
of Total Outdoor Recreation Value-Added
Table 5. Chain-type Quantity Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Value-
Added by Activity
Table 6. Percent Changes in Chain-Type Quantity Indexes for Outdoor
Recreation Value-Added by Activity
Table 7. Chain-Type Price Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Value-
Added by Activity
Table 8. Percent Changes in Chain-Type Price Indexes for Outdoor
Recreation Value-Added by Activity
Table 9. Real Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Industry
Table 10. Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Industry
Table 11. Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Industry as a
Percentage of Gross Domestic Product
Table 12. Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Industry as a
Percentage of Total Outdoor Recreation Value-Added
Table 13. Chain-type Quantity Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Value-
Added by Industry
Table 14. Percent Changes in Chain-Type Quantity Indexes for
Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Industry
Table 15. Chain-Type Price Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Value-
Added by Industry
Table 16. Percent Changes in Chain-Type Price Indexes for Outdoor
Recreation Value-Added by Industry
Table 17. Real Outdoor Recreation Gross Output by Activity
Table 18. Outdoor Recreation Gross Output by Activity
Table 19. Chain-type Quantity Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Gross
Output by Activity
Table 20. Percent Changes in Chain-Type Quantity Indexes for
Outdoor Recreation Gross Output by Activity
Table 21. Chain-Type Price Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Gross
Output by Activity
Table 22. Percent Changes in Chain-Type Price Indexes for Outdoor
Recreation Gross Output by Activity
Table 23. Real Outdoor Recreation Gross Output by Industry
Table 24. Outdoor Recreation Gross Output by Industry
Table 25. Chain-type Quantity Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Gross
Output by Industry
Table 26. Percent Changes in Chain-Type Quantity Indexes for
Outdoor Recreation Gross Output by Industry
Table 27. Chain-Type Price Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Gross
Output by Industry
Table 28. Percent Changes in Chain-Type Price Indexes for Outdoor
Recreation Gross Output by Industry
Table 29. Outdoor Recreation Compensation by Industry
Table 30. Outdoor Recreation Employment by Industry
List of State Level News Release Tables
Table 1. Outdoor Recreation Value-Added, Employment, and
Compensation as a percent of Total, 2017
Table 2. Value-Added Outdoor Recreation by State, Selected
Activities, 2017
Table 3. Value-Added Outdoor Recreation by State, Selected
Industries, 2017
Table 4. Employment, Outdoor Recreation by State, Selected
Industries, 2017
Table 5. Compensation, Outdoor Recreation by State, Selected
Industries, 2017
national level news release tables
Table 1. Real Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Activity
[Millions of chained (2012) dollars]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
Total Outdoor
360,509
361,153
363,128
370,446
371,789
386,107
Recreation
2
Total Core
181,182
182,453
185,380
186,452
187,001
196,628
Outdoor Recreation
3
Conventional
111,349
112,623
113,991
116,012
116,392
122,221
Outdoor
Recreation
4
Bicycling
1,750
1,877
1,904
1,839
2,073
2,091
5
Boating/
17,436
17,165
17,235
17,629
17,897
18,733
Fishing
6
Canoeing
76
73
76
78
80
83
7
Kayaking
326
323
315
327
347
363
8
Fishing
2,583
2,478
2,486
2,533
2,522
2,500
(excludes
Boating)
9
Sailing
1,042
1,039
1,095
1,105
1,145
1,192
10
Other Boating
13,408
13,254
13,267
13,589
13,805
14,590
11
Climbing/
3,067
3,141
3,179
3,106
3,266
3,241
Hiking/Tent
Camping
12
Equestrian
5,245
5,389
5,686
5,800
6,139
6,800
13
Hunting/
6,514
7,288
6,821
7,393
6,938
7,900
Shooting/
Trapping
14
Hunting/
3,457
3,763
3,474
3,872
3,388
3,811
Trapping
15
Shooting
3,057
3,526
3,349
3,517
3,563
4,107
(includes
Archery)
16
Motorcycling/
8,144
8,177
8,384
8,474
8,255
8,315
ATVing
17
Recreational
1,166
1,111
1,186
1,208
1,247
1,258
Flying
18
RVing
12,654
13,048
13,146
13,314
13,485
14,797
19
Snow
5,041
4,888
5,214
5,220
5,055
5,152
Activities
20
Skiing
1,565
1,541
1,675
1,689
1,646
1,725
21
Snowboarding
1,346
1,342
1,429
1,430
1,443
1,524
22
Other Snow
2,130
2,005
2,111
2,102
1,966
1,903
Activities
(includes
Snowmobiling) \
1\1
23
Other
8,813
8,694
9,425
9,603
9,797
10,111
Conventional
Outdoor
Recreation
Activities
24
Other
6,909
6,907
7,521
7,623
7,845
8,175
Conventional
Air and Land
Activities \2\
25
Other
1,904
1,787
1,908
1,980
1,959
1,952
Conventional
Water
Activities \3\
26
Multi-use
41,519
41,842
41,851
42,451
42,255
43,722
Apparel and
Accessories
(Conventional)
\4\
27
Other Outdoor
69,833
69,828
71,388
70,445
70,613
74,407
Recreation
28
Amusement
8,918
8,087
7,916
7,940
8,033
8,639
Parks/Water
Parks
29
Festivals/
10,703
11,102
11,800
10,731
11,218
11,594
Sporting Events/
Concerts
30
Field Sports
2,719
2,659
2,791
2,868
2,931
2,975
31
Game Areas
16,996
17,168
16,982
16,550
16,882
17,831
(includes
Golfing and
Tennis)
32
Guided Tours/
12,054
11,904
12,069
11,156
10,139
11,136
Outfitted
Travel
33
Air and Land
6,588
6,536
6,830
6,678
6,393
6,687
Guided Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
34
Water Guided
5,466
5,368
5,241
4,487
3,761
4,457
Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
(includes
Boating and
Fishing
Charters)
35
Productive
6,680
6,928
7,795
8,300
8,564
8,882
Activities
(includes
Gardening)
36
Other Outdoor
8,249
8,208
8,511
9,304
9,312
9,621
Recreation
Activities \5\
37
Multi-use
3,513
3,803
3,599
3,805
3,779
3,904
Apparel and
Accessories
(Other) \4\
38
Supporting
179,327
178,700
177,768
183,951
184,743
189,505
Outdoor Recreation
39
Construction
5,392
5,187
5,217
5,497
5,688
5,809
40
Local Trips
33,019
33,206
33,578
33,398
32,322
33,005
and Travel \6\
41
Trips and
122,373
121,888
120,768
126,700
127,733
131,103
Travel \7\
42
Food and
21,802
17,871
18,218
18,783
18,817
19,074
Beverages
43
Lodging
34,614
35,523
32,472
35,057
34,973
34,726
44
Shopping and
20,725
21,141
21,330
21,354
21,419
21,721
Souvenirs
45
Transportatio
45,231
47,379
48,823
51,551
52,584
55,730
n
46
Government
18,543
18,424
18,222
18,351
18,912
19,493
Expenditures
47
Federal
2,751
2,960
2,743
2,677
2,776
2,746
Government
48
State and
15,793
15,469
15,474
15,664
16,127
16,732
Local
Government
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legend/Footnotes:
\1\ Consists of dog mushing, sleighing, snowmobiling, snow shoeing, snow tubing.
\2\ Consists of air sports, driving for pleasure, geocaching/orienteering/rock hounding, ice skating, inline
skating, land/sand sailing, races, running/walking/jogging, skateboarding, and wildlife watching/birding.
\3\ Consists of boardsailing/windsurfing, SCUBA diving, snorkeling, stand-up paddling, surfing, tubing,
wakeboarding, water skiing, and whitewater rafting.
\4\ Consists of backpacks, bug spray, coolers, general outdoor clothing, GPS equipment, hydration equipment,
lighting, sports racks, sunscreen, watches, and other miscellaneous gear and equipment.
\5\ Consists of agritourism, augmented reality games, beachgoing, disc golf, hot springs soaking, kite flying,
model airplane/rocket/UAV, paintball, photography, stargazing/astronomy, swimming, therapeutic programs, water
polo, yard sports.
\6\ Trip expenses less than 50 miles away from home, including food and beverages, lodging, shopping and
souvenirs, and transportation.
\7\ Travel and tourism expenses in the Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account are consistent with the Travel and
Tourism Satellite Account, which includes only expenses for travel at least 50 miles away from home.
Table 2. Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Activity
[Millions of current dollars]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
Total Outdoor
360,509
369,280
378,654
400,205
407,362
427,189
Recreation
2
Total Core
181,182
186,700
191,226
198,881
202,513
213,246
Outdoor Recreation
3
Conventional
111,349
115,482
117,737
123,249
124,873
130,844
Outdoor
Recreation
4
Bicycling
1,750
1,850
1,876
1,845
2,151
2,145
5
Boating/
17,436
17,691
18,306
19,253
19,920
20,887
Fishing
6
Canoeing
76
74
79
83
88
92
7
Kayaking
326
335
343
362
397
414
8
Fishing
2,583
2,623
2,635
2,730
2,715
2,686
(excludes
Boating)
9
Sailing
1,042
1,048
1,124
1,183
1,259
1,295
10
Other Boating
13,408
13,611
14,125
14,894
15,461
16,399
11
Climbing/
3,067
3,201
3,303
3,441
3,488
3,465
Hiking/Tent
Camping
12
Equestrian
5,245
5,523
6,146
6,437
6,842
7,756
13
Hunting/
6,514
7,604
7,225
8,063
7,746
8,787
Shooting/
Trapping
14
Hunting/
3,457
3,967
3,768
4,354
3,922
4,404
Trapping
15
Shooting
3,057
3,637
3,457
3,709
3,824
4,383
(includes
Archery)
16
Motorcycling/
8,144
8,311
8,463
8,789
8,861
9,079
ATVing
17
Recreational
1,166
1,221
1,289
1,326
1,318
1,400
Flying
18
RVing
12,654
13,500
14,123
14,888
15,411
16,888
19
Snow
5,041
4,897
5,297
5,530
5,449
5,646
Activities
20
Skiing
1,565
1,534
1,682
1,779
1,784
1,849
21
Snowboarding
1,346
1,341
1,441
1,521
1,579
1,648
22
Other Snow
2,130
2,022
2,174
2,230
2,086
2,149
Activities
(includes
Snowmobiling)
\1\
23
Other
8,813
8,969
9,192
9,575
9,697
10,072
Conventional
Outdoor
Recreation
Activities
24
Other
6,909
7,106
7,206
7,448
7,557
7,965
Conventional
Air and Land
Activities \2\
25
Other
1,904
1,863
1,987
2,127
2,141
2,107
Conventional
Water
Activities \3\
26
Multi-use
41,519
42,713
42,517
44,101
43,989
44,719
Apparel and
Accessories
(Conventional)
\4\
27
Other Outdoor
69,833
71,219
73,490
75,633
77,640
82,402
Recreation
28
Amusement
8,918
8,804
9,112
9,740
10,537
11,859
Parks/Water
Parks
29
Festivals/
10,703
11,385
12,477
12,258
13,368
14,143
Sporting Events/
Concerts
30
Field Sports
2,719
2,738
2,896
3,057
3,184
3,238
31
Game Areas
16,996
17,071
16,993
17,306
18,015
18,471
(includes
Golfing and
Tennis)
32
Guided Tours/
12,054
12,113
12,545
12,275
11,572
12,890
Outfitted
Travel
33
Air and Land
6,588
6,632
7,051
7,288
7,217
7,666
Guided Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
34
Water Guided
5,466
5,481
5,494
4,987
4,354
5,224
Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
(includes
Boating and
Fishing
Charters)
35
Productive
6,680
6,979
7,146
7,478
7,628
8,098
Activities
(includes
Gardening)
36
Other Outdoor
8,249
8,315
8,722
9,710
9,597
9,822
Recreation
Activities \5\
37
Multi-use
3,513
3,814
3,599
3,810
3,741
3,882
Apparel and
Accessories
(Other) \4\
38
Supporting
179,327
182,580
187,428
201,324
204,849
213,944
Outdoor Recreation
39
Construction
5,392
5,504
5,930
6,650
7,315
7,853
40
Local Trips
33,019
33,467
34,534
35,489
34,118
35,763
and Travel \6\
41
Trips and
122,373
124,141
126,877
138,338
141,933
147,813
Travel \7\
42
Food and
21,802
18,405
19,218
20,800
21,714
22,678
Beverages
43
Lodging
34,614
36,498
34,698
38,805
40,036
40,786
44
Shopping and
20,725
21,372
21,984
22,719
22,901
23,196
Souvenirs
45
Transportatio
45,231
47,866
50,977
56,014
57,281
61,152
n
46
Government
18,543
19,468
20,087
20,846
21,483
22,515
Expenditures
47
Federal
2,751
3,018
2,874
2,858
3,013
3,066
Government
48
State and
15,793
16,450
17,213
17,989
18,470
19,449
Local
Government
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legend/Footnotes:
\1\ Consists of dog mushing, sleighing, snowmobiling, snow shoeing, snow tubing.
\2\ Consists of air sports, driving for pleasure, geocaching/orienteering/rock hounding, ice skating, inline
skating, land/sand sailing, races, running/walking/jogging, skateboarding, and wildlife watching/birding.
\3\ Consists of boardsailing/windsurfing, SCUBA diving, snorkeling, stand-up paddling, surfing, tubing,
wakeboarding, water skiing, and whitewater rafting.
\4\ Consists of backpacks, bug spray, coolers, general outdoor clothing, GPS equipment, hydration equipment,
lighting, sports racks, sunscreen, watches, and other miscellaneous gear and equipment.
\5\ Consists of agritourism, augmented reality games, beachgoing, disc golf, hot springs soaking, kite flying,
model airplane/rocket/UAV, paintball, photography, stargazing/astronomy, swimming, therapeutic programs, water
polo, yard sports.
\6\ Trip expenses less than 50 miles away from home, including food and beverages, lodging, shopping and
souvenirs, and transportation.
\7\ Travel and tourism expenses in the Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account are consistent with the Travel and
Tourism Satellite Account, which includes only expenses for travel at least 50 miles away from home.
Table 3. Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Activity as a Percentage of Gross Domestic Product
[Percent]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
Total Outdoor
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
Recreation
2
Total Core
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
Outdoor Recreation
3
Conventional
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
Outdoor
Recreation
4
Bicycling
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
5
Boating/
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Fishing
6
Canoeing
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
7
Kayaking
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
8
Fishing
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
(excludes
Boating)
9
Sailing
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
10
Other Boating
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
11
Climbing/
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Hiking/Tent
Camping
12
Equestrian
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
13
Hunting/
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Shooting/
Trapping
14
Hunting/
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Trapping
15
Shooting
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
(includes
Archery)
16
Motorcycling/
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
ATVing
17
Recreational
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Flying
18
RVing
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
19
Snow
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Activities
20
Skiing
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
21
Snowboarding
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
22
Other Snow
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Activities
(includes
Snowmobiling)
\1\
23
Other
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Conventional
Outdoor
Recreation
Activities
24
Other
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Conventional
Air and Land
Activities \2\
25
Other
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Conventional
Water
Activities \3\
26
Multi-use
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
Apparel and
Accessories
(Conventional)
\4\
27
Other Outdoor
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
Recreation
28
Amusement
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Parks/Water
Parks
29
Festivals/
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Sporting Events/
Concerts
30
Field Sports
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
31
Game Areas
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
(includes
Golfing and
Tennis)
32
Guided Tours/
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Outfitted
Travel
33
Air and Land
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Guided Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
34
Water Guided
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
(includes
Boating and
Fishing
Charters)
35
Productive
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Activities
(includes
Gardening)
36
Other Outdoor
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
Recreation
Activities \5\
37
Multi-use
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Apparel and
Accessories
(Other) \4\
38
Supporting
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
Outdoor Recreation
39
Construction
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
40
Local Trips
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
and Travel \6\
41
Trips and
0.8
0.7
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.8
Travel \7\
42
Food and
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Beverages
43
Lodging
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
44
Shopping and
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Souvenirs
45
Transportatio
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
n
46
Government
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Expenditures
47
Federal
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Government
48
State and
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Local
Government
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legend/Footnotes:
\1\ Consists of dog mushing, sleighing, snowmobiling, snow shoeing, snow tubing.
\2\ Consists of air sports, driving for pleasure, geocaching/orienteering/rock hounding, ice skating, inline
skating, land/sand sailing, races, running/walking/jogging, skateboarding, and wildlife watching/birding.
\3\ Consists of boardsailing/windsurfing, SCUBA diving, snorkeling, stand-up paddling, surfing, tubing,
wakeboarding, water skiing, and whitewater rafting.
\4\ Consists of backpacks, bug spray, coolers, general outdoor clothing, GPS equipment, hydration equipment,
lighting, sports racks, sunscreen, watches, and other miscellaneous gear and equipment.
\5\ Consists of agritourism, augmented reality games, beachgoing, disc golf, hot springs soaking, kite flying,
model airplane/rocket/UAV, paintball, photography, stargazing/astronomy, swimming, therapeutic programs, water
polo, yard sports.
\6\ Trip expenses less than 50 miles away from home, including food and beverages, lodging, shopping and
souvenirs, and transportation.
\7\ Travel and tourism expenses in the Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account are consistent with the Travel and
Tourism Satellite Account, which includes only expenses for travel at least 50 miles away from home.
Table 4. Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Activity as a Percentage of Total Outdoor Recreation Value-Added
[Percent]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
Total Outdoor
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Recreation
2
Total Core
50.3
50.6
50.5
49.7
49.7
49.9
Outdoor Recreation
3
Conventional
30.9
31.3
31.1
30.8
30.7
30.6
Outdoor
Recreation
4
Bicycling
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
5
Boating/
4.8
4.8
4.8
4.8
4.9
4.9
Fishing
6
Canoeing
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
7
Kayaking
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
8
Fishing
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.6
(excludes
Boating)
9
Sailing
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
10
Other Boating
3.7
3.7
3.7
3.7
3.8
3.8
11
Climbing/
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.8
Hiking/Tent
Camping
12
Equestrian
1.5
1.5
1.6
1.6
1.7
1.8
13
Hunting/
1.8
2.1
1.9
2.0
1.9
2.1
Shooting/
Trapping
14
Hunting/
1.0
1.1
1.0
1.1
1.0
1.0
Trapping
15
Shooting
0.8
1.0
0.9
0.9
0.9
1.0
(includes
Archery)
16
Motorcycling/
2.3
2.3
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.1
ATVing
17
Recreational
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
Flying
18
RVing
3.5
3.7
3.7
3.7
3.8
4.0
19
Snow
1.4
1.3
1.4
1.4
1.3
1.3
Activities
20
Skiing
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
21
Snowboarding
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
22
Other Snow
0.6
0.5
0.6
0.6
0.5
0.5
Activities
(includes
Snowmobiling)
\1\
23
Other
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.4
Conventional
Outdoor
Recreation
Activities
24
Other
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.9
Conventional
Air and Land
Activities \2\
25
Other
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
Conventional
Water
Activities \3\
26
Multi-use
11.5
11.6
11.2
11.0
10.8
10.5
Apparel and
Accessories
(Conventional)
\4\
27
Other Outdoor
19.4
19.3
19.4
18.9
19.1
19.3
Recreation
28
Amusement
2.5
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.6
2.8
Parks/Water
Parks
29
Festivals/
3.0
3.1
3.3
3.1
3.3
3.3
Sporting Events/
Concerts
30
Field Sports
0.8
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
31
Game Areas
4.7
4.6
4.5
4.3
4.4
4.3
(includes
Golfing and
Tennis)
32
Guided Tours/
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.1
2.8
3.0
Outfitted
Travel
33
Air and Land
1.8
1.8
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.8
Guided Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
34
Water Guided
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.2
1.1
1.2
Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
(includes
Boating and
Fishing
Charters)
35
Productive
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.9
Activities
(includes
Gardening)
36
Other Outdoor
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.4
2.4
2.3
Recreation
Activities \5\
37
Multi-use
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.9
0.9
Apparel and
Accessories
(Other) \4\
38
Supporting
49.7
49.4
49.5
50.3
50.3
50.1
Outdoor Recreation
39
Construction
1.5
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.8
40
Local Trips
9.2
9.1
9.1
8.9
8.4
8.4
and Travel \6\
41
Trips and
33.9
33.6
33.5
34.6
34.8
34.6
Travel \7\
42
Food and
6.0
5.0
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.3
Beverages
43
Lodging
9.6
9.9
9.2
9.7
9.8
9.5
44
Shopping and
5.7
5.8
5.8
5.7
5.6
5.4
Souvenirs
45
Transportatio
12.5
13.0
13.5
14.0
14.1
14.3
n
46
Government
5.1
5.3
5.3
5.2
5.3
5.3
Expenditures
47
Federal
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.7
0.7
0.7
Government
48
State and
4.4
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.6
Local
Government
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legend/Footnotes:
\1\ Consists of dog mushing, sleighing, snowmobiling, snow shoeing, snow tubing.
\2\ Consists of air sports, driving for pleasure, geocaching/orienteering/rock hounding, ice skating, inline
skating, land/sand sailing, races, running/walking/jogging, skateboarding, and wildlife watching/birding.
\3\ Consists of boardsailing/windsurfing, SCUBA diving, snorkeling, stand-up paddling, surfing, tubing,
wakeboarding, water skiing, and whitewater rafting.
\4\ Consists of backpacks, bug spray, coolers, general outdoor clothing, GPS equipment, hydration equipment,
lighting, sports racks, sunscreen, watches, and other miscellaneous gear and equipment.
\5\ Consists of agritourism, augmented reality games, beachgoing, disc golf, hot springs soaking, kite flying,
model airplane/rocket/UAV, paintball, photography, stargazing/astronomy, swimming, therapeutic programs, water
polo, yard sports.
\6\ Trip expenses less than 50 miles away from home, including food and beverages, lodging, shopping and
souvenirs, and transportation.
\7\ Travel and tourism expenses in the Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account are consistent with the Travel and
Tourism Satellite Account, which includes only expenses for travel at least 50 miles away from home.
Table 5. Chain-Type Quantity Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Activity
[index numbers, 2012 = 100]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
Total Outdoor
100.000
100.179
100.726
102.756
103.129
107.100
Recreation
2
Total Core
100.000
100.701
102.317
102.909
103.212
108.525
Outdoor Recreation
3
Conventional
100.000
101.144
102.372
104.188
104.529
109.764
Outdoor
Recreation
4
Bicycling
100.000
107.240
108.818
105.065
118.450
119.503
5
Boating/
100.000
98.447
98.851
101.108
102.648
107.441
Fishing
6
Canoeing
100.000
95.799
99.911
102.616
105.238
109.753
7
Kayaking
100.000
98.969
96.444
100.009
106.303
111.097
8
Fishing
100.000
95.938
96.230
98.074
97.624
96.795
(excludes
Boating)
9
Sailing
100.000
99.695
105.104
106.027
109.881
114.393
10
Other Boating
100.000
98.845
98.944
101.346
102.960
108.814
11
Climbing/
100.000
102.414
103.649
101.273
106.483
105.675
Hiking/Tent
Camping
12
Equestrian
100.000
102.742
108.406
110.581
117.034
129.638
13
Hunting/
100.000
111.883
104.710
113.490
106.514
121.281
Shooting/
Trapping
14
Hunting/
100.000
108.862
100.517
112.028
98.031
110.262
Trapping
15
Shooting
100.000
115.334
109.540
115.035
116.529
134.345
(includes
Archery)
16
Motorcycling/
100.000
100.408
102.951
104.050
101.368
102.098
ATVing
17
Recreational
100.000
95.281
101.700
103.588
106.945
107.869
Flying
18
RVing
100.000
103.114
103.886
105.209
106.567
116.933
19
Snow
100.000
96.965
103.424
103.558
100.273
102.196
Activities
20
Skiing
100.000
98.431
106.990
107.911
105.166
110.214
21
Snowboarding
100.000
99.753
106.177
106.260
107.193
113.259
22
Other Snow
100.000
94.146
99.107
98.703
92.305
89.350
Activities
(includes
Snowmobiling)
\1\
23
Other
100.000
98.651
106.942
108.958
111.158
114.725
Conventional
Outdoor
Recreation
Activities
24
Other
100.000
99.978
108.856
110.336
113.546
118.325
Conventional
Air and Land
Activities \2\
25
Other
100.000
93.855
100.167
103.952
102.860
102.493
Conventional
Water
Activities \3\
26
Multi-use
100.000
100.779
100.801
102.246
101.773
105.308
Apparel and
Accessories
(Conventional)
\4\
27
Other Outdoor
100.000
99.993
102.227
100.876
101.117
106.551
Recreation
28
Amusement
100.000
90.681
88.766
89.034
90.077
96.872
Parks/Water
Parks
29
Festivals/
100.000
103.722
110.242
100.261
104.805
108.326
Sporting Events/
Concerts
30
Field Sports
100.000
97.794
102.641
105.473
107.807
109.408
31
Game Areas
100.000
101.016
99.922
97.377
99.329
104.912
(includes
Golfing and
Tennis)
32
Guided Tours/
100.000
98.755
100.127
92.550
84.115
92.385
Outfitted
Travel
33
Air and Land
100.000
99.219
103.683
101.370
97.042
101.512
Guided Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
34
Water Guided
100.000
98.197
95.884
82.077
68.807
81.539
Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
(includes
Boating and
Fishing
Charters)
35
Productive
100.000
103.717
116.690
124.253
128.195
132.963
Activities
(includes
Gardening)
36
Other Outdoor
100.000
99.497
103.176
112.794
112.884
116.632
Recreation
Activities \5\
37
Multi-use
100.000
108.246
102.460
108.301
107.576
111.145
Apparel and
Accessories
(Other) \4\
38
Supporting
100.000
99.650
99.130
102.578
103.020
105.675
Outdoor Recreation
39
Construction
100.000
96.194
96.753
101.957
105.495
107.746
40
Local Trips
100.000
100.566
101.692
101.148
97.888
99.957
and Travel \6\
41
Trips and
100.000
99.604
98.688
103.536
104.381
107.135
Travel \7\
42
Food and
100.000
81.967
83.558
86.153
86.305
87.485
Beverages
43
Lodging
100.000
102.626
93.812
101.278
101.036
100.323
44
Shopping and
100.000
102.006
102.918
103.035
103.347
104.806
Souvenirs
45
Transportatio
100.000
104.749
107.941
113.973
116.258
123.212
n
46
Government
100.000
99.359
98.265
98.965
101.989
105.121
Expenditures
47
Federal
100.000
107.628
99.726
97.330
100.910
99.832
Government
48
State and
100.000
97.947
97.981
99.186
102.117
105.947
Local
Government
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legend/Footnotes:
\1\ Consists of dog mushing, sleighing, snowmobiling, snow shoeing, snow tubing.
\2\ Consists of air sports, driving for pleasure, geocaching/orienteering/rock hounding, ice skating, inline
skating, land/sand sailing, races, running/walking/jogging, skateboarding, and wildlife watching/birding.
\3\ Consists of boardsailing/windsurfing, SCUBA diving, snorkeling, stand-up paddling, surfing, tubing,
wakeboarding, water skiing, and whitewater rafting.
\4\ Consists of backpacks, bug spray, coolers, general outdoor clothing, GPS equipment, hydration equipment,
lighting, sports racks, sunscreen, watches, and other miscellaneous gear and equipment.
\5\ Consists of agritourism, augmented reality games, beachgoing, disc golf, hot springs soaking, kite flying,
model airplane/rocket/UAV, paintball, photography, stargazing/astronomy, swimming, therapeutic programs, water
polo, yard sports.
\6\ Trip expenses less than 50 miles away from home, including food and beverages, lodging, shopping and
souvenirs, and transportation.
\7\ Travel and tourism expenses in the Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account are consistent with the Travel and
Tourism Satellite Account, which includes only expenses for travel at least 50 miles away from home.
Table 6. Percent Changes in Chain-Type Quantity Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Activity
[Percent Change]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
Total Outdoor Recreation
0.2
0.5
2.0
0.4
3.9
2
Total Core Outdoor
0.7
1.6
0.6
0.3
5.1
Recreation
3
Conventional Outdoor
1.1
1.2
1.8
0.3
5.0
Recreation
4
Bicycling
7.2
1.5
^3.4
12.7
0.9
5
Boating/Fishing
^1.6
0.4
2.3
1.5
4.7
6
Canoeing
^4.2
4.3
2.7
2.6
4.3
7
Kayaking
^1.0
^2.6
3.7
6.3
4.5
8
Fishing (excludes
^4.1
0.3
1.9
^0.5
^0.8
Boating)
9
Sailing
^0.3
5.4
0.9
3.6
4.1
10
Other Boating
^1.2
0.1
2.4
1.6
5.7
11
Climbing/Hiking/Tent
2.4
1.2
^2.3
5.1
^0.8
Camping
12
Equestrian
2.7
5.5
2.0
5.8
10.8
13
Hunting/Shooting/
11.9
^6.4
8.4
^6.1
13.9
Trapping
14
Hunting/Trapping
8.9
^7.7
11.5
^12.5
12.5
15
Shooting (includes
15.3
^5.0
5.0
1.3
15.3
Archery)
16
Motorcycling/ATVing
0.4
2.5
1.1
^2.6
0.7
17
Recreational Flying
^4.7
6.7
1.9
3.2
0.9
18
RVing
3.1
0.7
1.3
1.3
9.7
19
Snow Activities
^3.0
6.7
0.1
^3.2
1.9
20
Skiing
^1.6
8.7
0.9
^2.5
4.8
21
Snowboarding
^0.2
6.4
0.1
0.9
5.7
22
Other Snow
^5.9
5.3
^0.4
^6.5
^3.2
Activities (includes
Snowmobiling) \1\
23
Other Conventional
^1.3
8.4
1.9
2.0
3.2
Outdoor Recreation
Activities
24
Other Conventional
0.0
8.9
1.4
2.9
4.2
Air and Land
Activities \2\
25
Other Conventional
^6.1
6.7
3.8
^1.1
^0.4
Water Activities \3\
26
Multi-use Apparel
0.8
0.0
1.4
^0.5
3.5
and Accessories
(Conventional) \4\
27
Other Outdoor
0.0
2.2
^1.3
0.2
5.4
Recreation
28
Amusement Parks/
^9.3
^2.1
0.3
1.2
7.5
Water Parks
29
Festivals/Sporting
3.7
6.3
^9.1
4.5
3.4
Events/Concerts
30
Field Sports
^2.2
5.0
2.8
2.2
1.5
31
Game Areas (includes
1.0
^1.1
^2.5
2.0
5.6
Golfing and Tennis)
32
Guided Tours/
^1.2
1.4
^7.6
^9.1
9.8
Outfitted Travel
33
Air and Land Guided
^0.8
4.5
^2.2
^4.3
4.6
Tours/Outfitted
Travel
34
Water Guided Tours/
^1.8
^2.4
^14.4
^16.2
18.5
Outfitted Travel
(includes Boating
and Fishing
Charters)
35
Productive
3.7
12.5
6.5
3.2
3.7
Activities (includes
Gardening)
36
Other Outdoor
^0.5
3.7
9.3
0.1
3.3
Recreation Activities
\5\
37
Multi-use Apparel
8.2
^5.3
5.7
^0.7
3.3
and Accessories
(Other) \4\
38
Supporting Outdoor
^0.3
^0.5
3.5
0.4
2.6
Recreation
39
Construction
^3.8
0.6
5.4
3.5
2.1
40
Local Trips and
0.6
1.1
^0.5
^3.2
2.1
Travel \6\
41
Trips and Travel \7\
^0.4
^0.9
4.9
0.8
2.6
42
Food and Beverages
^18.0
1.9
3.1
0.2
1.4
43
Lodging
2.6
^8.6
8.0
^0.2
^0.7
44
Shopping and
2.0
0.9
0.1
0.3
1.4
Souvenirs
45
Transportation
4.7
3.0
5.6
2.0
6.0
46
Government
^0.6
^1.1
0.7
3.1
3.1
Expenditures
47
Federal Government
7.6
^7.3
^2.4
3.7
^1.1
48
State and Local
^2.1
0.0
1.2
3.0
3.8
Government
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legend/Footnotes:
\1\ Consists of dog mushing, sleighing, snowmobiling, snow shoeing, snow tubing.
\2\ Consists of air sports, driving for pleasure, geocaching/orienteering/rock hounding, ice skating, inline
skating, land/sand sailing, races, running/walking/jogging, skateboarding, and wildlife watching/birding.
\3\ Consists of boardsailing/windsurfing, SCUBA diving, snorkeling, stand-up paddling, surfing, tubing,
wakeboarding, water skiing, and whitewater rafting.
\4\ Consists of backpacks, bug spray, coolers, general outdoor clothing, GPS equipment, hydration equipment,
lighting, sports racks, sunscreen, watches, and other miscellaneous gear and equipment.
\5\ Consists of agritourism, augmented reality games, beachgoing, disc golf, hot springs soaking, kite flying,
model airplane/rocket/UAV, paintball, photography, stargazing/astronomy, swimming, therapeutic programs, water
polo, yard sports.
\6\ Trip expenses less than 50 miles away from home, including food and beverages, lodging, shopping and
souvenirs, and transportation.
\7\ Travel and tourism expenses in the Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account are consistent with the Travel and
Tourism Satellite Account, which includes only expenses for travel at least 50 miles away from home.
Table 7. Chain-Type Price Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Activity
[index numbers, 2012 = 100]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
Total Outdoor
100.000
102.250
104.428
108.191
109.728
110.802
Recreation
2
Total Core
100.000
102.327
103.452
106.974
108.608
108.764
Outdoor Recreation
3
Conventional
100.000
102.537
103.769
106.734
107.788
107.556
Outdoor
Recreation
4
Bicycling
100.000
98.587
98.519
100.361
103.751
102.555
5
Boating/
100.000
103.067
106.216
109.215
111.301
111.496
Fishing
6
Canoeing
100.000
102.473
103.881
107.413
109.999
110.752
7
Kayaking
100.000
103.655
108.939
110.997
114.343
114.140
8
Fishing
100.000
105.840
106.008
107.765
107.662
107.422
(excludes
Boating)
9
Sailing
100.000
100.861
102.663
107.072
110.005
108.681
10
Other Boating
100.000
102.701
106.473
109.608
111.994
112.399
11
Climbing/
100.000
101.906
103.895
110.791
106.818
106.918
Hiking/Tent
Camping
12
Equestrian
100.000
102.483
108.081
110.969
111.457
114.060
13
Hunting/
100.000
104.338
105.926
109.072
111.648
111.228
Shooting/
Trapping
14
Hunting/
100.000
105.436
108.437
112.449
115.747
115.563
Trapping
15
Shooting
100.000
103.135
103.234
105.455
107.342
106.704
(includes
Archery)
16
Motorcycling/
100.000
101.626
100.924
103.710
107.331
109.185
ATVing
17
Recreational
100.000
109.964
108.679
109.813
105.709
111.321
Flying
18
RVing
100.000
103.459
107.428
111.826
114.277
114.127
19
Snow
100.000
100.184
101.595
105.924
107.796
109.586
Activities
20
Skiing
100.000
99.575
100.416
105.287
108.375
107.171
21
Snowboarding
100.000
99.880
100.844
106.366
109.457
108.137
22
Other Snow
100.000
100.835
102.994
106.081
106.093
112.894
Activities
(includes
Snowmobiling)
\1\
23
Other
100.000
103.164
103.763
106.078
105.310
105.978
Conventional
Outdoor
Recreation
Activities
24
Other
100.000
102.883
103.670
105.717
104.227
105.424
Conventional
Air and Land
Activities \2\
25
Other
100.000
104.229
104.147
107.431
109.281
107.941
Conventional
Water
Activities \3\
26
Multi-use
100.000
102.081
101.591
103.886
104.104
102.279
Apparel and
Accessories
(Conventional)
\4\
27
Other Outdoor
100.000
101.992
102.944
107.365
109.951
110.744
Recreation
28
Amusement
100.000
108.869
115.102
122.665
131.166
137.269
Parks/Water
Parks
29
Festivals/
100.000
102.550
105.738
114.223
119.168
121.982
Sporting Events/
Concerts
30
Field Sports
100.000
102.954
103.754
106.597
108.604
108.823
31
Game Areas
100.000
99.432
100.065
104.566
106.710
103.589
(includes
Golfing and
Tennis)
32
Guided Tours/
100.000
101.754
103.938
110.031
114.124
115.748
Outfitted
Travel
33
Air and Land
100.000
101.469
103.228
109.135
112.896
114.634
Guided Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
34
Water Guided
100.000
102.099
104.818
111.156
115.763
117.201
Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
(includes
Boating and
Fishing
Charters)
35
Productive
100.000
100.733
91.679
90.088
89.075
91.175
Activities
(includes
Gardening)
36
Other Outdoor
100.000
101.308
102.477
104.358
103.062
102.086
Recreation
Activities \5\
37
Multi-use
100.000
100.293
99.984
100.134
98.979
99.412
Apparel and
Accessories
(Other) \4\
38
Supporting
100.000
102.171
105.435
109.445
110.884
112.897
Outdoor Recreation
39
Construction
100.000
106.116
113.700
120.989
128.643
135.206
40
Local Trips
100.000
100.785
102.847
106.261
105.555
108.357
and Travel \6\
41
Trips and
100.000
101.848
105.059
109.186
111.117
112.745
Travel \7\
42
Food and
100.000
102.988
105.490
110.735
115.400
118.898
Beverages
43
Lodging
100.000
102.743
106.853
110.693
114.479
117.450
44
Shopping and
100.000
101.093
103.068
106.390
106.922
106.791
Souvenirs
45
Transportatio
100.000
101.029
104.413
108.658
108.932
109.730
n
46
Government
100.000
105.666
110.236
113.596
113.595
115.504
Expenditures
47
Federal
100.000
101.946
104.763
106.737
108.545
111.650
Government
48
State and
100.000
106.347
111.240
114.842
114.531
116.241
Local
Government
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legend/Footnotes:
\1\ Consists of dog mushing, sleighing, snowmobiling, snow shoeing, snow tubing.
\2\ Consists of air sports, driving for pleasure, geocaching/orienteering/rock hounding, ice skating, inline
skating, land/sand sailing, races, running/walking/jogging, skateboarding, and wildlife watching/birding.
\3\ Consists of boardsailing/windsurfing, SCUBA diving, snorkeling, stand-up paddling, surfing, tubing,
wakeboarding, water skiing, and whitewater rafting.
\4\ Consists of backpacks, bug spray, coolers, general outdoor clothing, GPS equipment, hydration equipment,
lighting, sports racks, sunscreen, watches, and other miscellaneous gear and equipment.
\5\ Consists of agritourism, augmented reality games, beachgoing, disc golf, hot springs soaking, kite flying,
model airplane/rocket/UAV, paintball, photography, stargazing/astronomy, swimming, therapeutic programs, water
polo, yard sports.
\6\ Trip expenses less than 50 miles away from home, including food and beverages, lodging, shopping and
souvenirs, and transportation.
\7\ Travel and tourism expenses in the Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account are consistent with the Travel and
Tourism Satellite Account, which includes only expenses for travel at least 50 miles away from home.
Table 8. Percent Changes in Chain-Type Price Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Activity
[Percent Change]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
Total Outdoor Recreation
2.2
2.1
3.6
1.4
1.0
2
Total Core Outdoor
2.3
1.1
3.4
1.5
0.1
Recreation
3
Conventional Outdoor
2.5
1.2
2.9
1.0
^0.2
Recreation
4
Bicycling
^1.4
^0.1
1.9
3.4
^1.2
5
Boating/Fishing
3.1
3.1
2.8
1.9
0.2
6
Canoeing
2.5
1.4
3.4
2.4
0.7
7
Kayaking
3.7
5.1
1.9
3.0
^0.2
8
Fishing (excludes
5.8
0.2
1.7
^0.1
^0.2
Boating)
9
Sailing
0.9
1.8
4.3
2.7
^1.2
10
Other Boating
2.7
3.7
2.9
2.2
0.4
11
Climbing/Hiking/Tent
1.9
2.0
6.6
^3.6
0.1
Camping
12
Equestrian
2.5
5.5
2.7
0.4
2.3
13
Hunting/Shooting/
4.3
1.5
3.0
2.4
^0.4
Trapping
14
Hunting/Trapping
5.4
2.8
3.7
2.9
^0.2
15
Shooting (includes
3.1
0.1
2.2
1.8
^0.6
Archery)
16
Motorcycling/ATVing
1.6
^0.7
2.8
3.5
1.7
17
Recreational Flying
10.0
^1.2
1.0
^3.7
5.3
18
RVing
3.5
3.8
4.1
2.2
^0.1
19
Snow Activities
0.2
1.4
4.3
1.8
1.7
20
Skiing
^0.4
0.8
4.9
2.9
^1.1
21
Snowboarding
^0.1
1.0
5.5
2.9
^1.2
22
Other Snow
0.8
2.1
3.0
0.0
6.4
Activities (includes
Snowmobiling) \1\
23
Other Conventional
3.2
0.6
2.2
^0.7
0.6
Outdoor Recreation
Activities
24
Other Conventional
2.9
0.8
2.0
^1.4
1.1
Air and Land
Activities \2\
25
Other Conventional
4.2
^0.1
3.2
1.7
^1.2
Water Activities \3\
26
Multi-use Apparel
2.1
^0.5
2.3
0.2
^1.8
and Accessories
(Conventional) \4\
27
Other Outdoor
2.0
0.9
4.3
2.4
0.7
Recreation
28
Amusement Parks/
8.9
5.7
6.6
6.9
4.7
Water Parks
29
Festivals/Sporting
2.6
3.1
8.0
4.3
2.4
Events/Concerts
30
Field Sports
3.0
0.8
2.7
1.9
0.2
31
Game Areas (includes
^0.6
0.6
4.5
2.1
^2.9
Golfing and Tennis)
32
Guided Tours/
1.8
2.1
5.9
3.7
1.4
Outfitted Travel
33
Air and Land Guided
1.5
1.7
5.7
3.4
1.5
Tours/Outfitted
Travel
34
Water Guided Tours/
2.1
2.7
6.0
4.1
1.2
Outfitted Travel
(includes Boating and
Fishing Charters)
35
Productive
0.7
^9.0
^1.7
^1.1
2.4
Activities (includes
Gardening)
36
Other Outdoor
1.3
1.2
1.8
^1.2
^0.9
Recreation Activities
\5\
37
Multi-use Apparel
0.3
^0.3
0.2
^1.2
0.4
and Accessories
(Other) \4\
38
Supporting Outdoor
2.2
3.2
3.8
1.3
1.8
Recreation
39
Construction
6.1
7.1
6.4
6.3
5.1
40
Local Trips and
0.8
2.0
3.3
^0.7
2.7
Travel \6\
41
Trips and Travel \7\
1.8
3.2
3.9
1.8
1.5
42
Food and Beverages
3.0
2.4
5.0
4.2
3.0
43
Lodging
2.7
4.0
3.6
3.4
2.6
44
Shopping and
1.1
2.0
3.2
0.5
^0.1
Souvenirs
45
Transportation
1.0
3.4
4.1
0.3
0.7
46
Government
5.7
4.3
3.0
0.0
1.7
Expenditures
47
Federal Government
1.9
2.8
1.9
1.7
2.9
48
State and Local
6.3
4.6
3.2
^0.3
1.5
Government
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legend/Footnotes:
\1\ Consists of dog mushing, sleighing, snowmobiling, snow shoeing, snow tubing.
\2\ Consists of air sports, driving for pleasure, geocaching/orienteering/rock hounding, ice skating, inline
skating, land/sand sailing, races, running/walking/jogging, skateboarding, and wildlife watching/birding.
\3\ Consists of boardsailing/windsurfing, SCUBA diving, snorkeling, stand-up paddling, surfing, tubing,
wakeboarding, water skiing, and whitewater rafting.
\4\ Consists of backpacks, bug spray, coolers, general outdoor clothing, GPS equipment, hydration equipment,
lighting, sports racks, sunscreen, watches, and other miscellaneous gear and equipment.
\5\ Consists of agritourism, augmented reality games, beachgoing, disc golf, hot springs soaking, kite flying,
model airplane/rocket/UAV, paintball, photography, stargazing/astronomy, swimming, therapeutic programs, water
polo, yard sports.
\6\ Trip expenses less than 50 miles away from home, including food and beverages, lodging, shopping and
souvenirs, and transportation.
\7\ Travel and tourism expenses in the Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account are consistent with the Travel and
Tourism Satellite Account, which includes only expenses for travel at least 50 miles away from home.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Editor's note: this table of information was excluded from the pdf
submitted, and posted on the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis website.
It is incoporated herein, in [brackets] and is available in the xlsx
file entitled, Tables--Value-Added by Activity (https://www.bea.gov/
system/files/2019-09/orsa0919-VA-Activity_1.xlsx)
[Activity List *
[Outdoor Recreation Activities in Conventional Definition
[Bicycling (All recreational bicycling, including BMX, E-bikes,
Mountain, On-road)
[Boating/Fishing (All recreational boating, including Canoeing, Fishing,
Inboard/Outboard, Kayaking, Personal watercraft, Sailing)
[Climbing/Hiking/Tent Camping
[Equestrian
[Hunting/Trapping/Shooting (including Archery)
[Motorcycling/ATVs (Off-road, On-road)
[Recreational flying (Experimental, Glider, Turboprop, Ultralight)
[RVing
[Snow activities (Dog mushing, Skiing, Sleighing, Snowboarding,
Snowmobiling, Snow shoeing, Tubing)
[Other Conventional Activities
[Other Conventional Air and Land activities
[Air sports (Base jumping, Hang gliding, Skydiving)
[Driving for pleasure (Gas spending only)
[Geocaching/Orienteering/Rock hounding
[Ice skating
[Inline skating
[Land/Sand sailing
[Races (includes Bike and Endurance racing)
[Running/Jogging/Walking
[Skateboarding
[Wildlife watching/Birding
[Other Conventional Water activities
[Boardsailing/Windsurfing
[SCUBA Diving
[Snorkeling
[Stand-up paddling
[Surfing
[Tubing/Wakeboarding
[Water skiing
[Whitewater rafting
[Outdoor Recreation Activities in Other Definition
[Amusement parks/Water parks
[Festivals/Sporting events/Concerts (includes Professional sports)
[Field sports (e.g., Football, Lacrosse, Soccer)
[Game area sports (e.g., Basketball, Golf, Tennis)
[Guided tours/Outfitted travel (includes Boating and Fishing charters)
[Productive activities (Beekeeping, Foraging, Gardening, Panning for
ore)
[Other Activities
[Agritourism (Animal sanctuaries, Petting zoos, Pick-your-own produce
farms, Vineyard tours)
[Augmented reality games
[Beachgoing
[Disc golf
[Hot springs soaking
[Kite flying
[Model airplane/rocket/UAV
[Paintball
[Photography
[Stargazing/Astronomy
[Swimming
[Therapeutic Programs
[Water Polo
[Yard sports (e.g., Bocce ball, Croquet)]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 9. Real Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Industry
[Millions of chained (2012) dollars]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
All Industries
360,509
361,153
363,128
370,446
371,789
386,107
2
Private
339,779
340,215
342,222
349,558
350,389
363,963
industries
3
Agriculture,
6,782
7,519
8,025
8,485
7,962
8,040
forestry,
fishing, and
hunting
4
Farms
4,791
5,455
6,145
6,407
6,586
6,536
5
Forestry,
1,991
2,066
1,918
2,097
1,563
1,655
fishing, and
related
activities
6
Mining
340
313
284
264
249
321
7
Oil and gas
105
107
104
133
133
96
extraction
8
Mining, except
183
159
125
93
87
199
oil and gas
9
Support
51
46
50
33
28
31
activities for
mining
10
Utilities
1
1
1
1
1
1
11
Construction
5,274
4,902
4,925
5,110
5,298
5,410
12
Manufacturing
48,726
50,739
50,611
49,377
47,541
51,812
13
Durable goods
18,433
18,940
18,414
18,039
17,603
20,012
14
Wood products
3
3
3
3
3
3
15
Nonmetallic
47
50
51
50
51
51
mineral
products
16
Primary
5
4
5
4
4
4
metals
17
Fabricated
1,728
1,861
1,647
1,813
1,855
2,434
metal products
18
Machinery
1,942
1,939
1,725
1,435
1,010
1,419
19
Computer and
551
568
683
1,202
909
1,088
electronic
products
20
Electrical
643
612
582
596
459
472
equipment,
appliances,
and components
21
Motor
3,436
3,693
3,616
3,333
3,338
4,184
vehicles,
bodies and
trailers, and
parts
22
Other
6,699
7,123
7,158
6,888
6,941
6,954
transportation
equipment
23
Furniture and
55
55
53
47
41
40
related
products
24
Miscellaneous
3,325
3,023
2,907
2,757
3,002
3,320
manufacturing
25
Nondurable
30,293
31,808
32,261
31,391
29,925
31,534
goods
26
Food and
6,440
6,583
6,516
6,241
6,187
6,071
beverage and
tobacco
products
27
Textile mills
482
405
437
452
468
464
and textile
product mills
28
Apparel and
2,653
2,574
2,524
2,491
2,817
2,965
leather and
allied
products
29
Paper
300
306
334
315
302
283
products
30
Printing and
112
110
115
116
115
102
related
support
activities
31
Petroleum and
16,578
17,910
18,499
18,237
15,888
18,053
coal products
32
Chemical
3,490
3,713
3,694
3,457
3,506
3,501
products
33
Plastics and
240
239
230
235
241
252
rubber
products
34
Wholesale trade
32,193
28,419
29,897
31,085
30,137
29,952
35
Retail trade
84,301
88,246
86,834
87,613
87,987
92,151
36
Motor vehicle
8,170
8,230
7,840
8,879
9,833
11,468
and parts
dealers
37
Food and
6,002
5,943
5,790
5,631
5,450
5,598
beverage stores
38
General
15,056
16,204
16,162
16,699
16,299
16,445
merchandise
stores
39
Other retail
55,074
57,885
57,086
56,465
56,440
58,673
40
Transportation
33,036
34,962
36,346
38,494
39,700
41,681
and warehousing
41
Air
21,998
23,069
24,678
27,736
30,141
31,803
transportation
42
Rail
580
562
560
567
566
600
transportation
43
Water
2,733
3,704
3,639
2,975
2,116
2,382
transportation
44
Truck
3,808
3,693
3,603
3,370
3,253
3,240
transportation
45
Transit and
2,235
2,169
2,104
2,026
1,942
2,017
ground
passenger
transportation
46
Pipeline
354
362
348
455
486
486
transportation
47
Other
1,291
1,381
1,386
1,293
1,259
1,201
transportation
and support
activities
48
Warehousing
36
37
35
36
38
36
and storage
49
Information
1,297
1,340
1,343
1,450
1,546
1,685
50
Publishing
529
481
462
460
460
481
industries,
except internet
(includes
software)
51
Motion picture
47
42
42
47
52
53
and sound
recording
industries
52
Broadcasting
601
683
693
750
803
869
and
telecommunicati
ons
53
Data
120
135
149
195
235
290
processing,
internet
publishing, and
other
information
services
54
Finance,
22,226
21,498
18,905
21,076
21,947
21,717
insurance, real
estate, rental,
and leasing
55
Finance and
3,805
3,325
4,005
4,357
4,196
3,775
insurance
56
Federal
408
376
384
423
414
406
Reserve banks,
credit
intermediation
, and related
activities
57
Securities,
0
0
0
0
0
0
commodity
contracts, and
investments
58
Insurance
3,396
2,949
3,622
3,936
3,783
3,371
carriers and
related
activities
59
Funds,
0
0
0
0
0
0
trusts, and
other
financial
vehicles
60
Real estate
18,421
18,173
14,910
16,728
17,768
17,984
and rental and
leasing
61
Real estate
15,460
15,195
12,047
12,965
13,192
13,027
62
Housing
15,455
15,191
12,043
12,960
13,187
13,022
63
Other real
5
5
5
5
5
5
estate
64
Rental and
2,961
2,977
2,859
3,787
4,720
5,208
leasing
services and
lessors of
intangible
assets
65
Professional
6,078
5,806
5,967
6,203
6,256
6,906
and business
services
66
Professional,
1,246
1,220
1,338
1,434
1,489
1,586
scientific, and
technical
services
67
Legal
0
0
0
0
0
0
services
68
Computer
62
50
49
60
61
67
systems design
and related
services
69
Miscellaneous
1,184
1,170
1,290
1,375
1,428
1,519
professional,
scientific,
and technical
services
70
Management of
0
0
0
0
0
0
companies and
enterprises
71
Administrative
4,832
4,586
4,628
4,766
4,764
5,318
and waste
management
services
72
Administrativ
4,831
4,585
4,627
4,765
4,763
5,317
e and support
services
73
Waste
1
1
1
1
1
1
management and
remediation
services
74
Educational
3,061
2,931
3,055
3,007
3,039
3,009
services, health
care, and social
assistance
75
Educational
2,554
2,464
2,568
2,498
2,510
2,470
services
76
Health care
507
467
487
511
533
545
and social
assistance
77
Ambulatory
296
276
292
309
327
335
health care
services
78
Hospitals
161
143
146
152
158
161
79
Nursing and
22
19
19
19
20
20
residential
care
facilities
80
Social
28
29
30
31
29
30
assistance
81
Arts,
91,833
89,264
91,506
92,641
93,637
96,546
entertainment,
recreation,
accommodation,
and food
services
82
Arts,
41,793
41,465
43,034
41,527
42,897
45,712
entertainment,
and recreation
83
Performing
10,481
10,792
11,495
10,586
11,082
11,505
arts,
spectator
sports,
museums, and
related
activities
84
Amusements,
31,312
30,672
31,534
30,949
31,817
34,226
gambling, and
recreation
industries
85
Accommodation
50,041
47,801
48,483
51,105
50,729
50,837
and food
services
86
Accommodation
27,868
29,079
29,265
31,299
30,931
30,746
87
Food services
22,173
18,725
19,221
19,805
19,798
20,088
and drinking
places
88
Other services,
4,631
4,551
4,640
4,687
4,736
4,770
except
government
89
Government
20,730
20,936
20,910
20,917
21,404
22,152
90
Federal
3,093
3,412
3,198
3,133
3,225
3,197
91
General
2,768
2,975
2,759
2,692
2,796
2,766
government
92
National
0
1
1
0
1
1
defense
93
Non-defense
2,768
2,974
2,759
2,691
2,796
2,766
94
Government
325
440
445
450
430
434
enterprises
95
State and local
17,637
17,531
17,706
17,772
18,169
18,931
96
General
18,134
17,538
17,581
17,785
18,271
18,972
government
97
Government
^497
53
170
80
66
80
enterprises
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 10. Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Industry
[Millions of current dollars]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
All Industries
360,509
369,280
378,654
400,205
407,362
427,189
2
Private
339,779
347,211
355,672
376,142
382,564
401,264
industries
3
Agriculture,
6,782
7,718
7,621
7,851
7,181
7,428
forestry,
fishing, and
hunting
4
Farms
4,791
5,528
5,487
5,422
5,286
5,414
5
Forestry,
1,991
2,189
2,133
2,429
1,895
2,014
fishing, and
related
activities
6
Mining
340
312
284
205
182
271
7
Oil and gas
105
117
128
92
81
91
extraction
8
Mining, except
183
143
102
73
65
139
oil and gas
9
Support
51
52
54
41
36
40
activities for
mining
10
Utilities
1
1
1
1
1
1
11
Construction
5,274
5,192
5,593
6,193
6,838
7,338
12
Manufacturing
48,726
50,409
50,590
50,494
46,638
51,667
13
Durable goods
18,433
19,866
19,734
20,438
20,478
23,064
14
Wood products
3
3
3
3
3
4
15
Nonmetallic
47
50
51
53
55
56
mineral
products
16
Primary
5
4
5
5
5
4
metals
17
Fabricated
1,728
2,118
1,896
2,137
2,186
2,860
metal products
18
Machinery
1,942
2,002
1,861
1,629
1,120
1,554
19
Computer and
551
551
663
1,094
732
864
electronic
products
20
Electrical
643
622
598
633
493
496
equipment,
appliances,
and components
21
Motor
3,436
3,975
4,088
4,176
4,517
5,853
vehicles,
bodies and
trailers, and
parts
22
Other
6,699
7,381
7,501
7,659
8,084
8,119
transportation
equipment
23
Furniture and
55
59
58
57
54
51
related
products
24
Miscellaneous
3,325
3,101
3,010
2,993
3,228
3,204
manufacturing
25
Nondurable
30,293
30,543
30,856
30,056
26,160
28,604
goods
26
Food and
6,440
6,720
7,057
7,511
7,645
7,339
beverage and
tobacco
products
27
Textile mills
482
439
484
512
541
532
and textile
product mills
28
Apparel and
2,653
2,674
2,605
2,616
3,022
3,267
leather and
allied
products
29
Paper
300
300
317
307
304
272
products
30
Printing and
112
110
117
124
125
112
related
support
activities
31
Petroleum and
16,578
16,258
16,130
14,760
10,089
12,640
coal products
32
Chemical
3,490
3,803
3,915
3,973
4,168
4,171
products
33
Plastics and
240
239
231
253
267
270
rubber
products
34
Wholesale trade
32,193
31,794
33,303
35,298
34,612
34,774
35
Retail trade
84,301
87,648
87,539
91,022
92,373
95,661
36
Motor vehicle
8,170
8,453
8,483
9,441
10,260
11,309
and parts
dealers
37
Food and
6,002
6,092
6,197
6,486
6,591
6,800
beverage
stores
38
General
15,056
15,640
15,159
15,452
15,337
15,543
merchandise
stores
39
Other retail
55,074
57,464
57,700
59,644
60,186
62,008
40
Transportation
33,036
35,587
38,432
42,981
45,538
47,932
and warehousing
41
Air
21,998
23,448
26,385
30,828
33,607
35,680
transportation
42
Rail
580
590
603
639
641
688
transportation
43
Water
2,733
3,670
3,524
3,412
3,142
3,336
transportation
44
Truck
3,808
3,809
3,864
3,830
3,741
3,766
transportation
45
Transit and
2,235
2,246
2,182
2,215
2,225
2,314
ground
passenger
transportation
46
Pipeline
354
383
401
563
620
622
transportation
47
Other
1,291
1,404
1,438
1,459
1,524
1,490
transportation
and support
activities
48
Warehousing
36
37
36
36
38
36
and storage
49
Information
1,297
1,368
1,382
1,493
1,580
1,711
50
Publishing
529
493
481
486
496
527
industries,
except
internet
(includes
software)
51
Motion
47
50
53
59
60
66
picture and
sound
recording
industries
52
Broadcasting
601
687
697
751
789
826
and
telecommunicat
ions
53
Data
120
137
151
198
236
291
processing,
internet
publishing,
and other
information
services
54
Finance,
22,226
22,085
20,070
22,647
24,002
24,600
insurance, real
estate, rental,
and leasing
55
Finance and
3,805
3,415
4,184
4,662
4,757
4,595
insurance
56
Federal
408
394
410
459
467
468
Reserve
banks, credit
intermediatio
n, and
related
activities
57
Securities,
0
0
0
0
0
0
commodity
contracts,
and
investments
58
Insurance
3,396
3,020
3,774
4,202
4,289
4,127
carriers and
related
activities
59
Funds,
0
0
0
0
0
0
trusts, and
other
financial
vehicles
60
Real estate
18,421
18,670
15,886
17,985
19,245
20,005
and rental and
leasing
61
Real estate
15,460
15,625
12,785
14,263
15,066
15,453
62
Housing
15,455
15,620
12,780
14,258
15,061
15,447
63
Other real
5
5
5
5
5
5
estate
64
Rental and
2,961
3,045
3,101
3,722
4,179
4,552
leasing
services and
lessors of
intangible
assets
65
Professional
6,078
5,898
6,133
6,595
6,859
7,786
and business
services
66
Professional,
1,246
1,249
1,396
1,547
1,658
1,805
scientific,
and technical
services
67
Legal
0
0
0
0
0
0
services
68
Computer
62
53
54
65
63
71
systems
design and
related
services
69
Miscellaneou
1,184
1,195
1,342
1,482
1,594
1,733
s
professional,
scientific,
and technical
services
70
Management of
0
0
0
0
0
0
companies and
enterprises
71
Administrativ
4,832
4,649
4,737
5,048
5,201
5,981
e and waste
management
services
72
Administrati
4,831
4,648
4,736
5,047
5,200
5,980
ve and
support
services
73
Waste
1
1
1
1
1
1
management
and
remediation
services
74
Educational
3,061
3,058
3,267
3,328
3,482
3,610
services,
health care,
and social
assistance
75
Educational
2,554
2,583
2,772
2,806
2,936
3,047
services
76
Health care
507
475
495
522
546
562
and social
assistance
77
Ambulatory
296
282
296
309
323
329
health care
services
78
Hospitals
161
146
152
163
172
180
79
Nursing and
22
20
20
21
22
22
residential
care
facilities
80
Social
28
27
28
29
29
30
assistance
81
Arts,
91,833
91,434
96,529
102,891
107,934
112,870
entertainment,
recreation,
accommodation,
and food
services
82
Arts,
41,793
42,291
44,954
46,169
49,500
52,880
entertainment,
and recreation
83
Performing
10,481
11,062
12,145
12,070
13,181
14,006
arts,
spectator
sports,
museums, and
related
activities
84
Amusements,
31,312
31,229
32,809
34,099
36,319
38,874
gambling, and
recreation
industries
85
Accommodation
50,041
49,143
51,575
56,722
58,434
59,990
and food
services
86
Accommodatio
27,868
29,865
31,308
34,779
35,538
36,072
n
87
Food
22,173
19,278
20,268
21,943
22,896
23,918
services and
drinking
places
88
Other
4,631
4,708
4,927
5,142
5,344
5,615
services,
except
government
89
Government
20,730
22,069
22,982
24,063
24,799
25,926
90
Federal
3,093
3,456
3,293
3,248
3,400
3,471
91
General
2,768
3,033
2,891
2,872
3,034
3,087
government
92
National
0
1
1
0
1
1
defense
93
Non-defense
2,768
3,032
2,890
2,872
3,034
3,087
94
Government
325
423
402
376
366
383
enterprises
95
State and local
17,637
18,613
19,689
20,815
21,398
22,455
96
General
18,134
18,569
19,448
20,359
20,890
21,948
government
97
Government
^497
44
241
456
508
508
enterprises
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 11. Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Industry as a Percentage of Gross Domestic Product
[Percent]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
All Industries
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
2
Private
2.1
2.1
2.0
2.1
2.0
2.1
industries
3
Agriculture,
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
forestry,
fishing, and
hunting
4
Mining
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
5
Utilities
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
6
Construction
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
7
Manufacturing
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.3
8
Durable goods
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
9
Nondurable
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
goods
10
Wholesale trade
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
11
Retail trade
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
12
Transportation
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
and warehousing
13
Information
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
14
Finance,
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
insurance, real
estate, rental,
and leasing
15
Finance and
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
insurance
16
Real estate
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
and rental and
leasing
17
Professional
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
and business
services
18
Professional,
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
scientific, and
technical
services
19
Management of
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
companies and
enterprises
20
Administrative
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
and waste
management
services
21
Educational
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
services, health
care, and social
assistance
22
Educational
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
services
23
Health care
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
and social
assistance
24
Arts,
0.6
0.5
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
entertainment,
recreation,
accommodation,
and food
services
25
Arts,
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
entertainment,
and recreation
26
Accommodation
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
and food
services
27
Other services,
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
except
government
28
Government
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
29
Federal
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
30
State and local
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 12. Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Industry as a Percentage of Total Outdoor Recreation Value-Added
[Percent]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
All Industries
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
2
Private
94.2
94.0
93.9
94.0
93.9
93.9
industries
3
Agriculture,
1.9
2.1
2.0
2.0
1.8
1.7
forestry,
fishing, and
hunting
4
Farms
1.3
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.3
1.3
5
Forestry,
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.5
0.5
fishing, and
related
activities
6
Mining
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.1
7
Oil and gas
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
extraction
8
Mining, except
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
oil and gas
9
Support
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
activities for
mining
10
Utilities
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
11
Construction
1.5
1.4
1.5
1.5
1.7
1.7
12
Manufacturing
13.5
13.7
13.4
12.6
11.4
12.1
13
Durable goods
5.1
5.4
5.2
5.1
5.0
5.4
14
Wood products
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
15
Nonmetallic
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
mineral
products
16
Primary
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
metals
17
Fabricated
0.5
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.7
metal products
18
Machinery
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.4
19
Computer and
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.2
electronic
products
20
Electrical
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
equipment,
appliances,
and components
21
Motor
1.0
1.1
1.1
1.0
1.1
1.4
vehicles,
bodies and
trailers, and
parts
22
Other
1.9
2.0
2.0
1.9
2.0
1.9
transportation
equipment
23
Furniture and
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
related
products
24
Miscellaneous
0.9
0.8
0.8
0.7
0.8
0.8
manufacturing
25
Nondurable
8.4
8.3
8.1
7.5
6.4
6.7
goods
26
Food and
1.8
1.8
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.7
beverage and
tobacco
products
27
Textile mills
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
and textile
product mills
28
Apparel and
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.8
leather and
allied
products
29
Paper
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
products
30
Printing and
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
related
support
activities
31
Petroleum and
4.6
4.4
4.3
3.7
2.5
3.0
coal products
32
Chemical
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
products
33
Plastics and
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
rubber
products
34
Wholesale trade
8.9
8.6
8.8
8.8
8.5
8.1
35
Retail trade
23.4
23.7
23.1
22.7
22.7
22.4
36
Motor vehicle
2.3
2.3
2.2
2.4
2.5
2.6
and parts
dealers
37
Food and
1.7
1.6
1.6
1.6
1.6
1.6
beverage stores
38
General
4.2
4.2
4.0
3.9
3.8
3.6
merchandise
stores
39
Other retail
15.3
15.6
15.2
14.9
14.8
14.5
40
Transportation
9.2
9.6
10.1
10.7
11.2
11.2
and warehousing
41
Air
6.1
6.3
7.0
7.7
8.2
8.4
transportation
42
Rail
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
transportation
43
Water
0.8
1.0
0.9
0.9
0.8
0.8
transportation
44
Truck
1.1
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.9
0.9
transportation
45
Transit and
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.5
0.5
ground
passenger
transportation
46
Pipeline
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
transportation
47
Other
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.3
transportation
and support
activities
48
Warehousing
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
and storage
49
Information
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
50
Publishing
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
industries,
except internet
(includes
software)
51
Motion picture
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
and sound
recording
industries
52
Broadcasting
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
and
telecommunicati
ons
53
Data
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
processing,
internet
publishing, and
other
information
services
54
Finance,
6.2
6.0
5.3
5.7
5.9
5.8
insurance, real
estate, rental,
and leasing
55
Finance and
1.1
0.9
1.1
1.2
1.2
1.1
insurance
56
Federal
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Reserve banks,
credit
intermediation
, and related
activities
57
Securities,
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
commodity
contracts, and
investments
58
Insurance
0.9
0.8
1.0
1.0
1.1
1.0
carriers and
related
activities
59
Funds,
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
trusts, and
other
financial
vehicles
60
Real estate
5.1
5.1
4.2
4.5
4.7
4.7
and rental and
leasing
61
Real estate
4.3
4.2
3.4
3.6
3.7
3.6
62
Housing
4.3
4.2
3.4
3.6
3.7
3.6
63
Other real
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
estate
64
Rental and
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
leasing
services and
lessors of
intangible
assets
65
Professional
1.7
1.6
1.6
1.6
1.7
1.8
and business
services
66
Professional,
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
scientific,
and technical
services
67
Legal
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
services
68
Computer
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
systems
design and
related
services
69
Miscellaneou
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
s
professional,
scientific,
and technical
services
70
Management of
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
companies and
enterprises
71
Administrativ
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.4
e and waste
management
services
72
Administrati
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.4
ve and
support
services
73
Waste
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
management
and
remediation
services
74
Educational
0.8
0.8
0.9
0.8
0.9
0.8
services,
health care,
and social
assistance
75
Educational
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
services
76
Health care
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
and social
assistance
77
Ambulatory
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
health care
services
78
Hospitals
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
79
Nursing and
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
residential
care
facilities
80
Social
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
assistance
81
Arts,
25.5
24.8
25.5
25.7
26.5
26.4
entertainment,
recreation,
accommodation,
and food
services
82
Arts,
11.6
11.5
11.9
11.5
12.2
12.4
entertainment,
and recreation
83
Performing
2.9
3.0
3.2
3.0
3.2
3.3
arts,
spectator
sports,
museums, and
related
activities
84
Amusements,
8.7
8.5
8.7
8.5
8.9
9.1
gambling, and
recreation
industries
85
Accommodation
13.9
13.3
13.6
14.2
14.3
14.0
and food
services
86
Accommodatio
7.7
8.1
8.3
8.7
8.7
8.4
n
87
Food
6.2
5.2
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.6
services and
drinking
places
88
Other
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
services,
except
government
89
Government
5.8
6.0
6.1
6.0
6.1
6.1
90
Federal
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.8
0.8
0.8
91
General
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.7
0.7
0.7
government
92
National
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
defense
93
Non-defense
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.7
0.7
0.7
94
Government
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
enterprises
95
State and local
4.9
5.0
5.2
5.2
5.3
5.3
96
General
5.0
5.0
5.1
5.1
5.1
5.1
government
97
Government
^0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
enterprises
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 13. Chain-Type Quantity Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Industry
[index numbers, 2012 = 100]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
All Industries
100.000
100.179
100.726
102.756
103.129
107.100
2
Private
100.000
100.128
100.719
102.878
103.123
107.118
industries
3
Agriculture,
100.000
110.855
118.316
125.097
117.392
118.538
forestry,
fishing, and
hunting
4
Farms
100.000
113.866
128.267
133.734
137.464
136.429
5
Forestry,
100.000
103.727
96.336
105.325
78.471
83.091
fishing, and
related
activities
6
Mining
100.000
91.995
83.533
77.753
73.402
94.548
7
Oil and gas
100.000
101.665
98.613
126.151
126.547
91.355
extraction
8
Mining, except
100.000
86.508
68.233
50.942
47.643
108.457
oil and gas
9
Support
100.000
90.057
96.816
64.890
54.216
60.290
activities for
mining
10
Utilities
100.000
97.457
80.986
83.511
88.696
84.879
11
Construction
100.000
92.945
93.393
96.893
100.455
102.573
12
Manufacturing
100.000
104.130
103.868
101.335
97.566
106.332
13
Durable goods
100.000
102.747
99.896
97.861
95.496
108.564
14
Wood products
100.000
106.507
113.158
112.935
114.960
122.015
15
Nonmetallic
100.000
106.820
107.633
106.012
107.868
108.734
mineral
products
16
Primary
100.000
73.981
88.934
71.047
74.985
74.946
metals
17
Fabricated
100.000
107.675
95.343
104.918
107.343
140.856
metal products
18
Machinery
100.000
99.866
88.837
73.929
52.016
73.062
19
Computer and
100.000
103.102
123.994
218.194
164.995
197.573
electronic
products
20
Electrical
100.000
95.108
90.499
92.723
71.418
73.328
equipment,
appliances,
and components
21
Motor
100.000
107.486
105.231
97.005
97.156
121.759
vehicles,
bodies and
trailers, and
parts
22
Other
100.000
106.328
106.846
102.823
103.611
103.809
transportation
equipment
23
Furniture and
100.000
100.448
97.506
86.207
74.622
73.604
related
products
24
Miscellaneous
100.000
90.903
87.424
82.910
90.285
99.837
manufacturing
25
Nondurable
100.000
105.001
106.496
103.625
98.784
104.096
goods
26
Food and
100.000
102.232
101.193
96.908
96.083
94.280
beverage and
tobacco
products
27
Textile mills
100.000
84.095
90.700
93.821
97.045
96.200
and textile
product mills
28
Apparel and
100.000
97.042
95.153
93.909
106.212
111.797
leather and
allied
products
29
Paper
100.000
102.086
111.241
105.164
100.797
94.290
products
30
Printing and
100.000
98.498
102.687
103.480
102.699
91.515
related
support
activities
31
Petroleum and
100.000
108.037
111.592
110.009
95.838
108.901
coal products
32
Chemical
100.000
106.402
105.861
99.054
100.459
100.314
products
33
Plastics and
100.000
99.664
95.828
97.955
100.563
105.202
rubber
products
34
Wholesale trade
100.000
88.279
92.870
96.560
93.614
93.040
35
Retail trade
100.000
104.679
103.004
103.928
104.372
109.312
36
Motor vehicle
100.000
100.733
95.965
108.679
120.360
140.366
and parts
dealers
37
Food and
100.000
99.022
96.480
93.832
90.804
93.276
beverage stores
38
General
100.000
107.626
107.350
110.913
108.258
109.229
merchandise
stores
39
Other retail
100.000
105.103
103.652
102.525
102.479
106.534
40
Transportation
100.000
105.831
110.018
116.520
120.172
126.169
and warehousing
41
Air
100.000
104.873
112.184
126.085
137.020
144.578
transportation
42
Rail
100.000
96.854
96.460
97.719
97.579
103.427
transportation
43
Water
100.000
135.553
133.147
108.882
77.419
87.160
transportation
44
Truck
100.000
96.990
94.603
88.506
85.420
85.086
transportation
45
Transit and
100.000
97.039
94.140
90.637
86.904
90.218
ground
passenger
transportation
46
Pipeline
100.000
102.229
98.152
128.498
137.238
137.187
transportation
47
Other
100.000
106.952
107.323
100.148
97.513
92.969
transportation
and support
activities
48
Warehousing
100.000
100.921
97.106
98.480
103.744
98.199
and storage
49
Information
100.000
103.315
103.609
111.819
119.212
129.931
50
Publishing
100.000
90.894
87.288
86.974
87.025
90.858
industries,
except internet
(includes
software)
51
Motion picture
100.000
89.537
89.267
99.471
110.279
111.517
and sound
recording
industries
52
Broadcasting
100.000
113.754
115.339
124.942
133.682
144.636
and
telecommunicati
ons
53
Data
100.000
112.204
123.880
162.878
195.915
241.861
processing,
internet
publishing, and
other
information
services
54
Finance,
100.000
96.727
85.061
94.827
98.749
97.710
insurance, real
estate, rental,
and leasing
55
Finance and
100.000
87.404
105.271
114.532
110.294
99.228
insurance
56
Federal
100.000
91.993
94.114
103.453
101.384
99.401
Reserve banks,
credit
intermediation
, and related
activities
57
Securities,
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
commodity
contracts, and
investments
58
Insurance
100.000
86.846
106.653
115.906
111.404
99.270
carriers and
related
activities
59
Funds,
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
trusts, and
other
financial
vehicles
60
Real estate
100.000
98.651
80.940
90.809
96.454
97.625
and rental and
leasing
61
Real estate
100.000
98.288
77.925
83.863
85.329
84.259
62
Housing
100.000
98.291
77.922
83.861
85.328
84.258
63
Other real
100.000
88.142
88.794
89.007
89.119
86.836
estate
64
Rental and
100.000
100.555
96.571
127.886
159.409
175.899
leasing
services and
lessors of
intangible
assets
65
Professional
100.000
95.520
98.181
102.052
102.932
113.631
and business
services
66
Professional,
100.000
97.906
107.381
115.107
119.482
127.272
scientific, and
technical
services
67
Legal
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
services
68
Computer
100.000
80.061
78.410
95.697
98.177
107.796
systems design
and related
services
69
Miscellaneous
100.000
98.868
108.959
116.165
120.638
128.346
professional,
scientific,
and technical
services
70
Management of
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
companies and
enterprises
71
Administrative
100.000
94.902
95.780
98.639
98.599
110.060
and waste
management
services
72
Administrativ
100.000
94.901
95.777
98.634
98.594
110.058
e and support
services
73
Waste
100.000
100.583
113.102
120.260
123.868
120.606
management and
remediation
services
74
Educational
100.000
95.750
99.807
98.235
99.287
98.304
services, health
care, and social
assistance
75
Educational
100.000
96.466
100.537
97.811
98.288
96.721
services
76
Health care
100.000
92.091
96.079
100.779
105.075
107.519
and social
assistance
77
Ambulatory
100.000
93.147
98.651
104.256
110.265
112.972
health care
services
78
Hospitals
100.000
88.998
90.620
94.788
98.151
100.419
79
Nursing and
100.000
86.386
86.310
86.465
87.132
87.244
residential
care
facilities
80
Social
100.000
103.781
109.171
110.982
105.543
108.337
assistance
81
Arts,
100.000
97.202
99.644
100.879
101.964
105.132
entertainment,
recreation,
accommodation,
and food
services
82
Arts,
100.000
99.217
102.969
99.364
102.643
109.377
entertainment,
and recreation
83
Performing
100.000
102.969
109.674
101.006
105.741
109.777
arts,
spectator
sports,
museums, and
related
activities
84
Amusements,
100.000
97.957
100.710
98.840
101.613
109.307
gambling, and
recreation
industries
85
Accommodation
100.000
95.525
96.886
102.126
101.376
101.591
and food
services
86
Accommodation
100.000
104.347
105.016
112.315
110.994
110.328
87
Food services
100.000
84.449
86.687
89.320
89.287
90.597
and drinking
places
88
Other services,
100.000
98.292
100.202
101.214
102.268
103.003
except
government
89
Government
100.000
100.996
100.868
100.903
103.250
106.861
90
Federal
100.000
110.314
103.393
101.291
104.258
103.366
91
General
100.000
107.469
99.683
97.231
101.014
99.932
government
92
National
100.000
138.177
145.667
132.300
143.584
147.661
defense
93
Non-defense
100.000
107.465
99.677
97.226
101.008
99.925
94
Government
100.000
135.379
136.758
138.396
132.290
133.509
enterprises
95
State and local
100.000
99.402
100.395
100.769
103.017
107.340
96
General
100.000
96.712
96.950
98.078
100.759
104.620
government
97
Government
^100.000
10.640
34.078
16.137
13.309
16.125
enterprises
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 14. Percent Changes in Chain-Type Quantity Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Industry
[Percent Change]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
All Industries
0.2
0.5
2.0
0.4
3.9
2
Private industries
0.1
0.6
2.1
0.2
3.9
3
Agriculture,
10.9
6.7
5.7
^6.2
1.0
forestry, fishing, and
hunting
4
Farms
13.9
12.6
4.3
2.8
^0.8
5
Forestry, fishing,
3.7
^7.1
9.3
^25.5
5.9
and related
activities
6
Mining
^8.0
^9.2
^6.9
^5.6
28.8
7
Oil and gas
1.7
^3.0
27.9
0.3
^27.8
extraction
8
Mining, except oil
^13.5
^21.1
^25.3
^6.5
127.6
and gas
9
Support activities
^9.9
7.5
^33.0
^16.5
11.2
for mining
10
Utilities
^2.5
^16.9
3.1
6.2
^4.3
11
Construction
^7.1
0.5
3.7
3.7
2.1
12
Manufacturing
4.1
^0.3
^2.4
^3.7
9.0
13
Durable goods
2.7
^2.8
^2.0
^2.4
13.7
14
Wood products
6.5
6.2
^0.2
1.8
6.1
15
Nonmetallic mineral
6.8
0.8
^1.5
1.8
0.8
products
16
Primary metals
^26.0
20.2
^20.1
5.5
^0.1
17
Fabricated metal
7.7
^11.5
10.0
2.3
31.2
products
18
Machinery
^0.1
^11.0
^16.8
^29.6
40.5
19
Computer and
3.1
20.3
76.0
^24.4
19.7
electronic products
20
Electrical
^4.9
^4.8
2.5
^23.0
2.7
equipment,
appliances, and
components
21
Motor vehicles,
7.5
^2.1
^7.8
0.2
25.3
bodies and trailers,
and parts
22
Other
6.3
0.5
^3.8
0.8
0.2
transportation
equipment
23
Furniture and
0.4
^2.9
^11.6
^13.4
^1.4
related products
24
Miscellaneous
^9.1
^3.8
^5.2
8.9
10.6
manufacturing
25
Nondurable goods
5.0
1.4
^2.7
^4.7
5.4
26
Food and beverage
2.2
^1.0
^4.2
^0.9
^1.9
and tobacco products
27
Textile mills and
^15.9
7.9
3.4
3.4
^0.9
textile product
mills
28
Apparel and leather
^3.0
^1.9
^1.3
13.1
5.3
and allied products
29
Paper products
2.1
9.0
^5.5
^4.2
^6.5
30
Printing and
^1.5
4.3
0.8
^0.8
^10.9
related support
activities
31
Petroleum and coal
8.0
3.3
^1.4
^12.9
13.6
products
32
Chemical products
6.4
^0.5
^6.4
1.4
^0.1
33
Plastics and rubber
^0.3
^3.8
2.2
2.7
4.6
products
34
Wholesale trade
^11.7
5.2
4.0
^3.1
^0.6
35
Retail trade
4.7
^1.6
0.9
0.4
4.7
36
Motor vehicle and
0.7
^4.7
13.2
10.7
16.6
parts dealers
37
Food and beverage
^1.0
^2.6
^2.7
^3.2
2.7
stores
38
General merchandise
7.6
^0.3
3.3
^2.4
0.9
stores
39
Other retail
5.1
^1.4
^1.1
0.0
4.0
40
Transportation and
5.8
4.0
5.9
3.1
5.0
warehousing
41
Air transportation
4.9
7.0
12.4
8.7
5.5
42
Rail transportation
^3.1
^0.4
1.3
^0.1
6.0
43
Water transportation
35.6
^1.8
^18.2
^28.9
12.6
44
Truck transportation
^3.0
^2.5
^6.4
^3.5
^0.4
45
Transit and ground
^3.0
^3.0
^3.7
^4.1
3.8
passenger
transportation
46
Pipeline
2.2
^4.0
30.9
6.8
0.0
transportation
47
Other transportation
7.0
0.3
^6.7
^2.6
^4.7
and support
activities
48
Warehousing and
0.9
^3.8
1.4
5.3
^5.3
storage
49
Information
3.3
0.3
7.9
6.6
9.0
50
Publishing
^9.1
^4.0
^0.4
0.1
4.4
industries, except
internet (includes
software)
51
Motion picture and
^10.5
^0.3
11.4
10.9
1.1
sound recording
industries
52
Broadcasting and
13.8
1.4
8.3
7.0
8.2
telecommunications
53
Data processing,
12.2
10.4
31.5
20.3
23.5
internet publishing,
and other information
services
54
Finance, insurance,
^3.3
^12.1
11.5
4.1
^1.1
real estate, rental,
and leasing
55
Finance and
^12.6
20.4
8.8
^3.7
^10.0
insurance
56
Federal Reserve
^8.0
2.3
9.9
^2.0
^2.0
banks, credit
intermediation, and
related activities
57
Securities,
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
commodity contracts,
and investments
58
Insurance carriers
^13.2
22.8
8.7
^3.9
^10.9
and related
activities
59
Funds, trusts, and
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
other financial
vehicles
60
Real estate and
^1.3
^18.0
12.2
6.2
1.2
rental and leasing
61
Real estate
^1.7
^20.7
7.6
1.7
^1.3
62
Housing
^1.7
^20.7
7.6
1.7
^1.3
63
Other real estate
^11.9
0.7
0.2
0.1
^2.6
64
Rental and leasing
0.6
^4.0
32.4
24.6
10.3
services and lessors
of intangible assets
65
Professional and
^4.5
2.8
3.9
0.9
10.4
business services
66
Professional,
^2.1
9.7
7.2
3.8
6.5
scientific, and
technical services
67
Legal services
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
68
Computer systems
^19.9
^2.1
22.0
2.6
9.8
design and related
services
69
Miscellaneous
^1.1
10.2
6.6
3.9
6.4
professional,
scientific, and
technical services
70
Management of
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
companies and
enterprises
71
Administrative and
^5.1
0.9
3.0
0.0
11.6
waste management
services
72
Administrative and
^5.1
0.9
3.0
0.0
11.6
support services
73
Waste management
0.6
12.4
6.3
3.0
^2.6
and remediation
services
74
Educational services,
^4.3
4.2
^1.6
1.1
^1.0
health care, and
social assistance
75
Educational services
^3.5
4.2
^2.7
0.5
^1.6
76
Health care and
^7.9
4.3
4.9
4.3
2.3
social assistance
77
Ambulatory health
^6.9
5.9
5.7
5.8
2.5
care services
78
Hospitals
^11.0
1.8
4.6
3.5
2.3
79
Nursing and
^13.6
^0.1
0.2
0.8
0.1
residential care
facilities
80
Social assistance
3.8
5.2
1.7
^4.9
2.6
81
Arts, entertainment,
^2.8
2.5
1.2
1.1
3.1
recreation,
accommodation, and
food services
82
Arts, entertainment,
^0.8
3.8
^3.5
3.3
6.6
and recreation
83
Performing arts,
3.0
6.5
^7.9
4.7
3.8
spectator sports,
museums, and related
activities
84
Amusements,
^2.0
2.8
^1.9
2.8
7.6
gambling, and
recreation
industries
85
Accommodation and
^4.5
1.4
5.4
^0.7
0.2
food services
86
Accommodation
4.3
0.6
7.0
^1.2
^0.6
87
Food services and
^15.6
2.6
3.0
0.0
1.5
drinking places
88
Other services,
^1.7
1.9
1.0
1.0
0.7
except government
89
Government
1.0
^0.1
0.0
2.3
3.5
90
Federal
10.3
^6.3
^2.0
2.9
^0.9
91
General government
7.5
^7.2
^2.5
3.9
^1.1
92
National defense
38.2
5.4
^9.2
8.5
2.8
93
Non-defense
7.5
^7.2
^2.5
3.9
^1.1
94
Government
35.4
1.0
1.2
^4.4
0.9
enterprises
95
State and local
^0.6
1.0
0.4
2.2
4.2
96
General government
^3.3
0.2
1.2
2.7
3.8
97
Government
^110.6
220.3
^52.6
^17.5
21.2
enterprises
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 15. Chain-Type Price Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Industry
[index numbers, 2012 = 100]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
All Industries
100.000
102.250
104.428
108.191
109.728
110.802
2
Private
100.000
102.057
104.092
107.772
109.352
110.420
industries
3
Agriculture,
100.000
102.646
94.965
92.527
90.193
92.397
forestry,
fishing, and
hunting
4
Farms
100.000
101.334
89.292
84.616
80.259
82.832
5
Forestry,
100.000
105.996
111.206
115.809
121.287
121.737
fishing, and
related
activities
6
Mining
100.000
99.765
100.096
77.739
72.960
84.269
7
Oil and gas
100.000
109.456
123.234
69.302
61.111
95.243
extraction
8
Mining, except
100.000
90.342
81.828
77.964
74.009
70.033
oil and gas
9
Support
100.000
111.602
108.614
122.041
129.422
129.293
activities for
mining
10
Utilities
100.000
106.754
112.094
123.102
129.483
136.101
11
Construction
100.000
105.926
113.582
121.209
129.112
135.681
12
Manufacturing
100.000
99.351
99.972
102.278
98.115
99.735
13
Durable goods
100.000
104.893
107.167
113.300
116.332
115.249
14
Wood products
100.000
99.091
96.990
101.796
108.993
108.279
15
Nonmetallic
100.000
100.525
99.966
106.032
108.963
109.257
mineral
products
16
Primary
100.000
107.806
109.555
125.391
123.990
112.750
metals
17
Fabricated
100.000
113.853
115.065
117.904
117.881
117.499
metal products
18
Machinery
100.000
103.238
107.885
113.490
110.902
109.515
19
Computer and
100.000
96.964
97.132
90.992
80.493
79.411
electronic
products
20
Electrical
100.000
101.606
102.683
106.082
107.375
105.156
equipment,
appliances,
and components
21
Motor
100.000
107.643
113.062
125.286
135.309
139.897
vehicles,
bodies and
trailers, and
parts
22
Other
100.000
103.622
104.796
111.186
116.462
116.747
transportation
equipment
23
Furniture and
100.000
107.332
108.810
120.811
132.593
126.301
related
products
24
Miscellaneous
100.000
102.596
103.564
108.575
107.543
96.509
manufacturing
25
Nondurable
100.000
96.022
95.668
95.769
87.439
90.728
goods
26
Food and
100.000
102.081
108.295
120.356
123.559
120.878
beverage and
tobacco
products
27
Textile mills
100.000
108.255
110.775
113.326
115.671
114.919
and textile
product mills
28
Apparel and
100.000
103.875
103.470
105.270
107.552
110.441
leather and
allied
products
29
Paper
100.000
98.017
95.073
97.481
100.461
96.359
products
30
Printing and
100.000
100.048
101.885
107.338
108.704
109.103
related
support
activities
31
Petroleum and
100.000
90.775
87.195
80.933
63.503
70.017
coal products
32
Chemical
100.000
102.426
105.965
114.933
118.883
119.142
products
33
Plastics and
100.000
99.870
100.508
107.810
110.484
107.061
rubber
products
34
Wholesale trade
100.000
111.874
111.685
113.852
115.151
116.404
35
Retail trade
100.000
99.322
101.295
104.389
105.488
104.305
36
Motor vehicle
100.000
102.707
108.205
106.333
104.345
98.619
and parts
dealers
37
Food and
100.000
102.506
107.068
115.219
120.988
121.526
beverage stores
38
General
100.000
96.519
94.153
92.891
94.460
94.879
merchandise
stores
39
Other retail
100.000
99.273
101.704
106.285
107.299
106.341
40
Transportation
100.000
101.786
105.786
111.704
114.753
115.047
and warehousing
41
Air
100.000
101.640
106.919
111.148
111.501
112.190
transportation
42
Rail
100.000
104.881
107.617
112.609
113.187
114.530
transportation
43
Water
100.000
99.086
96.845
114.658
148.501
140.076
transportation
44
Truck
100.000
103.116
107.667
114.089
115.449
116.666
transportation
45
Transit and
100.000
103.533
103.691
109.338
114.547
114.756
ground
passenger
transportation
46
Pipeline
100.000
105.792
115.403
123.639
127.543
128.054
transportation
47
Other
100.000
101.682
103.749
112.803
121.034
124.145
transportation
and support
activities
48
Warehousing
100.000
101.199
102.699
100.296
99.431
101.553
and storage
49
Information
100.000
102.105
102.868
103.004
102.256
101.574
50
Publishing
100.000
102.608
104.068
105.556
107.833
109.559
industries,
except internet
(includes
software)
51
Motion picture
100.000
119.052
126.244
125.165
115.004
126.585
and sound
recording
industries
52
Broadcasting
100.000
100.638
100.685
100.133
98.225
95.139
and
telecommunicati
ons
53
Data
100.000
101.569
101.556
101.270
100.413
100.627
processing,
internet
publishing, and
other
information
services
54
Finance,
100.000
102.732
106.162
107.457
109.360
113.278
insurance, real
estate, rental,
and leasing
55
Finance and
100.000
102.693
104.474
106.989
113.355
121.730
insurance
56
Federal
100.000
104.974
106.740
108.748
112.835
115.391
Reserve banks,
credit
intermediation
, and related
activities
57
Securities,
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
commodity
contracts, and
investments
58
Insurance
100.000
102.411
104.195
106.762
113.373
122.416
carriers and
related
activities
59
Funds,
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
trusts, and
other
financial
vehicles
60
Real estate
100.000
102.740
106.546
107.517
108.315
111.238
and rental and
leasing
61
Real estate
100.000
102.828
106.122
110.010
114.206
118.625
62
Housing
100.000
102.828
106.122
110.011
114.208
118.627
63
Other real
100.000
102.151
105.820
107.900
110.025
112.350
estate
64
Rental and
100.000
102.284
108.455
98.305
88.543
87.397
leasing
services and
lessors of
intangible
assets
65
Professional
100.000
101.584
102.781
106.329
109.637
112.737
and business
services
66
Professional,
100.000
102.377
104.355
107.895
111.361
113.822
scientific, and
technical
services
67
Legal
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
services
68
Computer
100.000
107.336
110.272
108.471
103.292
106.495
systems design
and related
services
69
Miscellaneous
100.000
102.140
104.079
107.835
111.673
114.101
professional,
scientific,
and technical
services
70
Management of
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
companies and
enterprises
71
Administrative
100.000
101.376
102.358
105.909
109.172
112.469
and waste
management
services
72
Administrativ
100.000
101.375
102.358
105.909
109.173
112.469
e and support
services
73
Waste
100.000
107.857
104.949
105.651
106.833
111.679
management and
remediation
services
74
Educational
100.000
104.335
107.295
111.036
114.961
120.355
services, health
care, and social
assistance
75
Educational
100.000
104.813
107.946
112.313
116.976
123.367
services
76
Health care
100.000
101.871
103.902
104.403
104.696
105.361
and social
assistance
77
Ambulatory
100.000
102.355
104.862
103.839
102.554
101.967
health care
services
78
Hospitals
100.000
102.282
104.226
106.925
109.393
111.715
79
Nursing and
100.000
102.253
104.249
107.852
110.897
113.751
residential
care
facilities
80
Social
100.000
94.500
92.530
94.822
98.252
102.062
assistance
81
Arts,
100.000
102.431
105.492
111.068
115.271
116.911
entertainment,
recreation,
accommodation,
and food
services
82
Arts,
100.000
101.991
104.468
111.184
115.398
115.687
entertainment,
and recreation
83
Performing
100.000
102.501
105.662
114.027
118.942
121.740
arts, spectator
sports,
museums, and
related
activities
84
Amusements,
100.000
101.815
104.047
110.183
114.154
113.585
gambling, and
recreation
industries
85
Accommodation
100.000
102.807
106.380
110.992
115.188
118.006
and food
services
86
Accommodation
100.000
102.704
106.980
111.119
114.896
117.324
87
Food services
100.000
102.953
105.445
110.794
115.648
119.068
and drinking
places
88
Other services,
100.000
103.429
106.203
109.723
112.848
117.731
except
government
89
Government
100.000
105.402
109.913
115.044
115.864
117.038
90
Federal
100.000
101.280
103.009
103.717
105.486
108.603
91
General
100.000
101.941
104.752
106.706
108.505
111.596
government
92
National
100.000
99.968
100.313
100.392
98.502
98.675
defense
93
Non-defense
100.000
101.942
104.753
106.707
108.507
111.599
94
Government
100.000
96.180
90.855
83.919
85.485
88.752
enterprises
95
State and local
100.000
106.161
111.192
117.116
117.767
118.606
96
General
100.000
105.879
110.621
114.472
114.333
115.686
government
97
Government
100.000
83.278
142.780
569.888
769.711
634.725
enterprises
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 16. Percent Changes in Chain-Type Price Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by Industry
[Percent Change]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
All Industries
2.2
2.1
3.6
1.4
1.0
2
Private industries
2.1
2.0
3.5
1.5
1.0
3
Agriculture,
2.6
^7.5
^2.6
^2.5
2.4
forestry, fishing, and
hunting
4
Farms
1.3
^11.9
^5.2
^5.1
3.2
5
Forestry, fishing,
6.0
4.9
4.1
4.7
0.4
and related
activities
6
Mining
^0.2
0.3
^22.3
^6.1
15.5
7
Oil and gas
9.5
12.6
^43.8
^11.8
55.9
extraction
8
Mining, except oil
^9.7
^9.4
^4.7
^5.1
^5.4
and gas
9
Support activities
11.6
^2.7
12.4
6.0
^0.1
for mining
10
Utilities
6.8
5.0
9.8
5.2
5.1
11
Construction
5.9
7.2
6.7
6.5
5.1
12
Manufacturing
^0.6
0.6
2.3
^4.1
1.7
13
Durable goods
4.9
2.2
5.7
2.7
^0.9
14
Wood products
^0.9
^2.1
5.0
7.1
^0.7
15
Nonmetallic mineral
0.5
^0.6
6.1
2.8
0.3
products
16
Primary metals
7.8
1.6
14.5
^1.1
^9.1
17
Fabricated metal
13.9
1.1
2.5
0.0
^0.3
products
18
Machinery
3.2
4.5
5.2
^2.3
^1.3
19
Computer and
^3.0
0.2
^6.3
^11.5
^1.3
electronic products
20
Electrical
1.6
1.1
3.3
1.2
^2.1
equipment,
appliances, and
components
21
Motor vehicles,
7.6
5.0
10.8
8.0
3.4
bodies and trailers,
and parts
22
Other
3.6
1.1
6.1
4.7
0.2
transportation
equipment
23
Furniture and
7.3
1.4
11.0
9.8
^4.7
related products
24
Miscellaneous
2.6
0.9
4.8
^1.0
^10.3
manufacturing
25
Nondurable goods
^4.0
^0.4
0.1
^8.7
3.8
26
Food and beverage
2.1
6.1
11.1
2.7
^2.2
and tobacco products
27
Textile mills and
8.3
2.3
2.3
2.1
^0.7
textile product
mills
28
Apparel and leather
3.9
^0.4
1.7
2.2
2.7
and allied products
29
Paper products
^2.0
^3.0
2.5
3.1
^4.1
30
Printing and
0.0
1.8
5.4
1.3
0.4
related support
activities
31
Petroleum and coal
^9.2
^3.9
^7.2
^21.5
10.3
products
32
Chemical products
2.4
3.5
8.5
3.4
0.2
33
Plastics and rubber
^0.1
0.6
7.3
2.5
^3.1
products
34
Wholesale trade
11.9
^0.2
1.9
1.1
1.1
35
Retail trade
^0.7
2.0
3.1
1.1
^1.1
36
Motor vehicle and
2.7
5.4
^1.7
^1.9
^5.5
parts dealers
37
Food and beverage
2.5
4.5
7.6
5.0
0.4
stores
38
General merchandise
^3.5
^2.5
^1.3
1.7
0.4
stores
39
Other retail
^0.7
2.4
4.5
1.0
^0.9
40
Transportation and
1.8
3.9
5.6
2.7
0.3
warehousing
41
Air transportation
1.6
5.2
4.0
0.3
0.6
42
Rail transportation
4.9
2.6
4.6
0.5
1.2
43
Water transportation
^0.9
^2.3
18.4
29.5
^5.7
44
Truck transportation
3.1
4.4
6.0
1.2
1.1
45
Transit and ground
3.5
0.2
5.4
4.8
0.2
passenger
transportation
46
Pipeline
5.8
9.1
7.1
3.2
0.4
transportation
47
Other transportation
1.7
2.0
8.7
7.3
2.6
and support
activities
48
Warehousing and
1.2
1.5
^2.3
^0.9
2.1
storage
49
Information
2.1
0.7
0.1
^0.7
^0.7
50
Publishing
2.6
1.4
1.4
2.2
1.6
industries, except
internet (includes
software)
51
Motion picture and
19.1
6.0
^0.9
^8.1
10.1
sound recording
industries
52
Broadcasting and
0.6
0.0
^0.5
^1.9
^3.1
telecommunications
53
Data processing,
1.6
0.0
^0.3
^0.8
0.2
internet publishing,
and other information
services
54
Finance, insurance,
2.7
3.3
1.2
1.8
3.6
real estate, rental,
and leasing
55
Finance and
2.7
1.7
2.4
5.9
7.4
insurance
56
Federal Reserve
5.0
1.7
1.9
3.8
2.3
banks, credit
intermediation, and
related activities
57
Securities,
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
commodity contracts,
and investments
58
Insurance carriers
2.4
1.7
2.5
6.2
8.0
and related
activities
59
Funds, trusts, and
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
other financial
vehicles
60
Real estate and
2.7
3.7
0.9
0.7
2.7
rental and leasing
61
Real estate
2.8
3.2
3.7
3.8
3.9
62
Housing
2.8
3.2
3.7
3.8
3.9
63
Other real estate
2.2
3.6
2.0
2.0
2.1
64
Rental and leasing
2.3
6.0
^9.4
^9.9
^1.3
services and lessors
of intangible assets
65
Professional and
1.6
1.2
3.5
3.1
2.8
business services
66
Professional,
2.4
1.9
3.4
3.2
2.2
scientific, and
technical services
67
Legal services
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
68
Computer systems
7.3
2.7
^1.6
^4.8
3.1
design and related
services
69
Miscellaneous
2.1
1.9
3.6
3.6
2.2
professional,
scientific, and
technical services
70
Management of
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
companies and
enterprises
71
Administrative and
1.4
1.0
3.5
3.1
3.0
waste management
services
72
Administrative and
1.4
1.0
3.5
3.1
3.0
support services
73
Waste management
7.9
^2.7
0.7
1.1
4.5
and remediation
services
74
Educational services,
4.3
2.8
3.5
3.5
4.7
health care, and
social assistance
75
Educational services
4.8
3.0
4.0
4.2
5.5
76
Health care and
1.9
2.0
0.5
0.3
0.6
social assistance
77
Ambulatory health
2.4
2.4
^1.0
^1.2
^0.6
care services
78
Hospitals
2.3
1.9
2.6
2.3
2.1
79
Nursing and
2.3
2.0
3.5
2.8
2.6
residential care
facilities
80
Social assistance
^5.5
^2.1
2.5
3.6
3.9
81
Arts, entertainment,
2.4
3.0
5.3
3.8
1.4
recreation,
accommodation, and
food services
82
Arts, entertainment,
2.0
2.4
6.4
3.8
0.3
and recreation
83
Performing arts,
2.5
3.1
7.9
4.3
2.4
spectator sports,
museums, and related
activities
84
Amusements,
1.8
2.2
5.9
3.6
^0.5
gambling, and
recreation
industries
85
Accommodation and
2.8
3.5
4.3
3.8
2.4
food services
86
Accommodation
2.7
4.2
3.9
3.4
2.1
87
Food services and
3.0
2.4
5.1
4.4
3.0
drinking places
88
Other services,
3.4
2.7
3.3
2.8
4.3
except government
89
Government
5.4
4.3
4.7
0.7
1.0
90
Federal
1.3
1.7
0.7
1.7
3.0
91
General government
1.9
2.8
1.9
1.7
2.8
92
National defense
0.0
0.3
0.1
^1.9
0.2
93
Non-defense
1.9
2.8
1.9
1.7
2.8
94
Government
^3.8
^5.5
^7.6
1.9
3.8
enterprises
95
State and local
6.2
4.7
5.3
0.6
0.7
96
General government
5.9
4.5
3.5
^0.1
1.2
97
Government
^16.7
71.5
299.1
35.1
^17.5
enterprises
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 17. Real Outdoor Recreation Gross Output by Activity
[Millions of chained (2012) dollars]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
Total Outdoor
691,782
699,173
708,666
730,321
742,793
762,768
Recreation
2
Total Core
342,735
352,736
359,960
368,509
375,449
391,354
Outdoor Recreation
3
Conventional
214,386
222,085
226,931
233,108
238,877
248,087
Outdoor
Recreation
4
Bicycling
3,182
3,353
3,445
3,306
3,729
3,874
5
Boating/
32,428
32,760
33,153
34,769
35,854
38,039
Fishing
6
Canoeing
124
121
126
129
133
141
7
Kayaking
580
580
581
618
680
736
8
Fishing
4,863
4,829
4,947
5,082
5,063
5,031
(excludes
Boating)
9
Sailing
1,824
1,888
1,974
2,052
2,151
2,231
10
Other Boating
25,037
25,343
25,527
26,891
27,833
29,913
11
Climbing/
5,588
5,823
5,967
5,815
6,102
6,058
Hiking/Tent
Camping
12
Equestrian
9,307
9,862
10,663
11,046
11,887
13,446
13
Hunting/
11,371
12,968
12,397
13,267
13,043
14,068
Shooting/
Trapping
14
Hunting/
5,844
6,518
6,217
6,779
6,280
6,709
Trapping
15
Shooting
5,527
6,451
6,181
6,486
6,772
7,371
(includes
Archery)
16
Motorcycling/
17,154
17,575
17,989
18,825
18,703
19,592
ATVing
17
Recreational
2,870
2,849
3,018
3,068
3,251
3,206
Flying
18
RVing
26,710
28,869
30,374
31,147
33,016
34,552
19
Snow
10,638
10,733
11,091
11,323
11,298
11,575
Activities
20
Skiing
2,929
2,988
3,211
3,321
3,277
3,411
21
Snowboarding
2,534
2,635
2,770
2,864
2,912
3,050
22
Other Snow
5,175
5,110
5,108
5,125
5,092
5,067
Activities
(includes
Snowmobiling)
\1\
23
Other
18,331
18,560
19,923
20,510
21,416
21,970
Conventional
Outdoor
Recreation
Activities
24
Other
15,308
15,595
16,786
17,153
18,104
18,678
Conventional
Air and Land
Activities \2\
25
Other
3,023
2,966
3,141
3,344
3,338
3,340
Conventional
Water
Activities \3\
26
Multi-use
76,807
78,728
78,969
80,095
80,680
81,727
Apparel and
Accessories
(Conventional)
\4\
27
Other Outdoor
128,349
130,650
133,030
135,421
136,652
143,306
Recreation
28
Amusement
13,206
12,460
12,234
12,685
13,045
14,153
Parks/Water
Parks
29
Festivals/
20,560
20,852
21,587
21,728
22,373
23,189
Sporting Events/
Concerts
30
Field Sports
5,232
5,243
5,490
5,720
5,923
6,026
31
Game Areas
32,082
33,243
32,501
32,621
33,537
34,800
(includes
Golfing and
Tennis)
32
Guided Tours/
25,481
25,938
26,992
26,062
24,167
26,280
Outfitted
Travel
33
Air and Land
13,811
14,382
15,349
15,663
15,277
15,885
Guided Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
34
Water Guided
11,670
11,556
11,646
10,410
8,910
10,406
Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
(includes
Boating and
Fishing
Charters)
35
Productive
10,703
11,193
12,326
13,258
14,025
14,529
Activities
(includes
Gardening)
36
Other Outdoor
14,722
15,022
15,547
16,905
17,072
17,480
Recreation
Activities \5\
37
Multi-use
6,362
6,728
6,420
6,568
6,678
6,911
Apparel and
Accessories
(Other) \4\
38
Supporting
349,046
346,420
348,688
361,855
367,350
371,099
Outdoor Recreation
39
Construction
9,385
9,060
9,127
10,441
11,184
10,932
40
Local Trips
71,515
72,271
72,463
73,093
73,031
73,708
and Travel \6\
41
Trips and
234,570
231,223
232,960
242,296
245,136
248,304
Travel \7\
42
Food and
38,079
31,475
32,171
33,746
34,668
34,852
Beverages
43
Lodging
49,531
50,373
48,973
51,489
52,619
52,420
44
Shopping and
40,398
41,297
41,968
42,558
43,454
44,251
Souvenirs
45
Transportatio
106,561
108,119
109,935
114,569
114,187
116,815
n
46
Government
33,576
33,870
34,135
35,772
37,458
37,675
Expenditures
47
Federal
3,947
4,176
3,853
3,834
3,985
3,944
Government
48
State and
29,629
29,696
30,279
31,935
33,470
33,731
Local
Government
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legend/Footnotes:
\1\ Consists of dog mushing, sleighing, snowmobiling, snow shoeing, snow tubing.
\2\ Consists of air sports, driving for pleasure, geocaching/orienteering/rock hounding, ice skating, inline
skating, land/sand sailing, races, running/walking/jogging, skateboarding, and wildlife watching/birding.
\3\ Consists of boardsailing/windsurfing, SCUBA diving, snorkeling, stand-up paddling, surfing, tubing,
wakeboarding, water skiing, and whitewater rafting.
\4\ Consists of backpacks, bug spray, coolers, general outdoor clothing, GPS equipment, hydration equipment,
lighting, sports racks, sunscreen, watches, and other miscellaneous gear and equipment.
\5\ Consists of agritourism, augmented reality games, beachgoing, disc golf, hot springs soaking, kite flying,
model airplane/rocket/UAV, paintball, photography, stargazing/astronomy, swimming, therapeutic programs, water
polo, yard sports.
\6\ Trip expenses less than 50 miles away from home, including food and beverages, lodging, shopping and
souvenirs, and transportation.
\7\ Travel and tourism expenses in the Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account are consistent with the Travel and
Tourism Satellite Account, which includes only expenses for travel at least 50 miles away from home.
Table 18. Outdoor Recreation Gross Output by Activity
[Millions of current dollars]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
Total Outdoor
691,782
709,072
725,728
730,955
741,630
778,487
Recreation
2
Total Core
342,735
358,561
368,355
377,843
386,701
408,053
Outdoor Recreation
3
Conventional
214,386
225,790
231,538
235,600
241,433
253,955
Outdoor
Recreation
4
Bicycling
3,182
3,341
3,454
3,342
3,840
4,011
5
Boating/
32,428
33,413
34,434
35,757
37,050
39,878
Fishing
6
Canoeing
124
123
130
136
142
153
7
Kayaking
580
595
616
661
738
805
8
Fishing
4,863
5,007
5,171
5,353
5,337
5,346
(excludes
Boating)
9
Sailing
1,824
1,906
2,027
2,148
2,282
2,372
10
Other Boating
25,037
25,781
26,489
27,458
28,552
31,202
11
Climbing/
5,588
5,910
6,171
6,170
6,327
6,361
Hiking/Tent
Camping
12
Equestrian
9,307
10,031
11,106
11,487
12,315
14,174
13
Hunting/
11,371
13,342
12,918
13,942
13,807
15,060
Shooting/
Trapping
14
Hunting/
5,844
6,745
6,558
7,227
6,741
7,312
Trapping
15
Shooting
5,527
6,597
6,360
6,715
7,066
7,747
(includes
Archery)
16
Motorcycling/
17,154
17,680
17,996
18,134
18,082
19,553
ATVing
17
Recreational
2,870
2,957
3,069
2,727
2,747
2,888
Flying
18
RVing
26,710
29,388
31,524
31,980
33,974
36,095
19
Snow
10,638
10,754
11,135
10,770
10,670
11,304
Activities
20
Skiing
2,929
2,996
3,260
3,438
3,439
3,593
21
Snowboarding
2,534
2,646
2,820
2,979
3,068
3,225
22
Other Snow
5,175
5,112
5,055
4,352
4,162
4,486
Activities
(includes
Snowmobiling)
\1\
23
Other
18,331
18,856
19,026
18,206
18,620
19,669
Conventional
Outdoor
Recreation
Activities
24
Other
15,308
15,803
15,775
14,687
15,071
16,116
Conventional
Air and Land
Activities \2\
25
Other
3,023
3,054
3,251
3,519
3,550
3,552
Conventional
Water
Activities \3\
26
Multi-use
76,807
80,117
80,705
83,085
84,001
84,963
Apparel and
Accessories
(Conventional)
\4\
27
Other Outdoor
128,349
132,772
136,817
142,243
145,268
154,099
Recreation
28
Amusement
13,206
13,246
13,609
14,708
15,805
17,765
Parks/Water
Parks
29
Festivals/
20,560
21,326
22,660
24,156
25,656
27,153
Sporting Events/
Concerts
30
Field Sports
5,232
5,352
5,665
5,983
6,256
6,416
31
Game Areas
32,082
33,316
32,945
33,674
34,917
36,011
(includes
Golfing and
Tennis)
32
Guided Tours/
25,481
26,275
27,770
27,387
25,769
28,403
Outfitted
Travel
33
Air and Land
13,811
14,547
15,733
16,383
16,186
17,057
Guided Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
34
Water Guided
11,670
11,728
12,037
11,004
9,583
11,346
Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
(includes
Boating and
Fishing
Charters)
35
Productive
10,703
11,288
11,749
12,322
12,792
13,484
Activities
(includes
Gardening)
36
Other Outdoor
14,722
15,195
15,931
17,405
17,411
17,891
Recreation
Activities \5\
37
Multi-use
6,362
6,775
6,489
6,608
6,663
6,977
Apparel and
Accessories
(Other) \4\
38
Supporting
349,046
350,511
357,372
353,112
354,929
370,433
Outdoor Recreation
39
Construction
9,385
9,429
9,936
11,696
12,956
13,197
40
Local Trips
71,515
72,417
72,354
64,665
62,214
66,300
and Travel \6\
41
Trips and
234,570
233,694
239,182
239,604
241,213
251,064
Travel \7\
42
Food and
38,079
32,197
33,699
36,283
38,145
39,281
Beverages
43
Lodging
49,531
51,543
51,805
55,703
58,250
59,378
44
Shopping and
40,398
41,746
43,215
43,161
43,558
44,975
Souvenirs
45
Transportatio
106,561
108,208
110,464
104,457
101,260
107,431
n
46
Government
33,576
34,971
35,900
37,147
38,546
39,873
Expenditures
47
Federal
3,947
4,247
4,011
4,036
4,247
4,313
Government
48
State and
29,629
30,724
31,889
33,111
34,299
35,560
Local
Government
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legend/Footnotes:
\1\ Consists of dog mushing, sleighing, snowmobiling, snow shoeing, snow tubing.
\2\ Consists of air sports, driving for pleasure, geocaching/orienteering/rock hounding, ice skating, inline
skating, land/sand sailing, races, running/walking/jogging, skateboarding, and wildlife watching/birding.
\3\ Consists of boardsailing/windsurfing, SCUBA diving, snorkeling, stand-up paddling, surfing, tubing,
wakeboarding, water skiing, and whitewater rafting.
\4\ Consists of backpacks, bug spray, coolers, general outdoor clothing, GPS equipment, hydration equipment,
lighting, sports racks, sunscreen, watches, and other miscellaneous gear and equipment.
\5\ Consists of agritourism, augmented reality games, beachgoing, disc golf, hot springs soaking, kite flying,
model airplane/rocket/UAV, paintball, photography, stargazing/astronomy, swimming, therapeutic programs, water
polo, yard sports.
\6\ Trip expenses less than 50 miles away from home, including food and beverages, lodging, shopping and
souvenirs, and transportation.
\7\ Travel and tourism expenses in the Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account are consistent with the Travel and
Tourism Satellite Account, which includes only expenses for travel at least 50 miles away from home.
Table 19. Chain-Type Quantity Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Gross Output by Activity
[index numbers, 2012 = 100]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
Total Outdoor
100.000
101.069
102.441
105.571
107.374
110.261
Recreation
2
Total Core
100.000
102.918
105.026
107.520
109.545
114.186
Outdoor Recreation
3
Conventional
100.000
103.591
105.851
108.733
111.423
115.720
Outdoor
Recreation
4
Bicycling
100.000
105.353
108.245
103.884
117.189
121.722
5
Boating/
100.000
101.026
102.236
107.221
110.565
117.303
Fishing
6
Canoeing
100.000
97.093
100.948
103.910
106.698
113.516
7
Kayaking
100.000
100.146
100.252
106.719
117.267
126.939
8
Fishing
100.000
99.299
101.714
104.502
104.098
103.459
(excludes
Boating)
9
Sailing
100.000
103.516
108.214
112.473
117.947
122.335
10
Other Boating
100.000
101.224
101.959
107.407
111.168
119.477
11
Climbing/
100.000
104.210
106.781
104.074
109.196
108.419
Hiking/Tent
Camping
12
Equestrian
100.000
105.960
114.564
118.683
127.719
144.470
13
Hunting/
100.000
114.048
109.028
116.680
114.709
123.725
Shooting/
Trapping
14
Hunting/
100.000
111.543
106.395
116.009
107.475
114.805
Trapping
15
Shooting
100.000
116.712
111.832
117.348
122.521
133.370
(includes
Archery)
16
Motorcycling/
100.000
102.452
104.870
109.740
109.031
114.214
ATVing
17
Recreational
100.000
99.280
105.167
106.905
113.285
111.701
Flying
18
RVing
100.000
108.080
113.718
116.609
123.608
129.356
19
Snow
100.000
100.889
104.261
106.442
106.205
108.806
Activities
20
Skiing
100.000
101.997
109.613
113.391
111.892
116.466
21
Snowboarding
100.000
103.957
109.296
112.996
114.884
120.348
22
Other Snow
100.000
98.756
98.713
99.052
98.397
97.915
Activities
(includes
Snowmobiling)
\1\
23
Other
100.000
101.249
108.680
111.885
116.828
119.848
Conventional
Outdoor
Recreation
Activities
24
Other
100.000
101.875
109.653
112.051
118.263
122.011
Conventional
Air and Land
Activities \2\
25
Other
100.000
98.101
103.913
110.609
110.401
110.467
Conventional
Water
Activities \3\
26
Multi-use
100.000
102.501
102.816
104.281
105.043
106.406
Apparel and
Accessories
(Conventional)
\4\
27
Other Outdoor
100.000
101.793
103.647
105.510
106.469
111.654
Recreation
28
Amusement
100.000
94.350
92.635
96.054
98.778
107.167
Parks/Water
Parks
29
Festivals/
100.000
101.417
104.991
105.677
108.813
112.784
Sporting Events/
Concerts
30
Field Sports
100.000
100.214
104.931
109.327
113.217
115.187
31
Game Areas
100.000
103.617
101.303
101.678
104.535
108.470
(includes
Golfing and
Tennis)
32
Guided Tours/
100.000
101.792
105.930
102.279
94.841
103.135
Outfitted
Travel
33
Air and Land
100.000
104.133
111.135
113.403
110.608
115.012
Guided Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
34
Water Guided
100.000
99.027
99.794
89.205
76.349
89.169
Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
(includes
Boating and
Fishing
Charters)
35
Productive
100.000
104.584
115.164
123.879
131.045
135.749
Activities
(includes
Gardening)
36
Other Outdoor
100.000
102.039
105.606
114.826
115.961
118.733
Recreation
Activities \5\
37
Multi-use
100.000
105.752
100.903
103.227
104.963
108.624
Apparel and
Accessories
(Other) \4\
38
Supporting
100.000
99.248
99.897
103.670
105.244
106.318
Outdoor Recreation
39
Construction
100.000
96.532
97.243
111.246
119.163
116.481
40
Local Trips
100.000
101.057
101.325
102.207
102.119
103.066
and Travel \6\
41
Trips and
100.000
98.573
99.314
103.294
104.504
105.855
Travel \7\
42
Food and
100.000
82.656
84.485
88.622
91.041
91.526
Beverages
43
Lodging
100.000
101.699
98.872
103.951
106.234
105.831
44
Shopping and
100.000
102.224
103.886
105.346
107.564
109.536
Souvenirs
45
Transportatio
100.000
101.462
103.166
107.515
107.157
109.623
n
46
Government
100.000
100.876
101.666
106.540
111.560
112.209
Expenditures
47
Federal
100.000
105.796
97.623
97.132
100.955
99.914
Government
48
State and
100.000
100.226
102.193
107.783
112.965
113.846
Local
Government
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legend/Footnotes:
\1\ Consists of dog mushing, sleighing, snowmobiling, snow shoeing, snow tubing.
\2\ Consists of air sports, driving for pleasure, geocaching/orienteering/rock hounding, ice skating, inline
skating, land/sand sailing, races, running/walking/jogging, skateboarding, and wildlife watching/birding.
\3\ Consists of boardsailing/windsurfing, SCUBA diving, snorkeling, stand-up paddling, surfing, tubing,
wakeboarding, water skiing, and whitewater rafting.
\4\ Consists of backpacks, bug spray, coolers, general outdoor clothing, GPS equipment, hydration equipment,
lighting, sports racks, sunscreen, watches, and other miscellaneous gear and equipment.
\5\ Consists of agritourism, augmented reality games, beachgoing, disc golf, hot springs soaking, kite flying,
model airplane/rocket/UAV, paintball, photography, stargazing/astronomy, swimming, therapeutic programs, water
polo, yard sports.
\6\ Trip expenses less than 50 miles away from home, including food and beverages, lodging, shopping and
souvenirs, and transportation.
\7\ Travel and tourism expenses in the Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account are consistent with the Travel and
Tourism Satellite Account, which includes only expenses for travel at least 50 miles away from home.
Table 20. Percent Changes in Chain-Type Quantity Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Gross Output by Activity
[Percent Change]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
Total Outdoor Recreation
1.1
1.4
3.1
1.7
2.7
2
Total Core Outdoor
2.9
2.0
2.4
1.9
4.2
Recreation
3
Conventional Outdoor
3.6
2.2
2.7
2.5
3.9
Recreation
4
Bicycling
5.4
2.7
^4.0
12.8
3.9
5
Boating/Fishing
1.0
1.2
4.9
3.1
6.1
6
Canoeing
^2.9
4.0
2.9
2.7
6.4
7
Kayaking
0.1
0.1
6.5
9.9
8.2
8
Fishing (excludes
^0.7
2.4
2.7
^0.4
^0.6
Boating)
9
Sailing
3.5
4.5
3.9
4.9
3.7
10
Other Boating
1.2
0.7
5.3
3.5
7.5
11
Climbing/Hiking/Tent
4.2
2.5
^2.5
4.9
^0.7
Camping
12
Equestrian
6.0
8.1
3.6
7.6
13.1
13
Hunting/Shooting/
14.0
^4.4
7.0
^1.7
7.9
Trapping
14
Hunting/Trapping
11.5
^4.6
9.0
^7.4
6.8
15
Shooting (includes
16.7
^4.2
4.9
4.4
8.9
Archery)
16
Motorcycling/ATVing
2.5
2.4
4.6
^0.6
4.8
17
Recreational Flying
^0.7
5.9
1.7
6.0
^1.4
18
RVing
8.1
5.2
2.5
6.0
4.6
19
Snow Activities
0.9
3.3
2.1
^0.2
2.4
20
Skiing
2.0
7.5
3.4
^1.3
4.1
21
Snowboarding
4.0
5.1
3.4
1.7
4.8
22
Other Snow
^1.2
0.0
0.3
^0.7
^0.5
Activities (includes
Snowmobiling) \1\
23
Other Conventional
1.2
7.3
2.9
4.4
2.6
Outdoor Recreation
Activities
24
Other Conventional
1.9
7.6
2.2
5.5
3.2
Air and Land
Activities \2\
25
Other Conventional
^1.9
5.9
6.4
^0.2
0.1
Water Activities \3\
26
Multi-use Apparel
2.5
0.3
1.4
0.7
1.3
and Accessories
(Conventional) \4\
27
Other Outdoor
1.8
1.8
1.8
0.9
4.9
Recreation
28
Amusement Parks/
^5.7
^1.8
3.7
2.8
8.5
Water Parks
29
Festivals/Sporting
1.4
3.5
0.7
3.0
3.6
Events/Concerts
30
Field Sports
0.2
4.7
4.2
3.6
1.7
31
Game Areas (includes
3.6
^2.2
0.4
2.8
3.8
Golfing and Tennis)
32
Guided Tours/
1.8
4.1
^3.4
^7.3
8.7
Outfitted Travel
33
Air and Land Guided
4.1
6.7
2.0
^2.5
4.0
Tours/Outfitted
Travel
34
Water Guided Tours/
^1.0
0.8
^10.6
^14.4
16.8
Outfitted Travel
(includes Boating
and Fishing
Charters)
35
Productive
4.6
10.1
7.6
5.8
3.6
Activities (includes
Gardening)
36
Other Outdoor
2.0
3.5
8.7
1.0
2.4
Recreation Activities
\5\
37
Multi-use Apparel
5.8
^4.6
2.3
1.7
3.5
and Accessories
(Other) \4\
38
Supporting Outdoor
^0.8
0.7
3.8
1.5
1.0
Recreation
39
Construction
^3.5
0.7
14.4
7.1
^2.3
40
Local Trips and
1.1
0.3
0.9
^0.1
0.9
Travel \6\
41
Trips and Travel \7\
^1.4
0.8
4.0
1.2
1.3
42
Food and Beverages
^17.3
2.2
4.9
2.7
0.5
43
Lodging
1.7
^2.8
5.1
2.2
^0.4
44
Shopping and
2.2
1.6
1.4
2.1
1.8
Souvenirs
45
Transportation
1.5
1.7
4.2
^0.3
2.3
46
Government
0.9
0.8
4.8
4.7
0.6
Expenditures
47
Federal Government
5.8
^7.7
^0.5
3.9
^1.0
48
State and Local
0.2
2.0
5.5
4.8
0.8
Government
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legend/Footnotes:
\1\ Consists of dog mushing, sleighing, snowmobiling, snow shoeing, snow tubing.
\2\ Consists of air sports, driving for pleasure, geocaching/orienteering/rock hounding, ice skating, inline
skating, land/sand sailing, races, running/walking/jogging, skateboarding, and wildlife watching/birding.
\3\ Consists of boardsailing/windsurfing, SCUBA diving, snorkeling, stand-up paddling, surfing, tubing,
wakeboarding, water skiing, and whitewater rafting.
\4\ Consists of backpacks, bug spray, coolers, general outdoor clothing, GPS equipment, hydration equipment,
lighting, sports racks, sunscreen, watches, and other miscellaneous gear and equipment.
\5\ Consists of agritourism, augmented reality games, beachgoing, disc golf, hot springs soaking, kite flying,
model airplane/rocket/UAV, paintball, photography, stargazing/astronomy, swimming, therapeutic programs, water
polo, yard sports.
\6\ Trip expenses less than 50 miles away from home, including food and beverages, lodging, shopping and
souvenirs, and transportation.
\7\ Travel and tourism expenses in the Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account are consistent with the Travel and
Tourism Satellite Account, which includes only expenses for travel at least 50 miles away from home.
Table 21. Chain-Type Price Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Gross Output by Activity
[index numbers, 2012 = 100]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
Total Outdoor
100.000
101.416
102.558
100.234
99.990
102.211
Recreation
2
Total Core
100.000
101.652
102.630
102.831
103.296
104.570
Outdoor Recreation
3
Conventional
100.000
101.668
102.502
101.536
101.537
102.838
Outdoor
Recreation
4
Bicycling
100.000
99.638
100.264
101.079
102.956
103.542
5
Boating/
100.000
101.993
103.863
102.839
103.338
104.836
Fishing
6
Canoeing
100.000
101.931
103.380
105.211
106.883
108.185
7
Kayaking
100.000
102.571
106.008
106.843
108.548
109.462
8
Fishing
100.000
103.692
104.544
105.338
105.415
106.250
(excludes
Boating)
9
Sailing
100.000
100.955
102.700
104.695
106.069
106.309
10
Other Boating
100.000
101.730
103.770
102.110
102.585
104.311
11
Climbing/
100.000
101.500
103.429
106.098
103.695
104.993
Hiking/Tent
Camping
12
Equestrian
100.000
101.713
104.159
103.997
103.605
105.417
13
Hunting/
100.000
102.886
104.203
105.088
105.856
107.046
Shooting/
Trapping
14
Hunting/
100.000
103.489
105.482
106.607
107.334
108.997
Trapping
15
Shooting
100.000
102.264
102.899
103.537
104.344
105.099
(includes
Archery)
16
Motorcycling/
100.000
100.600
100.038
96.332
96.679
99.798
ATVing
17
Recreational
100.000
103.770
101.688
88.870
84.471
90.066
Flying
18
RVing
100.000
101.797
103.784
102.676
102.900
104.466
19
Snow
100.000
100.198
100.391
95.110
94.439
97.661
Activities
20
Skiing
100.000
100.276
101.548
103.526
104.944
105.335
21
Snowboarding
100.000
100.427
101.787
104.017
105.376
105.731
22
Other Snow
100.000
100.037
98.959
84.917
81.748
88.537
Activities
(includes
Snowmobiling)
\1\
23
Other
100.000
101.596
101.066
93.936
92.011
94.743
Conventional
Outdoor
Recreation
Activities
24
Other
100.000
101.329
100.588
91.643
89.099
92.355
Conventional
Air and Land
Activities \2\
25
Other
100.000
102.976
103.491
105.233
106.356
106.371
Conventional
Water
Activities \3\
26
Multi-use
100.000
101.765
102.198
103.733
104.116
103.959
Apparel and
Accessories
(Conventional)
\4\
27
Other Outdoor
100.000
101.624
102.847
105.038
106.305
107.531
Recreation
28
Amusement
100.000
106.303
111.245
115.945
121.159
125.522
Parks/Water
Parks
29
Festivals/
100.000
102.276
104.972
111.178
114.675
117.094
Sporting Events/
Concerts
30
Field Sports
100.000
102.079
103.189
104.604
105.624
106.475
31
Game Areas
100.000
100.219
101.367
103.227
104.113
103.481
(includes
Golfing and
Tennis)
32
Guided Tours/
100.000
101.299
102.881
105.085
106.631
108.076
Outfitted
Travel
33
Air and Land
100.000
101.143
102.500
104.600
105.955
107.379
Guided Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
34
Water Guided
100.000
101.487
103.357
105.707
107.557
109.032
Tours/
Outfitted
Travel
(includes
Boating and
Fishing
Charters)
35
Productive
100.000
100.843
95.324
92.939
91.203
92.806
Activities
(includes
Gardening)
36
Other Outdoor
100.000
101.150
102.466
102.961
101.987
102.351
Recreation
Activities \5\
37
Multi-use
100.000
100.697
101.082
100.618
99.770
100.952
Apparel and
Accessories
(Other) \4\
38
Supporting
100.000
101.181
102.491
97.584
96.620
99.821
Outdoor Recreation
39
Construction
100.000
104.073
108.890
112.045
115.877
120.747
40
Local Trips
100.000
100.201
99.849
88.470
85.189
89.949
and Travel \6\
41
Trips and
100.000
101.069
102.671
98.889
98.400
101.112
Travel \7\
42
Food and
100.000
102.293
104.749
107.517
110.029
112.707
Beverages
43
Lodging
100.000
102.323
105.783
108.186
110.700
113.274
44
Shopping and
100.000
101.087
102.971
101.417
100.238
101.636
Souvenirs
45
Transportatio
100.000
100.083
100.481
91.174
88.680
91.966
n
46
Government
100.000
103.250
105.170
103.843
102.906
105.833
Expenditures
47
Federal
100.000
101.702
104.104
105.271
106.583
109.365
Government
48
State and
100.000
103.463
105.317
103.682
102.476
105.420
Local
Government
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legend/Footnotes:
\1\ Consists of dog mushing, sleighing, snowmobiling, snow shoeing, snow tubing.
\2\ Consists of air sports, driving for pleasure, geocaching/orienteering/rock hounding, ice skating, inline
skating, land/sand sailing, races, running/walking/jogging, skateboarding, and wildlife watching/birding.
\3\ Consists of boardsailing/windsurfing, SCUBA diving, snorkeling, stand-up paddling, surfing, tubing,
wakeboarding, water skiing, and whitewater rafting.
\4\ Consists of backpacks, bug spray, coolers, general outdoor clothing, GPS equipment, hydration equipment,
lighting, sports racks, sunscreen, watches, and other miscellaneous gear and equipment.
\5\ Consists of agritourism, augmented reality games, beachgoing, disc golf, hot springs soaking, kite flying,
model airplane/rocket/UAV, paintball, photography, stargazing/astronomy, swimming, therapeutic programs, water
polo, yard sports.
\6\ Trip expenses less than 50 miles away from home, including food and beverages, lodging, shopping and
souvenirs, and transportation.
\7\ Travel and tourism expenses in the Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account are consistent with the Travel and
Tourism Satellite Account, which includes only expenses for travel at least 50 miles away from home.
Table 22. Percent Changes in Chain-Type Price Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Gross Output by Activity
[Percent Change]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
Total Outdoor Recreation
1.4
1.1
^2.3
^0.2
2.2
2
Total Core Outdoor
1.7
1.0
0.2
0.5
1.2
Recreation
3
Conventional Outdoor
1.7
0.8
^0.9
0.0
1.3
Recreation
4
Bicycling
^0.4
0.6
0.8
1.9
0.6
5
Boating/Fishing
2.0
1.8
^1.0
0.5
1.5
6
Canoeing
1.9
1.4
1.8
1.6
1.2
7
Kayaking
2.6
3.4
0.8
1.6
0.8
8
Fishing (excludes
3.7
0.8
0.8
0.1
0.8
Boating)
9
Sailing
1.0
1.7
1.9
1.3
0.2
10
Other Boating
1.7
2.0
^1.6
0.5
1.7
11
Climbing/Hiking/Tent
1.5
1.9
2.6
^2.3
1.3
Camping
12
Equestrian
1.7
2.4
^0.2
^0.4
1.7
13
Hunting/Shooting/
2.9
1.3
0.8
0.7
1.1
Trapping
14
Hunting/Trapping
3.5
1.9
1.1
0.7
1.5
15
Shooting (includes
2.3
0.6
0.6
0.8
0.7
Archery)
16
Motorcycling/ATVing
0.6
^0.6
^3.7
0.4
3.2
17
Recreational Flying
3.8
^2.0
^12.6
^5.0
6.6
18
RVing
1.8
2.0
^1.1
0.2
1.5
19
Snow Activities
0.2
0.2
^5.3
^0.7
3.4
20
Skiing
0.3
1.3
1.9
1.4
0.4
21
Snowboarding
0.4
1.4
2.2
1.3
0.3
22
Other Snow
0.0
^1.1
^14.2
^3.7
8.3
Activities (includes
Snowmobiling) \1\
23
Other Conventional
1.6
^0.5
^7.1
^2.0
3.0
Outdoor Recreation
Activities
24
Other Conventional
1.3
^0.7
^8.9
^2.8
3.7
Air and Land
Activities \2\
25
Other Conventional
3.0
0.5
1.7
1.1
0.0
Water Activities \3\
26
Multi-use Apparel
1.8
0.4
1.5
0.4
^0.2
and Accessories
(Conventional) \4\
27
Other Outdoor
1.6
1.2
2.1
1.2
1.2
Recreation
28
Amusement Parks/
6.3
4.6
4.2
4.5
3.6
Water Parks
29
Festivals/Sporting
2.3
2.6
5.9
3.1
2.1
Events/Concerts
30
Field Sports
2.1
1.1
1.4
1.0
0.8
31
Game Areas (includes
0.2
1.1
1.8
0.9
^0.6
Golfing and Tennis)
32
Guided Tours/
1.3
1.6
2.1
1.5
1.4
Outfitted Travel
33
Air and Land Guided
1.1
1.3
2.0
1.3
1.3
Tours/Outfitted
Travel
34
Water Guided Tours/
1.5
1.8
2.3
1.7
1.4
Outfitted Travel
(includes Boating
and Fishing
Charters)
35
Productive
0.8
^5.5
^2.5
^1.9
1.8
Activities (includes
Gardening)
36
Other Outdoor
1.2
1.3
0.5
^0.9
0.4
Recreation Activities
\5\
37
Multi-use Apparel
0.7
0.4
^0.5
^0.8
1.2
and Accessories
(Other) \4\
38
Supporting Outdoor
1.2
1.3
^4.8
^1.0
3.3
Recreation
39
Construction
4.1
4.6
2.9
3.4
4.2
40
Local Trips and
0.2
^0.4
^11.4
^3.7
5.6
Travel \6\
41
Trips and Travel \7\
1.1
1.6
^3.7
^0.5
2.8
42
Food and Beverages
2.3
2.4
2.6
2.3
2.4
43
Lodging
2.3
3.4
2.3
2.3
2.3
44
Shopping and
1.1
1.9
^1.5
^1.2
1.4
Souvenirs
45
Transportation
0.1
0.4
^9.3
^2.7
3.7
46
Government
3.3
1.9
^1.3
^0.9
2.8
Expenditures
47
Federal Government
1.7
2.4
1.1
1.2
2.6
48
State and Local
3.5
1.8
^1.6
^1.2
2.9
Government
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legend/Footnotes:
\1\ Consists of dog mushing, sleighing, snowmobiling, snow shoeing, snow tubing.
\2\ Consists of air sports, driving for pleasure, geocaching/orienteering/rock hounding, ice skating, inline
skating, land/sand sailing, races, running/walking/jogging, skateboarding, and wildlife watching/birding.
\3\ Consists of boardsailing/windsurfing, SCUBA diving, snorkeling, stand-up paddling, surfing, tubing,
wakeboarding, water skiing, and whitewater rafting.
\4\ Consists of backpacks, bug spray, coolers, general outdoor clothing, GPS equipment, hydration equipment,
lighting, sports racks, sunscreen, watches, and other miscellaneous gear and equipment.
\5\ Consists of agritourism, augmented reality games, beachgoing, disc golf, hot springs soaking, kite flying,
model airplane/rocket/UAV, paintball, photography, stargazing/astronomy, swimming, therapeutic programs, water
polo, yard sports.
\6\ Trip expenses less than 50 miles away from home, including food and beverages, lodging, shopping and
souvenirs, and transportation.
\7\ Travel and tourism expenses in the Outdoor Recreation Satellite Account are consistent with the Travel and
Tourism Satellite Account, which includes only expenses for travel at least 50 miles away from home.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Editor's note: this table of information was excluded from the pdf
submitted, and posted on the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis website.
It is incoporated herein, in [brackets] and is available in the xlsx
file entitled, Outdoor Recreation Activities in Conventional Definition
(https://www.bea.gov/system/files/2019-09/orsa0919-GO-Activity_1.xlsx)
[Activity List *
[Outdoor Recreation Activities in Conventional Definition
[Bicycling (All recreational bicycling, including BMX, E-bikes,
Mountain, On-road)
[Boating/Fishing (All recreational boating, including Canoeing, Fishing,
Inboard/Outboard, Kayaking, Personal watercraft, Sailing)
[Climbing/Hiking/Tent Camping
[Equestrian
[Hunting/Trapping/Shooting (including Archery)
[Motorcycling/ATVs (Off-road, On-road)
[Recreational flying (Experimental, Glider, Turboprop, Ultralight)
[RVing
[Snow activities (Dog mushing, Skiing, Sleighing, Snowboarding,
Snowmobiling, Snow shoeing, Tubing)
[Other Conventional Activities
[Other Conventional Air and Land activities
[Air sports (Base jumping, Hang gliding, Skydiving)
[Driving for pleasure (Gas spending only)
[Geocaching/Orienteering/Rock hounding
[Ice skating
[Inline skating
[Land/Sand sailing
[Races (includes Bike and Endurance racing)
[Running/Jogging/Walking
[Skateboarding
[Wildlife watching/Birding
[Other Conventional Water activities
[Boardsailing/Windsurfing
[SCUBA Diving
[Snorkeling
[Stand-up paddling
[Surfing
[Tubing/Wakeboarding
[Water skiing
[Whitewater rafting
[Outdoor Recreation Activities in Other Definition
[Amusement parks/Water parks
[Festivals/Sporting events/Concerts (includes Professional sports)
[Field sports (e.g., Football, Lacrosse, Soccer)
[Game area sports (e.g., Basketball, Golf, Tennis)
[Guided tours/Outfitted travel (includes Boating and Fishing charters)
[Productive activities (Beekeeping, Foraging, Gardening, Panning for
ore)
[Other Activities
[Agritourism (Animal sanctuaries, Petting zoos, Pick-your-own produce
farms, Vineyard tours)
[Augmented reality games
[Beachgoing
[Disc golf
[Hot springs soaking
[Kite flying
[Model airplane/rocket/UAV
[Paintball
[Photography
[Stargazing/Astronomy
[Swimming
[Therapeutic Programs
[Water Polo
[Yard sports (e.g., Bocce ball, Croquet)]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 23. Real Outdoor Recreation Gross Output by Industry
[Millions of chained (2012) dollars]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
All Industries
691,782
699,173
708,666
730,321
742,793
762,768
2
Private
651,193
658,779
668,072
687,893
698,553
718,236
industries
3
Agriculture,
10,923
12,147
13,010
13,749
13,483
13,372
forestry,
fishing, and
hunting
4
Farms
7,970
8,941
9,930
10,548
11,208
11,014
5
Forestry,
2,953
3,207
3,105
3,236
2,497
2,552
fishing, and
related
activities
6
Mining
576
510
500
405
368
521
7
Oil and gas
194
199
227
215
217
225
extraction
8
Mining, except
330
263
215
151
123
263
oil and gas
9
Support
51
46
50
33
28
31
activities for
mining
10
Utilities
2
2
2
2
2
2
11
Construction
8,591
8,598
8,670
9,833
10,555
10,338
12
Manufacturing
147,357
152,559
152,242
154,419
157,223
162,069
13
Durable goods
44,100
46,962
47,691
48,381
48,179
51,889
14
Wood products
4
4
4
4
4
5
15
Nonmetallic
81
81
82
80
82
84
mineral
products
16
Primary
13
10
13
11
10
11
metals
17
Fabricated
3,062
3,443
3,151
3,491
3,763
4,277
metal products
18
Machinery
5,009
4,712
4,486
3,769
2,509
3,235
19
Computer and
789
780
884
1,384
1,098
1,199
electronic
products
20
Electrical
1,294
1,142
1,176
1,099
1,002
979
equipment,
appliances,
and components
21
Motor
11,160
13,234
14,091
14,189
15,324
16,630
vehicles,
bodies and
trailers, and
parts
22
Other
15,418
16,393
17,304
17,914
17,628
18,557
transportation
equipment
23
Furniture and
134
143
134
127
111
112
related
products
24
Miscellaneous
7,136
7,007
6,375
6,354
6,601
6,737
manufacturing
25
Nondurable
103,257
105,572
104,473
105,955
109,526
109,450
goods
26
Food and
17,661
17,898
18,002
18,262
18,872
18,925
beverage and
tobacco
products
27
Textile mills
887
790
837
864
894
911
and textile
product mills
28
Apparel and
4,488
4,368
4,187
4,308
5,582
6,342
leather and
allied
products
29
Paper
731
712
757
700
686
716
products
30
Printing and
208
203
211
217
222
190
related
support
activities
31
Petroleum and
72,112
74,010
72,649
73,899
74,543
72,648
coal products
32
Chemical
6,567
7,000
7,193
7,130
7,225
7,289
products
33
Plastics and
602
602
595
598
624
622
rubber
products
34
Wholesale trade
58,414
55,224
57,130
56,237
54,317
54,987
35
Retail trade
139,090
146,030
147,038
151,773
154,595
160,768
36
Motor vehicle
12,667
12,684
12,723
15,034
17,044
19,894
and parts
dealers
37
Food and
9,087
8,938
8,930
8,890
8,786
8,878
beverage stores
38
General
22,958
24,890
24,500
25,071
24,367
24,440
merchandise
stores
39
Other retail
94,377
99,537
100,889
102,735
104,281
107,438
40
Transportation
71,843
73,208
75,812
79,716
78,942
81,068
and warehousing
41
Air
46,990
47,877
49,449
53,025
52,701
53,432
transportation
42
Rail
1,094
1,082
1,103
1,100
1,116
1,163
transportation
43
Water
9,071
9,416
10,168
10,246
9,994
10,747
transportation
44
Truck
7,630
7,556
7,689
7,544
7,417
7,466
transportation
45
Transit and
3,303
3,369
3,425
3,538
3,530
3,704
ground
passenger
transportation
46
Pipeline
555
559
567
623
600
601
transportation
47
Other
3,159
3,308
3,384
3,617
3,574
3,869
transportation
and support
activities
48
Warehousing
42
42
40
41
43
44
and storage
49
Information
2,131
2,163
2,262
2,366
2,515
2,717
50
Publishing
761
720
716
714
689
739
industries,
except internet
(includes
software)
51
Motion picture
74
69
68
76
82
83
and sound
recording
industries
52
Broadcasting
1,068
1,140
1,236
1,298
1,435
1,521
and
telecommunicati
ons
53
Data
228
235
244
282
316
381
processing,
internet
publishing, and
other
information
services
54
Finance,
28,769
28,521
25,647
27,494
28,772
29,132
insurance, real
estate, rental,
and leasing
55
Finance and
7,238
7,030
7,399
7,674
7,847
7,924
insurance
56
Federal
574
563
544
580
587
589
Reserve banks,
credit
intermediation
, and related
activities
57
Securities,
0
0
0
0
0
0
commodity
contracts, and
investments
58
Insurance
6,664
6,467
6,855
7,095
7,260
7,336
carriers and
related
activities
59
Funds,
0
0
0
0
0
0
trusts, and
other
financial
vehicles
60
Real estate and
21,531
21,490
18,264
19,831
20,938
21,221
rental and
leasing
61
Real estate
15,900
15,701
12,448
13,390
13,687
13,574
62
Housing
15,894
15,697
12,443
13,386
13,682
13,569
63
Other real
5
5
5
5
5
5
estate
64
Rental and
5,631
5,790
5,820
6,451
7,330
7,795
leasing
services and
lessors of
intangible
assets
65
Professional
11,336
11,645
12,177
12,908
13,658
14,717
and business
services
66
Professional,
1,627
1,668
1,827
1,922
2,070
2,242
scientific, and
technical
services
67
Legal
0
0
0
0
0
0
services
68
Computer
64
52
51
60
62
68
systems design
and related
services
69
Miscellaneous
1,563
1,616
1,777
1,862
2,009
2,175
professional,
scientific,
and technical
services
70
Management of
0
0
0
0
0
0
companies and
enterprises
71
Administrative
9,709
9,978
10,349
10,984
11,586
12,472
and waste
management
services
72
Administrativ
9,708
9,977
10,348
10,983
11,585
12,471
e and support
services
73
Waste
1
1
1
1
1
1
management and
remediation
services
74
Educational
6,217
6,152
6,370
6,511
6,590
6,749
services, health
care, and social
assistance
75
Educational
5,647
5,600
5,788
5,899
5,949
6,086
services
76
Health care
570
553
582
612
643
666
and social
assistance
77
Ambulatory
345
345
369
393
420
437
health care
services
78
Hospitals
174
156
160
166
172
177
79
Nursing and
24
21
21
21
21
21
residential
care
facilities
80
Social
28
31
32
33
31
31
assistance
81
Arts,
160,042
156,400
161,405
166,342
171,052
175,455
entertainment,
recreation,
accommodation,
and food
services
82
Arts,
73,256
74,346
75,936
77,394
80,026
84,615
entertainment,
and recreation
83
Performing
19,373
19,599
20,324
20,587
21,259
22,080
arts,
spectator
sports,
museums, and
related
activities
84
Amusements,
53,884
54,748
55,609
56,808
58,770
62,561
gambling, and
recreation
industries
85
Accommodation
86,785
82,060
85,468
88,943
91,020
90,841
and food
services
86
Accommodation
46,580
48,095
50,429
52,113
53,127
52,790
87
Food services
40,205
33,967
35,041
36,833
37,896
38,054
and drinking
places
88
Other services,
5,902
5,821
5,906
6,015
6,220
6,290
except
government
89
Government
40,589
40,399
40,606
42,422
44,196
44,518
90
Federal
4,644
4,811
4,478
4,453
4,587
4,541
91
General
3,965
4,190
3,870
3,848
4,006
3,964
government
92
National
0
1
1
1
1
1
defense
93
Non-defense
3,964
4,190
3,869
3,848
4,005
3,964
94
Government
679
619
609
605
575
571
enterprises
95
State and local
35,944
35,590
36,123
37,960
39,600
39,968
96
General
33,916
33,700
34,392
36,233
37,910
38,257
government
97
Government
2,029
1,891
1,730
1,727
1,695
1,717
enterprises
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 24. Outdoor Recreation Gross Output by Industry
[Millions of current dollars]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
All Industries
691,782
709,072
725,728
730,955
741,630
778,487
2
Private
651,193
667,458
683,184
686,929
696,061
731,385
industries
3
Agriculture,
10,923
12,386
12,717
12,878
12,038
12,098
forestry,
fishing, and
hunting
4
Farms
7,970
9,050
9,377
9,348
9,285
9,212
5
Forestry,
2,953
3,335
3,340
3,530
2,753
2,886
fishing, and
related
activities
6
Mining
576
508
496
317
271
431
7
Oil and gas
194
209
251
150
135
185
extraction
8
Mining, except
330
247
191
127
99
206
oil and gas
9
Support
51
52
54
41
36
40
activities for
mining
10
Utilities
2
2
2
2
2
2
11
Construction
8,591
8,948
9,439
11,020
12,237
12,488
12
Manufacturing
147,357
151,604
148,878
127,511
121,696
133,051
13
Durable goods
44,100
47,946
49,357
50,666
50,630
55,064
14
Wood products
4
4
4
4
5
5
15
Nonmetallic
81
82
83
83
86
89
mineral
products
16
Primary
13
10
13
11
10
10
metals
17
Fabricated
3,062
3,710
3,423
3,786
4,046
4,661
metal products
18
Machinery
5,009
4,787
4,662
3,968
2,599
3,360
19
Computer and
789
763
867
1,285
920
994
electronic
products
20
Electrical
1,294
1,148
1,192
1,119
1,020
1,002
equipment,
appliances,
and components
21
Motor
11,160
13,543
14,696
15,110
16,545
18,367
vehicles,
bodies and
trailers, and
parts
22
Other
15,418
16,632
17,707
18,556
18,471
19,771
transportation
equipment
23
Furniture and
134
147
141
136
123
124
related
products
24
Miscellaneous
7,136
7,119
6,568
6,609
6,806
6,681
manufacturing
25
Nondurable
103,257
103,658
99,521
76,845
71,066
77,987
goods
26
Food and
17,661
18,186
19,025
19,123
19,283
19,507
beverage and
tobacco
products
27
Textile mills
887
827
892
921
958
982
and textile
product mills
28
Apparel and
4,488
4,486
4,302
4,471
5,846
6,748
leather and
allied
products
29
Paper
731
711
752
694
681
710
products
30
Printing and
208
204
213
221
225
195
related
support
activities
31
Petroleum and
72,112
71,532
66,278
43,305
35,789
41,337
coal products
32
Chemical
6,567
7,106
7,448
7,501
7,651
7,874
products
33
Plastics and
602
608
610
609
632
635
rubber
products
34
Wholesale trade
58,414
59,128
61,302
61,158
59,585
61,089
35
Retail trade
139,090
146,262
149,260
157,377
161,764
168,440
36
Motor vehicle
12,667
12,965
13,523
15,851
17,827
20,318
and parts
dealers
37
Food and
9,087
9,131
9,450
9,872
10,076
10,286
beverage stores
38
General
22,958
24,412
23,665
24,074
23,686
23,960
merchandise
stores
39
Other retail
94,377
99,754
102,621
107,580
110,175
113,875
40
Transportation
71,843
73,622
77,497
78,757
77,800
81,437
and warehousing
41
Air
46,990
48,019
50,719
51,580
50,199
52,127
transportation
42
Rail
1,094
1,116
1,153
1,133
1,142
1,226
transportation
43
Water
9,071
9,387
10,066
10,221
10,676
11,430
transportation
44
Truck
7,630
7,666
7,898
7,599
7,419
7,637
transportation
45
Transit and
3,303
3,458
3,519
3,674
3,764
4,003
ground
passenger
transportation
46
Pipeline
555
583
628
723
712
720
transportation
47
Other
3,159
3,351
3,471
3,786
3,844
4,250
transportation
and support
activities
48
Warehousing
42
42
41
41
43
45
and storage
49
Information
2,131
2,197
2,316
2,427
2,577
2,781
50
Publishing
761
735
741
747
734
798
industries,
except internet
(includes
software)
51
Motion picture
74
76
79
87
90
97
and sound
recording
industries
52
Broadcasting
1,068
1,147
1,248
1,307
1,435
1,500
and
telecommunicati
ons
53
Data
228
238
248
286
319
387
processing,
internet
publishing, and
other
information
services
54
Finance,
28,769
29,224
27,041
29,267
31,125
32,541
insurance, real
estate, rental,
and leasing
55
Finance and
7,238
7,173
7,663
8,096
8,594
9,086
insurance
56
Federal
574
586
577
623
649
666
Reserve banks,
credit
intermediation
, and related
activities
57
Securities,
0
0
0
0
0
0
commodity
contracts, and
investments
58
Insurance
6,664
6,587
7,086
7,474
7,945
8,420
carriers and
related
activities
59
Funds,
0
0
0
0
0
0
trusts, and
other
financial
vehicles
60
Real estate
21,531
22,051
19,378
21,171
22,531
23,455
and rental and
leasing
61
Real estate
15,900
16,146
13,206
14,713
15,604
16,065
62
Housing
15,894
16,141
13,201
14,708
15,599
16,060
63
Other real
5
5
5
5
5
5
estate
64
Rental and
5,631
5,905
6,172
6,457
6,927
7,390
leasing
services and
lessors of
intangible
assets
65
Professional
11,336
11,820
12,515
13,541
14,591
15,999
and business
services
66
Professional,
1,627
1,707
1,909
2,066
2,285
2,520
scientific, and
technical
services
67
Legal
0
0
0
0
0
0
services
68
Computer
64
56
56
65
64
72
systems design
and related
services
69
Miscellaneous
1,563
1,652
1,853
2,000
2,222
2,447
professional,
scientific,
and technical
services
70
Management of
0
0
0
0
0
0
companies and
enterprises
71
Administrative
9,709
10,113
10,606
11,476
12,306
13,480
and waste
management
services
72
Administrativ
9,708
10,112
10,605
11,474
12,304
13,478
e and support
services
73
Waste
1
1
1
1
1
1
management and
remediation
services
74
Educational
6,217
6,315
6,660
6,968
7,184
7,558
services, health
care, and social
assistance
75
Educational
5,647
5,753
6,068
6,342
6,523
6,868
services
76
Health care
570
563
592
627
661
690
and social
assistance
77
Ambulatory
345
353
373
396
420
438
health care
services
78
Hospitals
174
159
167
177
187
197
79
Nursing and
24
21
22
22
23
24
residential
care
facilities
80
Social
28
29
30
31
31
32
assistance
81
Arts,
160,042
159,449
168,847
179,212
188,336
196,288
entertainment,
recreation,
accommodation,
and food
services
82
Arts,
73,256
75,602
78,943
83,482
88,259
94,255
entertainment,
and recreation
83
Performing
19,373
20,037
21,322
22,849
24,333
25,806
arts,
spectator
sports,
museums, and
related
activities
84
Amusements,
53,884
55,565
57,621
60,633
63,926
68,450
gambling, and
recreation
industries
85
Accommodation
86,785
83,847
89,905
95,731
100,076
102,032
and food
services
86
Accommodation
46,580
49,114
53,206
56,130
58,385
59,153
87
Food services
40,205
34,733
36,699
39,600
41,692
42,879
and drinking
places
88
Other services,
5,902
5,993
6,214
6,492
6,857
7,181
except
government
89
Government
40,589
41,614
42,544
44,026
45,569
47,102
90
Federal
4,644
4,871
4,605
4,589
4,787
4,865
91
General
3,965
4,262
4,028
4,051
4,268
4,334
government
92
National
0
1
1
1
1
1
defense
93
Non-defense
3,964
4,261
4,028
4,050
4,268
4,334
94
Government
679
610
576
538
518
531
enterprises
95
State and local
35,944
36,743
37,939
39,437
40,782
42,237
96
General
33,916
34,792
36,137
37,588
38,924
40,318
government
97
Government
2,029
1,951
1,803
1,848
1,859
1,919
enterprises
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 25. Chain-Type Quantity Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Gross Output by Industry
[index numbers, 2012 = 100]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
All Industries
100.000
101.069
102.441
105.571
107.374
110.261
2
Private
100.000
101.165
102.592
105.636
107.273
110.295
industries
3
Agriculture,
100.000
111.204
119.108
125.877
123.436
122.422
forestry,
fishing, and
hunting
4
Farms
100.000
112.189
124.598
132.356
140.632
138.199
5
Forestry,
100.000
108.573
105.132
109.556
84.550
86.427
fishing, and
related
activities
6
Mining
100.000
88.512
86.822
70.378
63.888
90.509
7
Oil and gas
100.000
102.721
117.093
111.024
111.797
115.889
extraction
8
Mining, except
100.000
79.445
65.052
45.548
37.283
79.520
oil and gas
9
Support
100.000
90.060
96.822
64.899
54.217
60.294
activities for
mining
10
Utilities
100.000
101.498
86.151
87.632
89.177
86.030
11
Construction
100.000
100.087
100.926
114.457
122.864
120.336
12
Manufacturing
100.000
103.530
103.315
104.793
106.695
109.984
13
Durable goods
100.000
106.490
108.144
109.708
109.250
117.663
14
Wood products
100.000
100.778
107.625
115.268
118.055
127.101
15
Nonmetallic
100.000
100.975
101.225
99.043
101.447
104.176
mineral
products
16
Primary
100.000
75.998
93.904
78.952
76.647
79.514
metals
17
Fabricated
100.000
112.466
102.932
114.018
122.910
139.694
metal products
18
Machinery
100.000
94.065
89.566
75.235
50.081
64.575
19
Computer and
100.000
98.858
112.091
175.409
139.216
151.964
electronic
products
20
Electrical
100.000
88.243
90.897
84.951
77.466
75.670
equipment,
appliances,
and components
21
Motor
100.000
118.585
126.260
127.143
137.315
149.013
vehicles,
bodies and
trailers, and
parts
22
Other
100.000
106.323
112.229
116.187
114.330
120.358
transportation
equipment
23
Furniture and
100.000
106.537
100.294
94.629
83.178
83.535
related
products
24
Miscellaneous
100.000
98.187
89.330
89.037
92.504
94.403
manufacturing
25
Nondurable
100.000
102.241
101.177
102.612
106.071
105.997
goods
26
Food and
100.000
101.342
101.931
103.403
106.858
107.158
beverage and
tobacco
products
27
Textile mills
100.000
89.022
94.361
97.333
100.739
102.687
and textile
product mills
28
Apparel and
100.000
97.327
93.293
95.991
124.387
141.325
leather and
allied
products
29
Paper
100.000
97.361
103.463
95.745
93.837
97.927
products
30
Printing and
100.000
97.473
101.496
104.634
106.663
91.606
related
support
activities
31
Petroleum and
100.000
102.632
100.744
102.478
103.371
100.743
coal products
32
Chemical
100.000
106.584
109.532
108.563
110.017
110.989
products
33
Plastics and
100.000
99.914
98.743
99.287
103.654
103.167
rubber
products
34
Wholesale trade
100.000
94.539
97.803
96.273
92.987
94.134
35
Retail trade
100.000
104.990
105.715
109.119
111.147
115.586
36
Motor vehicle
100.000
100.132
100.436
118.681
134.551
157.049
and parts
dealers
37
Food and
100.000
98.356
98.272
97.838
96.687
97.696
beverage stores
38
General
100.000
108.415
106.716
109.203
106.136
106.455
merchandise
stores
39
Other retail
100.000
105.467
106.900
108.855
110.494
113.839
40
Transportation
100.000
101.899
105.524
110.958
109.880
112.839
and warehousing
41
Air
100.000
101.888
105.233
112.845
112.154
113.710
transportation
42
Rail
100.000
98.944
100.872
100.603
101.999
106.297
transportation
43
Water
100.000
103.806
112.090
112.954
110.171
118.474
transportation
44
Truck
100.000
99.037
100.783
98.873
97.208
97.853
transportation
45
Transit and
100.000
102.004
103.691
107.121
106.868
112.127
ground
passenger
transportation
46
Pipeline
100.000
100.712
102.051
112.209
108.041
108.227
transportation
47
Other
100.000
104.718
107.120
114.493
113.149
122.492
transportation
and support
activities
48
Warehousing
100.000
99.781
96.587
98.139
103.719
105.238
and storage
49
Information
100.000
101.504
106.164
111.071
118.070
127.529
50
Publishing
100.000
94.581
94.103
93.804
90.616
97.142
industries,
except internet
(includes
software)
51
Motion picture
100.000
93.038
92.486
102.829
110.743
112.002
and sound
recording
industries
52
Broadcasting
100.000
106.727
115.747
121.513
134.315
142.392
and
telecommunicati
ons
53
Data
100.000
103.202
106.812
123.479
138.473
167.258
processing,
internet
publishing, and
other
information
services
54
Finance,
100.000
99.137
89.149
95.567
100.011
101.261
insurance, real
estate, rental,
and leasing
55
Finance and
100.000
97.129
102.223
106.030
108.408
109.476
insurance
56
Federal
100.000
98.153
94.868
101.032
102.310
102.641
Reserve banks,
credit
intermediation
, and related
activities
57
Securities,
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
commodity
contracts, and
investments
58
Insurance
100.000
97.040
102.872
106.472
108.946
110.078
carriers and
related
activities
59
Funds,
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
trusts, and
other
financial
vehicles
60
Real estate
100.000
99.810
84.825
92.105
97.247
98.561
and rental and
leasing
61
Real estate
100.000
98.752
78.289
84.219
86.084
85.373
62
Housing
100.000
98.756
78.285
84.217
86.083
85.372
63
Other real
100.000
88.142
88.794
89.007
89.119
86.836
estate
64
Rental and
100.000
102.808
103.355
114.555
130.164
138.417
leasing
services and
lessors of
intangible
assets
65
Professional
100.000
102.727
107.415
113.861
120.482
129.824
and business
services
66
Professional,
100.000
102.494
112.291
118.145
127.213
137.823
scientific, and
technical
services
67
Legal
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
services
68
Computer
100.000
80.829
78.795
94.010
96.236
105.877
systems design
and related
services
69
Miscellaneous
100.000
103.404
113.710
119.168
128.513
139.169
professional,
scientific,
and technical
services
70
Management of
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
companies and
enterprises
71
Administrative
100.000
102.766
106.585
113.133
119.331
128.453
and waste
management
services
72
Administrativ
100.000
102.766
106.585
113.133
119.330
128.454
e and support
services
73
Waste
100.000
100.583
113.102
120.260
123.868
120.606
management and
remediation
services
74
Educational
100.000
98.952
102.448
104.719
105.991
108.548
services, health
care, and social
assistance
75
Educational
100.000
99.161
102.494
104.467
105.348
107.771
services
76
Health care
100.000
96.875
102.035
107.381
112.759
116.735
and social
assistance
77
Ambulatory
100.000
100.100
107.206
114.182
121.812
126.791
health care
services
78
Hospitals
100.000
89.899
91.955
95.524
98.895
101.974
79
Nursing and
100.000
86.541
86.867
86.268
86.912
87.765
residential
care
facilities
80
Social
100.000
109.848
115.234
117.049
111.737
112.135
assistance
81
Arts,
100.000
97.725
100.852
103.936
106.880
109.631
entertainment,
recreation,
accommodation,
and food
services
82
Arts,
100.000
101.488
103.657
105.648
109.241
115.505
entertainment,
and recreation
83
Performing
100.000
101.166
104.912
106.268
109.734
113.976
arts,
spectator
sports,
museums, and
related
activities
84
Amusements,
100.000
101.604
103.201
105.427
109.067
116.103
gambling, and
recreation
industries
85
Accommodation
100.000
94.555
98.483
102.486
104.880
104.673
and food
services
86
Accommodation
100.000
103.253
108.263
111.878
114.056
113.331
87
Food services
100.000
84.485
87.156
91.614
94.258
94.651
and drinking
places
88
Other services,
100.000
98.614
100.055
101.907
105.381
106.559
except
government
89
Government
100.000
99.533
100.042
104.516
108.887
109.681
90
Federal
100.000
103.583
96.410
95.875
98.770
97.784
91
General
100.000
105.691
97.602
97.062
101.029
99.985
government
92
National
100.000
138.629
146.247
133.086
144.098
148.627
defense
93
Non-defense
100.000
105.688
97.597
97.059
101.025
99.981
94
Government
100.000
91.089
89.571
89.065
84.609
84.008
enterprises
95
State and local
100.000
99.015
100.496
105.608
110.169
111.195
96
General
100.000
99.363
101.405
106.833
111.778
112.800
government
97
Government
100.000
93.205
85.257
85.143
83.542
84.628
enterprises
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 26. Percent Changes in Chain-Type Quantity Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Gross Output by Industry
[Percent Change]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
All Industries
1.1
1.4
3.1
1.7
2.7
2
Private industries
1.2
1.4
3.0
1.5
2.8
3
Agriculture,
11.2
7.1
5.7
^1.9
^0.8
forestry, fishing, and
hunting
4
Farms
12.2
11.1
6.2
6.3
^1.7
5
Forestry, fishing,
8.6
^3.2
4.2
^22.8
2.2
and related
activities
6
Mining
^11.5
^1.9
^18.9
^9.2
41.7
7
Oil and gas
2.7
14.0
^5.2
0.7
3.7
extraction
8
Mining, except oil
^20.6
^18.1
^30.0
^18.1
113.3
and gas
9
Support activities
^9.9
7.5
^33.0
^16.5
11.2
for mining
10
Utilities
1.5
^15.1
1.7
1.8
^3.5
11
Construction
0.1
0.8
13.4
7.3
^2.1
12
Manufacturing
3.5
^0.2
1.4
1.8
3.1
13
Durable goods
6.5
1.6
1.4
^0.4
7.7
14
Wood products
0.8
6.8
7.1
2.4
7.7
15
Nonmetallic mineral
1.0
0.2
^2.2
2.4
2.7
products
16
Primary metals
^24.0
23.6
^15.9
^2.9
3.7
17
Fabricated metal
12.5
^8.5
10.8
7.8
13.7
products
18
Machinery
^5.9
^4.8
^16.0
^33.4
28.9
19
Computer and
^1.1
13.4
56.5
^20.6
9.2
electronic products
20
Electrical
^11.8
3.0
^6.5
^8.8
^2.3
equipment,
appliances, and
components
21
Motor vehicles,
18.6
6.5
0.7
8.0
8.5
bodies and trailers,
and parts
22
Other
6.3
5.6
3.5
^1.6
5.3
transportation
equipment
23
Furniture and
6.5
^5.9
^5.6
^12.1
0.4
related products
24
Miscellaneous
^1.8
^9.0
^0.3
3.9
2.1
manufacturing
25
Nondurable goods
2.2
^1.0
1.4
3.4
^0.1
26
Food and beverage
1.3
0.6
1.4
3.3
0.3
and tobacco products
27
Textile mills and
^11.0
6.0
3.1
3.5
1.9
textile product
mills
28
Apparel and leather
^2.7
^4.1
2.9
29.6
13.6
and allied products
29
Paper products
^2.6
6.3
^7.5
^2.0
4.4
30
Printing and
^2.5
4.1
3.1
1.9
^14.1
related support
activities
31
Petroleum and coal
2.6
^1.8
1.7
0.9
^2.5
products
32
Chemical products
6.6
2.8
^0.9
1.3
0.9
33
Plastics and rubber
^0.1
^1.2
0.6
4.4
^0.5
products
34
Wholesale trade
^5.5
3.5
^1.6
^3.4
1.2
35
Retail trade
5.0
0.7
3.2
1.9
4.0
36
Motor vehicle and
0.1
0.3
18.2
13.4
16.7
parts dealers
37
Food and beverage
^1.6
^0.1
^0.4
^1.2
1.0
stores
38
General merchandise
8.4
^1.6
2.3
^2.8
0.3
stores
39
Other retail
5.5
1.4
1.8
1.5
3.0
40
Transportation and
1.9
3.6
5.1
^1.0
2.7
warehousing
41
Air transportation
1.9
3.3
7.2
^0.6
1.4
42
Rail transportation
^1.1
1.9
^0.3
1.4
4.2
43
Water transportation
3.8
8.0
0.8
^2.5
7.5
44
Truck transportation
^1.0
1.8
^1.9
^1.7
0.7
45
Transit and ground
2.0
1.7
3.3
^0.2
4.9
passenger
transportation
46
Pipeline
0.7
1.3
10.0
^3.7
0.2
transportation
47
Other transportation
4.7
2.3
6.9
^1.2
8.3
and support
activities
48
Warehousing and
^0.2
^3.2
1.6
5.7
1.5
storage
49
Information
1.5
4.6
4.6
6.3
8.0
50
Publishing
^5.4
^0.5
^0.3
^3.4
7.2
industries, except
internet (includes
software)
51
Motion picture and
^7.0
^0.6
11.2
7.7
1.1
sound recording
industries
52
Broadcasting and
6.7
8.5
5.0
10.5
6.0
telecommunications
53
Data processing,
3.2
3.5
15.6
12.1
20.8
internet publishing,
and other information
services
54
Finance, insurance,
^0.9
^10.1
7.2
4.7
1.2
real estate, rental,
and leasing
55
Finance and
^2.9
5.2
3.7
2.2
1.0
insurance
56
Federal Reserve
^1.8
^3.3
6.5
1.3
0.3
banks, credit
intermediation, and
related activities
57
Securities,
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
commodity contracts,
and investments
58
Insurance carriers
^3.0
6.0
3.5
2.3
1.0
and related
activities
59
Funds, trusts, and
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
other financial
vehicles
60
Real estate and
^0.2
^15.0
8.6
5.6
1.4
rental and leasing
61
Real estate
^1.2
^20.7
7.6
2.2
^0.8
62
Housing
^1.2
^20.7
7.6
2.2
^0.8
63
Other real estate
^11.9
0.7
0.2
0.1
^2.6
64
Rental and leasing
2.8
0.5
10.8
13.6
6.3
services and lessors
of intangible assets
65
Professional and
2.7
4.6
6.0
5.8
7.8
business services
66
Professional,
2.5
9.6
5.2
7.7
8.3
scientific, and
technical services
67
Legal services
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
68
Computer systems
^19.2
^2.5
19.3
2.4
10.0
design and related
services
69
Miscellaneous
3.4
10.0
4.8
7.8
8.3
professional,
scientific, and
technical services
70
Management of
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
companies and
enterprises
71
Administrative and
2.8
3.7
6.1
5.5
7.6
waste management
services
72
Administrative and
2.8
3.7
6.1
5.5
7.6
support services
73
Waste management
0.6
12.4
6.3
3.0
^2.6
and remediation
services
74
Educational services,
^1.0
3.5
2.2
1.2
2.4
health care, and
social assistance
75
Educational services
^0.8
3.4
1.9
0.8
2.3
76
Health care and
^3.1
5.3
5.2
5.0
3.5
social assistance
77
Ambulatory health
0.1
7.1
6.5
6.7
4.1
care services
78
Hospitals
^10.1
2.3
3.9
3.5
3.1
79
Nursing and
^13.5
0.4
^0.7
0.7
1.0
residential care
facilities
80
Social assistance
9.8
4.9
1.6
^4.5
0.4
81
Arts, entertainment,
^2.3
3.2
3.1
2.8
2.6
recreation,
accommodation, and
food services
82
Arts, entertainment,
1.5
2.1
1.9
3.4
5.7
and recreation
83
Performing arts,
1.2
3.7
1.3
3.3
3.9
spectator sports,
museums, and related
activities
84
Amusements,
1.6
1.6
2.2
3.5
6.5
gambling, and
recreation
industries
85
Accommodation and
^5.4
4.2
4.1
2.3
^0.2
food services
86
Accommodation
3.3
4.9
3.3
1.9
^0.6
87
Food services and
^15.5
3.2
5.1
2.9
0.4
drinking places
88
Other services,
^1.4
1.5
1.9
3.4
1.1
except government
89
Government
^0.5
0.5
4.5
4.2
0.7
90
Federal
3.6
^6.9
^0.6
3.0
^1.0
91
General government
5.7
^7.7
^0.6
4.1
^1.0
92
National defense
38.6
5.5
^9.0
8.3
3.1
93
Non-defense
5.7
^7.7
^0.6
4.1
^1.0
94
Government
^8.9
^1.7
^0.6
^5.0
^0.7
enterprises
95
State and local
^1.0
1.5
5.1
4.3
0.9
96
General government
^0.6
2.1
5.4
4.6
0.9
97
Government
^6.8
^8.5
^0.1
^1.9
1.3
enterprises
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 27. Chain-Type Price Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Gross Output by Industry
[index numbers, 2012 = 100]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
All Industries
100.000
101.416
102.558
100.234
99.990
102.211
2
Private
100.000
101.317
102.421
100.015
99.799
101.989
industries
3
Agriculture,
100.000
101.967
97.749
93.665
89.282
90.470
forestry,
fishing, and
hunting
4
Farms
100.000
101.224
94.434
88.622
82.843
83.636
5
Forestry,
100.000
104.010
107.572
109.112
110.243
113.073
fishing, and
related
activities
6
Mining
100.000
99.741
99.248
78.233
73.546
82.730
7
Oil and gas
100.000
104.978
110.516
69.456
62.322
82.229
extraction
8
Mining, except
100.000
94.276
88.888
84.193
80.618
78.486
oil and gas
9
Support
100.000
111.600
108.614
122.036
129.416
129.288
activities for
mining
10
Utilities
100.000
104.341
108.295
114.535
118.939
124.257
11
Construction
100.000
104.068
108.893
112.102
115.968
120.833
12
Manufacturing
100.000
99.374
97.797
82.580
77.408
82.101
13
Durable goods
100.000
102.096
103.493
104.723
105.088
106.120
14
Wood products
100.000
100.147
99.615
101.825
106.511
107.292
15
Nonmetallic
100.000
100.907
102.029
103.890
105.222
106.150
mineral
products
16
Primary
100.000
100.264
100.488
100.600
97.819
98.102
metals
17
Fabricated
100.000
107.757
108.630
108.455
107.513
108.986
metal products
18
Machinery
100.000
101.599
103.915
105.280
103.594
103.881
19
Computer and
100.000
97.878
98.063
92.842
83.761
82.903
electronic
products
20
Electrical
100.000
100.546
101.395
101.857
101.760
102.330
equipment,
appliances,
and components
21
Motor
100.000
102.337
104.299
106.488
107.965
110.448
vehicles,
bodies and
trailers, and
parts
22
Other
100.000
101.457
102.328
103.584
104.785
106.540
transportation
equipment
23
Furniture and
100.000
102.810
104.625
106.968
109.973
110.765
related
products
24
Miscellaneous
100.000
101.599
103.031
104.008
103.103
99.165
manufacturing
25
Nondurable
100.000
98.188
95.270
72.533
64.891
71.260
goods
26
Food and
100.000
101.606
105.681
104.712
102.176
103.072
beverage and
tobacco
products
27
Textile mills
100.000
104.731
106.578
106.716
107.265
107.819
and textile
product mills
28
Apparel and
100.000
102.701
102.980
104.003
104.942
106.620
leather and
allied
products
29
Paper
100.000
99.788
99.410
99.101
99.257
99.069
products
30
Printing and
100.000
100.481
101.170
101.438
101.738
102.604
related
support
activities
31
Petroleum and
100.000
96.652
91.231
58.600
48.011
56.900
coal products
32
Chemical
100.000
101.517
103.544
105.216
105.898
108.021
products
33
Plastics and
100.000
100.961
102.531
101.829
101.179
102.137
rubber
products
34
Wholesale trade
100.000
107.070
107.763
109.219
110.169
111.575
35
Retail trade
100.000
100.158
102.018
104.210
105.159
105.294
36
Motor vehicle
100.000
102.215
106.294
105.440
104.596
102.134
and parts
dealers
37
Food and
100.000
102.165
105.877
111.095
114.733
115.921
beverage stores
38
General
100.000
98.079
96.958
96.385
97.574
98.405
merchandise
stores
39
Other retail
100.000
100.217
102.363
105.381
106.323
106.665
40
Transportation
100.000
100.565
102.265
98.839
98.594
100.498
and warehousing
41
Air
100.000
100.296
102.570
97.275
95.253
97.559
transportation
42
Rail
100.000
103.129
104.518
102.943
102.335
105.435
transportation
43
Water
100.000
99.686
98.997
99.755
106.828
106.355
transportation
44
Truck
100.000
101.453
103.112
101.133
100.424
102.691
transportation
45
Transit and
100.000
102.623
102.757
103.830
106.640
108.084
ground
passenger
transportation
46
Pipeline
100.000
104.167
110.870
116.063
118.720
119.686
transportation
47
Other
100.000
101.316
102.592
104.683
107.550
109.837
transportation
and support
activities
48
Warehousing
100.000
101.453
103.049
101.094
100.331
102.527
and storage
49
Information
100.000
101.578
102.394
102.568
102.462
102.383
50
Publishing
100.000
102.147
103.521
104.681
106.412
107.962
industries,
except internet
(includes
software)
51
Motion picture
100.000
111.472
116.094
114.850
109.718
116.881
and sound
recording
industries
52
Broadcasting
100.000
100.607
100.935
100.705
100.031
98.658
and
telecommunicati
ons
53
Data
100.000
101.341
101.806
101.642
101.144
101.513
processing,
internet
publishing, and
other
information
services
54
Finance,
100.000
102.467
105.435
106.449
108.175
111.702
insurance, real
estate, rental,
and leasing
55
Finance and
100.000
102.033
103.567
105.497
109.522
114.660
insurance
56
Federal
100.000
104.095
105.923
107.365
110.554
113.004
Reserve banks,
credit
intermediation
, and related
activities
57
Securities,
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
commodity
contracts, and
investments
58
Insurance
100.000
101.854
103.364
105.333
109.425
114.780
carriers and
related
activities
59
Funds,
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
trusts, and
other
financial
vehicles
60
Real estate
100.000
102.610
106.104
106.755
107.606
110.526
and rental and
leasing
61
Real estate
100.000
102.832
106.094
109.878
114.004
118.354
62
Housing
100.000
102.833
106.094
109.879
114.006
118.356
63
Other real
100.000
102.151
105.820
107.900
110.025
112.350
estate
64
Rental and
100.000
101.996
106.048
100.099
94.502
94.804
leasing
services and
lessors of
intangible
assets
65
Professional
100.000
101.499
102.775
104.910
106.831
108.714
and business
services
66
Professional,
100.000
102.375
104.488
107.466
110.420
112.377
scientific, and
technical
services
67
Legal
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
services
68
Computer
100.000
107.136
110.036
108.304
103.191
106.377
systems design
and related
services
69
Miscellaneous
100.000
102.200
104.289
107.409
110.618
112.536
professional,
scientific,
and technical
services
70
Management of
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
companies and
enterprises
71
Administrative
100.000
101.352
102.485
104.472
106.210
108.080
and waste
management
services
72
Administrativ
100.000
101.352
102.485
104.472
106.210
108.080
e and support
services
73
Waste
100.000
107.857
104.949
105.651
106.833
111.679
management and
remediation
services
74
Educational
100.000
102.646
104.769
107.246
109.234
112.215
services, health
care, and social
assistance
75
Educational
100.000
102.729
104.846
107.500
109.648
112.848
services
76
Health care
100.000
101.818
104.008
104.710
105.144
106.064
and social
assistance
77
Ambulatory
100.000
102.225
104.617
104.426
103.821
103.878
health care
services
78
Hospitals
100.000
102.196
104.683
106.818
108.870
111.112
79
Nursing and
100.000
102.174
104.783
107.668
110.219
112.941
residential
care
facilities
80
Social
100.000
94.661
92.829
95.066
98.325
102.075
assistance
81
Arts,
100.000
101.949
104.613
107.739
110.106
111.875
entertainment,
recreation,
accommodation,
and food
services
82
Arts,
100.000
101.689
103.963
107.869
110.291
111.397
entertainment,
and recreation
83
Performing
100.000
102.235
104.911
110.988
114.463
116.875
arts,
spectator
sports,
museums, and
related
activities
84
Amusements,
100.000
101.494
103.622
106.737
108.778
109.417
gambling, and
recreation
industries
85
Accommodation
100.000
102.178
105.191
107.632
109.950
112.320
and food
services
86
Accommodation
100.000
102.119
105.506
107.709
109.896
112.055
87
Food services
100.000
102.253
104.732
107.512
110.015
112.680
and drinking
places
88
Other services,
100.000
102.959
105.223
107.942
110.254
114.185
except
government
89
Government
100.000
103.007
104.780
103.787
103.113
105.810
90
Federal
100.000
101.258
102.891
103.109
104.404
107.180
91
General
100.000
101.700
104.099
105.255
106.562
109.337
government
92
National
100.000
99.954
100.304
100.289
98.446
98.579
defense
93
Non-defense
100.000
101.700
104.100
105.255
106.563
109.338
94
Government
100.000
98.484
95.070
89.309
90.524
93.346
enterprises
95
State and local
100.000
103.238
105.029
103.890
102.987
105.675
96
General
100.000
103.240
105.073
103.741
102.673
105.388
government
97
Government
100.000
103.194
104.216
107.001
109.675
111.753
enterprises
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 28. Percent Changes in Chain-Type Price Indexes for Outdoor Recreation Gross Output by Industry
[Percent Change]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
All Industries
1.4
1.1
^2.3
^0.2
2.2
2
Private industries
1.3
1.1
^2.3
^0.2
2.2
3
Agriculture,
2.0
^4.1
^4.2
^4.7
1.3
forestry, fishing, and
hunting
4
Farms
1.2
^6.7
^6.2
^6.5
1.0
5
Forestry, fishing,
4.0
3.4
1.4
1.0
2.6
and related
activities
6
Mining
^0.3
^0.5
^21.2
^6.0
12.5
7
Oil and gas
5.0
5.3
^37.2
^10.3
31.9
extraction
8
Mining, except oil
^5.7
^5.7
^5.3
^4.2
^2.6
and gas
9
Support activities
11.6
^2.7
12.4
6.0
^0.1
for mining
10
Utilities
4.3
3.8
5.8
3.8
4.5
11
Construction
4.1
4.6
2.9
3.4
4.2
12
Manufacturing
^0.6
^1.6
^15.6
^6.3
6.1
13
Durable goods
2.1
1.4
1.2
0.3
1.0
14
Wood products
0.1
^0.5
2.2
4.6
0.7
15
Nonmetallic mineral
0.9
1.1
1.8
1.3
0.9
products
16
Primary metals
0.3
0.2
0.1
^2.8
0.3
17
Fabricated metal
7.8
0.8
^0.2
^0.9
1.4
products
18
Machinery
1.6
2.3
1.3
^1.6
0.3
19
Computer and
^2.1
0.2
^5.3
^9.8
^1.0
electronic products
20
Electrical
0.5
0.8
0.5
^0.1
0.6
equipment,
appliances, and
components
21
Motor vehicles,
2.3
1.9
2.1
1.4
2.3
bodies and trailers,
and parts
22
Other
1.5
0.9
1.2
1.2
1.7
transportation
equipment
23
Furniture and
2.8
1.8
2.2
2.8
0.7
related products
24
Miscellaneous
1.6
1.4
0.9
^0.9
^3.8
manufacturing
25
Nondurable goods
^1.8
^3.0
^23.9
^10.5
9.8
26
Food and beverage
1.6
4.0
^0.9
^2.4
0.9
and tobacco products
27
Textile mills and
4.7
1.8
0.1
0.5
0.5
textile product
mills
28
Apparel and leather
2.7
0.3
1.0
0.9
1.6
and allied products
29
Paper products
^0.2
^0.4
^0.3
0.2
^0.2
30
Printing and
0.5
0.7
0.3
0.3
0.9
related support
activities
31
Petroleum and coal
^3.3
^5.6
^35.8
^18.1
18.5
products
32
Chemical products
1.5
2.0
1.6
0.6
2.0
33
Plastics and rubber
1.0
1.6
^0.7
^0.6
0.9
products
34
Wholesale trade
7.1
0.6
1.4
0.9
1.3
35
Retail trade
0.2
1.9
2.1
0.9
0.1
36
Motor vehicle and
2.2
4.0
^0.8
^0.8
^2.4
parts dealers
37
Food and beverage
2.2
3.6
4.9
3.3
1.0
stores
38
General merchandise
^1.9
^1.1
^0.6
1.2
0.9
stores
39
Other retail
0.2
2.1
2.9
0.9
0.3
40
Transportation and
0.6
1.7
^3.3
^0.2
1.9
warehousing
41
Air transportation
0.3
2.3
^5.2
^2.1
2.4
42
Rail transportation
3.1
1.3
^1.5
^0.6
3.0
43
Water transportation
^0.3
^0.7
0.8
7.1
^0.4
44
Truck transportation
1.5
1.6
^1.9
^0.7
2.3
45
Transit and ground
2.6
0.1
1.0
2.7
1.4
passenger
transportation
46
Pipeline
4.2
6.4
4.7
2.3
0.8
transportation
47
Other transportation
1.3
1.3
2.0
2.7
2.1
and support
activities
48
Warehousing and
1.5
1.6
^1.9
^0.8
2.2
storage
49
Information
1.6
0.8
0.2
^0.1
^0.1
50
Publishing
2.1
1.3
1.1
1.7
1.5
industries, except
internet (includes
software)
51
Motion picture and
11.5
4.1
^1.1
^4.5
6.5
sound recording
industries
52
Broadcasting and
0.6
0.3
^0.2
^0.7
^1.4
telecommunications
53
Data processing,
1.3
0.5
^0.2
^0.5
0.4
internet publishing,
and other information
services
54
Finance, insurance,
2.5
2.9
1.0
1.6
3.3
real estate, rental,
and leasing
55
Finance and
2.0
1.5
1.9
3.8
4.7
insurance
56
Federal Reserve
4.1
1.8
1.4
3.0
2.2
banks, credit
intermediation, and
related activities
57
Securities,
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
commodity contracts,
and investments
58
Insurance carriers
1.9
1.5
1.9
3.9
4.9
and related
activities
59
Funds, trusts, and
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
other financial
vehicles
60
Real estate and
2.6
3.4
0.6
0.8
2.7
rental and leasing
61
Real estate
2.8
3.2
3.6
3.8
3.8
62
Housing
2.8
3.2
3.6
3.8
3.8
63
Other real estate
2.2
3.6
2.0
2.0
2.1
64
Rental and leasing
2.0
4.0
^5.6
^5.6
0.3
services and lessors
of intangible assets
65
Professional and
1.5
1.3
2.1
1.8
1.8
business services
66
Professional,
2.4
2.1
2.9
2.7
1.8
scientific, and
technical services
67
Legal services
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
68
Computer systems
7.1
2.7
^1.6
^4.7
3.1
design and related
services
69
Miscellaneous
2.2
2.0
3.0
3.0
1.7
professional,
scientific, and
technical services
70
Management of
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
companies and
enterprises
71
Administrative and
1.4
1.1
1.9
1.7
1.8
waste management
services
72
Administrative and
1.4
1.1
1.9
1.7
1.8
support services
73
Waste management
7.9
^2.7
0.7
1.1
4.5
and remediation
services
74
Educational services,
2.6
2.1
2.4
1.9
2.7
health care, and
social assistance
75
Educational services
2.7
2.1
2.5
2.0
2.9
76
Health care and
1.8
2.2
0.7
0.4
0.9
social assistance
77
Ambulatory health
2.2
2.3
^0.2
^0.6
0.1
care services
78
Hospitals
2.2
2.4
2.0
1.9
2.1
79
Nursing and
2.2
2.6
2.8
2.4
2.5
residential care
facilities
80
Social assistance
^5.3
^1.9
2.4
3.4
3.8
81
Arts, entertainment,
1.9
2.6
3.0
2.2
1.6
recreation,
accommodation, and
food services
82
Arts, entertainment,
1.7
2.2
3.8
2.2
1.0
and recreation
83
Performing arts,
2.2
2.6
5.8
3.1
2.1
spectator sports,
museums, and related
activities
84
Amusements,
1.5
2.1
3.0
1.9
0.6
gambling, and
recreation
industries
85
Accommodation and
2.2
2.9
2.3
2.2
2.2
food services
86
Accommodation
2.1
3.3
2.1
2.0
2.0
87
Food services and
2.3
2.4
2.7
2.3
2.4
drinking places
88
Other services,
3.0
2.2
2.6
2.1
3.6
except government
89
Government
3.0
1.7
^0.9
^0.6
2.6
90
Federal
1.3
1.6
0.2
1.3
2.7
91
General government
1.7
2.4
1.1
1.2
2.6
92
National defense
0.0
0.3
0.0
^1.8
0.1
93
Non-defense
1.7
2.4
1.1
1.2
2.6
94
Government
^1.5
^3.5
^6.1
1.4
3.1
enterprises
95
State and local
3.2
1.7
^1.1
^0.9
2.6
96
General government
3.2
1.8
^1.3
^1.0
2.6
97
Government
3.2
1.0
2.7
2.5
1.9
enterprises
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 29. Outdoor Recreation Compensation by Industry
[Millions of current dollars]
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
All Industries
177,963
179,837
186,169
195,635
203,145
213,441
2
Private
159,068
160,065
165,953
174,536
181,372
190,851
industries
3
Agriculture,
2,010
1,956
2,086
2,214
2,244
2,358
forestry,
fishing, and
hunting
4
Farms
1,582
1,470
1,627
1,651
1,816
1,896
5
Forestry,
428
486
459
563
428
462
fishing, and
related
activities
6
Mining
81
72
61
51
48
69
7
Oil and gas
9
9
10
12
11
8
extraction
8
Mining, except
57
47
36
27
23
48
oil and gas
9
Support
15
16
15
12
14
14
activities for
mining
10
Utilities
0
1
0
1
1
1
11
Construction
3,421
3,317
3,498
3,602
4,018
4,465
12
Manufacturing
15,109
15,359
15,704
16,123
16,539
17,941
13
Durable goods
8,680
8,792
8,998
9,358
9,402
10,636
14
Wood products
1
1
1
1
1
1
15
Nonmetallic
18
18
18
18
19
18
mineral
products
16
Primary
2
2
2
2
2
2
metals
17
Fabricated
736
826
801
920
926
1,215
metal products
18
Machinery
834
839
805
771
559
797
19
Computer and
286
267
307
469
339
413
electronic
products
20
Electrical
357
323
329
322
291
299
equipment,
appliances,
and components
21
Motor
1,644
1,700
1,696
1,691
1,839
2,651
vehicles,
bodies and
trailers, and
parts
22
Other
3,004
3,144
3,422
3,450
3,617
3,410
transportation
equipment
23
Furniture and
26
29
29
29
27
25
related
products
24
Miscellaneous
1,773
1,644
1,588
1,685
1,782
1,806
manufacturing
25
Nondurable
6,429
6,567
6,706
6,765
7,137
7,306
goods
26
Food and
1,908
1,996
2,134
2,182
2,318
2,240
beverage and
tobacco
products
27
Textile mills
227
208
227
232
249
231
and textile
product mills
28
Apparel and
1,853
1,847
1,845
1,797
1,985
2,106
leather and
allied
products
29
Paper
125
118
127
120
119
86
products
30
Printing and
63
61
66
69
70
64
related
support
activities
31
Petroleum and
1,307
1,342
1,283
1,309
1,341
1,500
coal products
32
Chemical
839
887
914
943
934
953
products
33
Plastics and
108
107
109
112
120
125
rubber
products
34
Wholesale trade
11,364
11,038
11,610
12,260
11,984
12,168
35
Retail trade
44,085
45,357
45,731
47,717
48,207
49,804
36
Motor vehicle
3,504
3,462
3,525
3,896
4,223
4,637
and parts
dealers
37
Food and
3,636
3,712
3,800
4,007
4,056
4,148
beverage stores
38
General
9,955
10,428
9,979
10,199
10,158
10,250
merchandise
stores
39
Other retail
26,990
27,755
28,426
29,614
29,771
30,769
40
Transportation
15,496
16,292
16,943
18,680
20,187
21,373
and warehousing
41
Air
9,731
10,268
10,919
12,403
13,762
14,806
transportation
42
Rail
308
293
302
336
335
350
transportation
43
Water
1,275
1,467
1,480
1,559
1,600
1,700
transportation
44
Truck
2,014
2,057
2,063
2,113
2,106
2,180
transportation
45
Transit and
1,175
1,132
1,068
1,107
1,153
1,167
ground
passenger
transportation
46
Pipeline
54
49
48
64
68
69
transportation
47
Other
926
1,011
1,049
1,082
1,146
1,081
transportation
and support
activities
48
Warehousing
14
14
14
15
16
20
and storage
49
Information
437
460
482
501
511
540
50
Publishing
209
209
211
223
214
219
industries,
except internet
(includes
software)
51
Motion picture
15
18
20
22
23
27
and sound
recording
industries
52
Broadcasting
174
188
203
199
212
216
and
telecommunicati
ons
53
Data
40
45
48
57
62
78
processing,
internet
publishing, and
other
information
services
54
Finance,
3,405
3,311
3,182
3,480
3,571
3,804
insurance, real
estate, rental,
and leasing
55
Finance and
1,952
1,855
1,820
1,837
1,819
1,945
insurance
56
Federal
141
145
139
164
172
176
Reserve banks,
credit
intermediation
, and related
activities
57
Securities,
0
0
0
0
0
0
commodity
contracts, and
investments
58
Insurance
1,811
1,710
1,681
1,673
1,648
1,769
carriers and
related
activities
59
Funds,
0
0
0
0
0
0
trusts, and
other
financial
vehicles
60
Real estate
1,453
1,456
1,363
1,643
1,751
1,859
and rental and
leasing
61
Real estate
564
579
459
488
503
525
62
Housing
562
578
457
487
501
524
63
Other real
1
1
1
1
1
1
estate
64
Rental and
890
876
904
1,155
1,249
1,334
leasing
services and
lessors of
intangible
assets
65
Professional
3,611
3,296
3,488
3,886
4,026
4,719
and business
services
66
Professional,
635
557
618
707
776
853
scientific, and
technical
services
67
Legal
0
0
0
0
0
0
services
68
Computer
35
30
31
40
38
43
systems design
and related
services
69
Miscellaneous
600
526
587
667
739
810
professional,
scientific,
and technical
services
70
Management of
0
0
0
0
0
0
companies and
enterprises
71
Administrative
2,976
2,740
2,870
3,179
3,250
3,866
and waste
management
services
72
Administrativ
2,975
2,739
2,870
3,179
3,249
3,866
e and support
services
73
Waste
0
0
0
0
0
0
management and
remediation
services
74
Educational
2,614
2,663
2,880
2,984
3,119
3,237
services, health
care, and social
assistance
75
Educational
2,342
2,393
2,599
2,686
2,808
2,914
services
76
Health care
271
270
282
297
312
324
and social
assistance
77
Ambulatory
164
170
179
188
199
208
health care
services
78
Hospitals
83
76
79
83
86
89
79
Nursing and
13
11
12
12
12
12
residential
care
facilities
80
Social
11
13
13
14
14
14
assistance
81
Arts,
55,125
54,539
57,754
60,333
64,062
67,329
entertainment,
recreation,
accommodation,
and food
services
82
Arts,
27,743
28,812
30,819
31,688
34,120
36,203
entertainment,
and recreation
83
Performing
7,148
7,555
8,327
8,531
9,350
9,987
arts,
spectator
sports,
museums, and
related
activities
84
Amusements,
20,595
21,257
22,492
23,156
24,770
26,216
gambling, and
recreation
industries
85
Accommodation
27,383
25,726
26,935
28,645
29,942
31,125
and food
services
86
Accommodation
13,818
14,032
14,605
15,379
15,886
16,321
87
Food services
13,565
11,694
12,329
13,266
14,056
14,805
and drinking
places
88
Other services,
2,309
2,404
2,533
2,705
2,855
3,043
except
government
89
Government
18,896
19,772
20,216
21,099
21,773
22,590
90
Federal
1,992
2,148
2,049
2,038
2,147
2,188
91
General
1,726
1,864
1,778
1,786
1,904
1,933
government
92
National
0
0
0
0
0
0
defense
93
Non-defense
1,726
1,864
1,778
1,786
1,904
1,933
94
Government
266
283
270
252
243
255
enterprises
95
State and local
16,904
17,624
18,167
19,061
19,626
20,402
96
General
15,053
15,448
16,228
16,976
17,549
18,403
government
97
Government
1,851
2,177
1,939
2,086
2,077
1,998
enterprises
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 30. Outdoor Recreation Employment by Industry
Thousands of full- and part-time employees
Bureau of Economic Analysis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
All Industries
4,841
4,794
4,879
4,983
5,081
5,171
2
Private
4,557
4,509
4,594
4,694
4,787
4,873
industries
3
Agriculture,
50
47
50
52
53
55
forestry,
fishing, and
hunting
4
Farms
45
41
44
45
47
48
5
Forestry,
5
6
6
7
6
7
fishing, and
related
activities
6
Mining
1
1
1
0
0
1
7
Oil and gas
0
0
0
0
0
0
extraction
8
Mining, except
1
0
0
0
0
0
oil and gas
9
Support
0
0
0
0
0
0
activities for
mining
10
Utilities
0
0
0
0
0
0
11
Construction
88
90
93
101
102
103
12
Manufacturing
227
231
230
235
244
256
13
Durable goods
128
134
133
137
144
159
14
Wood products
0
0
0
0
0
0
15
Nonmetallic
0
0
0
0
0
0
mineral
products
16
Primary
0
0
0
0
0
0
metals
17
Fabricated
9
10
10
11
11
11
metal products
18
Machinery
9
9
8
8
6
7
19
Computer and
3
3
4
5
4
4
electronic
products
20
Electrical
5
4
4
4
4
4
equipment,
appliances,
and components
21
Motor
34
38
38
40
47
58
vehicles,
bodies and
trailers, and
parts
22
Other
39
41
42
43
46
50
transportation
equipment
23
Furniture and
1
1
1
1
1
0
related
products
24
Miscellaneous
28
27
26
26
26
25
manufacturing
25
Nondurable
99
97
97
97
99
97
goods
26
Food and
35
35
36
37
39
39
beverage and
tobacco
products
27
Textile mills
5
5
5
5
5
5
and textile
product mills
28
Apparel and
39
37
36
36
36
33
leather and
allied
products
29
Paper
2
2
2
1
1
1
products
30
Printing and
1
1
1
1
1
1
related
support
activities
31
Petroleum and
7
7
6
7
6
6
coal products
32
Chemical
9
9
9
9
9
9
products
33
Plastics and
2
2
2
2
2
2
rubber
products
34
Wholesale trade
150
147
148
150
148
148
35
Retail trade
1,601
1,610
1,612
1,632
1,629
1,627
36
Motor vehicle
89
91
94
99
102
105
and parts
dealers
37
Food and
126
128
131
134
135
135
beverage stores
38
General
396
381
378
380
376
357
merchandise
stores
39
Other retail
990
1,010
1,010
1,019
1,016
1,031
40
Transportation
216
214
217
226
231
238
and warehousing
41
Air
111
108
111
119
123
130
transportation
42
Rail
3
3
3
3
3
3
transportation
43
Water
13
14
14
15
15
15
transportation
44
Truck
34
34
33
33
33
32
transportation
45
Transit and
29
28
27
27
27
27
ground
passenger
transportation
46
Pipeline
1
1
1
1
1
1
transportation
47
Other
25
26
27
28
29
29
transportation
and support
activities
48
Warehousing
0
0
0
0
0
0
and storage
49
Information
6
6
6
6
6
6
50
Publishing
4
4
4
4
3
3
industries,
except internet
(includes
software)
51
Motion picture
1
1
1
1
1
1
and sound
recording
industries
52
Broadcasting
2
2
2
2
2
2
and
telecommunicati
ons
53
Data
0
0
0
0
0
0
processing,
internet
publishing, and
other
information
services
54
Finance,
53
53
49
50
51
52
insurance, real
estate, rental,
and leasing
55
Finance and
18
17
16
16
15
16
insurance
56
Federal
2
2
2
2
2
2
Reserve banks,
credit
intermediation
, and related
activities
57
Securities,
0
0
0
0
0
0
commodity
contracts, and
investments
58
Insurance
16
15
14
14
13
14
carriers and
related
activities
59
Funds,
0
0
0
0
0
0
trusts, and
other
financial
vehicles
60
Real estate
35
36
33
34
35
36
and rental and
leasing
61
Real estate
14
14
10
10
10
10
62
Housing
14
14
10
10
10
10
63
Other real
0
0
0
0
0
0
estate
64
Rental and
21
22
23
24
25
26
leasing
services and
lessors of
intangible
assets
65
Professional
67
68
69
72
77
77
and business
services
66
Professional,
16
17
18
19
20
21
scientific, and
technical
services
67
Legal
0
0
0
0
0
0
services
68
Computer
0
0
0
0
0
0
systems design
and related
services
69
Miscellaneous
16
17
18
19
20
21
professional,
scientific,
and technical
services
70
Management of
0
0
0
0
0
0
companies and
enterprises
71
Administrative
51
51
51
53
57
56
and waste
management
services
72
Administrativ
51
51
51
53
57
56
e and support
services
73
Waste
0
0
0
0
0
0
management and
remediation
services
74
Educational
96
102
108
112
118
123
services, health
care, and social
assistance
75
Educational
91
98
103
108
113
118
services
76
Health care
4
4
4
5
5
5
and social
assistance
77
Ambulatory
2
3
3
3
3
3
health care
services
78
Hospitals
1
1
1
1
1
1
79
Nursing and
0
0
0
0
0
0
residential
care
facilities
80
Social
0
0
0
0
0
0
assistance
81
Arts,
1,941
1,880
1,948
1,994
2,065
2,123
entertainment,
recreation,
accommodation,
and food
services
82
Arts,
870
892
938
953
999
1,036
entertainment,
and recreation
83
Performing
73
75
79
80
81
84
arts,
spectator
sports,
museums, and
related
activities
84
Amusements,
796
816
859
873
918
952
gambling, and
recreation
industries
85
Accommodation
1,071
988
1,010
1,041
1,066
1,088
and food
services
86
Accommodation
425
434
441
453
461
470
87
Food services
646
554
568
589
604
618
and drinking
places
88
Other services,
61
61
64
64
64
64
except
government
89
Government
284
285
285
289
294
297
90
Federal
24
26
23
23
23
23
91
General
24
26
23
23
23
23
government
92
National
0
0
0
0
0
0
defense
93
Non-defense
24
26
23
23
23
23
94
Government
0
0
0
0
0
0
enterprises
95
State and local
260
259
262
266
271
275
96
General
236
233
239
242
247
253
government
97
Government
23
26
23
24
24
22
enterprises
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
state level news release tables
Table 1. Outdoor Recreation Value-Added, Employment, and Compensation as a Percent of Total, 2017
[Millions of current dollars]
Friday, September 20, 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total Outdoor
Total Outdoor
Total Outdoor
Recreation
Recreation Value-
Percent of Total
Recreation
Percent of Total
Compensation
Percent of Total
Added (Thousands of
Value-Added \1\
Employment
Employment \1\
(Thousands of
Compensation \1\
Dollars)
Dollars)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
United States
427,189,444
2.2
5,170,670
3.4
213,440,905
2.1
Alabama....................
4,133,003
2.0
62,647
3.0
2,083,927
1.8
Alaska.....................
2,187,367
4.2
22,677
6.4
1,030,701
3.8
Arizona....................
8,654,150
2.7
108,460
3.8
4,327,385
2.4
Arkansas...................
2,887,050
2.3
39,299
3.1
1,390,053
2.0
California.................
52,120,252
1.9
588,680
3.3
27,383,466
1.9
Colorado...................
11,308,942
3.3
146,178
5.3
5,963,912
3.1
Connecticut................
3,594,652
1.4
48,390
2.8
1,923,607
1.4
Delaware...................
1,309,865
1.8
18,485
4.0
611,026
1.9
District of Columbia.......
1,623,489
1.2
23,651
3.0
977,279
1.1
Florida....................
42,183,230
4.3
502,939
5.6
20,690,183
3.9
Georgia....................
12,319,942
2.2
144,203
3.1
6,274,833
2.1
Hawaii.....................
4,794,590
5.4
57,584
7.9
2,437,813
5.1
Idaho......................
2,328,949
3.2
33,831
4.5
1,182,979
3.0
Illinois...................
14,725,840
1.8
165,400
2.7
7,737,696
1.7
Indiana....................
9,658,524
2.8
108,535
3.4
4,486,832
2.4
Iowa.......................
3,442,812
1.9
48,185
3.0
1,634,494
1.8
Kansas.....................
2,918,117
1.8
39,776
2.7
1,425,887
1.7
Kentucky...................
4,135,194
2.1
53,632
2.7
1,973,149
1.8
Louisiana..................
5,898,325
2.5
59,460
2.9
2,588,692
2.1
Maine......................
2,957,847
4.8
40,720
6.4
1,373,098
3.8
Maryland...................
7,058,582
1.8
92,683
3.3
3,746,066
1.7
Massachusetts..............
9,210,427
1.7
111,609
3.0
4,907,443
1.6
Michigan...................
9,954,756
2.0
126,681
2.8
4,755,614
1.7
Minnesota..................
9,638,553
2.7
101,035
3.4
4,505,794
2.2
Mississippi................
2,629,162
2.4
33,111
2.7
1,119,665
1.9
Missouri...................
6,761,351
2.2
91,090
3.1
3,586,118
2.0
Montana....................
2,381,709
5.1
28,847
5.9
1,068,201
4.2
Nebraska...................
2,273,407
1.9
29,863
2.9
1,095,738
1.8
Nevada.....................
4,462,542
2.8
56,940
4.2
2,239,107
2.7
New Hampshire..............
2,710,336
3.3
37,818
5.5
1,315,354
2.9
New Jersey.................
11,222,802
1.9
139,017
3.3
6,070,879
1.9
New Mexico.................
2,314,310
2.5
33,486
3.9
1,167,986
2.4
New York...................
26,299,866
1.6
293,447
3.0
14,178,838
1.7
North Carolina.............
11,936,052
2.2
151,589
3.3
5,758,490
2.0
North Dakota...............
1,208,579
2.3
14,856
3.3
542,894
2.0
Ohio.......................
10,167,019
1.6
137,073
2.4
5,348,251
1.5
Oklahoma...................
3,836,530
2.0
47,096
2.8
1,793,835
1.8
Oregon.....................
6,538,383
2.9
86,529
4.4
3,583,571
2.8
Pennsylvania...............
13,173,567
1.8
173,588
2.8
6,826,124
1.7
Rhode Island...............
1,391,601
2.3
21,642
4.3
748,122
2.2
South Carolina.............
6,853,918
3.1
101,274
4.7
3,466,434
2.8
South Dakota...............
1,341,806
2.7
18,718
4.1
615,661
2.6
Tennessee..................
7,342,537
2.1
101,033
3.3
3,707,056
2.0
Texas......................
34,565,594
2.1
340,798
2.7
14,285,680
1.7
Utah.......................
5,514,051
3.3
75,143
4.9
2,844,732
3.2
Vermont....................
1,468,493
4.5
17,301
5.3
612,583
3.2
Virginia...................
9,285,508
1.8
128,407
3.1
4,795,163
1.6
Washington.................
11,535,055
2.2
128,991
3.7
5,850,632
2.2
West Virginia..............
1,497,706
2.0
22,202
3.1
688,507
1.8
Wisconsin..................
7,785,344
2.4
93,009
3.1
3,889,401
2.1
Wyoming....................
1,647,761
4.4
23,062
8.0
829,955
4.7
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Based on state level data published on bea.gov, GDP estimates were published on May 1, 2019, compensation estimates were published on March 26, 2019
and employment estimates were published on September 25, 2018.
Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Table 2. Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by State, Selected Activities, 2017
[Thousands of dollars]
Friday, September 20, 2019
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conventional
All Other
Total Outdoor
Outdoor
Other Outdoor
Amusement Parks/
Festivals/Sporting
Game Areas
Supporting
Government
Recreation
Recreation
Boating/Fishing
RVing
Snow Activities
Recreation
Water Parks
Events/Concerts
(including Golf
Outdoor
Expenditures
Activities \1\
Activities
Activities
and Tennis)
Recreation
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
United
427,189,444
130,843,864
20,886,503
16,887,771
5,646,013
82,401,718
11,858,821
14,143,242
18,470,569
191,428,668
22,515,194
States
Alabama
4,133,003
1,513,165
287,174
192,640
17,382
705,054
48,474
37,770
228,052
1,687,077
227,708
Alaska
2,187,367
396,836
99,675
67,133
22,454
251,753
10,309
8,553
33,336
1,426,362
112,417
Arizona
8,654,150
2,198,635
275,125
410,065
33,605
1,604,016
77,969
393,827
406,973
4,316,331
535,168
Arkansas
2,887,050
1,169,862
245,991
125,510
4,871
440,253
36,367
40,479
144,598
1,107,668
169,267
California
52,120,252
14,903,257
1,805,319
1,492,339
652,463
11,103,139
2,463,511
2,017,050
2,261,707
23,183,116
2,930,739
Colorado
11,308,942
3,779,399
319,683
338,657
1,542,589
1,678,724
107,085
330,373
379,270
5,186,972
663,848
Connecticu
3,594,652
1,473,762
280,836
100,671
57,557
742,060
53,472
55,665
247,065
1,203,746
175,083
t
Delaware
1,309,865
316,284
53,390
32,914
4,421
168,869
20,225
11,448
53,363
775,680
49,032
District
1,623,489
182,503
29,630
10,124
2,104
266,267
9,138
144,003
22,579
856,311
318,408
of
Columbia
Florida
42,183,230
8,823,495
2,692,393
936,806
38,143
9,938,871
4,652,634
1,158,660
1,826,905
21,881,235
1,539,629
Georgia
12,319,942
3,565,188
542,342
351,011
20,616
2,178,995
192,305
322,345
566,169
6,081,781
493,978
Hawaii
4,794,590
567,859
127,848
25,590
5,899
651,644
29,675
20,097
181,338
3,357,456
217,630
Idaho
2,328,949
891,370
112,086
168,340
53,062
317,197
29,776
13,234
98,608
998,799
121,584
Illinois
14,725,840
4,059,338
542,627
324,438
38,319
3,296,306
306,325
624,093
680,335
6,424,837
945,360
Indiana
9,658,524
5,193,968
516,539
2,878,685
44,666
1,727,556
96,387
290,061
268,160
2,430,991
306,008
Iowa
3,442,812
1,389,040
139,288
373,661
13,838
722,578
45,760
56,268
164,808
1,159,670
171,523
Kansas
2,918,117
1,019,262
128,938
90,201
11,752
594,558
33,804
21,233
164,844
1,111,376
192,921
Kentucky
4,135,194
1,423,568
177,406
133,018
9,109
782,697
55,870
90,043
174,357
1,707,784
221,144
Louisiana
5,898,325
1,732,372
317,086
232,828
49,347
771,031
61,229
202,510
142,639
2,979,713
415,209
Maine
2,957,847
905,466
248,946
137,428
75,279
277,110
16,847
22,537
94,552
1,694,895
80,376
Maryland
7,058,582
1,929,167
444,438
160,930
38,592
1,198,978
98,341
271,629
273,773
3,125,590
804,847
Massachuse
9,210,427
2,862,275
561,534
166,855
124,803
2,177,186
119,437
477,173
622,702
3,818,889
352,077
tts
Michigan
9,954,756
3,271,515
735,330
488,864
73,329
2,074,983
86,816
327,382
523,178
4,159,714
448,544
Minnesota
9,638,553
3,635,061
631,370
319,703
149,706
1,775,834
119,703
290,706
470,772
3,608,163
619,495
Mississipp
2,629,162
891,794
114,900
101,986
21,077
377,259
24,866
7,477
95,054
1,163,174
196,936
i
Missouri
6,761,351
2,276,350
399,748
253,040
16,152
1,687,485
153,005
447,573
293,834
2,395,916
401,599
Montana
2,381,709
753,790
134,869
132,604
76,189
387,345
13,115
18,072
98,954
1,117,209
123,365
Nebraska
2,273,407
889,006
92,293
65,735
9,300
428,485
22,070
23,684
121,723
835,163
120,753
Nevada
4,462,542
1,109,185
147,494
114,943
40,467
776,603
46,962
143,734
183,061
2,175,122
401,632
New
2,710,336
1,020,325
117,569
110,153
151,646
370,199
47,261
23,696
105,782
1,256,029
63,781
Hampshire
New Jersey
11,222,802
3,252,606
576,794
263,841
94,839
2,135,241
280,278
403,538
469,982
5,417,809
417,146
New Mexico
2,314,310
634,520
58,572
89,462
85,949
244,833
23,108
13,573
67,115
1,206,577
228,380
New York
26,299,866
8,505,481
1,087,834
528,351
173,532
5,329,389
269,502
1,686,377
967,921
10,985,837
1,479,158
North
11,936,052
3,329,353
601,451
351,652
53,031
2,153,456
155,146
509,620
529,178
5,790,064
663,180
Carolina
North
1,208,579
414,008
65,609
58,319
6,244
186,838
7,009
4,440
44,902
480,304
127,429
Dakota
Ohio
10,167,019
3,509,001
495,138
599,483
66,173
2,533,501
304,237
527,545
589,166
3,481,007
643,510
Oklahoma
3,836,530
1,259,053
182,524
235,995
12,636
618,359
48,862
105,046
133,048
1,726,174
232,944
Oregon
6,538,383
2,472,405
298,462
457,202
129,346
887,025
61,760
98,147
215,549
2,797,936
381,017
Pennsylvan
13,173,567
4,300,774
474,598
479,694
230,038
2,993,272
274,095
645,234
716,878
5,339,144
540,377
ia
Rhode
1,391,601
365,212
160,492
21,992
5,296
208,147
12,471
16,883
65,659
760,084
58,159
Island
South
6,853,918
2,162,875
434,601
384,926
6,649
1,014,010
86,955
61,192
364,333
3,352,219
324,815
Carolina
South
1,341,806
457,237
50,800
66,977
12,447
189,748
12,355
9,394
52,305
558,877
135,944
Dakota
Tennessee
7,342,537
2,473,242
596,524
298,012
43,827
1,440,669
145,710
323,178
294,560
3,038,362
390,262
Texas
34,565,594
11,188,472
1,587,775
1,484,522
237,143
5,949,940
643,170
846,453
1,440,466
16,320,292
1,106,890
Utah
5,514,051
1,842,019
192,153
218,329
549,150
871,266
80,599
128,646
250,906
2,398,643
402,122
Vermont
1,468,493
475,685
37,934
42,752
175,855
151,325
4,974
8,404
61,472
804,911
36,572
Virginia
9,285,508
2,394,061
402,411
222,064
23,571
1,524,070
177,989
195,534
398,927
4,661,578
705,799
Washington
11,535,055
3,455,420
662,066
372,139
220,871
2,626,855
85,754
377,657
422,593
4,858,624
594,157
West
1,497,706
451,005
64,201
42,200
24,564
189,716
18,965
7,728
47,311
721,408
135,577
Virginia
Wisconsin
7,785,344
3,422,687
495,037
272,915
76,388
1,546,930
82,615
280,390
368,694
2,477,944
337,782
Wyoming
1,647,761
335,653
39,657
60,069
19,726
134,096
4,533
2,889
41,110
1,024,101
153,910
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Total outdoor recreation activit[i]es includes core activities, supporting activities, and activities with secondary production that are designated as outdoor recreation.
Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Table 3. Outdoor Recreation Value-Added by State, Selected Industries, 2017
[Thousands of dollars]
Friday, September 20, 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finance, insurance,
Total Outdoor
Private industries
Manufacturing
Retail trade
real estate, rental,
Arts, entertainment,
Accomodations and food
All other private
Government
Recreation Industries
and leasing
and recreation
service
industries
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
United States
427,189,444
401,263,550
51,667,166
95,660,596
24,599,990
52,879,893
59,990,341
116,465,567
25,925,894
Alabama
4,133,003
3,868,776
411,126
1,310,458
224,647
315,368
745,847
861,331
264,227
Alaska
2,187,367
1,902,875
133,404
387,089
135,789
138,851
414,822
692,920
284,492
Arizona
8,654,150
8,066,337
360,525
2,116,316
709,129
1,024,244
1,715,235
2,140,887
587,813
Arkansas
2,887,050
2,697,898
559,630
787,842
137,102
207,343
377,154
628,826
189,152
California
52,120,252
48,774,747
5,773,527
10,838,594
2,675,553
7,461,103
6,634,132
15,391,837
3,345,505
Colorado
11,308,942
10,541,979
449,206
2,241,274
878,328
1,788,763
2,150,763
3,033,643
766,963
Connecticut
3,594,652
3,390,193
451,906
982,530
205,969
478,414
402,647
868,727
204,459
Delaware
1,309,865
1,253,257
112,658
430,046
134,604
95,887
316,596
163,466
56,607
District of Columbia
1,623,489
1,274,056
5,714
232,081
44,616
183,978
576,839
230,828
349,433
Florida
42,183,230
40,458,633
1,147,658
7,640,811
3,337,140
8,604,150
9,358,083
10,370,790
1,724,597
Georgia
12,319,942
11,752,952
1,234,272
2,456,209
489,236
1,298,055
1,340,313
4,934,867
566,990
Hawaii
4,794,590
4,547,173
107,705
665,996
238,976
317,556
1,278,773
1,938,168
247,416
Idaho
2,328,949
2,191,639
295,780
695,638
139,219
206,892
325,647
528,461
137,311
Illinois
14,725,840
13,660,892
1,894,583
2,840,819
667,136
1,708,275
1,199,480
5,350,598
1,064,949
Indiana
9,658,524
9,314,465
4,738,520
1,739,953
219,873
705,935
494,850
1,415,334
344,058
Iowa
3,442,812
3,244,711
744,066
896,247
96,639
301,964
294,473
911,324
198,101
Kansas
2,918,117
2,697,547
684,153
684,044
86,645
211,491
322,902
708,312
220,570
Kentucky
4,135,194
3,880,834
712,851
1,102,575
156,872
354,668
473,982
1,079,887
254,359
Louisiana
5,898,325
5,424,409
1,553,033
1,237,542
237,811
459,348
547,295
1,389,382
473,916
Maine
2,957,847
2,867,990
328,022
610,533
401,661
228,192
986,874
312,709
89,857
Maryland
7,058,582
6,155,998
279,759
1,743,814
385,701
813,696
1,193,063
1,739,966
902,584
Massachusetts
9,210,427
8,803,667
982,280
1,940,554
643,326
1,363,963
1,291,584
2,581,961
406,760
Michigan
9,954,756
9,435,579
1,142,187
2,548,301
892,593
1,085,448
1,170,175
2,596,875
519,177
Minnesota
9,638,553
8,949,024
1,843,732
1,956,471
553,258
885,278
656,192
3,054,092
689,529
Mississippi
2,629,162
2,409,268
647,087
739,081
123,513
119,458
319,220
460,910
219,894
Missouri
6,761,351
6,311,424
1,176,775
1,547,960
354,856
968,809
716,288
1,546,737
449,927
Montana
2,381,709
2,245,956
194,459
518,297
140,878
337,060
509,882
545,381
135,754
Nebraska
2,273,407
2,135,018
416,639
546,354
70,117
181,077
255,271
665,560
138,389
Nevada
4,462,542
4,020,274
93,084
1,079,368
218,216
536,725
682,962
1,409,919
442,268
New Hampshire
2,710,336
2,629,758
317,346
757,303
294,166
294,782
602,650
363,511
80,577
New Jersey
11,222,802
10,744,273
901,545
2,736,368
903,195
1,460,630
1,347,769
3,394,764
478,529
New Mexico
2,314,310
2,054,069
122,001
617,224
185,928
176,106
595,921
356,891
260,241
New York
26,299,866
24,434,332
1,687,444
5,635,691
1,745,373
3,616,572
3,091,380
8,657,873
1,865,533
North Carolina
11,936,052
11,181,670
1,513,993
2,798,488
622,800
1,391,631
1,895,312
2,959,448
754,382
North Dakota
1,208,579
1,064,864
74,471
378,362
50,506
79,538
119,321
362,666
143,716
Ohio
10,167,019
9,432,595
1,620,087
2,667,856
397,680
1,518,966
694,283
2,533,724
734,424
Oklahoma
3,836,530
3,568,921
462,148
998,936
197,984
384,577
360,539
1,164,737
267,609
Oregon
6,538,383
6,109,216
561,501
1,568,294
293,692
561,962
1,217,677
1,906,089
429,168
Pennsylvania
13,173,567
12,534,629
1,679,625
3,073,179
865,696
1,978,941
1,239,418
3,697,772
638,938
Rhode Island
1,391,601
1,324,679
91,310
308,017
76,209
163,119
420,202
265,823
66,922
South Carolina
6,853,918
6,487,440
855,561
1,702,804
371,669
560,882
2,061,767
934,756
366,478
South Dakota
1,341,806
1,193,064
86,596
360,369
50,733
93,594
284,198
317,575
148,741
Tennessee
7,342,537
6,912,889
1,031,143
1,832,094
322,063
892,723
1,287,678
1,547,189
429,648
Texas
34,565,594
33,278,498
7,283,778
8,488,429
1,308,366
3,385,750
2,230,830
10,581,345
1,287,097
Utah
5,514,051
5,065,651
441,331
1,353,907
402,922
670,673
849,359
1,347,458
448,400
Vermont
1,468,493
1,422,689
148,923
294,569
231,625
150,214
413,979
183,382
45,803
Virginia
9,285,508
8,470,711
594,651
2,341,920
428,290
961,205
1,548,477
2,596,170
814,797
Washington
11,535,055
10,846,978
1,547,813
2,781,151
506,584
1,059,994
1,344,415
3,607,022
688,077
West Virginia
1,497,706
1,346,611
99,649
463,473
110,069
122,593
251,044
299,782
151,095
Wisconsin
7,785,344
7,402,179
1,966,479
1,636,411
584,357
880,771
742,139
1,592,021
383,165
Wyoming
1,647,761
1,480,264
105,430
348,956
50,680
92,677
640,641
241,878
167,497
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The estimates are based on the 2012 North American Industry Classification System (NAICS).
Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
Table 4. Outdoor Recreation Employment by State, Selected Industries, 2017
Friday, September 20, 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finance, insurance,
Total Outdoor
Private industries
Manufacturing
Retail trade
real estate, rental,
Arts, entertainment,
Accomodations and food
All other private
Government
Recreation Industries
and leasing
and recreation
service
industries
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
United States
5,170,670
4,873,294
255,664
1,627,246
51,860
1,035,899
1,087,555
815,069
297,376
Alabama
62,647
58,757
4,167
24,498
536
8,835
13,330
7,391
3,890
Alaska
22,677
20,802
202
6,161
179
3,081
6,645
4,533
1,875
Arizona
108,460
102,631
2,255
33,386
1,437
19,829
30,358
15,366
5,829
Arkansas
39,299
36,950
4,568
13,633
270
6,337
7,141
5,002
2,349
California
588,680
554,550
27,339
169,229
5,490
123,559
116,571
112,362
34,130
Colorado
146,178
136,013
2,645
38,330
2,738
35,010
37,188
20,099
10,165
Connecticut
48,390
46,228
1,496
16,698
579
12,025
7,968
7,461
2,162
Delaware
18,485
17,944
335
7,719
161
2,314
5,995
(D)
541
District of Columbia
23,651
21,312
(D)
3,907
80
1,584
12,889
2,097
2,339
Florida
502,939
488,810
11,068
124,273
4,608
128,529
153,556
66,776
14,129
Georgia
144,203
135,841
8,637
47,227
1,280
25,814
25,229
27,653
8,362
Hawaii
57,584
54,626
484
11,405
472
6,883
22,012
13,370
2,958
Idaho
33,831
32,073
2,053
12,066
363
7,071
6,258
4,262
1,758
Illinois
165,400
147,208
7,662
51,859
1,780
30,073
24,094
31,740
18,192
Indiana
108,535
104,160
35,577
30,163
766
16,089
10,117
11,448
4,375
Iowa
48,185
45,727
7,720
16,970
371
8,950
5,544
6,172
2,458
Kansas
39,776
36,383
3,131
14,636
256
6,805
6,314
5,240
3,392
Kentucky
53,632
50,641
2,939
20,130
499
10,287
8,769
8,017
2,991
Louisiana
59,460
55,079
2,606
21,441
512
8,930
10,134
11,456
4,380
Maine
40,720
39,498
2,441
10,512
597
7,429
15,563
2,956
1,222
Maryland
92,683
86,187
1,549
31,266
875
16,944
22,522
13,031
6,496
Massachusetts
111,609
108,041
4,867
32,757
1,396
25,303
24,730
18,989
3,568
Michigan
126,681
121,266
5,660
46,162
1,527
27,247
21,514
19,156
5,415
Minnesota
101,035
92,390
7,943
33,052
1,206
20,062
12,302
17,825
8,645
Mississippi
33,111
30,956
2,559
14,547
231
3,998
6,150
3,473
2,154
Missouri
91,090
84,360
6,548
31,331
842
18,369
14,432
12,839
6,730
Montana
28,847
27,589
711
8,387
285
6,406
8,132
3,668
1,258
Nebraska
29,863
27,996
2,229
9,785
259
5,876
4,633
5,213
1,868
Nevada
56,940
53,012
615
18,153
495
9,793
14,425
9,532
3,927
New Hampshire
37,818
36,902
1,150
13,022
608
7,952
10,457
3,712
916
New Jersey
139,017
131,008
4,516
47,518
1,551
27,370
25,960
24,092
8,009
New Mexico
33,486
30,883
385
10,933
380
5,423
10,231
3,531
2,603
New York
293,447
274,043
9,046
88,847
2,939
56,551
57,011
59,649
19,404
North Carolina
151,589
143,515
7,472
49,948
1,226
30,102
33,952
20,816
8,074
North Dakota
14,856
12,805
230
5,566
104
2,204
2,378
2,321
2,051
Ohio
137,073
125,846
7,083
49,016
1,579
33,818
14,416
19,932
11,227
Oklahoma
47,096
44,274
2,275
18,058
479
8,933
6,819
7,707
2,821
Oregon
86,529
81,082
5,126
25,744
697
13,440
22,121
13,954
5,447
Pennsylvania
173,588
164,944
8,022
56,906
2,227
45,789
24,452
27,549
8,645
Rhode Island
21,642
21,238
785
5,327
180
4,345
8,126
2,179
404
South Carolina
101,274
96,368
5,726
29,885
697
15,048
36,663
8,351
4,906
South Dakota
18,718
16,873
510
6,242
103
2,893
4,810
2,314
1,845
Tennessee
101,033
95,875
6,233
34,829
876
18,118
23,524
12,293
5,158
Texas
340,798
324,713
14,184
132,757
3,352
68,160
44,093
62,167
16,085
Utah
75,143
68,826
3,833
23,228
980
15,010
14,921
10,856
6,317
Vermont
17,301
16,918
581
5,589
232
2,154
6,649
1,713
383
Virginia
128,407
118,037
2,437
42,158
1,042
24,119
30,251
18,030
10,370
Washington
128,991
121,379
7,209
37,077
1,097
23,622
26,729
25,644
7,611
West Virginia
22,202
20,391
274
9,213
185
3,454
4,944
2,322
1,812
Wisconsin
93,009
89,052
8,378
29,528
1,148
21,389
14,157
14,451
3,957
Wyoming
23,062
21,291
(D)
6,172
90
2,572
10,375
(D)
1,772
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(D) Data are suppressed to avoid disclosure of confidential information.
The estimates are based on the 2012 North American Industry Classification System (NAICS).
Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Table 5. Outdoor Recreation Compensation by State, Selected Industries, 2017
[Thousands of dollars]
Friday, September 20, 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finance, insurance,
Total Outdoor
Private industries
Manufacturing
Retail trade
real estate, rental,
Arts, entertainment,
Accomodations and food
All other private
Government
Recreation Industries
and leasing
and recreation
service
industries
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
United States
213,440,905
190,850,673
17,941,414
49,803,996
3,804,191
36,203,459
31,125,464
51,972,151
22,590,232
Alabama
2,083,927
1,836,504
167,396
656,008
35,002
206,113
383,589
388,396
247,424
Alaska
1,030,701
855,609
13,367
202,798
10,053
100,387
202,056
326,951
175,091
Arizona
4,327,385
3,911,667
171,258
1,033,321
87,207
748,683
881,278
989,922
415,717
Arkansas
1,390,053
1,234,191
228,658
380,557
15,676
155,889
196,088
257,324
155,862
California
27,383,466
24,223,717
2,139,669
5,804,727
429,890
5,275,931
3,432,888
7,140,612
3,159,749
Colorado
5,963,912
5,294,002
186,924
1,200,145
210,520
1,269,076
1,098,658
1,328,679
669,910
Connecticut
1,923,607
1,756,921
163,870
523,014
68,330
339,726
213,537
448,444
166,686
Delaware
611,026
570,365
25,609
222,975
10,668
62,596
169,369
76,035
40,661
District of Columbia
977,279
751,938
(D)
128,943
6,099
137,529
338,136
(D)
225,341
Florida
20,690,183
19,566,765
529,000
3,982,411
298,301
5,411,340
4,720,704
4,625,008
1,123,418
Georgia
6,274,833
5,687,701
541,765
1,392,935
92,768
849,054
708,207
2,102,973
587,132
Hawaii
2,437,813
2,237,381
27,906
351,466
26,970
217,816
668,783
944,442
200,432
Idaho
1,182,979
1,071,911
123,291
379,802
19,116
161,860
172,278
215,563
111,069
Illinois
7,737,696
6,571,896
731,439
1,547,051
178,949
1,197,759
653,786
2,262,912
1,165,800
Indiana
4,486,832
4,236,457
1,955,843
853,596
52,943
475,626
262,233
636,216
250,375
Iowa
1,634,494
1,474,390
342,683
459,026
26,988
193,816
152,537
299,340
160,103
Kansas
1,425,887
1,238,015
215,912
410,667
19,322
149,186
173,319
269,609
187,872
Kentucky
1,973,149
1,771,477
207,078
528,650
38,676
301,065
244,352
451,655
201,673
Louisiana
2,588,692
2,263,917
294,475
613,824
34,860
322,617
285,247
712,896
324,775
Maine
1,373,098
1,293,114
157,644
313,821
34,284
182,207
478,538
126,619
79,984
Maryland
3,746,066
3,167,505
118,826
935,491
69,292
601,959
633,175
808,763
578,561
Massachusetts
4,907,443
4,546,628
487,878
1,056,129
111,983
958,112
693,052
1,239,475
360,815
Michigan
4,755,614
4,419,974
412,051
1,363,076
100,435
827,337
600,975
1,116,101
335,640
Minnesota
4,505,794
3,945,849
646,592
969,545
103,269
643,558
333,420
1,249,465
559,945
Mississippi
1,119,665
984,995
162,806
376,121
12,568
88,970
167,905
176,625
134,670
Missouri
3,586,118
3,203,870
462,395
891,515
57,478
700,363
380,455
711,664
382,248
Montana
1,068,201
978,075
55,391
256,506
13,520
198,144
250,047
204,467
90,125
Nebraska
1,095,738
985,653
168,047
288,977
20,613
127,509
132,343
248,163
110,085
Nevada
2,239,107
1,961,778
37,992
556,264
29,493
294,709
385,311
658,010
277,329
New Hampshire
1,315,354
1,255,150
120,739
399,670
38,796
198,070
299,392
198,483
60,205
New Jersey
6,070,879
5,380,208
361,543
1,523,860
139,805
1,032,284
722,952
1,599,764
690,671
New Mexico
1,167,986
966,658
27,915
325,587
22,621
126,951
303,237
160,347
201,328
New York
14,178,838
12,108,598
702,857
3,093,606
244,301
2,314,439
1,618,258
4,135,136
2,070,240
North Carolina
5,758,490
5,212,748
434,113
1,411,882
82,776
1,034,961
979,248
1,269,768
545,743
North Dakota
542,894
449,310
19,467
174,464
6,340
54,058
64,121
130,861
93,585
Ohio
5,348,251
4,529,076
484,790
1,365,860
130,263
1,070,871
365,465
1,111,828
819,174
Oklahoma
1,793,835
1,594,219
129,849
526,156
33,557
272,265
188,872
443,519
199,616
Oregon
3,583,571
3,180,745
274,546
860,625
44,450
374,616
633,061
993,446
402,826
Pennsylvania
6,826,124
6,021,655
617,055
1,553,903
164,706
1,415,369
643,184
1,627,438
804,469
Rhode Island
748,122
710,837
39,611
171,309
13,368
121,237
228,240
124,185
37,284
South Carolina
3,466,434
3,154,607
384,565
869,506
41,835
358,725
1,073,339
426,636
311,827
South Dakota
615,661
520,305
35,646
176,065
5,796
59,883
138,167
104,746
95,356
Tennessee
3,707,056
3,375,504
374,536
988,271
57,641
589,153
662,672
703,232
331,551
Texas
14,285,680
13,073,825
1,267,875
3,940,372
248,482
2,286,128
1,161,087
4,169,882
1,211,855
Utah
2,844,732
2,539,561
229,323
726,438
67,217
448,569
438,367
629,647
305,171
Vermont
612,583
580,133
44,766
175,469
13,435
56,407
205,948
84,109
32,449
Virginia
4,795,163
4,106,889
146,074
1,202,353
70,598
694,592
831,889
1,161,383
688,274
Washington
5,850,632
5,153,886
537,080
1,375,660
73,490
711,594
727,135
1,728,927
696,746
West Virginia
688,507
600,895
19,219
242,725
9,992
81,427
134,336
113,192
87,612
Wisconsin
3,889,401
3,591,160
886,836
830,992
74,788
634,183
376,684
787,679
298,240
Wyoming
829,955
702,435
(D)
189,858
4,664
68,739
317,546
(D)
127,520
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(D) Data are suppressed to avoid disclosure of confidential information.
The estimates are based on the 2012 North American Industry Classification System (NAICS).
Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
______
Submitted Article by Hon. Chellie Pingree, a Representative in Congress
from Maine
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Unsung champs of carbon capture, small Maine woodlots can have big
impact
https://www.pressherald.com/2019/09/17/unsung-champs-of-carbon-capture-
small-maine-woodlots-can-have-big-impact/
Posted September 17
Updated September 17
Fires in the Amazon this summer have increased global
awareness of the role of rainforests in tempering climate
change. Less appreciated is the carbon storage capacity of
forests like Maine's.
By Tux Turkel (https://www.pressherald.com/author/tux-turkel), Staff
Writer
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Denny Gallaudet has been harvesting his woodlot in Cumberland
for 40 years, mostly for firewood to heat his home, but has
changed his management techniques to reduce carbon loss from
the carbon-rich soil and carbon-banking trees. Derek Davis/
Staff Photographer.
This story is part of Covering Climate Now, a global
collaboration of more than 220 news outlets to strengthen
coverage of the climate story.
Cumberland--The big, old pine isn't good for much, at least not
financially. A legacy tree from 75 years ago when the rolling woodlands
in this Portland suburb were hayfields, it's a landmark on Denny
Gallaudet's 25 acre woodlot, its spindly, branch-studded trunk reaching
like fingers toward the sky.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
A logging contractor might suggest felling it for softwood chips.
But to Gallaudet, the misshapen pine has a higher value. By his
calculations, it's storing roughly 6 metric tons of carbon as it grows,
keeping heat-trapping carbon dioxide out of Earth's warming atmosphere.
Fires in the Amazon this summer have increased awareness of the
role of rain forests in blunting climate change. Less appreciated is
the carbon storage capacity of northern temperate forests, like the one
covering most of Maine.
Now Gallaudet, who's leading a team at Sierra Club Maine, is trying
to figure out how the state's small woodlot owners can be encouraged to
manage their land not only for income, wildlife and recreation, but to
maximize carbon sequestration. Together, these local forests have the
potential to become a world-class carbon sink, Gallaudet and other
activists say.
America's northern forest covers roughly 176 million acres and its
growth has been increasing, according to the most recent USDA survey,
in part because of reduced timber harvesting for the region's
contracted paper industry. By some measures, today's forest is soaking
up 1 to 2 tons of carbon per acre every year.
As the state with the highest percentage of forest land in the
nation, Maine is a critical vault in this carbon bank, removing and
storing 1.4 pounds of carbon (https://www.mdf.org/wp-content/uploads/
2019/04/MOG-FullReport2019-FNL.pdf) for every pound emitted by burning
fossil fuels. Put another way, 5.5 acres of forest (https://
www.epa.gov/energy/greenhouse-gas-equivalencies-calculator) can capture
the annual emissions from one passenger car, according to the
Environmental Protection Agency.
But Gallaudet believes the small landowners who control 40 percent
of Maine's 17.6 million acres are in a unique position to do more.
Collectively, they could substantially offset the CO2
emitted each year in Maine from cars, factories and energy production.
Transformational Tactics
To get there, many small owners would need to change the way they
manage their land and embrace the practices of low-impact forestry.
They'll have to leave more big, carbon-banking trees standing, like
Gallaudet's old pine, as well as more dead trees. After a harvest,
they'll need to leave more limbs and branches on the forest floor. Both
will emit carbon, of course, but slowly, as they decay over time.
Landowners also will need to employ logging methods that have less
impact on the soil, where a surprising 50 percent carbon is stored. And
in some instances, for some trees, they just shouldn't do any cutting.
In the long run, this transformation will require changes in
government policies and perhaps modifications to the nascent markets
that offer financial rewards for storing carbon, so small owners can
see value from carbon storage, just as they do from pulp, chips or saw
logs.
Right now, those financial incentives are largely absent for small
woodlots, which in Maine tend to be less than 500 acres.
``We've struggled to find a way for small owners to participate in
the carbon market,'' said Tom Doak, executive director of Maine
Woodland Owners, whose members own a total of 500,000 acres. ``We've
looked at this for years and so far can't make the numbers work.''
But simply increasing awareness of how forests store carbon, Doak
said, can lead owners to make changes.
``There is an educational role,'' he said.
Earning Credit for Carbon
One example is an upcoming presentation (http://www.mofga.org/The-
Fair/Schedule) on carbon-capture forestry techniques, Sept. 21 at the
Common Ground Fair. It will be led by Peter Hagerty, who serves on a
low-impact forestry committee with the Maine Organic Farmers and
Gardeners Association and logs 100 acres of woodland with draft horses.
Hagerty said one challenge in making the transition will be for
landowners and policy makers to agree on the science behind carbon-
friendly harvesting techniques and not see it as a threat to jobs and
traditional logging.
``I'm hopeful that the forest industry in Maine can adapt,'' he
said.
Carbon Cycle
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Source: Minnesota Board of Soil and Water Resources, Staff
Graphic D Michael Fisher.
Managing woodlands for carbon capture isn't an entirely new idea.
Some leading environmental groups with a presence in Maine, as well as
the Passamaquoddy Tribe, have been pioneers in what's known as the
carbon offsets markets.
Based largely in California, these markets (https://
californiacarbon.info/) require a landowner to maintain a certified
level of carbon storage, typically for 100 years. In exchange, they get
a given price-per-ton, which recently stood around $15. That's
comparable to what they might get paid for stumpage, or timber sales.
The credits are sold under what's called a cap-and-trade arrangement
with utilities or petroleum companies, which buy them to offset their
emissions and meet state mandates.
In 2012, the Downeast Lakes Land Trust (https://downeastlakes.org/
the-finite-carbon-lyme-grand-lake-stream-improved-forest-management-
project/) completed the nation's first carbon credit sale. It finished
a second project in 2016, earning millions of dollars to buy additional
land for its conservation objectives around Grand Lake Stream. Similar
sales have been done by the Appalachian Mountain Club and The Nature
Conservancy. These projects total more than 200,000 acres.
Maine's large, commercial timberland owners so far haven't embraced
this model. In 2017, the Keeping Maine's Forest collaborative group
surveyed several land managers and found that while they had explored
the California market, they are holding off for now.
The group's report (https://crsf.umaine.edu/wp-content/uploads/
sites/214/2017/03/Carbon-Markets-in-Maine.pdf) found: ``While the up-
front payout from carbon credits can be substantial and a good way to
diversify income from forest land, the land managers found the costs,
risks, and the 100 year commitment required by carbon projects not
worthwhile at current credit prices.''
These cost and time commitments present major hurdles for small
owners. Gallaudet, a former bank President, estimated it would cost him
$15,000 to have his woodlot's carbon storage certified to meet
California standards, or even the less-valuable Regional Greenhouse Gas
Initiative standards in the Northeast.
``To my knowledge,'' Gallaudet said, ``there are no lead certifiers
in Maine either for California or RGGI. If small Maine landowners chose
to forgo timber sales in favor of banking carbon, they currently have
no way of monetizing the value they are creating in the form of
sequestered metric tons of CO2.''
Careful Stewardship
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Denny Gallaudet uses low-impact forestry techniques to
preserve as much of his woodlot's carbon storage as he can. He
estimates his 25 acre lot has 39 tons of carbon per acre stored
in its trees. Derek Davis/Staff Photographer.
Gallaudet changed his management practices voluntarily; he thinks
it's the right thing to do. He worked with a forestry consultant, who
helped with the details. On a recent tour of his woodlot, Gallaudet
highlighted some of the techniques he's using.
Gallaudet's old farm includes a mixed stand of softwoods such as
pine and hemlock, and hardwoods including, oak, maple and birch. The
land is hilly and bisected by a small brook.
Protecting the soil is a top priority. Gallaudet cuts four cords of
firewood each year to help heat his home, and occasional saw logs, if a
stand gets crowded. He uses a small Massey Ferguson tractor with rubber
tires that don't chew up the forest floor. He works when it's dry in
the fall. Shallow ruts are barely visible below the leaf litter, along
an opening where he pulled out logs using a skidding winch mounted on
the rear.
Entering the woodlot, dappled sunlight lit the forest. Overhead,
Gallaudet pointed to the tree canopy. He's careful not to cut too many
trees in one place, which would let the soil dry out.
During a conventional logging operation on a family woodlot, it's
not unusual to clean up the branches and limbs left over from a
harvest, to open the forest floor. Maybe they're sold to be burned in a
biomass energy plant. Gallaudet keeps the slash, taking the time to
create brush piles here and there across his land. They'll decompose
slowly, providing homes for wildlife today and, in time, nutrients for
the forest.
Future Possibilities
On a knoll, orange flagging tape is tied around trees in a sample
plot, noting trunks more than 4" in diameter. That's a first step in
estimating the volume or weight of a tree and how much carbon a forest
can store, based on its species and other factors. Carbon calculators,
(https://fsht.org/forestcarbonproject/forestcarbonproject-calculator/)
such as one linked on the website of the Francis Small Heritage Trust
in Limerick, make the task easier.
Big hardwoods are denser and store the most carbon. Older stands
capture more than new growth. Gallaudet's calculations show that his
woodlot holds roughly 39 tons of carbon per acre, nearly eight times
the carbon footprint of his home and small farm.
Maine small landowners could join forces to maximize carbon storage
and combine their acreage to take advantage of the offset markets, at
least in theory. But the existing markets don't recognize so-called
aggregation, so Sierra Club Maine and other advocates will be looking
at other options in the months ahead.
One idea could be to expand Maine's Tree Growth Tax, the 47 year
old law that reduces property taxes for owners who keep at least 10
acres in commercial timberland. But there are high financial penalties
for removing land from the program, and Doak said the rules are
constantly under assault by interest groups trying to modify them. He
wonders if the Farm and Open Space Tax law, which values land at less
than fair market value if certain requirements are met, might be a
better vehicle.
Another model could be the credits that some major corporations use
to offset their power consumption, by getting a percentage of their
energy from wind power, for instance. Hagerty foresees the possibility
of Maine companies partnering with small woodlot owners, buying local
credits to offset their carbon footprint.
``In a state where people know each other well, that could be
possible,'' he said.
______
Submitted Letter by Hon. Kim Schrier, a Representative in Congress from
Washington
April 1, 2019
Hon. Betty McCollum,
Chairwoman,
House Appropriations Subcommittee on Interior, Environment, and
Related Agencies,
Washington, D.C.;
Hon. David Joyce,
Ranking Minority Member,
House Appropriations Subcommittee on Interior, Environment, and
Related Agencies,
Washington, D.C.
Dear Chairwoman McCollum and Ranking Member Joyce:
I am writing requesting your support for watershed restoration and
addressing backlogs of road and trail maintenance on our National
Forests by appropriating $50 million in funding for the Forest Service
Legacy Roads and Trails Remediation Program (CMLG).
Since its authorization in FY 2008, the Legacy Roads and Trails
program has significantly enhanced the Forest Service's ability to
address key problems associated with its aging and poorly maintained
road system. This includes repairing roads and trails needed for public
access, replacing failed or undersized culverts to improve aquatic
passage and retire unneeded roads to prevent sediment pollution from
entering waterways important for salmon, trout, and other aquatic
species. The program delivers funds to address road problems in real
time, which enables the Forest Service to efficiently plan, design, and
implement restoration treatments. It is a critical tool for leveraging
non-Federal funds resulting in stronger projects and enhanced community
engagement. And because funds primarily go to actual work on the
ground, Legacy Roads and Trails creates high wage jobs for contractors,
including those who specialize in stream restoration, environmental
design, and heavy equipment operation.
From 2008-2018, this unique bipartisan program has invested over
$430 million to the following tangible and accountable results on our
National Forest watersheds:
Maintained and/or storm-proofed 18,057 miles of needed
roads, helping Americans get where they wish to go on Forest
Service lands;
Reclaimed 7,053 miles of unneeded roads, preventing sediment
from entering streams, many of which supply drinking water to
rural and urban towns and cities;
Replaced 1,030 culverts restoring fish passage to 1,671
miles of habitat, aiding the recovery of fish species important
to restoration goals, Tribal communities and sportfishing
enthusiasts;
Improved 5,020 miles of trails, keeping the $535 million
National Forest recreation industry going strong;
Created or maintained 697-1,115 jobs annually across the
nation, bringing dollars and jobs into rural communities;
Saved America's taxpayers $3.5 million per year in road
maintenance costs, promoting a more sustainable Forest Service
road system in the future.
In Washington, D.C. we've seen an interest in rebuilding America's
infrastructure. During these conversations we ask that you encourage
your colleagues to consider the proven track record of success from the
Legacy Roads and Trails program as a model. The program helps adapt the
road system to a more manageable size over time, reducing fiscal and
environmental burdens and enabling the Forest Service to ensure better
and more reliable access. It focuses on the key areas where projects
improve up and downstream connections for salmon, improve water quality
and ensure road/trail resilience in a changing climate. It's a simple
solution to a formidable problem. But it needs funding to succeed.
FY19 was the first year that the Legacy Roads and Trail program was
not specifically funded despite making a difference for Forest Service
watersheds, fish habitat, recreational infrastructure and local jobs
for a decade.
We ask for your support of the program by reinstating Legacy Roads
and Trails as a separate line item in the Fiscal Year (FY) 2020
Interior-Environment Appropriations Bill with a $50M allocation. This
is a small down payment on the growing problem impacting how people
access and experience public lands.
Sincerely,
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Hon. Kim Schrier.
______
Submitted Questions
Response from Lenise Lago, Associate Chief, U.S. Forest Service, U.S.
Department of Agriculture
Questions Submitted by Hon. Abigail Davis Spanberger, a Representative
in Congress from Virginia
Question 1. Associate Chief Lago, how does the Forest Service
calculate and classify deferred maintenance?
Answer. The Forest Service determines deferred maintenance for each
asset based on condition assessments conducted at different intervals
depending on the asset. During these assessments, staff collects
information on maintenance and repair needs. Condition surveys for most
assets are performed on a 5 year revolving schedule, except for road
bridges. Road bridges are required to be inspected every 2 years in
accordance with the National Bridge Inspection Standards. Deferred
maintenance for National Forest System (NFS) roads for passenger cars
is determined bi-annually from a random sample. Deferred maintenance
for high clearance/closed roads is not reported at this time.
Question 2. The Forest Service periodically assesses the condition
of its assets in order to estimate deferred maintenance. Please provide
detail on how the agency conducts these assessments, including whether
they differ for the various asset classes (e.g., roads versus
facilities) and the frequency of the assessments.
Answer. The procedures to conduct condition assessments varies
between assets. The assessments occur as follows:
Facilities--Assessments are generally done every 5 years.
Assessments are conducted following the enclosed guidance (see
Facilities Condition Assessment Field Training Guide [see
Attachment 1]);
Roads--A random sample of road segments is surveyed every 2
years using the Deferred Maintenance Protocols for Roads
(enclosed [see Attachment 2]); and
Road Bridges--Inspection reports are done every 2 years as
required by the National Bridge Inspection Standards. Detailed
procedures on how to conduct these inspections can be found in
the Bridge Inspection Guide (BIG).
Trails--A random sample of 1% of Forest Service trails that
are Trail Class 1-4 are assessed each year via the Trail
Assessment and Condition Surveys. All Class 5 trails, those
that are most highly developed, are surveyed every 5 years.
Question 3. The Forest Service receives funding to address deferred
maintenance from several sources. They include discretionary accounts
(e.g., Capital Improvement and Maintenance), mandatory appropriations
(e.g., recreation fees), and other agencies (e.g., the Federal Highway
Administration). Please identify all sources of funding that are used
for deferred maintenance, and the total from all funding sources used
in FY 2018.
Answer. The Forest Service uses different sources of funding to
address deferred maintenance including direct appropriations to the
Capital Improvement and Maintenance account, and external allocations
from the Federal Highway Administration's Federal Lands Transportation
Program and Federal Lands Access Program. The Agency also uses
partnerships to accomplish some of the deferred maintenance work
including cost-share agreements with counties and states, volunteer
work on trail improvement, and via the Good Neighbor Authority. Total
spending from all sources was approximately $230 million in 2018 to
address deferred maintenance directly.
Question 4. Associate Chief Lago, can you speak to the role
individual forests, regional foresters, and headquarters will play in
prioritizing maintenance projects moving forward?
Answer. Prioritization of routine maintenance, including annual
maintenance, and small non-recurring maintenance projects will continue
to be identified, prioritized and managed at the forest level with the
Regional Forester providing guidance and allocating funding based on
the Agency's priorities. The role of the Washington Office is to
communicate agency priorities and develop national policies and
standards to help determine where appropriated dollars should be
allocated for deferred maintenance projects that target larger agency
goals.
Question 5. In the past, Forest Service has needed to transfer
funds from other accounts to help cover the costs of wildfire
suppression. The wildfire funding fix, however, is intended to
eliminate some of the need for fire transfer and is set to take effect
in FY 2020. Has fire transfer affected the Forest Service's ability to
address maintenance needs? If so, in what ways might the wildfire
funding fix alleviate those concerns?
Answer. In the past, funds for maintenance were transferred to
firefighting efforts usually during the summer season, which is also
the time that most of the Agency's maintenance activities are scheduled
to occur, when there are an increased number of seasonal staff for
oversight of activities and favorable weather conditions. When fire
transfers from capital maintenance accounts occurred, planned
maintenance activities were deferred to the following year continuing
the never-ending cycle of deferring maintenance. The wildland fire
suppression funding fix should allow maintenance projects to proceed as
planned, allowing for less deferred maintenance to accumulate.
Question 6. How can the Forest Service enhance public-private
partnerships to address deferred maintenance projects? What is the
staffing level assigned to work on public-private partnerships, how has
that changed in recent years, and is the current staffing level
sufficient to foster and manage additional partnerships?
Answer. With a $5.2 billion deferred maintenance backlog, the
Forest Service recognizes new approaches are needed to address deferred
maintenance and infrastructure priorities on NFS lands. The Agency is
placing a major emphasis on building capacity for public-private
partnerships, with partnership coordinators assigned to every Forest
Service region, and an increasing number of National Forests
designating specific partnership positions. While we do face staffing
capacity challenges due to a workforce that has migrated into wildland
fire related work, partnerships are increasingly important to
accomplish our mission.
Trails maintenance is already highly leveraged within the Forest
Service to maximize maintenance and infrastructure funds. Furthermore,
the Forest Service engages a robust volunteer community that annually
contributes 4.7 million hours of work valued at $120,000,000 with the
help of 110,000 individuals.
Limited capacity to meet competing priorities continues to
challenge the Forest Service to find new ways to meet the needs of an
aging infrastructure. Conservation finance, through Pay for Success and
other funding models, has proven promising in recent pilot projects, as
a way of bringing private sector funding to local recreation projects.
Growing our skills and staffs in partnership collaboration will allow
us to foster new and innovative ways to accomplish work. For example, a
collaborative of local governments in Athens County, Ohio, industry
partners, nonprofits, Quantified Ventures and the Wayne National Forest
are funding sustainable recreation infrastructure by introducing the
first-ever Outdoor Recreation Environmental Impact Bond. Together, the
partners are developing the 88 mile Baileys Trail System on the Wayne
National Forest to revitalize the rural economy of southeast Ohio. The
Baileys Trail System will utilize a mix of new and existing trail
infrastructure on and adjacent to the National Forest to provide new
access to public lands and create new jobs within the Athens County
tourism industry. The Forest Service has partnered with the U.S.
Endowment for Forestry and Communities to implement a grant fund that
hopes to replicate the Baileys Trail System model, among other types of
conservation finance projects, in additional communities that rely on
the National Forest System.
Questions Submitted by Hon. Marcia L. Fudge, a Representative in
Congress from Ohio
Question 1. Ms. Lago, what are the existing pathways for hiring Job
Corps students into the Forest Service?
Answer. The Forest Service is committed to connecting our Job Corps
Civilian Conservation Centers directly to our mission and continuously
improving the performance of our centers and our student outcomes. The
current pathways for hiring our Job Corps students include:
Public Lands Corps Act. The Public Land Corps (PLC) allows
any student completing 640 hours of special conservation
project work under a Natural Resource Agency to apply for a
merit vacancy announcement (open to current Federal employees
and others with competitive eligibility) for up to 2 years upon
program completion. Eligible candidates can be selected for
permanent positions and are provided career-conditional
appointments.
Pathways Program. Students attending any of our five
accredited Job Corps Centers may qualify for the Pathways
special hiring authority if their specific trades align with an
applicable Forest Service position. A student selected under
the Pathways Intern Program must complete 640 paid work hours
and additional training upon Job Corps graduation to be
eligible for conversion into a permanent or Term Forest Service
position. The 640 hours must be performed on a unit-school
program hours do not count toward eligibility. In addition,
students who have completed an accredited trades program within
the last 2 years or are within 9 months of graduation may be
selected under the Pathways Recent Graduate Program for a
Forest Service position. Those who have not yet graduated will
be appointed upon graduation.
Schedule A or Veterans Recruitment Action (VRA). Students
who qualify for Schedule A (disability hiring) or VRA may be
hired non-competitively, by applying to a vacancy announcement
or other recruitment avenues, such as non-competitive direct
appointment.
Direct Hire Authority for Firefighters. On August 8, 2019,
the Office of Personnel Management authorized the Forest
Service to use a direct hire authority to assist in meeting
critical hiring needs in support of the FY 2020 wildland
firefighting season. This authority enables the Forest Service
to streamline the hiring process for permanent and temporary
firefighting positions. Every civilian conservation center
supports a wildland fire program, training students to serve as
firefighters. Eligible, qualifying students can be hired
directly upon graduation into Federal firefighter positions.
Question 1a. What does that process look like for a Job Corps
student?
Answer. Every center has a student advisor who assists students in
creating their resumes and applying for positions under the PLC
authority or any other authority they qualify for when applying for a
Forest Service job. To date, the PLC program has resulted in over 200
students completing internships that led to receiving a non-competitive
hiring authority preference. Of those students, approximately 20 have
been placed into permanent, full-time positions with the Forest
Service.
Question 1b. Are students made aware of opportunities within the
Forest Service?
Answer. Yes. Students who are interested in Forest Service careers
learn about those opportunities through the Job Corps Program. Students
compete for internship opportunities with the Forest Service, and if
they are successful, they complete a 4 month work experience and
receive non-competitive application preference status. This status
gives students a competitive advantage for permanent Forest Service
positions.
Question 2. You mentioned that the Forest Service is interested in
working with OPM to create a direct hiring authority for Job Corps
students. What is the status of this effort currently?
Answer. The Forest Service Job Corps National Office is working to
assemble and approve the appropriate materials through USDA and OPM
that will provide:
Direct hiring authority for Job Corps graduates under the
Public Land Corps Authority that is similar to the direct
hiring authority available for Resource Assistants.
Special hiring authority for Job Corps graduates that is
similar to the special hiring authority for AmeriCorps and
Peace Corps.
Question 3. What activities are Civilian Conservation Corps
students trained to assist with? How does that help to reduce the
deferred maintenance backlog?
Answer. Student trades include a variety of construction,
information technology, and natural resource trades. Construction
trades include carpentry, facilities maintenance, masonry, bricklaying,
painting, welding, operation of heavy equipment, and floor-covering.
Center students perform work on their local unit. In the last 2 years,
this work has contributed a total of almost $3 million in deferred
maintenance projects.
Question 4. You mentioned that the Forest Service is interested in
expanding the conservation trades to all of the Job Corps centers. When
do you expect to make that expansion? What impact could that have on
the deferred maintenance backlog?
Answer. Currently ten trades directly align with Forest Service
conservation work, including forestry, fire suppression, and dispatch.
The Forest Service is working to increase the alignment through an
expansion of conservation-related training curricula. Centers will also
work directly with their local National Forests to fully integrate
their curricula into the Forest's annual program of work. In addition,
each Center will be represented on their local National Forest's
leadership team and will participate in the planning of work for the
districts in their forest. Students will take part in work-based
learning on National Forests and in communities, including facilities
maintenance. The value of these projects could eventually add up to
millions of dollars but will still be far less than what would be
needed to appreciably slow the growth of deferred maintenance across
the agency.
We welcome the opportunity to update the Committee on our efforts
to strengthen Job Corps.
Question Submitted by Hon. Tom O'Halleran, a Representative in Congress
from Arizona
Question. In Arizona, road and trail repair needs account for
nearly 50% of the deferred maintenance backlog on Federal lands. Lack
of road and trail access to Federal public lands reduces visitation and
limits opportunities for recreation, impacting the economy of gateway
communities. Understanding this, our local governments have stepped up
to play their part in maintaining roads and other access points. 70% of
the 2,100 vehicles using Lake Mary road each day are due to
recreational traffic. For nearly a century, Coconino county has
maintained this road through a combination of funds, including local
taxes. Has the Forest Service explored similar partnerships with local
governments and does the forest service see this or other existing
partnerships as potential models for tackling deferred maintenance?
Answer. The cooperative road maintenance agreement as described
above is widely used on Forest Service transportation systems across
the country. This mechanism is actively used and promoted to allow
other public entities to participate in maintenance of routes critical
to local communities. Other methods of public-public partnerships are
also employed and encouraged by the Forest Service. One example of
these partnerships is the agreement between the Tennessee Valley
Authority (TVA) and the Forest Service under which TVA performs
inspections of Forest Service road bridges to meet the requirement
under the National Bridge Inspection Standards for a quality assurance
check of Forest Service road bridges by an external agency.
Questions Submitted by Hon. Chellie Pingree, a Representative in
Congress from Maine
Question 1. The Forest Service has an FY 2020 list of 25 Land and
Water Conservation Fund priority projects for acquisition, and 22 for
Forest Legacy. These projects would likely be funded under anticipated
appropriations for next year, but the agency has unmet needs beyond the
current list of projects. Based on need alone, how many acquisition and
Forest Legacy projects would the agency need to pursue? Can your agency
quantify the backlog, and say how many projects beyond the list could
improve management and reduce costs, if LWCF was more fully funded?
Answer. Each year, Forest Legacy Program (FLP) projects are
selected through a two-stage competitive process. The first stage is
state-level identification and approval. After a project is selected at
the state level, the second stage is a national level project review
conducted by a panel of representatives from states participating in
the FLP and the Forest Service. This two-stage process results in high-
quality projects that are supported both locally and nationally.
For FY 2020, 36 projects, with a total request of $123 million,
were submitted for consideration through the FLP. Some of these
projects received funding when FY 2019 appropriations were enacted,
while some of the proposed projects were no longer viable.
Maine has been an active participant in the FLP at 741,000 acres.
In terms of funds, Maine has received $76,061,534, which is second only
to Montana, which has received $77,405,533.
For land acquisition, the Forest Service works with a variety of
non-governmental organizations and willing sellers from the general
public. In Fiscal Year 2020, Congress appropriated $57,639,000 for
purchase of lands from willing sellers in 18 states. The acquisition
projects are prioritized based on: (1) the significance of the
acquisition; (2) the urgency of the acquisition; (3) management
efficiencies; (4) management cost savings; (5) geographic distribution;
(6) threats to the integrity of the land; and (7) the recreational
value of the land. The Forest Service's nine regions hold competitions
to cull the projects from units within the region's National Forests
and Grasslands, then submit top projects to the Washington Office (WO)
for a national competition. The WO competition results in a smaller
list of projects that is submitted to Congress, which determines the
amount of appropriations for the projects.
Question 2. Based on budget documents that I have received from
USDA, I understand the Forest Service spent $3.3 million on the climate
hubs in 2016, which I think is great, but the 2019 estimate is
$400,000. Given the challenges that we are dealing with, why is there
such a big drop, and do you see those as a valuable part of what you
are doing?
Answer. In FY 2016, the Forest Service allocated $3.3 million for
Climate Hubs. The Forest Service allocated $1.85 million per year for
both FY 2017 and FY 2018. In FY 2019, Climate Hub allocation was $1.665
million and has been budgeted to remain at this level for FY 2020. The
funding drop is reflective of prioritization of urgent forest
restoration program and project work. However, the agency continues to
support many important initiatives through our multiple Research and
Development programs.
Questions Submitted by Hon. Cynthia Axne, a Representative in Congress
from Iowa
Question 1. The Forest Service supplies water for agriculture and
communities and is a major economic driver for many forest dependent
communities. In fact, National Forest System lands are the nation's
largest source of municipal drinking water supply, serving more than 66
million people. Ms. Lago, please speak to the importance of these
systems to the environment, public health, and safety. Can you speak to
the current condition of Forest Service water systems?
Answer. The Forest Service continues to foster conditions for
clean, abundant water to help ensure the productive and sustainable use
of National Forest System lands. The Agency emphasizes reforestation
and revegetation efforts. Restoring ecosystems ensures that vital
amenities, such as clean water, are available to society. In FY 2018,
the Agency targeted investments in the National Best Management
Practices Program to improve tools to meet agency requirements under
the Clean Water Act and other statutes to protect clean water. The
program made advancements to increase the speed and accuracy of use and
sharing of data with state water quality agencies, the Environmental
Protection Agency, and other partners.
The Forest Service owns and operates over 4,700 drinking water
systems, of which over 30% are in poor or fair condition. Thirty-six
percent of all drinking water systems are more than 50 years old with
escalating repair costs every year. With a current water system
deferred maintenance backlog of $93 million, the impact of not
addressing this will affect the ability for the public and employees to
access recreation facilities, fire, administration and other
facilities.
Question 2. We recognize that restoration and maintenance of our
National Forests can be a source of long-term, sustainable jobs in
rural communities. Studies have indicated that for every $1 million
spent on forest watershed restoration, 14.5 jobs can be generated. Can
you provide references to studies documenting the impact of
infrastructure improvements on jobs?
Answer. Federal agencies examined job contributions of
infrastructure improvements with the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act of 2009 (ARRA) consistent with goals of the act, specifically, to
preserve and create jobs and stimulate economic recovery. Further, USDA
agencies used a common general framework for estimating the potential
effects of the ARRA using concepts and techniques embodied in a tool
called IMPLAN. Infrastructure investments by USDA Rural Development in
community facilities, water and waste, rural business support, single
family housing support, broadband and Rural Development Salary resulted
in 16 jobs per $1 million invested (USDA NRCS, 2010). Infrastructure
investments by USDA Farm Service Agency in information technology
resulted in 22 jobs per $1 million invested (USDA NRCS, 2010). A 2010
study partially funded by the Forest Service indicated that forest and
watershed restoration activities have the potential to create an
average of 14 jobs per $1 million invested (M. Nielsen-Pincus and C.
Moseley, 2010). A more recent study published by the Public Library of
Science, cites up to 33 jobs per $1 million invested from environmental
restoration, restoration-related conservation, and mitigation actions
(BenDor, et al., 2015). Infrastructure investments by USDA Natural
Resource Conservation Service in floodplain, dam and other projects
resulted in 220 jobs per $1 million invested (USDA NRCS 2010). Recent
examination of Forest Service investment in over $3 billion in
infrastructure indicates that 35,000 to 38,000 jobs annually could be
sustained across the nation, or 11 to 12 jobs per $1 million invested
(USDA Forest Service, 2017). In addition, a 2017 analysis of Forest
Service resource management investments ($5.9 billion) in program areas
such as infrastructure construction and maintenance, firefighting,
ecosystem restoration, research and development, fuels treatments, Job
Corps, salaries, etc. contributed 120,620 jobs across the nation; or 20
jobs per $1 million invested (USDA Forest Service, 2019).
References
BenDor, T. et al. ``Estimating the size and impact of the
ecological restoration economy,'' PLoS ONE, 10 (6) (2015): e0128339.
M. Nielsen-Pincus and C. Moseley. Economic and Employment Impacts
of Forest and Watershed Restoration in Oregon, 2010. Available from
Oregon State University at https://scholarsbank.uoregon.edu/xmlui/
bitstream/handle/1794/10776/WP24.pdf?sequence=1.
USDA NRCS 2010. Job Creation Estimates for Rural Development, FSA,
and NRCS Items in the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. Available
from NRCS at https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/detail/national/
technical/econ/tools/?cid=nrcs143_009732.
USDA Forest Service 2017. Briefing Paper on Forest Service
Infrastructure Improvement Opportunities.
USDA Forest Service 2019. Briefing Paper on Forest Service Jobs and
GDP Economic Contribution. Supporting the FY2020 Budget Justification.
Questions Submitted by Hon. Kim Schrier, a Representative in Congress
from Washington
Capital Improvement Plan Projects
Question 1. What considerations are made to narrow down the list of
projects submitted that meet the national priorities outlined?
Answer. The primary considerations for selecting and ranking
capital improvement projects are how the projects support our current
priorities including the following benefit areas: active management,
access to recreation, economic benefits, fire operations, environment
and sustainability, and research and technology. In addition, project
criticality and readiness are also considered when scheduling
implementation.
Question 2. Are Regions allocated a percentage of the CIP budget
based on need, miles of road, acres of Forest Service land? Or are
simply the top number of projects funded?
Answer. Regions are allocated funds for operations and maintenance
based on a distribution formula that includes miles of roads,
visitation, timber volume targets and others. Since 2017, the Forest
Service has set aside a small portion of the Capital Improvement and
Maintenance (CI&M) account for Roads and Facilities to fund competitive
Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) and Decommissioning projects.
Question 3. Given that the states with the highest concentration of
deferred repairs are: California, Montana, Idaho, Oregon, Colorado, and
Washington, respectively, will these states be allocated larger
proportion of the CIP budget due to their needs?
Answer. In general, these states get a large portion of CI&M
funding for operations and maintenance. However, the national CIP
project competition focuses on project specific cost-benefit ratio
rather than accumulated deferred maintenance. The reduction of deferred
maintenance as result of implementing a project is a desired outcome.
Question 4. How are Regional priorities considered? For example, in
Region 6, if improving Chinook salmon habitat and removing fish passage
barriers is of utmost priority, what weight will that be given in the
national priorities?
Answer. The CIP model used to rank and prioritize project uses
quantitative metrics and criticality scoring. Although the regional
ranking of projects is not used in the calculation of the final score,
it would be taken into consideration. Before finalizing the CIP list of
projects for each fiscal year the Asset Management Review Board (AMRB)
would make necessary adjustments to ensure that regional and national
priorities are in alignment.
Legacy Roads and Trails Program
Question 5. What direction are you providing to Regional Offices to
Legacy Roads and Trails program projects are implemented and tracked?
Answer. While the Legacy Roads and Trails Program was retired from
our budget line items starting in FY 2018, the Forest Service continues
to plan, implement and track projects which meet the goals of this
formerly dedicated funding mechanism.
Question 6. Is the USFS continuing to track and report annual
accomplishments under the program?
Answer. The Forest Service continues to track accomplishments from
transportation projects that improve watershed conditions, including
bettering streams for water quality and aquatic organisms.
Question 7. Across National Forest lands in OR/WA, 6,000 stream
miles are designated as critical habitat for federally listed fish, and
5,550 stream miles have been listed as water quality impaired under the
Federal Clean Water Act of 1972. What management improvements does the
USFS need to make to ensure waters are removed from the listings?
Answer. The Forest Service established a Watershed Condition
Framework to provide a consistent, comparable, and credible process for
improving the health of watersheds on National Forests and Grasslands
in 2011. The Pacific Northwest Region continues to focus on the
priority watersheds and choose projects to fund that improve watershed
conditions, including bettering streams for water quality and aquatic
organisms.
Question 8. How will the USFS meet its obligations to protect water
quality and salmon in my state?
Answer. The Pacific Northwest Region continues to leverage existing
and new partnerships to invest in watershed improvement projects that
address water quality and aquatic organism passage.
Questions Submitted by Hon. Jimmy Panetta, a Representative in Congress
from California
Question 1. The Nacimiento-Fergusson Road is a 24 mile long Forest
Service road in the Los Padres National Forest. When Big Sur residents
face inclement weather like mudslides and wildfires that cause road
failures on Highway 1, the Nacimiento-Fergusson road is the only way
they can get out of the Big Sur region. After storms in 2017 that shut
down Highway 1, there were hundreds of people who had no way to get out
of Big Sur. At the same time, the Nacimiento-Fergusson road has
suffered as a result of the Forest Service's maintenance backlog.
Associate Chief Lago, once the Wildfire Funding Fix is implemented in
Fiscal Year 2020, would you be willing to continue this dialogue and
work with me to ensure the Big Sur community can access much-needed
funding to for deferred maintenance on their roads?
Answer. Yes, the implementation of the Wildfire Funding Fix is
going to allow the agency to be more efficient in addressing
infrastructure needs and to better plan long term solutions to address
the deferred maintenance backlog.
Question 2. In Los Padres National Forest, our deferred maintenance
exceeds $24 million. My question is where does that lie relative to
other National Forests?
Answer. Los Padres National Forest deferred maintenance is
consistent with other National Forests. We have enclosed a file with
more detailed information on the deferred maintenance for all units of
the National Forest System [see Attachment 3].
Question 3. The State of California prides itself on technological
innovation. I am consistently impressed when I see the innovation in
our agricultural fields, from robotic harvesters to agricultural drones
that monitor crop growth. Can you speak to any Forest Service
investments in technology, including drones, satellites, and fire
surveillance cameras?
Answer. The Forest Service is actively involved in leveraging
leading edge technology to support decision-making at all levels of the
Forest Service from the field, to the regional offices, and to the
Washington Office. The FY 2021 Forest Service budget proposes $5
million to be used to implement the Wildfire Technology Modernization
section of the Dingell Conservation and Management Act (2019).
Implementation includes the development of a common, single display of
all fire resources and will significantly increase accountability for
how the agency uses assets. This will allow the agency to monitor,
analyze, and evaluate how tactical decisions and resource utilization
influences incident outcomes. This information will create a feedback
loop, allowing the agency to learn where, when, and how resources are
most effective. When combined with the Risk Management Assistance
framework, technology modernization for fire resources will enable
improvement in the efficient use of agency resources through early,
risk-based decision-making with State and local partners and through
transparent deployment of assets. The Forest Service is accelerating
adoption of new technologies to modernize the wildland fire system,
consistent with direction provided in the Dingell Act. Technology is
key not only for real-time incident management, but also to be able to
learn where and when resources are most effective. That learning will
be key for improved deployment in the future that will reduce risk to
responders and be more cost-effective. Investments in technology
include (among others):
UAS (drones). The Forest Service began evaluating UAS in
2003, and we now have an established Forest Service--UAS
Program Office to manage, support and expand the use of this
revolutionary capability. We are actively leveraging UAS
technologies to support a number of business needs including
fire/disaster support, engineering fieldwork (infrastructure
inspection and assessment), invasive species mapping, and
environmental cleanup. The Forest Service has also started
testing the use of drones to perform bridge inspection. The use
of UAS provides new data streams, saves time, and improves
personnel safety in the field.
Satellite Imagery. The Forest Service heavily leverages the
use of imagery from Federal-civil and commercial satellites to
support traditional mapping (paper and digital maps) and fire/
disaster support. The remote sensing community continues to
evaluate and incorporate new sensor data streams as they come
online. The Forest Service is a significant user of commercial
high-resolution satellite imagery, which is provided at no cost
to Federal-civil agencies by the National Geospatial-
Intelligence Agency.
Fire Surveillance Cameras. Federal, state and local fire
managers are increasingly relying on both airborne and ground
(fixed) fire surveillance cameras. The Forest Service is
actively pursuing automated smoke detection in the networked
ground surveillance cameras, as well as the use of UAS, new
thermal infrared cameras and the use of national systems to
support improved fire detection (and reporting) and active fire
management.
Questions Submitted by Hon. Doug LaMalfa, a Representative in Congress
from California
Question 1. Timber receipts have been down. Back years ago, we are
looking at 1991, we could see that there is $680 million in timber
receipts, of which ten percent goes directly towards forest roads, and
it is also very important, those receipts, for local schools and roads
under what is the Secure Rural Schools Fund. And so, now you want $680
million in receipts, and more recently, it is down to $21 million. So,
it would seem to me we could be going farther if we had the timber
receipts for the road maintenance for that ten percent.
Would you comment upon that?
Question 1a. Do you know that number now compared to the $680
million not-inflation-adjusted 1991 number?
Answer 1-1a. The 2014-2018 5 year average of timber receipts was
$32.8 million (see Table [1] below), as compared to the $686.6 million
sold, $845.7 million in receipts, and $84.57 million in ``Purchaser
Road Credits'' in 1991. This 5 year average is roughly 4% of the 1991
timber receipts. In 1991, the Forest Service changed from collecting
``Purchaser Road Credits'' to the ``Specified Road Costs'' approach to
maintaining Forest Service Roads above the standards necessary for
timber harvest. As in the past, where the road maintenance credits were
10% of the receipts, we are very close to that same rate today, as we
calculate the road costs to be 9% of total receipts.
Table 1. Total Timber Receipts 2014-2018
[millions of dollars]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2014-2018
Timber
2018
2017
2016
2015
2014
Average
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Class 1--Timber
40.83
33.22
29.96
29.93
30.04
32.80
KV Revenue
60.38
68.13
57.61
56.80
50.80
58.74
Specified Road
14.61
15.06
15.48
14.70
9.60
13.89
Costs
Timber Salvage
40.06
36.69
35.83
36.69
35.14
36.88
Sale
TPTP Revenue
4.29
4.72
5.57
5.51
5.25
5.07
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total Timber
160.16
157.83
144.45
143.63
130.82
147.38
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Under Forest Service Manual (FSM 2432.34a), the Purchaser pays for
the cost of building a road to the standard needed for consistency with
applicable environmental laws and regulations and as needed for timber
harvest. If the sale contract provides for road design standards in
excess of those needed for the harvest and removal of timber from that
sale, including measures to protect adjacent resource values, provision
shall be made in the contract for compensating the Purchaser for the
additional costs, unless the Purchaser elects Government construction
under section 14(i) of the National Forest Management Act of 1976. In
the absence of supplemental funds, the sale would need to be redesigned
or rescheduled.
The FY 2020 and FY 2021 Forest Service budget proposes to use the
Roads and Trails for States fund, without regard to the state in which
the amounts were derived, to repair or reconstruct roads, bridges, and
trails on National Forest System lands or to carry out and administer
projects to improve forest health conditions. This work may include the
repair or reconstruction of roads, bridges, and trails on National
Forest System lands in the wildland-community interface where there is
an abnormally high risk of fire.
Question 2. When we were talking about the backlog, when we are
seeing the Forest Service absorbing more lands through donations from
maybe NGOs or other instances, or the LWCF has also introduced more
land back into Forest Service control. How is that contributing to the
backlog and your ability to keep up, and as well as updating this $5.2
billion backlog figure?
Answer. The Forest Service has a policy not to acquire properties
that will increase deferred maintenance requirements when LWCF funds
are utilized. Naturally, there is a long-term maintenance cost to the
agency to own any acre of land or asset within the National Forest
System.
Question Submitted by Hon. Rick W. Allen, a Representative in Congress
from Georgia
Question. In your written testimony, you mentioned that perhaps
most critically, forest infrastructure provides fire protection for
communities, especially by providing access to forest lands and roads
for firefighters and emergency responders during rescue operations.
Due to the deferred maintenance backlog, how many miles of Forest
Service system roads have been decommissioned over the past 10 years?
Answer. Historically, the Forest Service has had a targeted road
mile decommissioning strategy in order to minimize resource damage to
the landscape caused by the presence of built infrastructure. The table
below presents those targets and associated decommissioning
accomplishments. It should be noted that the targets and
accomplishments include both System and non-System mileage. System
roads are roads inventoried, maintained and managed by the Forest
Service. Non-System roads are roads within National Forest System
boundaries, but which are not Forest Service roads. Until FY 2013,
System and non-System miles were not reported separately.
Forest Service Road Decommissioning FY 2010-FY 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Target (Mi., Total)
1,519
2,158
2,028
1,936
1,200
1,600
2,000
2,000
2,000
0
System Accomp. (Mi.)
N/A
N/A
N/A
780.78
508.00
416
265.36
296.3
142.7
132.9
Non-System (Mi.)
N/A
N/A
N/A
709.44
908.00
883.32
671.65
548.2
398.1
207.1
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
attachment 1
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Facilities Condition Assessment Field Training Guide
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a moderate-sized building with shingle siding, a
concrete foundation, and a steel-ribbed roof. A large brick
chimney extends above the roof in the center where the three
wings of the building meet. Tall conifer trees and a grass lawn
surround the building.
This 1934 building at the Cle Elum Ranger Station on the
Okanogan-Wenatchee National Forest, Pacific Northwest Region is
still in use and is in serviceable condition.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Forest Service, National Technology & Development Program
1473-2830-MTDC Facilities
January 2015
About the Authors
Kathleen Snodgrass joined the Missoula Technology and Development
Center (MTDC) as a project leader in 2001. She began her career with
the Forest Service at the Nez Perce National Forest working in
facilities, landscape architecture, land line, and general engineering
before serving as the facilities architect for about 7 years. She also
spent about 10 years working in highway design and construction with
the Idaho Division of Highways after graduating from Washington State
University in 1974 with a bachelor's degree in architectural studies.
Kathleen C. Marks is a multidisciplinary project leader at MTDC for
the facilities and environmental compliance and protection (ECAP)
programs. She began work for MTDC in 2010 after receiving a bachelor's
degree in civil engineering from Montana State University.
Kathleen Snodgrass, Project Leader;
Kathleen Marks Project Assistant,
USDA Forest Service, National Technology and Development Program,
Missoula, MT
9E92L11 Facility Inspection Field Guide
January 2015
USDA Nondiscrimination Statement
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis
of race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where
applicable, sex, marital status, familial status, parental
status, religion, sexual orientation, genetic information,
political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or part of an
individual's income is derived from any public assistance
program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.)
Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for
communication of program information (Braille, large print,
audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202)
720-2600 (voice and TDD). To file a complaint of
discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights,
1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, or
call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6832 (TDD). USDA is an
equal opportunity provider and employer.
Forest Service
The Forest Service, an agency of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA), has developed this information for the
guidance of its employees, its contractors, and its cooperating
Federal and State agencies. The Forest Service assumes no
responsibility for the interpretation or use of this
information by anyone except its own employees. The use of
trade, firm, or corporation names is for the information and
convenience of the reader. Such use does not constitute an
official endorsement or approval of any product or service to
the exclusion of others that may be suitable.
Acknowledgments
The authors deeply appreciate the contributions of Steve Oravetz,
Bruce Crockett, Randy Warbington, and Mark McDonough, who were the lead
developers of the Forest Service Condition Assessment system and
provided advice about and information for this publication. The authors
also thank the many Forest Service employees who provided great photos
of facilities, especially those who responded to specific item
requests. The authors thank the editors and visual information
specialists for turning the rough draft into a polished field guide.
The Facility Condition Assessment Form
This training guide is a memory-jogger that you can take with you
as you perform facility condition assessments. It contains the same
items in the same order as the complex facility condition assessment
form that is used to record work items for entry into the Natural
Resources Manager (NRM) Infra database. Use this guide to perform
condition assessments in a manner consistent with those performed by
other inspectors throughout the Forest Service.
Keep in mind that facility condition assessments are only intended
to record major facility maintenance needs. Performing operations work
and minor maintenance work on a regular basis is important, but such
work is not recorded through the facility condition assessment process.
The National Technology and Development Program (T&D) report ``So
That's Why It's Always Cold in Here: A Guide for Conducting Facilities
Condition Assessment Surveys'' (0473-2839-MTDC), provides detailed
guidance for inspecting buildings and associated assets to determine
their condition and what work is needed to correct deficiencies,
including operations and minor maintenance. The report is available in
printed form from the Missoula Technology and Development Center (MTDC)
or electronically at http://fsweb.mtdc.wo.fs.fed.us/php/
library_card.php?p_num=0473 2839.
This guide does not explain how to properly conduct condition
assessments on Forest Service buildings. You will need to take the
7100--Basic Building Condition Assessment and Work Items or 7300--
Complex Building Condition Survey Training course in person or through
AgLearn before using this guide in the field.
This guide does not explain how to use the NRM Infra database.
Please see your supervisor and forest NRM specialist if you need more
information about NRM or role assignments to access and modify data in
the NRM Infra database.
Before using this guide in the field, print the condition
assessment form for each building using the NRM Infra report
BLDSRV01JRL: Facility Condition Assessment Form (figure 1). NRM Infra
automatically populates the header information for the printed form,
except for the inspector signature, inspection date, and inspector
name. Check to ensure that you've printed the appropriate form (complex
versus basic building) and that the header information is accurate.
Figure 1
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Part of the Facility Condition Assessment Form for the
Missoula Technology and Development Center office/lab/shop.
Be sure to check the gross square feet (Gross SqFt) of the building
to ensure that it is correct. Compute gross square feet using physical
or as-built plan measurements to the outside faces of exterior walls
for all stories of the building. Don't include crawl spaces or areas
with less than a 3 clear ceiling height. Don't include the open air
over a double height room as part of the floor above; count only the
floor area that can be walked on. Do include excavated basement areas,
indoor mechanical spaces, mezzanines, penthouses and attics with
floors, garages, covered porches (with or without walls), balconies you
can stand on, and interior or covered corridors or walkways. Do include
the footprints of stairways, elevator shafts, and vertical duct shafts
as gross area on each floor through which they pass. If this
explanation is confusing, more details and sketches showing how these
rules are applied to a building are available at the U. S. Department
of Education's Facilities Inventory and Classification Manual Web page
http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2006/ficm/
content.asp?ContentType=Section&chapter=3&section=2&subsection=1.
All work item costs automatically populate when your inspection
data is entered into the NRM Infra database. The costs include the RS
Means estimated cost multiplied by 1.10 for design costs, by 1.10 for
contracting costs, and by 1.15 for overhead costs. The RS Means costs
are updated each year to match the current national average costs of
the work.
A multiplier is also applied to all work items to account for the
increasing costs as the distance increases from the building to the
nearest town with contractors and supplies. The multiplier is based on
the Estimated Travel Time (Hrs) value that is entered on the Building
Details screen in the NRM Infra database. The multiplier is 1.0 for 1
hour of travel time, 1.5 for 2 hours, 2.0 for 4 hours, 3.0 for 8 hours,
and 4.0 for more than 8 hours of travel time. The estimated travel time
is shown in the Facility Condition Assessment Form header. Check this
value for accuracy. If it is inaccurate, correct it on the Buildings
screen before entering work items.
Another multiplier, 1.5, is automatically applied to all work items
for buildings with Historic Status in the NRM Infra database of
EVALUATED/MEETS (has been evaluated and meets National Register
criteria), IN/PENDING (included in the National Register of Historic
Places or on a pending list), or MEETS AGE/FRTHR (more than 50 years
old, but requires further evaluation). The Facility Condition
Assessment Form header shows the Historic Status. Check this value for
accuracy. If it is inaccurate, correct it on the Buildings screen
before entering work items.
Whether you are assessing a complex or basic building, all the
standard work items are on the Facility Condition Assessment Form.
Complex buildings have 62 standard work items and simple buildings have
16 standard work items. This guide addresses each work item in the same
order as on the printed complex building form. If you are inspecting a
basic building, ignore the work items in this guide that are not on
your form.
Filling in the Facility Condition Assessment Form
You will need to physically inspect each building and fill in
Quantity, Reason, and Date Needed for each item that requires repair,
and check the box in the Critical column, if necessary. The cost for
each item self-populates from an interface with the current edition of
RS Means Building Construction Cost Data when the information from the
printed form is entered electronically into the NRM Infra database.
Quantity of work must be measured, calculated, or counted, unless
the preprinted unit is LS (lump sum). If the unit is LS, the quantity
is always ``1'' if the work is needed and ``0'' if no work is needed.
Other units of measure are:
CSF: 100 square feet
EA: each
LF: linear feet
MSF: 1,000 square feet
M.S.F.: 10,000 square feet
SF: square feet
SQ: 100 square feet
STEP, EA: stair riser
SYSTEM: each complete system
To calculate square feet, measure the length and width (or length
and height for vertical surfaces) in feet, then multiply length by
width (or length by height). CSF, MSF, SQ, and M.S.F. are variants of
SF, and are explained further under items using these units of measure.
Do not confuse M.S.F. with MSF. Available fonts prevented use of the
Roman numeral for 10,000 on the form. Designating 10,000 square feet as
M.S.F. was the workaround.
The Reason column identifies the reason for performing the work. It
contains only three choices:
1.
Resource protection work items must be performed to avoid damage,
obstruction, or negative impact to a natural or cultural
resource.
2.
Mission work items must be completed to ensure the ability of
employees to carry out the Forest Service mission. Needs
are related to administration and providing services
(transportation, recreation, grazing, etc.) that do not
fall into the H&S or Resource categories.
3.
Health and safety (H&S) work items are necessary to address
immediate threats to human health and safety.
In the Date Needed column, you normally should write in the last
day of the fiscal year in which the work needs to be performed.
Check the box in the Critical column only if completion of the work
item is necessary to correct a serious and immediate threat to health
or safety, a natural or cultural resource, or the ability of the Forest
Service to carry out its mission. Other work items necessary to address
potential risks to public or employee safety or health; compliance with
codes, standards, regulations, etc.; or needs that address potential
adverse consequences to natural resources or mission accomplishment are
considered non-critical. For example:
Complying with Notices of Violation (Occupational Safety and
Health Administration [OSHA], Environmental Protection Agency
[EPA], etc.) is a critical health and safety need.
Preventing irreversible damage to or loss of a historic
structure is a critical resource protection need.
Providing accessibility for people with disabilities is a
non-critical health and safety need.
Complying with Federal, State, and local building codes is a
non-critical health and safety need.
Making modifications to accommodate increased visitation is
a non-critical mission need.
Energy efficiency or renewable energy retrofits are a non-
critical mission need.
Please DO check your data to ensure that everything is entered
correctly, including the unit of measure.
Inspection Tips
Experienced inspectors provided the following tips to help you
perform a quicker, more effective inspection.
Use two people to survey large labs or office buildings. One
person can measure while the other records.
Use a set of as-built plans (if available) to count light
fixtures, windows, etc.
If you don't have as-built plans, sketch a simple floor plan
as you inspect to show doors, windows, flooring types, and
dimensions. Keep the sketch in the building file for future
reference.
Builders often use rules of thumb to estimate quantities.
You can, too, where it seems prudent. For instance:
b Multiply the gross square feet of the finished area of a house by
4.5 for a good approximation of the total square feet of
gypsum board that would be needed to completely replace the
gypsum board inside the house. If the garage is a full-
finish structure, multiply its square footage by 2.25 and
then add the result to the house total. A reasonable
multiplier for small office buildings is 3.2.
These estimating multipliers also work for repainting
the entire interior.
b Each region has a cooling ratio that is either implied or
dictated by the local building officials. The ratio states
how many square feet can be conditioned per ton of cooling.
If you know this ratio, you can easily estimate the tons of
cooling capacity needed for the building.
Use the adjustment factors shown in table 1 to figure
the roof area on the
slope, if you know the roof pitch and the horizontal area
covered by the roof
(including overhangs). Multiply the covered area by the
adjustment factor.
Table 1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Roof Slope
Adjustment Factor
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3 in 12
1.031
4 in 12
1.054
6 in 12
1.118
8 in 12
1.202
12 in 12
1.414
------------------------------------------------------------------------
After entering the work items into the NRM Infra database,
check your entered data to ensure that you entered everything
correctly and that you used the unit of measure the work item
requires.
b Enter roofing and siding quantities in 100 square feet units
(CSF), not square feet units (SF).
b Enter parking lot seal coat in 10,000 square feet units (M.S.F.),
and parking lot resurfacing in 1,000 square feet units
(MSF).
A work item is deferred maintenance if the material has been
in place longer than the typical life cycle listed on the page
for each work item. A carpet that was installed in 2000 and
inspected in 2012 was 12 years old when inspected. Because the
life cycle for carpeting is 8 years, replacing the carpet would
be considered deferred maintenance using the Forest Service
standard, even if the carpet was still in good condition.
Whether you agree with this logic or not, please conform to the
standard so our practices remain uniform and defensible.
A list of survey tools a facility inspector may wish to take
along to increase efficiency when performing condition
assessment inspections is available at http://
fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/eng/programs/facilities/documents/
ToolList.doc.
Work Items
The remainder of this guide consists of information about the
standard work items. Each work item has its own page that includes a
photo or two depicting the item as well as information to help you
decide whether the item applies to the building you're inspecting, how
often this work normally is needed, and how to measure and record the
quantity of work. This guide includes much of the information included
in the ``Building Work Items Data Dictionary'' http://
fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/eng/programs/facilities/documents/
BldgsWIDDictionary.pdf.
In the interest of minimizing the number of work items, similar
work is sometimes grouped together under a single work item. The actual
replacement costs for these similar items aren't identical, so a
representative cost is used. The work item title may not reflect the
range of work covered by the item. Check the considerations bullets for
more information about the work included in the item.
If the standard work items don't cover needed major maintenance
work, you may need to create a custom work item, as explained following
the standard work item pages.
Notes
Work Item 01001--Building Replacement, Complete
Definition: Remove and replace an entire building (figures 2 and
3).
Unit of Measure: lump sum (LS).
Typical Life Cycle: 50 years.
A well constructed and maintained building can last several
hundred years, and a poorly constructed and maintained building
may become unusable in a decade or 2. Base the replacement
decision on the condition and function and not the age of the
building.
Considerations:
Replacement is justified if a building is still needed, but:
b Deferred maintenance costs exceed the current replacement value
shown in the NRM Infra database.
b The building becomes functionally obsolete.
b The building cannot be modified to meet accessibility standards.
Check the Facilities Master Plan (FMP) to see whether the
building is needed.
Decide whether this work item is appropriate based on the
FMP decision and the building's condition.
If this item is selected, DO NOT record any other work items
for this building.
Figure 2 *
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Editor's note: the following figures, in addition to having a
text descriptor, have a description embedded in the picture. These are
captured in this publication as well and immediately follow the figure
as an italic descriptor.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of an old barn building next to a newer, larger barn.
The old barn's foundation posts are leaning and the door is
propped open with a board braced against the ground.
This old barn is in extremely poor condition. If the
Facilities Master Plan shows a continuing need for barn or
storage space here, the barn should be replaced. If not, the
barn should be removed.
Figure 3
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of an older wood-framed and wood-sided vault toilet
with a fiberglass roof, The building is only about 4 wide by
4 deep. Green algae is growing up the siding from the concrete
slab foundation and there are holes in the bottom of the siding
in three places.
Buildings that can't be modified to meet accessibility
requirements need to be replaced, if the function they provide
is still required. This outhouse is too small to provide the
required turning space.
Work Item 02001--Parking Lot, Repair and Seal Coating (per 10,000 S.F.)
Definition: Perform minor repairs, apply emulsified asphalt seal
coat to the asphalt-paved surface, and paint traffic and parking
markings (figure 4).
Unit of Measure: 10,000 square feet (M.S.F.).
To determine the number of units, calculate the total area
in square feet, then divide by 10,000. Round to the nearest
tenth. Enter this number as the quantity. Example: 67,543 SF &
10,000 (SF per M.S.F.) = 6.7543 M.S.F. Rounded to the nearest
tenth = 6.8 M.S.F.
Typical Life Cycle: 5 years.
Considerations:
Includes thoroughly cleaning the surface, patching holes,
filling cracks, applying two coats of petroleum emulsion, and
restriping the parking lot.
Includes asphalt seal only, not chip seal; use a custom item
for chip seal.
Asphalt parking lots need to be maintained with an
emulsified asphalt seal coat about every 5 years to maximize
pavement life.
Use only for pavement associated with a building, not a
road.
Use only for parking lots that are in relatively good
condition.
Figure 4
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of an asphalt parking lot with faded parking
delineation paint and a few cracks that have been coated with
tar.
This supervisor's office parking lot is in pretty good
condition, but could use a seal and repainting.
Work Item 02002--Parking Lot, Repair and Resurface
Definition: Repair defects, place 2" thick asphalt pavement overlay
on asphalt-paved surfaces, and paint traffic and parking markings
(figure 5).
Unit of Measure: 1,000 square feet (MSF).
To determine the number of units, calculate the total area
in square feet, then divide by 1,000. Round to the nearest
tenth. Example: 485 SF & 1,000 SF per MSF = 0.485 MSF. Rounded
to the nearest tenth = 0.5 MSF.
Typical Life Cycle: 10 years.
Asphalt pavement may last much longer if properly
maintained.
Considerations:
Includes thoroughly cleaning the surface, patching holes,
filling cracks, applying an emulsion tack coat, laying an
asphaltic concrete wearing course, and restriping the lot.
Use only for pavement associated with a building, not a
road.
Use when the aggregate base is generally sound but the
asphalt is broken up, has potholes, and, in general, is in poor
but salvageable condition.
Figure 5
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of an area paved with asphalt in poor condition behind
two buildings.
The raveling, developing potholes, and alligatoring on this
parking lot and driveway can't be cured by a seal coat; it
should have an asphalt overlay.
Work Item 02003--Concrete, Sidewalk or Curb, Remove/Replace
Definition: Replace concrete or asphalt curbs (figure 6) or
sidewalks (figure 7).
Unit of Measure: linear feet (LF) of sidewalk or curb.
Sidewalk only: measure linear feet to the nearest foot for a
sidewalk that is 24" to 48" wide. If the sidewalk is wider than
48", record proportionally more length.
Curb only: measure linear feet to the nearest foot.
Both sidewalk and curb: measure linear feet of each to the
nearest foot and add the lengths together.
Typical Life Cycle: 25 years.
Concrete typically has a long life, but may become degraded
because of overloading or poor initial construction. Continued
exposure to freeze-thaw cycles may shift alignment vertically
or horizontally, creating tripping hazardsand making surfaces
nonaccessible.
Considerations:
Includes removing the existing sidewalk or curb, placing a
3" thick, vibratory-plate-compacted aggregate base and a 4"
thick, broom-finished concrete sidewalk or formed curb with
gutter.
Does not include repair work, such as patching or grinding,
which is minor maintenance.
Figure 6
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a section of concrete curb and gutter at the edge of
an asphalt-paved parking lot. The concrete is cracked about
every 2, with chipping and spalling at most of the cracks.
This curb and gutter are deteriorating and no longer provide
good drainage flow, so they should be replaced.
Figure 7
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of two sidewalks leading to the back door of a wood-
sided Forest Service residence. The left sidewalk is
perpendicular to the bade wall of the house and has an 1\1/2\"
high ``step'' where the walk cracked and part of it settled.
The right sidewalk is parallel to the back wall of the house
and has a 2" wide gap in the concrete at a joint where the
sidewalk separated.
Two short sections of this sidewalk should be replaced to
correct the vertical alignment shift on the left and the
horizontal shift on the right. Use work item 15001 to record
the needed work to provide accessibility at the door.
Work Item 02004--Fence, All, Remove/Replace or Install New
Definition: Remove and replace existing fencing (figure 8) and
gates (figure 9).
Typical Life Cycle: 20 years.
Unit of Measure: linear feet (LF) of fence.
Measure to the nearest foot the linear feet of the section
of fence that needs to be replaced.
Considerations:
Includes replacing worn-out fences of all standard quality
types (worm, picket, chain link, barbed wire, etc.) regardless
of height or material, including gates.
Does not include premium quality fencing, such as
replicating an elaborate historic pattern or extensive use of
exotic hardwoods. If such work is necessary, it is a custom
item.
Does not include fence repair or routine maintenance, such
as tightening wires, staining, or replacing a couple of
pickets.
Figure 8
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a low post-and-rail fence beside a sidewalk in back
of a wood-sided Forest Service office. Part of the fence is
leaning away from the viewer.
Although the stain hides most of the deficiencies, the posts
of this fence are rotted at the base, cracked at the top, and
the rails are deteriorated. This fence should be replaced.
Figure 9
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a man standing beside a partly opened gate in a tall
chain-link fence with three strands of barbed wire on top. A
chain and padlock hang from the fence next to the gate latch.
The fence separates a parking lot from a wareyard.
This gate may still be fine for use in a low-security area,
even though the wire panel is warped. If the gate is in an area
with high-security needs, it should be replaced.
Work Item 02005--Electric, Outdoor Pole Lights, Remove/Replace or
Install New
Definition: Remove and replace an outdoor light fixture, complete
with supporting pole or bollard (figure 10).
Typical Life Cycle: 20 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes replacing security or parking lot site light
fixtures. Does not include replacing landscape lights, wall
packs, or other less expensive outdoor lights, which are
included in work item 13004.
Includes turning the branch circuit off, positioning the
truck, raising and lowering the boom bucket, removing and
installing the pole and 400 W HPS fixture with lamp and
ballast, testing the pole-mounted fixture, and turning the
branch circuit back on.
Consider relamping costs (labor, equipment, and frequency of
bulb replacement) when choosing new site lights. Relamping site
lights is an operations expense.
Before recording this item in the NRM Infra database, check
to ensure that the Forest Service owns the light(s). Many
utility companies retain ownership of site lights and charge
monthly rent for them. If a utility company owns the light,
have them replace it.
Figure 10
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a cobra head yard light atop a wood pole behind a
brick Forest Service office. The light illuminates a parking
lot.
This parking lot light pole has a distinct lean and minor rot
at the base. The light fixture lens is cracked. The fixture and
pole should be replaced.
Work Item 03001--Concrete Slab or Stem Wall, Minor Repair, Spalls &
Cracks
Definition: Repair concrete stem walls, retaining walls (figure
11), slabs (figure 12), etc.
Typical Life Cycle: 15 years.
Concrete slabs and stem walls last indefinitely unless
adversely affected by soil movement, overloading, or poor
initial construction (inadequate base, poor-quality concrete,
overworked finish, inadequate control joints, etc.). Typical
``wearing-out'' life cycles don't usually drive the need to
repair concrete on buildings.
Unit of Measure: square feet (SF).
Calculate the square feet of the concrete slab or wall that
needs work.
Considerations:
Includes extensive nonstructural repairs or sealing cracks
and spalls on formed concrete and concrete masonry units that
are part of a building, including entry sidewalks, ramps, and
cracked slabs in open buildings, such as carports or picnic
shelters.
Does not include major overlay, repair, or replacement
because of failure of the wall or slab. Does not include stone
or brick masonry work. Use a custom item for such work.
Figure 11
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a thick concrete wall with a stone cap that
separates a grass lawn from an outdoor stairway.
This wall remains sturdy, but the surface layer of the
concrete is peeling off. The surface layer should be removed
and refinished.
Figure 12
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of a joint in a concrete walkway slab at the
entrance to a building.
This concrete slab is cracked and is spalled at the edge of
the control joint. The deficiencies should be repaired.
Work Item 04001--Basic Roof, Fiberglass Shingles, Removal/Replacement
Definition: Remove and replace standard-quality, moderate-cost
roofing (figures 13 and 14).
Typical Life Cycle: 20 years.
Unit of Measure: square (SQ) of roofing.
A square of roofing covers about 100 square feet.
Calculate the square feet of roof on the slope and divide by
100; round up to the nearest square.
Considerations:
Includes standard-cost asphalt or fiberglass shingles (30
year shingle or less); V-crimp metal roofing; delta-rib,
exposed-fastener metal roofing; asphalt-roll roofing; or other
moderate-cost roof materials that typically have about a 20
year life cycle.
Includes setting up, securing, and taking down the ladder;
removing existing roofing; removing damaged metal flashing;
installing 15 pound roofing felt; installing new aluminum
flashing; installing roofing; and cleaning up.
Does not include repair work; fixing isolated leaks is
operations or minor maintenance work that needs to be completed
as soon as possible.
Does not include replacing sheathing or vents, other than
integral ridge vents.
Figure 13
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a small, wood-sided Forest Service ``gas house''
with a wood-shingle roof that is about half covered with a
thick growth of moss.
Timely operations and maintenance work, especially moss and
debris removal, could have extended the life of this roof. The
roofing has deteriorated to the point that it should be
replaced.
Figure 14
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of an asphalt-shingle roof on a Forest Service
warehouse building.
This roof has many patches of missing shingles and the
remaining shingles are in poor condition. The roof probably
leaks in several places. The shingles should be replaced.
Work Item 04002--Premium Roof, Metal/Membrane/Shakes, Removal and
Replacement
Definition: Remove and replace premium-quality roofing (figures 15
and 16).
Typical Life Cycle: membrane--20 years; wood, tile, or
architectural-grade shingles--30 years; standing-seam metal--50 years.
Unit of Measure: square (SQ) of roofing.
A square of roofing covers about 100 square feet.
Calculate the square feet of roof on the slope and divide by
100; round up to the nearest square.
Considerations:
Includes replacing wood shakes or shingles; tile roofing;
standing-seam metal roofing; slate-, shingle-, or tile-
patterned metal roofing; single-ply membrane roofing;
architectural-grade composition shingles; and other premium-
quality roofing.
Includes setting up, securing, and taking down the ladder;
removing existing roofing; removing flashing metal; installing
new flashing; installing a new roof system, including felt or
an underlayer; and cleaning up.
Because removing and reinstalling rooftop equipment, such as
condensing units, is often required, a crane might be needed to
remove and reinstall equipment. The cost of this work is
reflected in this standard work item.
Does not include replacing nonfunctioning or inadequate
roof-mounted equipment or vents. Use a custom item for such
work if the work is a major expense.
Does not include repair work; fixing isolated leaks is
operations or minor maintenance work that needs to be completed
as soon as possible.
Figure 15
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of an asphalt-shingle roof on a Forest Service
warehouse building.
This roof membrane has been patched so many times that it
should be replaced the next time it springs a leak.
Figure 16
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of a standing-seam metal roof on a partially
earth-sheltered wood-sided Forest Service building.
This standing-seam roofing is rusting and has come apart in
several places, including at one seam that has been ``fixed''
with caulking. The roofing should be replaced.
Work Item 04003--Skylight, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace a typical, unvented, non-opening
skylight (figure 17).
Typical Life Cycle: 30 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing bubble-type or similar
skylights that are broken, brittle, or no longer transmit
daylight.
Includes setting up and securing the scaffold, removing the
skylight, removing flashing, installing new flashing,
installing the new skylight, and removing scaffold.
Skylight leaks usually come from worn-out or improperly
installed flashing. They may leak through the frame if the
frame has separated. Skylights seldom leak through the glass or
plastic unless a crack or break is visible.
Do not reuse the existing flashing.
It may be necessary to replace some of the roofing
immediately surrounding the skylight to properly install new
flashing; such work is included in this item.
Figure 17
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of a rectangular domed skylight set in a sloped
composition-shingle roof on a wood-sided Forest Service
restroom building.
This building has typical bubble-type skylights. This
skylight probably leaks during windblown, heavy rain because of
the separated flashing at the lower end. Carefully evaluate
whether to replace the skylight or just repair the flashing and
roofing.
Work Item 04004--Gutters/Downspouts, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace downspouts (figure 18) and gutters
(figure 19).
Typical Life Cycle: 15 years.
Unit of Measure: linear feet (LF).
Measure the length of both gutters and downspouts, including
downspout returns, and add all segments for total linear feet.
Considerations:
Unless downspouts are directly piped into an underground
stormwater system, include minimum 3 downspout returns to
carry water away from the building (even if the existing
downspouts don't have returns).
Figure 18
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of the bottom of a square metal downspout with
peeling paint. A compressed section is directly above ground
level. It is visibly plugged with pine needles.
This downspout is crushed and plugged and should be replaced.
Figure 19
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of a section of collapsed gutter above the front
door of a wood-sided Forest Service residence. The back of the
gutter remains securely screwed to the fascia, but the outside
wall of the gutter has been bent down so that it is nearly
perpendicular to the ground, and the end seam has burst.
An ice dam overloaded this gutter. The outside edge of the
gutter is detached from the clip supports and is bent out and
down. The end seams have burst. This gutter should be replaced.
Work Item 05001--Steps, Exterior, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace exterior steps made from concrete
(figure 20), wood, or other materials.
Typical Life Cycle: 20 years.
Unit of Measure: step, each (STEP, EA).
Count the stair risers to determine the number of steps. For
example, the photo shows three risers, for a count of ``3 EA.''
Considerations:
Includes replacing exterior steps from 2 to 12 high that
are deteriorated or don't meet code requirements for existing
buildings.
Does not include tread resurfacing, painting, etc., which
are operations or minor maintenance expenses.
Does not include replacing railings. Use work item 05003 for
railings.
Does not include replacing the porch, deck, or stoop. Use
work item 05002 for a wood deck or porch or a custom item for a
concrete porch or stoop.
Figure 20
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a concrete porch and two concrete steps. Corners of
two steps have broken off, the front edge of the steps have
become rounded because of deterioration, and the surface of
both treads and parts of the risers has spalled off, revealing
the aggregate.
These deteriorated concrete steps are a tripping hazard and
should be replaced.
Work Item 05002--Wood Decks, Removal/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace a deteriorated wood (figure 21) or
plastic composite deck or porch.
Typical Life Cycle: 20 years.
If the ultraviolet-resistant finish on wood decks is
reapplied as needed, the boards should last about 20 years. If
not, they may last no more than 10 to 15 years.
Unit of Measure: square feet (SF).
Calculate the total square feet of deck that needs to be
replaced.
Considerations:
Includes replacing wood decking, stringers, the
substructure, and the foundation.
Does not include railings. Use work item 05003 for railings.
Does not include washing, sealing, or waterproofing, which
are operations or minor maintenance expenses.
Figure 21
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
View of a partly snow-covered porch with wood board decking
on a concrete foundation, with two concrete steps. Two gaps are
visible where deck boards are missing.
The decking on this porch is badly deteriorated. Most of the
boards are buckled and several are missing. The decking should
be replaced. The joists supporting the deck are probably also
rotten and should be replaced.
Work Item 05003--Railing, Porch & Deck, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace standard-quality exterior guardrail
(figures 22 and 23) and handrail around porches and decks and along
steps and ramps.
Typical Life Cycle: 20 years.
Unit of Measure: linear feet (LF).
Measure the total length in feet of railing to be replaced.
Considerations:
Includes porch, deck, and stairway rails that are
deteriorated or don't meet code requirements for the intended
use of the structure.
Includes all usual materials, including dimensioned lumber,
plastic composites, and metal.
Includes replacing a complete railing system 36" to 42"
high, including guardrails and the required scaffolding to
accomplish the task.
Figure 22
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a wood-framed guardrail with woven wire panels. The
top rail is missing above four of the panels.
This guardrail is in worse condition than is evident in a
photo of this size. Aside from the missing boards, many of the
bottom rails and posts are not attached to the structure, many
of the boards are rotted nearly through, fruiting fungi are
growing on many of the boards and posts, and some of the wire
panels are held in place with zip ties. The guardrail needs to
be completely replaced.
Figure 23
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of part of the middle rail of an observation
deck guardrail. Rot is visible on a 2 long section of the top
of the rail. Part of the rotten wood has fallen off,
This guardrail board on an overlook tower is rotten. If it's
the only rotten board, replacement is considered operations
work that should be completed as soon as possible. If most of
the boards are rotten, the entire guardrail should be recorded
under item 05003 and replaced.
Work Item 06001--Siding, All Types, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace siding (figures 24 and 25).
Typical Life Cycle: 25 years.
Unit of Measure: 100 square feet (CSF).
Calculate the square feet of all siding areas to be
replaced, then divide by 100.
Do not deduct for door and window openings.
Considerations:
Includes removing all types of siding (cement board, wood,
EIFS, plywood, aluminum, vinyl, hardboard, etc.) and replacing
it with the Forest Service standard: fiber cement board or
similar. Includes eaves, trim, fascia, and proper flashing
around windows and doors.
Includes setting up, securing, and taking down the ladder.
Includes painting the new siding.
Figure 24
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of part of the front of a Forest Service building with
wood lap siding and a metal roof.
This is not the original siding, and it's in poor condition.
Most siding boards are damaged and some siding is missing near
the door where knee braces for an entrance hood were removed.
This replacement siding should be replaced.
Figure 25
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of wood shingles on part of an outside wall of a
Forest Service building. Many shingles are broken, rotten, or
warped and some have been partly dislodged.
This shingle siding is worse in some places than in others,
but all the siding is weather damaged and brittle and should be
replaced.
Work Item 06002--Door, Exterior, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace an exterior pedestrian door (figures
26 and 27).
Typical Life Cycle: 20 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
``Each'' means each door. Double doors are counted as 2 EA.
An entry with both a door and a screen door is counted as 2 EA
if both need to be replaced.
Considerations:
Includes replacing pedestrian doors up to 4 wide and 8
tall (any material-wood, aluminum, steel, etc.), insulated
vision pane glass (if any), doorframes, closers, and all
commercial hardware and locksets.
Does not include metal-framed glass storefront-type door
surrounds, only the door. Use item 07006 for windows not
included within doors.
Does not include custom replication of fancy historic door
styles. Use a custom item for such work.
Figure 26
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a small storage building with a badly deteriorated
Craftsman style door. Some siding boards are cracked or broken.
The broken-out glass could be replaced, but the delaminating
panels on this door can't be repaired without expert
restoration skills. Preservation requirements determine whether
this historic building's door should be replaced in kind or
restored.
Figure 27
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a deteriorated door in an exterior wall. On the
bottom quarter of the door, the surface layers are peeling off
the pressed wood core and some of the surface layer is missing.
The bottom left side of the door frame trim is rotted and
cracked.
This door looks like an interior door that was mistakenly
installed on an exterior wall. It is badly deteriorated and
should be replaced with an exterior door.
Work Item 06003--Door, Garage, Overhead Door
Definition: Remove and replace overhead doors (figures 28 and 29).
Typical Life Cycle: 20 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes removing and disposing of doors up to 16 wide and
9 high that are broken, rotten, or nonfunctional, including
old swinging or sliding doors that need to be replaced with
modern overhead doors.
Includes all door materials (wood, steel, fiberglass, etc.)
along with any vision panes, rollers, springs, and hardware.
Does not include replacing swinging or sliding historic
garage or warehouse doors in kind. Use a custom item to replace
historic doors in kind.
Figure 28
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of part of a warehouse and loading dock, centered on a
large four-panel overhead door. An irregularly shaped scrape
that is about 6 long and 1 high is evident on the bottom
panel of the door.
This overhead warehouse door is damaged. Because several
layers of plywood were peeled off the panel, the strength of
the door is compromised. The door should be replaced.
Figure 29
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of the end of a garage with a bent and bowed overhead
garage door. The four-panel door has windows all across the
width of the second panel from the top.
This residential garage door is warped and does not open
properly. The door should be replaced.
Work Item 06004--Painting, Exterior, Includes Prep, Prime and Paint
Definition: Repaint the exterior of a building, including
preparation and prime coat (figures 30 and 31).
Typical Life Cycle: 5 years.
Typical life cycle is for paint on wood siding and trim.
Some other finishes, such as paint on cement composite siding
or semitransparent stain on wood siding, may last longer.
Unit of Measure: square feet (SF).
Calculate the gross square feet of the surface area to be
painted. Do not deduct for openings, such as doors and windows.
Considerations:
Includes surface preparation, caulking (if needed), a full or spot
prime coat (as needed), and painting or staining of all exterior
surfaces, including trim, with latex paint or water-based stain.
Use this item regardless of how many coats of paint are
actually needed, the type of paint (oil base, latex, stain,
etc.), or the type of siding being painted.
Does not include lead paint removal. Use work item 16001 for
removing lead paint.
Figure 30
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a building with wood Dutch-lap siding. The building
has a partial second floor under the roof. The building has two
doors, five windows, and a brick chimney 1extending above the
wood-shingle roof.
Although the paint is peeling badly, the wood siding of this
historic building is in decent condition. New paint will keep
the siding serviceable. Because it's a historic building, old
layers of paint may contain lead, requiring special preparation
(see work item 16001). Follow the building preservation plan
and use historic colors when repainting.
Figure 31
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of part of an outside building wall and a wood-
framed, double-hung window. There is little stain left on the
siding and some portions have darkened. Nearly all the paint on
the window frame is peeling.
The T1-11 siding should be cleaned and restained with a
semitransparent penetrating stain. Loose paint should be
scraped or sanded from the window frame and trim before they
are primed and repainted.
Work Item 07001--Doors, Interior, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace an interior door (figure 32).
Typical Life Cycle: 30 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
``Each'' means each door. Double doors are counted as 2 EA.
Considerations:
Includes replacing worn-out, damaged, or nonfunctioning
interior doors up to 4 wide and 8 tall, whether solid or
hollow core; wood, steel, fiberglass, or other standard-grade
material; casing; and hardware of all types.
Includes removing the old doors, doorframes, hardware, and
door closers (if any); installing new doorframes, hinges,
vision panes (if any), and doors; and replacing or reinstalling
the door casing, closers, and latches.
Does not include luxury-grade doors or custom replication of
fancy historic door styles. Use a custom item for such work.
Figure 32
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a wood-faced, flat-slab interior door and frame. The
face veneer is pulling away from the door on both sides.
This interior door is delaminated at the top and should be
replaced. Although only the door should be replaced (not the
frame or hardware), use item 07001 and its standard cost. To
improve accessibility, the knob should be replaced with a
lever-type handle.
Work Item 07002--Toilet Partitions, Per Stall, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace a toilet partition (figure 33) or
urinal screen (figure 34).
Typical Life Cycle: 20 years.
Partitions often need to be replaced because of vandalism or
abuse rather than for exceeding their expected life.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Count each complete stall or each urinal screen as 1 EA.
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing all types and sizes of
partitions and doors, all types of hardware and mounting
systems, and cleaning up.
Replacement partitions should be the Forest Service
standard-solid phenolic resin. Because of durability and
graffiti concerns, do not install wood or painted metal
partitions in locations used by the public.
Figure 33
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of part of four stalls in a restroom. The door of one
stall has been replaced with an unpainted piece of plywood,
fastened to the stall frame with heavy-duty hinges that don't
match the hinges on the rest of the stall doors.
Although the obvious problem is the mismatched plywood stall
door, all these partitions and doors are constructed of aging
plastic laminated to pressed board. The edges of the partitions
and doors are chipped, some are delaminating in places, and
some are warped. The doors and partitions should be replaced.
Figure 34
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a urinal and adjacent painted metal privacy screen.
The screen has extensive rust, especially on the portion that
is beside the urinal catch basin.
This urinal screen began to rust after the painted finish
became scratched and chipped. The screen should be replaced.
Work Item 07003--Drywall, Install & Taped, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace gypsum wallboard (figures 35 and
36).
Typical Life Cycle: 75 years.
Replacement is usually needed because of water damage,
vandalism, or abuse and is not typically related to the
expected life of the product.
Unit of Measure: square feet (SF).
Measure the replacement area to the center of the next nearest
support (stud, joist, etc.), because replacement material must be
fastened to a support. Calculate the total square feet to be replaced.
Considerations:
Includes taping and texturing \1/2\" or \5/8\" thick type X
gypsum wallboard (also called drywall, plasterboard, or
Sheetrock).
Includes removing other wall surfacing, such as plywood or
pressed-board paneling, and replacing it with gypsum wallboard.
Does not include painting. Use work item 09001 for painting.
Does not include in-kind replacement of plaster, premium
wood paneling, or other high-end wall surfaces. Use a custom
item for such work.
Figure 35
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of part of a ceiling. Water drops cling to the
painted surface in three large areas. Water coming through the
ceiling caused the paint on one area to bubble down from the
ceiling.
Water damage from a leaking roof ruined this gypsum wallboard
ceiling. The paint is probably the only thing keeping the
ceiling in place, because exposure to water degrades the
structural integrity of ordinary gypsum wallboard. After the
roof is repaired, the gypsum wallboard ceiling should be
replaced. See item 16002--Environmental Mitigation, if there is
mold.
Figure 36
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of part of a floor and wall next to an open
door. The bottom of the wall is fluted because of swelling and
delamination of the paper surface layer of the gypsum wallboard
caused by water.
Water damage from a burst pipe during the off-season caused a
flood in this crew-quarters building that damaged the bottom of
all the kitchen walls. The damaged gypsum wallboard should be
replaced.
Work Item 07004--Cabinets, Kitchen, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace built-in cabinetry and countertops
(figure 37).
Typical Life Cycle: 30 years.
Unit of Measure: linear feet (LF).
Measure linear feet along the wall from one end of the
cabinets to the other end.
All cabinets along the same wall are measured together for
this work item. The cost per linear foot includes base cabinets
and wall cabinets or either of these components alone. For
example, if only upper cabinets will be replaced, enter the
total length of the upper cabinets under this work item. Do not
reduce the length entered because the base cabinets will not be
replaced.
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing all types of worn-out,
broken, or nonfunctioning cabinets, except laboratory cabinets,
in all locations. Use item 07005 for laboratory cabinets.
Includes countertops, base cabinets, wall cabinets, hinges,
and pulls.
Does not include cabinet repair or refinishing, which could
be operations or minor maintenance work or a custom work item
if the expense is significant.
Figure 37
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
View of a kitchen wall with old wooden cabinets and a wide,
sliding, wood-framed window above the sink. The paint has come
off the cabinet drawers and doors in several places.
Although the doors are crooked and the drawers don't slide
easily, these cabinets are still functional. Because they are
sturdier than most modern cabinets, it may be better to fix
than to replace them, especially if they have historic
significance.
Work Item 07005--Cabinets, Laboratory, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace built-in laboratory cabinetry and
countertops (figures 38 and 39).
Typical Life Cycle: 40 years.
Unit of Measure: linear feet (LF).
Measure linear feet along the wall from one end of the
cabinets to the other end.
All cabinets along the same wall are measured together for
this work item. The cost per linear foot includes base cabinets
and wall cabinets or either of these components alone. For
example, if only base cabinets will be replaced, enter the
total length of the base cabinets under this work item. Do not
reduce the length entered because wall-hung upper cabinets are
not needed.
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing worn-out, broken, or
nonfunctioning chemical-resistant countertops, base cabinets,
and wall cabinets.
Does not include cabinet repair or refinishing, which could
be operations or minor maintenance work, or a custom item if
the expense is significant.
Figure 38
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of an old, painted steel base cabinet supporting a lab
sink. One cabinet door under the sink won't close completely.
This old lab cabinet has remained in use for more than 50
years, and it shows. Rust and pitting are extensive. The
cabinet should be replaced.
Figure 39
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a clear-finish wood cabinet supporting a lab sink
and counter. One cabinet door has a large horizontal scratch.
The cabinet finish is stained and deteriorating in a few
places.
This wooden lab cabinet and countertop look as though they
are in poor condition. However, a thorough cleaning and
refinishing will probably restore them. They still function
well.
Work Item 07006--Window, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace a window (figure 40).
Typical Life Cycle: 30 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Count each window unit as 1 EA. Window units are separated
by a section of wall or by a vertical support mullion, as shown
in figure 41. The paired components of sliding or double-hung
windows are counted as one window unit.
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing existing windows with new
windows that meet the Forest Service standard (good quality,
thermally efficient). Includes all materials, equipment, and
scaffolding required to complete the work, including replacing
or repairing trim.
Includes replacing windows that should be tempered but often
aren't, such as windows near doors and stairways or within 18"
of the floor.
Includes replacing single-pane windows with new windows to
increase energy efficiency.
Does not include storefront windows (large expanses of glass
typically surrounding an entry door), which are custom work.
Does not include window repair (an operations or maintenance
expense) or rebuilding historic windows (a custom item).
Caution: for buildings that are eligible for or listed on
the National Register of Historic Places, it is often better to
rebuild and/or add storm windows rather than replacing original
windows. Such work is a custom item.
Figure 40
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of part of a steel-frame, multi-pane window in a
painted brick wall. Two panes are cracked. The inside half of
part of the frame is missing and the glass is held in place at
the bottom by a 1" by 1" board.
It's difficult to tell in this photo, but the steel frame of
this window isn't in any better condition than the cracked
windowpanes. The frame is warped, rusted in places, and
partially missing. The window should be replaced.
Figure 41
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of the inside of a lookout tower cab. A low cabinet,
low shelf, woodstove on a ceramic tile base, and an Osborne
Firefinder are visible, as are the catwalk rails, mountains,
valleys, and lake beyond the windows.
This photo shows nine windows separated by support mullions
and a door with three vision panes. Each window has four
windowpanes (lites). If you had to replace them all, you would
count nine each of work item 07006 (windows) and one each of
work item 06002 (exterior door).
Work Item 08001--Stairs, Interior, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace interior stairs (figure 42).
Typical Life Cycle: 40 years.
Unit of Measure: step, each (STEP, EA).
Count the stair risers to determine the number of steps.
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing a complete flight of
interior stairs (including pull-down units) up to 42" wide,
constructed of any standard material, that are deteriorated or
don't meet code requirements for existing buildings.
Does not include replacing carpeting or other flooring for
the stairs or replacing railings. Use work items 09002, 09003,
09004, 09005, and 08002 for such work.
Does not include replacing flights of stairs more than 42"
wide (a custom item) or replacing one or two treads, which is
an operations or minor maintenance expense.
Figure 42
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Sideview photo of an interior stairway in a historic ranger's
house. An arrow and dimensions indicate the head clearance for
the stair is only 56".
The stairway of this early 20th century log house should be
replaced because it is unsafe and doesn't comply with building
codes for existing buildings. The stairway doesn't have enough
head clearance and the steps are too steep.
Work Item 08002--Railing, Stair, Guards and Handrails, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace interior handrails and guardrails
(figure 43).
Typical Life Cycle: 45 years.
Unit of Measure: linear feet (LF).
Measure the handrail and guardrail separately if they are
not integrated and both need to be replaced. Add the linear
feet of the handrail and the linear feet of the guardrail to
get the total linear feet.
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing nonfunctional, worn-out, or
non-code-compliant handrails and guardrails constructed of any
common building material.
Figure 43
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of an interior stairway looking at the top landing and
down the stairs. Mouse droppings and other debris litter the
floor and steps, but the structure is sound and undamaged. A
low hand rail is on the left and on the right is a guardrail
with a fancy newel post protecting the landing from the
stairwell dropoff.
This handrail is in good condition. It should be raised so
that it is 34" to 38" above the noses of the steps. The
guardrail should be rebuilt so that the top of the rail is 42"
above the floor. Because this structure is historic, the top
rail, newel cap, and newel base should be retained, refinished
and mounted atop longer balusters and a longer newel post that
have the same horizontal dimensions and appearance as the
originals.
Work Item 09001--Painting, Interior Walls and Ceiling, Includes Prep,
Prime and One Coat Latex
Definition: Prepare and paint interior walls, the ceiling, and trim
with prime and topcoat (figure 44).
Typical Life Cycle: 5 years.
Unit of Measure: square feet (SF).
Calculate the total square feet to be refinished. Do not
deduct for openings.
Considerations:
Includes repainting any common wall or ceiling surface, such
as gypsum wallboard, plaster, and pressed board.
Includes masking and providing floor protection; cleaning
and preparing the surface; priming or sealing; painting
interior walls, ceiling, and trim; and removing masking and
drop cloths.
Does not include removing lead-based paint. Use work item
16001 for removing lead-based paint.
Figure 44
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of an inside corner of an attic room. The walls and
ceiling are covered with painted plywood with \1/2\" by 2" wood
battens over the seams.
The walls and ceiling of this second floor room already are
sanded in preparation for a badly needed repainting. The
varying depth of sanding indicates the paint was in very poor
condition.
Work Item 09002--Flooring, Carpet, Repair/Replacement
Definition: Remove and replace standard-quality carpet and padding
(figure 45).
Typical Life Cycle: 8 years.
Unit of Measure: square feet (SF).
Calculate the square feet of carpet to be replaced. Unless
carpet is unitized (carpet ``tiles''), extend the replacement
area to a logical joint, such as under a door. Do not ``patch''
sheet carpet in the middle of a room.
Considerations:
Includes removing damaged carpet and installing new carpet
and pad.
Includes moving furniture out of the room (if the room is
furnished) and moving it back in.
If the carpet is not badly worn or damaged, consider
cleaning it instead of replacing it. Cleaning would be
considered an operations cost.
Consider replacing sheet carpet with carpet tiles to make it
easier to remove and replace damaged sections, add floor
outlets, etc.
Figure 45
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a badly stained and severely worn level loop carpet
in an empty office.
This carpet has exceeded its useful life and should be
replaced. The pile is completely worn away in some areas, the
seam is raveling, and the staining is severe.
Work Item 09003--Flooring, Tile, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace wood, laminate, ceramic, or quarry
floor or wall tiles or boards (figures 46 and 47).
Typical Life Cycle: 30 years.
Unit of Measure: square feet (SF).
Calculate the square feet of flooring to be replaced.
b If the material can be matched exactly, replace only the area
that is damaged.
b If the material cannot be matched exactly, extend the replacement
area to a logical joint, such as under a door. Do not
install a mismatched ``patch'' in the middle of a room.
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing damaged or excessively worn
ceramic, quarry, wood, or laminate wall tiles, floor tiles, or
flooring boards. Includes surface preparation.
Does not include refinishing existing wood flooring. Use
work item 09004 for refinishing.
Does not include vinyl or other composition flooring tiles.
Use work item 09005 for vinyl or composition flooring.
Does not include replacing underlayment, subfloor, or floor
joists. Such work is a custom item.
Figure 46
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of a floor covered with 1" by 1" ceramic tiles
with narrow grout lines.
Many of the individual tiles in this floor are chipped or
cracked. If it is impossible to find matching tiles to
individually replace the bad tiles, the entire floor surface
should be replaced.
Figure 47
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of part of a deteriorated narrow-width tongue and
groove wood floor.
The wood flooring of this lookout cabin is warped and pieces
are missing. The flooring should be completely replaced before
the building is returned to use.
Work Item 09004--Flooring, Wood, Sand and Refinish
Definition: Sand and refinish wood plank or tongue and groove
flooring (figure 48).
Typical Life Cycle: 10 years.
Unit of Measure: square feet (SF) of flooring to be refinished.
Calculate the square feet of the entire room. It's not
possible to satisfactorily refinish only a portion of a room's
wood floor.
Considerations:
Includes removing any remaining old finish and applying new
stain and a wear layer, as appropriate.
Does not include replacing wood flooring. Use work item
09003 for wood flooring.
Figure 48
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of part of a narrow-width tongue and groove wood floor
beside a kitchen cabinet. The boards are still perfectly flat
and the joints are tight.
The finish of this wood floor is completely worn off in some
areas. The entire floor should be sanded and refinished.
Work Item 09005--Flooring, Vinyl, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace vinyl or other composition flooring,
either sheet (figure 49) or tile.
Typical Life Cycle: 18 years.
Unit of Measure: square feet (SF).
Calculate the square feet of flooring to be replaced.
b If the material can be matched exactly, measure the area that is
damaged to the nearest pattern line that will camouflage
the patch.
b If the material cannot be matched exactly, measure the
replacement area to a logical joint, such as under a door.
Do not install a mismatched ``patch'' in the middle of a
room.
Considerations:
Includes removing damaged flooring, preparing the surface,
and installing new vinyl flooring.
Does not include removing flooring that contains asbestos.
Asbestos tiles typically are 9" by 9". Test if uncertain. Use
work item 16001 for removing asbestos.
Figure 49
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of part of a sheet vinyl floor. Arrows point to
large scratches and scrapes in two locations.
The wearing surface and color layer of this vinyl flooring
are completely scraped off in places. This damage cannot be
repaired. The flooring should be replaced.
Work Item 09006--Ceiling, Acoustic, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace acoustic ceiling tiles and the
support grid (figure 50).
Typical Life Cycle: 20 years.
Failure more typically results from water damage than
wearing out.
Unit of Measure: 100 square feet (CSF).
Calculate the square feet of the ceiling and divide by 100,
then round up to the nearest whole number.
Unless you can match the material exactly, replace the
ceiling of the entire room.
Considerations:
Includes setting up, securing, and taking down scaffold;
removing old ceiling tiles; removing the old ceiling grid;
installing the new ceiling grid; installing new ceiling tiles;
resetting existing light fixtures, diffusers, grills, etc.; and
sweeping and cleaning debris.
Does not include replacing light fixtures, diffusers, or
grills. Use work item 13004 for light fixtures. Replacing
diffusers or grills can be operations, minor maintenance, or a
custom item, depending on the extent and expense of the work.
Does not include replacing a couple of individual tiles in a
room. Such work is operations or minor maintenance.
Figure 50
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of part of a suspended acoustic ceiling, including a
vent, a grill, and a fire sprinkler set into the ceiling
panels.
This ceiling has suffered repeated water damage. Previous
stains were covered with spray paint. Darker areas of the
ceiling are currently wet. The corners of some of the panels
are coming apart and the grid is beginning to rust (circled).
The panels should be replaced before they lose structural
integrity and fall down. Roof leaks should be corrected before
the ceiling is replaced. See item 16002--Environmental
Mitigation, if there is mold.
Work Item 10001--Toilet/Urinal Fixture, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace a toilet (figure 51) or urinal,
including flush valves.
Typical Life Cycle: 35 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes turning shutoff valves off and on, removing
fixtures, installing new wall- or floor-mounted fixtures
(including wax rings and other connectors), installing flush
valves and pipes, and checking operation. For public restrooms,
use elongated toilet bowls (not round) with open-front seats.
Includes replacing an old fixture to provide accessibility
for employees and the public. Refer to the Architectural
Barriers Act (ABA) Accessibility Standards at http://
www.access-board.gov/ for requirements.
Includes replacing old fixtures to reduce water use. Refer
to http://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/eng/programs/facilities/sus_green/
fix_pro.htm for new fixture testing and performance
information.
Does not include replacing grab bars or toilet seats, which
usually are operations or minor maintenance work.
Does not include replacing a flush valve only, which is an
operations or minor maintenance expense. Life expectancy for a
flush valve is 10 years.
Figure 51
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of an old-style, tank-type toilet with an open-front
seat set in an alcove with a painted tile-patterned, pressed-
board wainscot on the lower half of the wall and composition
floor tiles.
This toilet from the 1930s still works, but it uses about 8
gallons of water per flush. Consider historic preservation and
accessibility requirements as well as water efficiency before
deciding whether to replace or modify historic fixtures in
historic buildings. Consult a mechanical engineer to learn
whether a historic fixture can be modified to use less water[.]
Work Item 10002--Lavatory Fixture, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace a sink, including faucets and drain
(figures 52 and 53).
Typical Life Cycle: 35 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes bathroom (lavatory) sinks, laundry room sinks, non-
freestanding single- and double-bowl kitchen sinks, and other
similar sinks.
Includes shutting off water (hot and cold); disconnecting
and removing sinks; and installing new sinks, faucets, drains,
and tubing.
Does not include oversize freestanding sinks or laboratory
sinks, which are custom work items.
Includes replacing sinks to provide accessibility for office
or crew-quarters restrooms or kitchens. Refer to the ABA
Accessibility Standards at http://www.access-board.gov/ for
requirements.
Figure 52
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of a one-piece lavatory countertop with integral
sink, set on a base cabinet. One corner of the countertop is
cracked all the way through diagonally.
This combination lavatory and countertop is broken (circled)
and should be replaced.
Figure 53
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of a double kitchen sink with dirty dishes
stacked in one bowl. A sign posted on the wall behind the sink
reads: ``Notice: Non-potable water. Not for drinking or
cleaning.['']
Although it has two bowls, this double kitchen sink would
count as ``1 each.'' A larger problem needs to be addressed,
however: the water is apparently nonpotable and not suitable
for washing the dishes that are stacked in the sink. To prevent
illness, water to the sink should be shut off until the water
system is restored to potability.
Work Item 10003--Tub/Shower Complete, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace a bathtub or shower, including
spout, faucet(s), and showerhead (figure 54).
Typical Life Cycle: 25 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing a tub, shower, or combo
unit, whether porcelain, tile, fiberglass, or other material.
Includes removing shower enclosures; installing new shower
enclosures; and installing new showerheads, arms, faucets and
drains, and valves.
Includes replacing showers or tubs to provide accessibility
in offices, fire stations, or crew quarters. Refer to the ABA
Accessibility Standards at http://www.access-board.gov/ for
requirements.
Does not include extensive reframing necessitated by severe
deterioration. Use a custom item for reframing.
Figure 54
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of two steel shower stalls with open curtains. Rust is
on the inside and outside of the stalls.
These old metal shower stalls are rusted, allowing water to
escape from the walls and pans of the stalls. The stalls should
be replaced.
Work Item 10004--Drinking Fountain, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace a drinking fountain (figure 55).
Typical Life Cycle: 18 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing the complete old drinking
fountain or water cooler and installing a new water cooler
unit. Don't save or reuse an old refrigerated drinking
fountain.
Includes replacing water coolers or drinking fountains
because of compressor failure or to provide accessibility
(figure 56). Refer to the ABA Accessibility Standards at http:/
/www.access-board.gov/ for requirements.
Figure 55
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of an old electrical panel with a wall-hung drinking
fountain directly below it and a wall phone to the right of it.
This is a very bad location for a drinking fountain. The
fountain must be outside the 36" clear area for the electrical
panel and should ideally be several feet away. The fountain
should be removed. It doesn't meet accessibility requirements.
If a drinking fountain is needed, install a new, accessible
fountain at a different location.
Figure 56
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
These drawings show some of the clearance and size
requirements for accessible drinking fountains. Refer to the
Architectural Barriers Act Accessibility Standards for more
information about accessibility requirements.
Work Item 10005--Eye Wash, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace an eyewash station (figures 57 and
58).
Typical Life Cycle: 25 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing eye wash stations that are
worn-out, damaged, dysfunctional, or that cannot be sanitized.
Test existing units during the condition assessment
inspection to ensure that they are functional and easy to
access.
Figure 57
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a sink faucet with an eyewash station operated using
a squeeze lever and automatic flip-up spout covers. The eyewash
station has a retractable extension hose so it can be pulled
out and over the sink for use. The eyewash station is very
dirty and greasy, as are the sink, counter, and sink faucet.
This eyewash station is too dirty to ensure a rinse with
uncontaminated water. If a thorough cleaning isn't sufficient
to return it to a sanitary condition, it should be replaced.
Figure 58
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a dirty, stained sink with a very old eyewash
station mounted on the end of a chrome sink faucet with an
``X''-type handle. The eyewash spouts look like sink faucet
aerators and have no protective covers. Beside the eye wash is
a rough-plumbed pipe extending from the wall with a wheel-type
handle and an elbow to a downturned discharge opening that
serves as the sink faucet.
The lack of protective covers and an easy-to-operate
activator make this eyewash station unsuitable for use. It
clearly should be replaced.
Work Item 10006--Water Heater, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace an electric or gas water heater
(figure 59) or small boiler (figure 60).
Typical Life Cycle: 15 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes completely removing and replacing commercial water
heaters (propane, natural gas, or electric) or small boilers up
to about 150,000 British thermal units (Btu) per hour,
including valves, venting, etc.
b Includes an anti-scald device and a pop-off valve with a
discharge pipe plumbed to a floor drain or to the outside.
b Includes seismic restraints, as required locally.
b Includes installing to code standards, including piping,
clearances, and elevation of the heater 18" above the floor
if it's in a garage or shop.
b Includes checking operation after installation.
Includes replacing water heaters to improve energy
efficiency--older units typically are 60-percent efficient,
while new condensing units are 90-percent efficient or more.
Figure 59
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of an old-style hot-water storage tank that is about
16" in diameter and 66" tall. It is piped at the bottom to the
cold-water supply, and hot water would exit the top. To the
left are the severed ends of the pipes near the bottom and top
of the tank that used to connect the heating coils inside the
tank to the heat-extracting coils inside a wood stove.
This old tank held water that was heated by coils inside a
wood heat or cook stove that was removed. The tank should be
replaced if hot water is still needed at this location.
Figure 60
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of an old vertical-tank gas boiler with a large exhaust
flue and 1\1/2\" diameter cold- and hot-water pipes entering
and leaving the boiler to the left of the photo. Exposed
single-strand plastic-coated wires connect various sensors and
controls on the boiler tank.
This old boiler may work, but it probably runs inefficiently,
and the exposed wiring connections are not safe. It should be
replaced.
Work Item 10007--Gas/LP Yard Line, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace underground natural gas, propane
(figure 61), or fuel oil piping.
Typical Life Cycle: 30 years.
Unit of Measure: linear feet (LF).
Measure and include the vertical portions of the line at the
tank and up the outside of the building, as well as the
horizontal line.
Considerations:
Includes completely replacing a rusted, corroded, deformed,
or leaking gas or oil underground service line.
b Includes piping and fittings, as well as trenching and backfill
to the building, from either an above-ground or buried
tank.
b Includes replacing hard or soft copper, black iron, or
polyethylene lines with code-compliant, properly sized
materials.
b Includes obtaining a permit, where required.
b Includes checking for breaks or leaks before removing the old
line and checking for leaks after installing the new line.
Check with the local fuel supplier; they may be responsible
for part of the work.
Ensure that the tank is the proper distance from the
building and openings. Refer to http://www.propane101.com/
propanetankdistancerules.htm.
Use detergent in water to check for leaks on exposed parts.
Refer to http://www.propane101.com/checkingforgasleaks.htm.
Figure 61
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo showing one wall of a wood-sided building on the left
and a large propane tank about 20 from the building on the
right. Shrubs and a couple of large conifer tree trunks are
visible between the building and the tank. A gas pipe runs
partway up the building wall and extends into the building. At
the tank, a regulator perches atop a gas pipe that runs from
the tank into the ground,
What's underground between the propane tank and the building?
The consequences can be severe if the line is defective.
Defective lines should be replaced immediately.
Work Item 11001--Pump, Circulation, Water or HVAC, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace a booster, vacuum, or circulation
pump (figure 62), including mounts, connections, and controls.
Typical Life Cycle: 20 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes circulation pumps, booster pumps, and vacuum pumps
up to about 3 horsepower, including controls.
Includes needed upgrades of support, vibration mounts,
isolation valves, flexible connections, disconnects, and
similar items to ensure efficient operation.
Includes removing flanged connection pumps, replacing pumps
and motor assemblies, and installing new flanged connection
pumps.
Does not include potable water, irrigation, or wastewater
pumps in pump/control houses or outside. Such pumps are covered
under water and wastewater maintenance or improvement.
Figure 62
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Close-up photo of a circulation pump mounted on a concrete
pedestal and connected to insulated piping at the top and left
side. The pump motor is on the right side of the pump.
The motor on this pump looks newer than the pump and
fittings. The extent of rust and the pump's marginal
performance indicate that the pump and fittings should be
replaced.
Work Item 11002--Boiler, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace a large boiler that uses any fuel
(figure 63).
Typical Life Cycle: 30 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes boilers from about 150,000 Btu per hour up to about
2 million Btu per hour, including connections and fittings.
Old boilers may be cast iron, steel, copper fin, or
condensing type.
Includes replacing boilers to improve energy efficiency.
Figure 63
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a small modern boiler in a rectangular housing that
is about 2 wide by 2 high by 4 deep. The boiler is connected
to insulated water and glycol pipes and a natural gas line. A
gas flue extends from the top of the boiler.
This relatively new and efficient 1 million Btu boiler is
about \1/4\ the size of an older, equal-capacity boiler. This
boiler is only about 10 years old and is in good condition.
Work Item 11003--Cooling Tower, Remove/Replace--Average 50 Ton
Definition: Remove and replace a cooling tower and its
appurtenances (figure 64).
Typical Life Cycle: 15 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes completely removing and replacing worn-out cooling
towers and appurtenances. Unit cost is based on a 50 to 100 ton
cooling tower.
Includes towers located indoors in a mechanical room or
outdoors on a roof or in a separate tower.
Cooling towers typically are used in conjunction with water-
cooled chillers (work item 11004).
Figure 64
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a large-enough-to-walk-into cooling tower enclosure.
On the front are an access door and controls. A cylindrical
pressure tank sits on the top. Ductwork on the right exhausts
hot air, and pipes connect to the chiller in figure 65.
This indoor cooling tower was installed in 1962 and is still
operating satisfactorily more than 50 years later. It has far
exceeded the typical operating life for cooling towers.
Work Item 11004--Chiller, Water Cooled, Remove/Replace--Average 50 Ton
Definition: Remove and replace a water-cooled chiller, including
its appurtenances (figure 65).
Typical Life Cycle: 20 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing worn-out centrifugal-,
screw-, or piston and cylinder-type chillers or water coolers,
50 to 100 ton capacity, including fittings and connections.
Water-cooled chillers typically are used in conjunction with
cooling towers (work item 11003).
Units with 60 to 100 tons of cooling capacity are common at
Forest Service labs.
Figure 65
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of the front of the rectangular control box, support
frame, cooling tube, and compressor of a chiller that cools
refrigerant for air conditioning. Numerous wires and pipes
connect to the chiller.
This indoor chiller, installed in 1962, uses water from the
cooling tower shown in figure 64. It has far exceeded the
typical operating life for chillers. It is inefficient and
replacement parts are becoming difficult to obtain. Both the
chiller and cooling tower should be replaced in the near
future.
Work Item 11005--Chiller, Air Cooled, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace an air-cooled chiller, including its
appurtenances (figure 66).
Typical Life Cycle: 15 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing worn-out, air-cooled
chillers, 50 to 100 ton capacity, including fittings and
connections.
Includes air-cooled chillers in any location (typically
outside on a pad or on the roof).
Units with 70 to 100 tons of cooling capacity are common at
Forest Service labs.
Figure 66
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of two Forest Service employees inspecting the housing
for four outdoor chillers. The housing is about 8 wide by 6
tall by 12 deep. Grills constitute most of the left side of
the enclosure, and four fan guards are on the top. Two large
insulated pipes run from the left side of the enclosure through
the supporting concrete slab.
These chillers still work, but they are inefficient and
repair parts are becoming difficult to find. They should be
replaced within a few years.
Work Item 11006--Replace Condenser, Air Cooled, 5 Ton
Definition: Remove and replace an air-cooled condenser (figure 67).
Typical Life Cycle: 15 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing a residential or light
commercial air-cooled condenser up to 5 tons of cooling
capacity, including fittings and connections.
Includes replacing pipe because of new refrigerant
requirements.
Includes replacing a condenser to improve energy efficiency,
to convert to ozone-saving refrigerants, because the
refrigerant pipe insulation is damaged, because it has
inadequate clearance, because it is not level, or because it
has bent fins or guards.
Does not include larger units up to about 60 tons that are
common at Forest Service labs. Use a custom item for condensers
with more than 5 tons of cooling capacity.
Figure 67
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a condenser outside a building. mounted on a 1 high
metal stand. Liquid and electric lines run between the
condenser and the building. A fuse box on the wall serves the
electric lines that run from the building to the condenser. The
three sides of the condenser that do not face the building are
covered with grills.
This 3 ton condensing unit is only about 5 years old and is
in pretty good condition. It should continue to work well for
many more years.
Work Item 11007--Replace Furnace
Definition: Remove and replace a furnace (figure 68), heat pump
(figure 69), wood heat stove, or pellet stove.
Typical Life Cycle: 15 years for heat pumps; 20 years for furnaces;
10 to 30 years or more for stoves.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes electric, liquid propane, fuel oil, natural gas,
wood, coal, or pellet furnaces; water-source or air-source heat
pump blower coil units; or free-standing gas, wood, or pellet
heat stoves about 20,000 to 150,000 Btu per hour. Includes
venting and connection to fuel lines, ductwork, electric power,
etc.
Includes replacing heating systems to improve energy
efficiency.
Does not include heat pumps with underground or underwater
exchange tubing, which are custom items.
Does not include replacing carbon monoxide detectors. Use
work item 13006 for carbon monoxide detectors.
Does not include clearing heat pump condensate lines and
terminations, increasing clearance from combustibles, repairing
leaks in piping, or changing filters, all of which normally are
operations or minor maintenance work.
Does not include replacing masonry flues or chimneys, which
are custom items.
Figure 68
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of the cast iron front of an old, rusty furnace. Doors
for flue cleanout, access to the firebox, access to the vapor
fan, and access to the ash pan are arrayed vertically, and a
long cleaning lever is at the left.
This pre-1930 Sunbeam Fox 1044-BDA model is a ductless
furnace. Although it's possible that it has been well
maintained and is safe to operate, it's definitely not as
efficient as modern furnaces. It should be replaced.
Figure 69
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of two roughly cube-shaped heat pumps mounted or,
concrete pads outside a vinyl-sided Forest Service office with
a stone-faced base. The concrete pads have settled and aren't
level. The heat pumps have grills on the front and sides.
These air-source heat pumps would probably operate acceptably
if they were sitting on level pads. The heat pumps are old and
not very efficient, however, so they probably should be
replaced.
Work Item 11008--Replace Package Terminal HVAC Unit
Definition: Remove and replace a package air-conditioning unit
(figures 70 and 71).
Typical Life Cycle: 10 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing worn-out or inoperative
through-wall, gas-pack, hotel-type, rooftop, window, suspended-
ceiling, or small ductless split-system air conditioners,
including fittings and connections, controls, fan motors,
compressors, condensers, and refrigerant.
Includes replacing air conditioners (which vary a lot in
efficiency) to reduce energy use.
Figure 70
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a very rusty outside condenser. One of the two
electrical conduits has separated from the condenser, exposing
two wires.
This split-system air conditioner is severely corroded. If it
hasn't already failed, it will soon. It should be replaced.
Figure 71
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of an air conditioner mounted nearly flush with the
interior wall of an office, surrounded by wood trim.
This window-type air conditioner is permanently mounted in
the wall. Check the manufacturer's literature. If this
nonstandard installation is unsafe, the air conditioner should
be replaced.
Work Item 11009--Unit Heater, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace an electric (figures 72 and 73) or
gas unit heater.
Typical Life Cycle: 15 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing unsafe, damaged, or
inefficient gas or electric unit heaters (single-room size) or
gas-fired radiant or infrared tube heaters, including fittings
and connections.
Does not include replacing carbon monoxide monitors if the
heaters are gas or oil fired. Use work item 13006 for carbon
monoxide detectors.
Figure 72
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a boxy electric heater with a discharge face
slightly tilted down from vertical, suspended from the ceiling
by two angled metal rods. The wiring is inside flexible
conduit.
This 5 kilowatt horizontal electric unit heater is suspended
from the ceiling. The wiring installation is inelegant, but all
the wiring is protected inside conduit.
Figure 73
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of an electric heater suspended about 1 below the
ceiling from a frame made from steel L-shaped, perforated bars.
Air intakes are on the sides and discharge is downward.
Many heaters are designed to be mounted with a specific
orientation and are hazardous if mounted improperly. This
electric heater was designed to be installed vertically on a
wall. It should be replaced with a heater designed to be
suspended from a ceiling.
Work Item 12001--Compressor, Air, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace a permanently mounted air compressor
(figures 74 and 75).
Typical Life Cycle: 25 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing worn-out, damaged, or
inoperable air compressors that are permanently mounted to a
building.
Does not include portable air compressors, which are
personal property.
Does not include monthly checks on compressors required by
OSHA, which is operations work.
Figure 74
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a floor-mounted permanently wired and piped air
compressor inside a screened alcove.
This compressor in a laboratory building is typical of
permanently mounted compressors that serve pressure air lines.
It operates well and will probably continue to do so for many
more years.
Figure 75
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a large air-compressor tank with two motors on top
that have separate switches. Several notes and tags with
operating instructions are attached to the tank and wiring
conduit.
This permanently mounted compressor is part of an HVAC
system. Although it's not new, it has been well maintained and
works well.
Work Item 12002--Elevator, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace an elevator that serves up to three
stories (figures 76 and 77).
Typical Life Cycle: 50 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing inoperative or unsafe
elevators or lifts serving two or three stories, or installing
a new elevator that is needed to provide accessibility.
Does not include elevators for high-rise buildings or other
long vertical distances. For instance, replacing the elevator
that descends 216 into Blanchard Springs Caverns on the Ozark
National Forest would be a custom item.
Does not include annual state inspections, repairing leaks
in oil reservoirs and piping, or repairing faulty emergency
phones, all of which are operations work.
Figure 76
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of an elevator door and frame with a bronze metallic
finish. A single elevator call button is on the wall beside the
frame. The numeral 2 is attached to the elevator door and
another numeral 2 is attached to the doorframe.
This elevator was installed more than 30 years ago. Although
the finish on the door and trim is a little worn, it has many
years of service left if it is properly maintained.
Figure 77
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of part of a two-story lobby with a balcony guarded by
an open metal mesh rail at the second floor. Elevator doors are
on both the lobby and balcony levels.
This elevator was installed when the building was constructed
in 2002. It serves two floors and is a typical size for a
Forest Service elevator. It has had a few operational problems
that have been corrected promptly. It is serviced regularly and
should continue to work well for a long time.
Work Item 12003--Laboratory Fume Hood/Exhaust Hood, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace an enclosed laboratory fume hood
(figure 78).
Typical Life Cycle: 30 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing worn-out or inoperative
laboratory-type fume hoods, fume hoods used for painting small
items, and other similar enclosed or semi-enclosed countertop
exhaust hoods.
Includes replacement because of inoperative sashes, a
compromised enclosure, or because the system is not energy
efficient.
Does not include HVAC exhaust equipment or other exhaust
fans not associated with an exhaust hood. Bathroom fans;
exhaust fans in shop buildings; residential kitchen hoods; and
fans in attics, warehouses, and garages are replaced as
maintenance work. These fans have a life expectancy of about 10
years.
Does not include the annual inspection of fan face velocity
and overall function required by OSHA, which is operations
work.
Does not include ductwork. Cleaning, repairing or replacing
ducts, duct insulation, duct cement, and duct taping or sealing
are usually operations work, but may be a custom item if the
work is extensive.
Figure 78
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a 6 wide fume-hood cabinet with a glass door that
is raised about halfway. The hood enclosure rests on a counter
over a wood cabinet. The fan and bottom of the vent duct are on
top of the hood cabinet.
This fume hood has operated satisfactorily since 1961. It
doesn't have modern features, but still works because it is
well maintained. The fan motor is probably inefficient,
however. Replacing the fan is ordinary maintenance work.
Work Item 13001--Main Service Switchgear, <1,200 Amps, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace the main switchgear at an electric
service entrance (figures 79 and 80).
Typical Life Cycle: 20 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing obsolete, corroded,
undersized, or worn-out metering and service equipment up to
1,200 amps and 600 volts.
Includes replacing switchgear for which fuses and breakers
are no longer available.
Does not include transformers.
Figure 79
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of an electric panel that is about 6 wide by 7 tall,
mounted behind a pair of open doors in an alcove under a roof
on the outside of a building. A meter is on the left half of
the panel and a main disconnect and seven subpanel shutoffs are
on the right half of the panel.
This typical 1,200 amp main service panel is in good
condition and should continue to work well for many more years.
Figure 80
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of an electric panel that is about 4 wide by 7 tall,
mounted inside a building in a corner on an outside wall. On
the panel face are a main disconnect, five subpanel shutoffs,
and two rows of nine circuit breakers.
If the rust on the surface of this 100 amp main service panel
extends to the interior, it should be replaced.
Work Item 13002--Disconnects or Enclosed Circuit Breakers, Remove/
Replace
Definition: Remove and replace an equipment disconnect or enclosed
circuit breaker (figures 81 and 82).
Typical Life Cycle: 25 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes replacing fused, unfused, or enclosed circuit
breakers (example: a single circuit breaker in a cabinet) or
shutoff switches that serve a single piece of equipment and are
located within sight of the equipment that they serve.
Figure 81
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of two large, exposed shutoff switches and two
emergency transfer switches in cabinets mounted on a wall.
Smaller unlabeled shutoff switches and flip switches are
mounted below each elevator switch.
Shutoff switches are sometimes grouped near the equipment
they serve. These heavy-duty switches are for a pair of
elevators. The switches are in excellent condition.
Figure 82
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a small shutoff switch mounted on a wall below a
panel box. The wire from the shutoff to the circuit-breaker box
and to the compressor is in flexible conduit. The conduit from
the shutoff to the compressor runs across a large round of wood
with an anvil attached to it. The compressor hose is looped
over a hose rack mounted on the wall behindthe conduit and
anvil block.
The wiring from the disconnect switch to the compressor in
this old shop should not be suspended across the anvil block.
The disconnect switch should be replaced with a switch closer
to the compressor, and the wiring from the panel to the switch
should be encased in rigid conduit secured to the wall.
Work Item 13003--Electrical Panel, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace an electrical panel (figures 83 and
84).
Typical Life Cycle: 30 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing an electric load center,
lighting, or equipment panel; single- or three-phase; up to 42
spaces and 400 amp rating.
Includes replacement because of rust and corrosion, growth
of the load being served, obsolescence, or possibly because of
hot spots revealed by thermography.
Does not include fitting knockouts with appropriate covers,
labeling circuits, or the checking and retightening of
electrical connections every few years by a licensed
electrician, which are operations or minor maintenance work.
Figure 83
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a 36-space panel box with the door open. Some of the
circuit numbers are written beside the breakers in felt pen,
some correct circuit numbers are on the breaker switches, some
wrong circuit numbers are on the breaker switches, and some
breakers are not numbered. Duct tape covers six circuit-breaker
switches. Three pieces of the tape are labeled ``off'' and
three are labeled ``leave on.'' Duct tape also covers an empty
slot. A note is taped to the inside of the door that says
``Audio/Video Equipment. On in morning. Off in evening.''
This old electrical panel is a bit rusty. Duct tape was used
as an inappropriate substitute for a knockout cover and to
indicate which circuits should remain on or off at all times.
The circuitry appears to have been modified many times, which
is a problem if the work was not performed according to code
requirements. This panel should be replaced.
Figure 84
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a 125 amp, 42 space panel box with the door open.
All circuit breakers are properly numbered.
The electrical panel in this photo is a good example of a
properly wired and well maintained panel, except that labels
for a few of the circuits are missing from the list on the
door.
Work Item 13004--Light Fixtures, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace a light fixture.
Typical Life Cycle: 20 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing broken or unsafe light
fixtures and replacing fixtures to increase energy efficiency.
Includes fluorescent, incandescent, high-intensity discharge
(HID), or light-emitting diode (LED) fixtures, both interior
(figure 85) and exterior (figure 86).
Does not include relamping, replacing yellowed or missing
fixture lenses, or replacing wiring channel covers or impact
guards, which are operations or minor maintenance work.
Figure 85
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a suspended light fixture in an office. The fixture
has two sections, each with two 4 long fluorescent tubes and
metal ``egg crate'' grills.
This typical, old fluorescent office light fixture uses T-12
tube lamps and a magnetic ballast. It is far less energy
efficient than modern fixtures. Although T-12 tubes are still
available, this fixture should be replaced in the near future.
Figure 86
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of an old storage shed with numerous buckets, a barrel,
tires, and miscellaneous equipment stacked around it. The light
fixture is on the gable end between the peak of the roof and a
screened vent. A sign on the shed door reads: ``Danger
Flammable.''
This exterior light fixture is simply a ceramic bulb socket
mounted under a handmade steel hood. It is unsafe and should be
replaced.
Work Item 13005--Emergency Light Fixture, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace an emergency light fixture (figure
87) or exit light (figure 88).
Typical Life Cycle: 20 years.
Unit of Measure: each (EA).
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing obsolete or inoperative
emergency light fixtures and exit signs with fluorescent or LED
fixtures or signs, or photoluminescent signs.
Photoluminescent signs must be lit continually by an outside
light source to work properly when the power goes out. Work
includes adding such a light source.
Includes replacing fixtures or signs to improve energy
efficiency.
Figure 87
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a commercial emergency light two small round
floodlights mounted on top of a rectangular box that holds the
transfer switches and battery. In the lower left corner of the
box are a button to push to test operation on battery and an
indicator light showing current power source.
Although this emergency light was only 10 years old, it
failed yearly operational testing and was repaired three times
before the facilities manager replaced it.
Figure 88
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a photoluminescent ``EXIT'' sign illuminated by a
small strip fight mounted above the sign.
The fluorescent exit signs with battery backup at this
building continually failed yearly operating tests and required
repair. Finally, the facilities manager purchased
photoluminescent signs and lit them with inexpensive LED strip
lights so that the signs would always be ``charged'' should the
power go out.
Work Item 13006--Fire Alarm and/or Security System, Install
Definition: Remove and replace a fire alarm system (figure 89) or
security system.
Typical Life Cycle: 20 years.
Unit of Measure: system (SYSTEM).
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing a complete inoperative or
obsolete fire alarm or security system, including control
panels, fire alarms, hard-wired smoke detectors, carbon
monoxide detectors, etc.
Includes installing a system when none exists. A change in
occupancy classification may make adding a system necessary.
For instance, converting a former office at a work center to
crew quarters may necessitate installing fire alarms, smoke
detectors, and carbon monoxide detectors.
Does not include testing and replacing inoperable individual
components of a system (figure 90), which are operations
expenses and should be completed immediately.
Combination fire alarm/intruder alarm systems are common in
larger buildings.
Figure 89
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of an old fire alarm manual pull switch and horn
mounted on a concrete block wall. The wiring for the horn and
alarm pull extends down from the ceiling in metal surface-
mounted wire raceway,
This old fire alarm system is obsolete. Even if it still
works, it probably should be replaced.
Figure 90
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of a small portion of a bedroom showing a wall, two
wood doors, and some wires dangling from a recessed box in the
ceiling. The dangling wires are where the smoke detector was
removed. One door goes to the hall and the other to the closet.
The hard-wired smoke alarm system in this building is fine,
but a smoke detector is missing (circled) and should be
replaced immediately using operations funding.
Work Item 13007--Lightning Protection System, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace a lightning protection system
(figures 91 and 92).
Typical Life Cycle: 25 years.
Unit of Measure: system (SYSTEM).
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing a complete lightning
protection system for a building or lookout/observation tower.
b Refer to ``Evaluating Lightning Protection on Lookouts and
Communication Facilities'' http://www.fs.fed.us/t-d/php/
library_card.php?p_num=0873 2333 for detailed information
about inspecting lightning protection systems and
requirements for proper systems.
b Lightning protection systems are particularly important in rural
and remote areas, and are mandatory for all lookout/
observation towers.
Includes design for the particular building or tower and
installation under the direction of a licensed professional
engineer or a master lightning protection installer certified
by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), Underwriter
Laboratories (or another listing agency), or the Lighting
Protection Institute.
Includes removing and replacing cables, excavating for a
ground rod, installing a \5/8\" diameter, 10 long ground rod
and ground clamp or radials, installing lightning rods (air
terminals), installing down conductors, installing bonding
clamps, and backfilling over the ground rod.
Does not include systems that protect large electronic
equipment from lightning surges. These systems are a custom
(and very expensive) item.
Does not include the yearly preopening inspection of
lightning protection systems for lookout towers, which is an
operations cost.
Does not include expert inspection every 5 years, per NFPA
780 B.5. Major work items identified during the expert
inspection need to be added to the NRM Infra database. Minor
work items should be accomplished using operations or
maintenance funds.
Figure 91
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of a solid guardrail high above the ground. A
small, single-wire antenna, a very short air terminal (vertical
copper rod), and the lower portion of a galvanized pipe mast
for a larger antenna are all mounted on it in close proximity
on the rail. An assortment of insulated wires, a braided steel
cable, and a braided, patinated copper cable--all in various
stages of deterioration--run horizontally along the rail and
are attached to it in a few places.
This lightning protection system includes a clamp that
doesn't grab all the strands, an air terminal that is far from
being the tallest conductor on the roof, and many unbonded
metal items. The system should be given a major overhaul or
should be replaced.
Figure 92
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of the base of a timber lookout tower. A braided copper
cable dangles from the frame about 6 above the ground.
This ground conductor isn't secured and the terminus
(circled) doesn't even come close to the ground rod. If the
rest of the system is as inadequate and poorly maintained, it
should be replaced. If the rest of the system is okay, the
ground conductor should be replaced immediately using
maintenance funds.
Work Item 14001--Fire Sprinkler System, Remove/Replace
Definition: Remove and replace a wet-pipe or dry-pipe fire
sprinkler system (figure 93).
Typical Life Cycle: 40 years.
Unit of Measure: square feet (SF).
Calculate the square feet of floor space to be protected by
the system.
Considerations:
Includes removing and replacing inoperative fire sprinkler
systems.
b Be sure to check the code requirements to determine whether the
system is adequate. A variety of NFPA standards apply,
including NFPA 13, 13D, 13R, 101, and 914.
Includes installing a new system where required and where
none currently exists, especially to comply with code when
renovating an existing building.
b Consider installing fire sprinkler systems to protect sleeping
quarters, historic structures, and structures with high-
value or irreplaceable contents, even when not required by
code.
Does not include required regular testing on existing
systems, which is operations work.
Figure 93
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of a fire sprinkler in a wood-paneled ceiling.
The system that includes this fire sprinkler is 10 years old
and in good condition. Replacement should not be necessary for
many years.
Work Item 15001--ABA Mitigation
Definition: Custom work item. Modify a building to provide
accessibility to people with disabilities, as required by the
Architectural Barriers Act Accessibility Standards.
Typical Life Cycle: none.
Unit of Measure: lump sum (LS).
Considerations:
Includes any work that must be done to meet accessibility
standards inside the building or to the porch, deck, entry
steps, or other assemblies directly tied to the building.
b Interior barriers often include halls or doors (figure 94) that
are too narrow or toilet rooms that are too small or
configured improperly.
b Exterior barriers often include lack of a ramp or door thresholds
(figure 95) that are too high.
All work under this item is specific to each building; there
is no standard unit cost.
Enter all building accessibility improvements using this
item so that the accessibility work can be tracked.
b If any work is consistent with a standard work item, use the unit
cost numbers from the standard work item, but calculate the
total and enter it as a lump sum under this item. Note how
the cost is generated (RS Means or borrowed from a standard
work item) in the remarks section.
b In some cases, it will be easiest to estimate the cost of
completely replacing the affected portion of the building.
Figure 94
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of the legs, feet, and hands of a man standing
in a bathroom doorway, using a tape to measure the width of the
door. Part of the bathtub and toilet are visible behind the
man. They are about as far apart as the door is wide.
This 26" wide door opening cannot be widened enough to
accommodate a 36" wide door. The bathroom can't be made
accessible. It must be enlarged and completely rebuilt if
accessibility is required.
Figure 95
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of the bottom portion of a new doorframe and
threshold for the front door of a log cabin.
This 36" wide door is retrofitted with a beveled threshold to
provide accessibility.
Work Item 16001--Lead Based Paint/Asbestos Mitigation
Definition: Custom work item. Remove or mitigate asbestos material
(figure 96) or lead-based paint (figure 97) in or on a building.
Typical Life Cycle: none.
Unit of Measure: lump sum (LS).
Considerations:
Includes lead-based paint or asbestos removal or abatement
work performed in accordance with National Emission Standards
for Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAP), EPA, and OSHA
requirements.
All work under this item is specific to each building; there
is no standard unit cost.
Enter all lead-based paint and asbestos work using this item
so that the work can be tracked.
b Calculate separate totals for lead-based paint and for asbestos
work for the building and enter each as a lump sum.
b If work is consistent with a standard work item, use the unit
cost numbers from the standard work item, but calculate the
total and enter it as a lump sum under this item. Note how
the cost is generated in the remarks section.
See the Facilities Toolbox for more information about
working with and removing asbestos at http://www.fs.fed.us/eng/
toolbox/haz/haz02.htm and lead-based paint at http://
www.fs.fed.us/eng/toolbox/haz/haz03.htm.
Figure 96
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Detail photo of a section of pipe in good condition. The
legible portion of the text printed on the pipe reads: ``Johns-
Manville TRANSITE 10" Round Type 2."
This intact transite pipe manufactured before 1980 is a
Category II asbestos-containing material. It does not have to
be removed unless it is in poor condition or is coming apart.
Figure 97
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of three people in full protective suits with hoods and
filtered-air-supply pumps strapped to their waists, standing on
drop cloths and facing an old, wood-sided building. They are
using tools to scrape loose paint off the building.
This crew is properly suited, certified, and equipped to
remove lead-based paint from an old Forest Service building.
Work Item 16002--Environmental Mitigation
Definition: Custom work item. Remove or abate an environmental
hazard in or on a building.
Typical Life Cycle: none.
Unit of Measure: lump sum (LS).
Considerations:
Includes removing or abating hazardous substances other than
lead-based paint and asbestos in buildings. See the Facilities
Toolbox hazardous materials section at http://www.fs.fed.us/
eng/toolbox/haz/index.htm for more information.
Includes large mold infestations (figure 98).
Does not include lead-based paint or asbestos--see work item
16001.
All work under this item is specific to each building; there
is no standard unit cost.
b Enter all environmental mitigation work using this work item so
that the work can be tracked.
b If work is consistent with a standard work item, use the unit
cost numbers from the standard work item, but calculate the
total and enter it as a lump sum under this item. Note how
the cost is generated in the remarks section.
Figure 98
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Photo of the inside of a pump room. A large electric pump
mounted on a cube-shaped concrete base is connected to a large-
diameter pipe with various fittings, gauges, and valves that
stretches across the width of the room. Most of the wall
surfaces of the room are smudged with black or orange (mold)
and there are several cracks on the wall surfaces. A thin layer
of water covers about half of the concrete floor.
Removing this substantial mold infestation in a pump room
requires a lot of work. The leak also must be fixed (a water/
wastewater project), and continuous ventilation probably should
be added to the room.
Custom Work Item--No Assigned Work Item Number
Definition: Custom work item.
Typical Life Cycle: Not applicable.
Unit of Measure: varies.
Considerations:
Includes work that is not one of the standard items on the
form, but is of significant value relative to the building
value.
b Suggest recording items that are at least one percent of the
total building value, or more than $10,000.
Does not include small or routine items--these items are
part of routine facilities operations and maintenance
practices.
Custom work item examples:
b Chip sealing a driveway or parking lot.
b Replacing a concrete porch or stoop.
b Overlaying, repairing, or replacing large concrete or masonry
slabs, walls, chimneys, or other structural elements.
b Replacing a retardant tank or plumbing at an air tanker base.
b Replacing a refrigeration unit for a tree seedling cooler.
b Replacing structural components or guy cabling on a fire lookout
tower.
b Replacing large expanses of glazing or the support structure on a
greenhouse.
b Conducting extensive restoration work on a historic log
structure.
b Replacing a snow-damaged flue for a woodburning stove and
installing a cricket to protect against future damage.
b Replacing swinging or sliding historic garage or warehouse doors
in kind.
b Replacing large expanses of plaster, premium wood paneling, or
other high-end wall surfaces in kind.
b Replacing storefront windows (large expanses of metal-framed
glass typically surrounding an entry door).
b Replacing an oversize, freestanding commercial kitchen or
laboratory sink.
b Replacing a large, air-cooled condenser with more than a 5 ton
capacity.
b Replacing underground or underwater exchange tubing for a heat
pump.
b Exterminating termites or other insects and replacing extensively
damaged structural members.
b Performing extensive rodent disinfection and deterrence
(structure modification).
To record custom work items, use the ``RS Assem,'' ``RS
Unit$'' or ``Mtnce/Rpr'' tabs (figure 99). You may need to
choose the item listed in RS Means that is closest to the work
you need and note any differences in the ``Remarks'' section.
b Custom work items not included in RS Means may be needed for
specialized assets.
Figure 99
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Screen shot of part of the NRM Infra Work Items screen for
the Missoula Technology and Development Center office building.
At the top of the left column, the ``RS Assem,'' ``Rs Units,''
and ``M[t]nce/Rpr'' tabs are circled. The ``RS Units'' tab is
open. Below the tabs, the MasterSpec construction divisions are
listed. To the right are the ``Features,'' ``Tasks,''
``Remarks,'' and ``Costs'' sections. The ``Remarks'' box is
circled.
This screen shot shows the NRM Infra database Work Items tabs
for custom items.
That's it. Congratulations! You have completed the facilities
condition assessment for the building.
Library Card
Snodgrass, K.; Marks, K. 2014. Facilities condition assessment
field training guide. 1473-2830-MTDC. Missoula, MT: U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service, Missoula Technology and Development
Center. 142 p.
This booklet is a training guide and a memory-jogger for Forest
Service employees who are trained to do facilities condition
assessments. The format enables inspectors to easily reference
necessary information onsite and to easily conduct assessments in a
manner that is consistent throughout the Forest Service. Each work item
has its own page that includes photos, guidance on whether the item
applies to the building being inspected, the normal useful life of the
item, and how to measure and record the quantity of necessary work.
Keywords: assessment, basic, building, complex, condition,
construction, database, deficiencies, energy, facility, facility
engineers, facilities, Infra, inspect, inspections, Iweb, maintenance,
measure, natural resources manager, NRM, operations, quantity, record,
survey, work item[.]
Additional single copies of this document may be ordered from:
USDA Forest Service,
Missoula Technology and Development Center,
5785 Hwy. 10 West,
Missoula, MT 59808-9361
Phone: 406-329-3978
Fax: 406-329-3719
Email: [emailprotected]
For additional technical information, contact MTDC:
Phone: 406-329-3900
Fax: 406-329-3719
Electronic copies of National Technology and Development documents
are available on the Internet at: http://www.fs.fed.us/eng/pubs
Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management employees can search
National Technology and Development documents, CDs, DVDs, and videos on
their internal computer networks at: http://fsweb.mtdc.wo.fs.fed.us/
search/; http://fsweb.sdtdc.wo.fs.fed.us/.
Produced by the National Technology & Development Program Missoula, MT
1473-2830-MTDC
attachment 2
FY 2020_Deferred Maintenance Protocols for Roads
Contents
1. Requirements for Reporting Deferred Maintenance, Annual
Maintenance, and Capital Improvement Needs for Roads
2. National Random Sample for Roads
3. Business Rules for Field Surveys
4. Year-End Schedule and Summarization Processes
5. Required Data Fields from FSH 7709.55, Zero Code
6. Frequently Asked Questions
Purpose of National Random Sample
The national random sample for roads is generated solely for:
1.
External reporting of:
a.
Critical and non-critical deferred maintenance needs for
passenger
car roads in FS financial statement
b.
Deferred Maintenance backlog to Congress, and
c.
Condition class of transportation system (Performance
Measures--not yet
implemented)
The following guidelines are applicable only for collecting and
reporting the agency's national deferred maintenance needs.
Thank you to Catherine Taylor and Christina Foreman of the
Volpe Center for their work on our Deferred Maintenance Method
in accordance with the OIG Audit recommendations and
contributing information incorporated into this document on the
revised sample methodology goals and objectives and their
Tables 1-3.
1. Requirements for Reporting Deferred Maintenance, Annual Maintenance,
and Capital Improvement Needs for Roads
Deferred Maintenance
The agency has moved to a national random sample to report deferred
maintenance for passenger car roads (operational maintenance level 3-
5). See item 2 below. There are no requirements to report deferred
maintenance needs at the Regional or Forest level.
Annual Maintenance
There are no national requirements to report annual maintenance
needs. Collection of annual maintenance needs, costs, and
accomplishments for the random sample is not required for agency
reporting purposes.
Reporting annual maintenance accomplishments on all system roads,
regardless of the random sample is required. The Road Maintenance
Planning tool is now available in NRM to support annual maintenance
planning, cost estimating, and accomplishment reporting. The tool can
be useful in prioritizing annual maintenance needs within a given
budget to produce annual maintenance plans. For more information on the
Road Maintenance Planning tool, see the Travel Routes Road User Board
webpage (https://usdagcc.sharepoint.com/sites/fs-wo-eng/SitePages/
RUB.aspx)[.]
Capital Improvements
There are no requirements to report capital improvement needs at
any level.
2. National Random Sample for Roads
Note: Conclusions and extrapolations determined from national
random sample condition survey data for roads are ONLY VALID AT THE
NATIONAL LEVEL.
Limitations of National Random Sample
1.
Deferred maintenance needs determined from the national random
sample are only valid for required reporting at the Forest
Service national level.
2.
Only deferred maintenance needs must be collected for the random
sample. Collection of annual maintenance needs data for the
national random sample is optional. Such data will not be
used at the national level but may be useful at the forest
level for planning purposes
3.
All deferred maintenance summaries or extrapolations resulting
from the data collected on the random sample are only valid
in the context of nationally averaged unit costs.
4.
The data gathered through this effort has been analyzed and
determine to be statistically invalid for use below the
national level reporting.
Business Process for Running the National Random Sample
There are four key considerations to address within the Random
Sample process:
1.
The total sample size (i.e., the total number of ML3-ML5 road
fragments to pull from the national database); and
2.
All the fragments in the new subset database have an equal
probability of being selected regardless of whether a
segment is on the same road has already been selected, and
3.
Roads sampled in prior years are available for inclusion in the
current sample, and
4.
The method for ensuring randomness.
Each of the four steps is summarized in the following sections.
Goals and Objectives
Because the goal is to estimate deferred maintenance cost per mile,
the statistic of interest is a ratio. The sample size calculation for a
ratio estimator is more intricate than the basic estimator because its
calculation takes into account variations in both the deferred
maintenance costs and segment lengths.
The original sampling method relied on the ROADCORE II database
which contains road segments of varying lengths that are defined by
natural breakpoints in the road such as county boundaries, bridges,
change in surface types like gravel, pavement, etc. As the result the
length of the segments in the database varied significantly from 0.1
miles to 40 miles. This variation in the underlying population of the
road segment length is a significant contributor to the large sample
size of segments and also increased the total road mileage sampled
since long segments would require the entire length to be analyzed for
deferred maintenance needs.
To keep the sample size and effort reasonable, while addressing OIG
concerns of calculating sample size based on ratio estimators, the
Random Roads sample methodology originally created for 2018 and
continued for use in 2020 creates fragment (previously based upon Road
Core segments) sample sections from the ROADCORE II database
(hereinafter referred to as fragments) of more uniform and shorter
length.
All fragments included need to meet the following criteria:
from ii--Road--Core
where JURISDICTION like `FS%'
and ROUTE--STATUS like `EX%'
and SYSTEM like `NFSR%'
and substr(OPER--MAINT--LEVEL,1,1) in (`3',`4',`5')
and ADMIN_ORG is not Null
The steps involved in this alternative method are:
1.
Create a new subset within the database of road fragments with
more uniform fragment lengths to be used as the sampling
frame for selecting road fragments for analysis of deferred
maintenance needs. The roads in the database are divided
into 1 mile fragments from the beginning mile post (BMP).
Since roads are rarely exact integers in length, the last
fragment of a road may be less than a mile.
2.
Based on the new fragmentation of the road database, the
calculated appropriate sample size to yield a point
estimate of deferred maintenance per mile that has a 90
percent confidence interval that is +/- 15% of the point
estimate incorporates the concept that the statistic of
interest is a ratio (as pointed out by OIG) and is based on
data from 2013, 2014, and 2015.
3.
The sample stratification plan results in a sample that is
representative of the entire FS network.
Total Sample Size
The total target sample size for FY 2020 is 600 road fragments (the
same as for FY 2018). This value represents the estimated required
sample size to obtain an estimate of mean deferred maintenance cost per
mile with a precision of 15% at the 90% confidence level. Note that in
FY 2018, the 600 fragment sample actually yielded a statistically
calculated precision of +/- 12% at the 90% confidence level. The
resulting data showed less variation than presumed in developing the FY
2018 sampling plan. If this FY 2020 effort similarly results in
precision tighter than +/- 15% using a sample size of 600, it may be
possible to reduce the sample size in future years.
Table 1 presents the counts and percentages of fragments in the new
roads database based on a snapshot of the roads database created for
the FY 2018 sample draw. For the purposes of the FY 2020 effort, it is
assumed that the underlying characteristics of the roads database has
not changed substantially since the FY18 effort. In that database snap
shot, 66% of the fragments have uniform lengths of 1 mile while the
remaining 34% of the road fragment population has lengths that vary
(between 0 and less than 1 mile). This also translates into 85% of the
miles from 1 mile fragments and 15% from incomplete fragments (54,913
miles and 10,015 miles).
Table 1. Counts and Percentages of Fragment Types from the new Road Database Subset from the FY 2018 Snapshot
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fragment Type
Count
% Count from Total
Miles
% Miles from Total
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Complete One Mile Fragments
54,913
66%
54,913
85%
Incomplete Fragments
27,838
34%
10,015
15%
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total........................
82,751
100%
64,928
100%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For the purposes of this analysis we assume a required sample size
that is weighted average of the sample size needed for a ratio
statistic that has a uniform denominator of 1 (that is, a statistic
that is not actually a ratio) and the sample size needed for ratio
statistic that has a denominator that is variable (that is, a statistic
that actually is a ratio).
Previously, the characteristics of deferred maintenance per mile
data from 2013, 2014, and 2015 yielded a sample size of 327 road
segments (non-ratio statistic). Calculations based on the OIG Audit
concerns yielded a required sample size of 1,121 segments (ratio
statistic). Taking the weighted average of two yields a sample size of
approximately 600 fragments based on (0.67
327 + 0.33
1,121 = 589).
Region-Level Sample Size
As with the FY 2018 sample, the total FY 2020 sample is stratified
by region, proportionally with respect to each region's share of newly
created road fragments. The target sample sizes by region are presented
in Table 1, by number of complete 1 mile fragments, the number of
incomplete fragments and the total fragments in the sample:
Table 2 Presents the Resulting Percentages of the New Database by Region Based on FY 2018 Snapshot
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
% of
Complete
% of Complete
Incomplete
Incomplete
% of
Fragments
Fragments from
% of Complete
Fragments
Fragments from
Incomplete
Region
(length = 1
Total Complete
Fragments from
(length <1
Total
Fragments from
mile)
Fragments
Overall Total
mile)
Incomplete
Overall Total
Fragments
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
11,186
20.45%
14%
4,267
15.24%
5%
2
5,218
9.54%
6%
2,928
10.46%
4%
3
3,988
7.29%
5%
1,650
5.89%
2%
4
5,051
9.23%
6%
3,239
11.57%
4%
5
6,910
12.63%
8%
3,907
13.96%
5%
6
8,472
15.49%
10%
2,723
9.73%
3%
8
7,809
14.28%
9%
5,089
18.18%
6%
9
5,523
10.10%
7%
3,921
14.01%
5%
10
544
0.99%
1%
269
0.96%
0%
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total......
54,701
100%
66%
27,993
100.00%
34%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 3 summarizes the proposed stratification plan based on
effective sample size. For example, 118 fragments should be drawn from
Region 1, and 104 should be drawn from the collection of fragments that
are 1 mile in length, and 14 drawn from fragments that are less than 1
mile in length.
Table 3: Region-Level Sample Sizes Based on FY 2018 Snapshot, for Use in
FY 2020 Effort
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Complete
Incomplete
Fragments
Fragments
Region
--------------------------------------
Total Fragments
(length = 1 mile)
(length <1 mile)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
104
14
118
2
49
9
58
3
37
5
42
4
47
10
57
5
64
13
77
6
79
9
88
8
73
16
89
9
52
13
64
10
5
1
6
--------------------------------------------------------
Total........
510
90
600
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regional distribution of the total sample does not match the
regional distribution of the total ML3-ML5 system mileage.
Randomness
Following are the requirements for ensuring the sample is purely
random. Note that the resulting random sample for FY 2020 is expected
to be substantially different than the random sample selected for FY
2018. Therefore, the analyst responsible for drawing the FY 2020 sample
should compare it to the random sample drawn for FY 2018 and confirm
that few, if any, segments that were drawn in FY 2018 are also drawn
for FY 2020.
1.
Each road fragment has an equal probability of being selected
within a region and road (It is possible to have multiple
fragments in one road.)
2.
The target region-level sample sizes in Table 3 are achieved.
3.
An entire road fragment is selected unless the ML changes or the
route ends.
FY 2018 Random Sample
The National Random Sample of 600 fragments, generated with the
above criteria is available from within NRM by running the roads report
RD--DM01L. These roads must receive a deferred maintenance condition
survey in FY 2020. The data collected from the condition surveys will
be used to determine the Forest Service's agency-wide road deferred
maintenance needs for ML 3-5 roads. The accuracy of the data contained
in the sixteen required fields listed in the Travel Planning Handbook
(FSH 7709.55, Zero Code) must be validated, and corrections made when
errors are discovered.
Users will be able to query live NRM data by security ID to monitor
condition survey accomplishments and check data entry. A Random Sample
List and Accomplishment Report are available for managers on the
Corporate Data Warehouse (CDW), under Deferred Maintenance/Roads, using
a snapshot of data that will be refreshed regularly.
3. Business Rules for Field Surveys
1.
Only Deferred Maintenance needs are required to be collected for
the random sample. Collection of Annual Maintenance needs
is optional.
2.
Deferred maintenance needs should be collected by Priority
(Critical/Non-Critical) and Reason (Health & Safety/
Resource Protection/Forest Mission), according to Deferred
Maintenance Protocols already established.
3.
All condition surveys should be based on operational maintenance
level needs. This change occurred in FY 2007, and was done
to place condition surveys in the context of annual
maintenance planning.
4.
All deferred maintenance needs will be computed using the
National Unit Costs accessed through the Task Tab in NRM or
ERL.
5.
If ERL is not used to conduct the condition survey, a Condition
Survey record must be entered in the Record of Events.
6.
Field surveys for random sample roads shall validate all existing
deferred maintenance work items and/or create new deferred
maintenance work items that reflect current conditions. If
a previous year's work item is no longer valid, it should
be deleted.
7.
Field surveys shall validate and reconcile the data contained in
the sixteen required fields listed in the Travel Planning
Handbook (FSH 7709.55, Zero Code). Make corrections in the
database when errors are found.
8.
Deferred Maintenance data for the random sample will be loaded
into NRM, and quality checked, by the date specified in the
Year-End Schedule.
9.
The Regional Engineer shall assure the quality and completeness
of the data collected for the Random Sample at the end of
each fiscal year. The Forest Staff Officer for Engineering
is responsible for the estimate of Deferred Maintenance
needs and will select individuals to complete condition
surveys based on knowledge, education, and experience.
10.
At a minimum, survey and enter work items for the road fragment
that is included in the random sample list. Surveying and
entering work items for any other portion of the road is
optional. Data on fragments not in the random sample will
not be used at the national level but may be useful at the
forest level for planning purposes.
4. Year-End Schedule and Summarization Processes
Schedule
October 31, 2019-September 29, 2020: Forests and regions enter
deferred maintenance needs and validate data for the random sample in
NRM. Forests and regions use NRM accomplishment and summarization
reports to check NRM data and make appropriate edits before agency
summaries are generated.
September 30: NRM is closed to editing.
The following dates are approximate:
October 2-6: Data Summarization Process is executed by NRM
Programmers. WO Roads Program Manager validates and approves data. (See
Summarization description below.) Once approved, NRM programmers will
finalize agency summaries and formats for formal submittal.
October 6: NRM is open for editing. Records cannot be deleted until
replication with CPAIS resumes. This can take up to 6 weeks.
Summarization Process
The data summarization process occurs after Forests and Regions
have validated their data in NRM and involves calculating total
deferred maintenance needs by Priority (Critical/Non-Critical) and
Reason (Health & Safety/Resource Protection/Forest Mission) for the
Random Sample. The WO Road Program Manager will use the random sample
subtotals, prior year needs reports, and other information to validate
the data for the Random Sample. Once validated, the random sample data
will be used to determine a national average unit cost per mile
extrapolated over the total Operational Maintenance Level 3-5 system to
determine the agency's deferred maintenance needs by priority and
reason.
5. Required Data Fields from FSH 7709.55, Zero Code
1.
Route number.
2.
Beginning mile post.
3.
Ending mile post.
4.
System.
5.
Jurisdiction.
6.
Development status.
7.
State.
8.
County.
9.
Congressional district.
10.
Administrative Unit (region, forest, and ranger district).
11.
Functional class.
12.
Number of lanes.
13.
Surface type.
14.
Primary maintainer.
15.
Operational maintenance level.
16.
Objective maintenance level.
6. Frequently Asked Questions:
Field Surveys
Q1. What do I do if the selected road does not physically exist?
Do not survey a replacement road.
Document road numbers and explain why they exist in the
inventory.
Forward documentation to the RO User Board Representative.
Correct data in NRM. For example, update the route status
for decommissioned roads.
Q2. What do I do if the selected road does not have any fragments
with FS jurisdiction?
Do not survey a replacement road.
Document road numbers and explain why Jurisdiction is
incorrect in the inventory.
Forward documentation to the RO User Board Representative.
Correct data in NRM. For example, update the road fragments
with incorrect Jurisdiction values equal to FS.
Q3. What do I do if the road selected is not a ML 3-5?
The random sample business process and NRM scripts are designed to
only select ML 3-5 roads. However, there may be situations where data
discrepancies or data edits that occurred after the random sample was
generated resulted on ML 1-2 roads being selected for the random
sample. In such cases:
Do not survey a replacement road.
Document road numbers and explain the maintenance level is
incorrect in the inventory.
Forward documentation to the RO User Board Representative.
Correct data in NRM. For example, update the operational
maintenance level.
Q4. How are these condition surveys related to Real Property Roads
Inventory?
The purpose of the condition surveys is to allow the Forest Service
to estimate its Deferred Maintenance needs on its passenger car road
system. As part of those surveys, units are required to validate the 16
required data fields, and update as needed. The Real Property Roads
Inventory is done to verify the existence of all roads in our
inventory, and to verify some of the data elements. These two efforts
are not related.
Q5. What do I do if the selected road has been changed from ML3 to
ML2?
Do not survey a replacement road.
Document road numbers and explain why they exist in the
inventory.
Forward documentation to the RO User Board Representative.
Correct data in NRM.
Data
Q1. What date fields are populated in NRM from ERL?
A ``Record of Event'' entry is made for a Condition Survey type
Inspection with the date (Inspection Date) and survey party (to
Remarks) from ERL.
For existing tasks:
The YEAR field is left unchanged
the DAY_ID field is updated with the date of the current
field survey
The CREATED_DATE is left unchanged
The MODIFIED_DATE is updated with the date of the upload.
For new tasks:
The YEAR field is populated with the current FY
The DAY_ID field is populated with the date of the current
field survey
The CREATED_DATE is populated with the date of the upload
The MODIFIED_DATE is populated with the date of the upload.
An ``Event'' entry is made in NRM. An Inspection Event Subtype =
CS--Condition Survey is made with the date of the condition survey
recorded in ERL.
Q2. Where is the Deferred Maintenance data collected prior to FY
2006?
Prior to FY06, all tasks (AM, DM, CI) regardless of
completion were archived. Beginning in FY06 and forward, only
completed tasks were archived. This change occurred due to file
size concerns, and accomplishment reporting requirements.
In addition, a snapshot of all tasks that existed at the end
of FY05 is included with the completed tasks on the Archived
Tasks screen.
To date, the Archived Tasks screen (filtered view of the ii
tasks table) contains a mix of completed tasks (AM, DM, CI)
when the YEAR is >= 2006, and all tasks (completed and
uncompleted) when the YEAR equals 2005.
To access road tasks older than 2005, utilize the Archived
Tasks for Roads (II_TASKS_ARCHIVR_ROAD_V) user view or submit a
helpdesk ticket. These tasks are stored in a separate table in
the database.
For condition surveys performed using ERL, the Survey Date
(DAY_ID) field will retain the original survey date, until the
work item is revisited on a subsequent condition survey; at
which time it will be overwritten with the latest survey date.
The work item date history, which records when the work item
was originally identified on a condition survey, is no longer
available. This eliminates the ability to determine how long
some of the maintenance needs have been languishing.
NRM's business rules for how date fields are handled has changed
several times. This has resulted in inconsistencies in date related
data for work tasks. It is difficult to establish any pattern for how
these dates have been handled since condition survey data was collected
in 1999. It is nearly impossible, without a major undertaking, to
utilize archived data older than FY 2006 for any kind of accomplishment
reporting or trend analysis.
attachment 3
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
USDA Forest Service FY 2018 Deferred Maintenance
By Asset Type
------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Buildings
$1,236,746,593
Dams
$79,560,275
Drinking Water Systems
$93,021,549
Heritage
$17,503,549
Minor Construction Features
$85,809,375
Road Bridges
$260,505,527
Roads
$3,152,783,200
Trail Bridges
$7,846,506
Trails
$278,012,495
Wastewater Systems
$30,803,655
------------------
Grand Total
$5,242,592,725
------------------------------------------------------------------------
By Region and National Forest
------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Region 1
$880,610,366
Beaverhead-Deerlodge National Forest
$100,438,396
Bitterroot National Forest
$47,513,708
Custer Gallatin National Forest
$62,471,940
Dakota Prairie Grasslands
$31,943,232
Flathead National Forest
$71,878,120
Helena-Lewis and Clark National Forest
$65,673,050
Idaho Panhandle National Forests
$140,540,397
Kootenai National Forest
$108,312,397
Lolo National Forest
$102,044,311
Montana Aerial Fire Depot
$2,372,916
Nez Perce-Clearwater National Forest
$144,904,488
Region 1 Unassigned Unit
$2,517,411
Region 2
$477,091,648
Arapaho-Roosevelt National Forest
$39,292,966
Bighorn National Forest
$22,805,899
Black Hills National Forest
$45,180,445
Grand Mesa Uncomp * Gunnison National Forest
$65,629,294
Medicine Bow-Routt National Forest
$81,322,769
Nebraska National Forest
$8,275,636
Pike-San Isabel National Forest
$55,039,152
Rio Grande National Forest
$39,927,539
San Juan National Forest
$48,087,303
Shoshone National Forest
$17,688,978
White River National Forest
$53,841,668
Region 3
$320,262,246
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest
$44,882,535
Carson National Forest
$24,751,450
Cibola National Forest
$22,058,719
Coconino National Forest
$46,245,731
Coronado National Forest
$26,904,461
Gila National Forest
$33,943,741
Kaibab National Forest
$31,023,736
Lincoln National Forest
$18,881,588
Prescott National Forest
$5,136,259
Region 3 Unit Unassigned
$14,522
Santa Fe National Forest
$32,271,870
Tonto National Forest
$34,147,634
Region 4
$513,267,130
Ashley National Forest
$43,683,425
Boise National Forest
$38,579,411
Bridger-Teton National Forest
$42,720,609
Caribou-Targhee National Forest
$51,928,130
Dixie National Forest
$37,864,379
Fishlake National Forest
$17,193,962
Humboldt-Toiyabe National Forest
$53,186,162
Manti-Lasal National Forest
$18,224,469
Payette National Forest
$43,330,143
Region 4 Unit Unassigned
$510,692
Salmon-Challis National Forest
$70,800,531
Sawtooth National Forest
$34,043,137
Uinta-Wasatch-Cache National Forest
$61,202,080
Region 5
$894,955,732
Angeles National Forest
$33,478,687
Cleveland National Forest
$37,143,160
Eldorado National Forest
$71,088,508
Inyo National Forest
$18,387,546
Klamath National Forest
$89,670,357
Lake Tahoe Basin Mgt. Unit
$30,419,417
Lassen National Forest
$42,936,187
Los Padres National Forest
$45,861,623
Mendocino National Forest
$43,412,592
Modoc National Forest
$31,128,839
Plumas National Forest
$50,300,037
Region 5 Unassigned Unit
$527,675
San Bernardino National Forest
$22,804,344
Sequoia National Forest
$46,102,641
Shasta Trinity National Forest
$89,096,956
Sierra National Forest
$95,826,714
Six Rivers National Forest
$59,417,958
Stanislaus National Forest
$34,321,666
Tahoe National Forest
$53,030,825
Region 6
$834,627,114
Columbia River Gorge National Scenic Area
$2,888,754
Colville National Forest
$26,799,109
Deschutes National Forest
$49,858,085
Fremont-Winema National Forests
$68,485,067
Gifford Pinchot National Forest
$98,244,205
Malheur National Forest
$28,577,945
Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest
$66,389,938
Mt. Hood National Forest
$58,798,653
Ochoco National Forest
$24,077,730
Okanogan-Wenatchee National Forests
$108,439,944
Olympic National Forest
$29,816,032
Rogue River-Siskiyou National Forest
$77,923,069
Siuslaw National Forest
$21,575,353
Umatilla National Forest
$37,248,092
Umpqua National Forest
$40,507,099
Wallowa Whitman National Forest
$44,611,060
Willamette National Forest
$50,386,980
Region 8
$617,866,943
Chattahoochee-Oconee National Forest
$37,394,009
Cherokee National Forest
$28,185,380
Daniel Boone National Forest
$28,601,485
El Yunque National Forest
$3,578,753
Francis Marion-Sumter National Forests
$51,765,646
George Washington and Jefferson National Forests
$54,677,814
Kisatchie National Forest
$49,819,841
Land Between the Lakes NRA
$26,163,626
National Forests in Alabama
$32,819,764
National Forests in Florida
$70,172,784
National Forests in Mississippi
$45,479,915
National Forests in North Carolina
$61,401,598
National Forests in Texas
$46,546,327
Ouachita National Forest
$64,184,569
Ozark-St. Francis National Forest
$17,075,432
Region 9
$501,510,365
Allegheny National Forest
$38,960,612
Chequamegon-Nicolet National Forest
$122,636,004
Chippewa National Forest
$34,694,078
Green Mountain and Finger Lakes National Forests
$7,180,071
Hiawatha National Forest
$34,043,140
Hoosier National Forest
$4,501,551
Huron Manistee National Forest
$34,167,611
Mark Twain National Forest
$38,385,203
Midewin National Tallgrass Prairie
$16,829,521
Monongahela National Forest
$43,282,272
Ottawa National Forest
$31,491,082
Shawnee National Forest
$15,409,686
Superior National Forest
$41,041,386
Wayne National Forest
$4,535,554
White Mountain National Forest
$34,352,593
Region 10
$100,338,382
Chugach National Forest
$11,114,034
Tongass National Forest
$89,224,348
Engineering
$3,590,861
Missoula Technology and Development Center
$74,439
San Dimas Technology and Development Center
$3,516,422
Job Corps
$3,316,536
Angell Job Corp Center
$412,615
Blackwell Job Corp Center
$108,355
Cass Job Corp Center
$45,726
Curlew Job Corp Center
$260,739
Frenchburg Job Corp Center
$85,043
Jacobs Creek Job Corp Center
$230,663
Ouachita Job Corp Center
$29,171
Pine Knot Job Corp Center
$726,180
Timber Lake Job Corp Center
$701,188
Trapper Creek Job Corp Center
$65,718
Wolf Creek Job Corp Center
$651,139
Other
$720,678
Grey Towers National Historic Site
$720,678
Research
$94,434,725
Forest Products Laboratory
$4,856,527
International Institute of Tropical Forestry
$2,342,201
Northern Research Station
$19,237,722
Pacific Northwest Research Station
$30,709,039
Rocky Mountain Research Station
$22,267,162
Southern Research Station
$14,667,630
Wood Education and Resource Center
$354,445
------------------
Grand Total
$5,242,592,725
------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Editor's note: the table, as submitted, when referring to the Grand
Mesa, Uncompahgre & Gunnison National Forest shortened ``Uncompahgre
&'' to ``Uncomp''.
By Region
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
By Region, National Forest, and Asset Type
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Forests
Region
& Grasslands/
State
Asset Type
Deferred
Station
Maintenance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Region 1--
Northern Region
ID, MT,
$880,610,366
Northern
Totals
ND, SD
Region 1
MT
Buildings
$2,517,411
Unassigned Unit
Beaverhead-
MT
Buildings
$4,787,917
Deerlodge
National Forest
Beaverhead-
MT
Dams
$9,200
Deerlodge
National Forest
Beaverhead-
MT
Drinking
$119,708
Deerlodge
Water
National Forest
Systems
Beaverhead-
MT
Heritage
$11,000
Deerlodge
National Forest
Beaverhead-
MT
Minor
$1,079,118
Deerlodge
Construct
National Forest
ed
Features
Beaverhead-
MT
Road
$5,094,455
Deerlodge
Bridges
National Forest
Beaverhead-
MT
Roads
$83,278,740
Deerlodge
National Forest
Beaverhead-
MT
Trail
$72,867
Deerlodge
Bridges
National Forest
Beaverhead-
MT
Trails
$5,680,950
Deerlodge
National Forest
Beaverhead-
MT
Wastewater
$304,440
Deerlodge
Systems
National Forest
Bitterroot
ID, MT
Buildings
$1,695,407
National Forest
Bitterroot
ID, MT
Dams
$8,500
National Forest
Bitterroot
ID, MT
Drinking
$398,355
National Forest
Water
Systems
Bitterroot
ID, MT
Heritage
$0
National Forest
Bitterroot
ID, MT
Minor
$257,785
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Bitterroot
ID, MT
Road
$1,671,285
National Forest
Bridges
Bitterroot
ID, MT
Roads
$40,344,476
National Forest
Bitterroot
ID, MT
Trail
$31,330
National Forest
Bridges
Bitterroot
ID, MT
Trails
$3,037,699
National Forest
Bitterroot
ID, MT
Wastewater
$68,870
National Forest
Systems
Idaho Panhandle
ID
Buildings
$25,059,093
National Forests
Idaho Panhandle
ID
Drinking
$548,530
National Forests
Water
Systems
Idaho Panhandle
ID
Heritage
$41,218
National Forests
Idaho Panhandle
ID
Minor
$408,283
National Forests
Construct
ed
Features
Idaho Panhandle
ID
Road
$6,509,244
National Forests
Bridges
Idaho Panhandle
ID
Roads
$100,686,192
National Forests
Idaho Panhandle
ID
Trail
$59,550
National Forests
Bridges
Idaho Panhandle
ID
Trails
$7,110,788
National Forests
Idaho Panhandle
ID
Wastewater
$117,499
National Forests
Systems
Flathead National
MT
Buildings
$17,006,459
Forest
Flathead National
MT
Dams
$3,000
Forest
Flathead National
MT
Drinking
$545,508
Forest
Water
Systems
Flathead National
MT
Heritage
$0
Forest
Flathead National
MT
Minor
$299,248
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Flathead National
MT
Road
$3,517,659
Forest
Bridges
Flathead National
MT
Roads
$46,374,147
Forest
Flathead National
MT
Trail
$118,330
Forest
Bridges
Flathead National
MT
Trails
$3,920,538
Forest
Flathead National
MT
Wastewater
$93,230
Forest
Systems
Custer Gallatin
MT
Buildings
$20,867,935
National Forest
Custer Gallatin
MT
Dams
$132,339
National Forest
Custer Gallatin
MT
Drinking
$1,500,418
National Forest
Water
Systems
Custer Gallatin
MT
Heritage
$18,000
National Forest
Custer Gallatin
MT
Minor
$459,312
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Custer Gallatin
MT
Road
$2,405,159
National Forest
Bridges
Custer Gallatin
MT
Roads
$30,358,991
National Forest
Custer Gallatin
MT
Trail
$242,460
National Forest
Bridges
Custer Gallatin
MT
Trails
$6,071,562
National Forest
Custer Gallatin
MT
Wastewater
$415,764
National Forest
Systems
Kootenai National
MT
Buildings
$15,911,640
Forest
Kootenai National
MT
Drinking
$134,628
Forest
Water
Systems
Kootenai National
MT
Heritage
$25,500
Forest
Kootenai National
MT
Minor
$710,621
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Kootenai National
MT
Road
$6,515,186
Forest
Bridges
Kootenai National
MT
Roads
$81,677,918
Forest
Kootenai National
MT
Trail
$28,650
Forest
Bridges
Kootenai National
MT
Trails
$3,153,765
Forest
Kootenai National
MT
Wastewater
$154,489
Forest
Systems
Helena-Lewis and
MT
Buildings
$8,139,467
Clark National
Forest
Helena-Lewis and
MT
Dams
$99,385
Clark National
Forest
Helena-Lewis and
MT
Drinking
$263,994
Clark National
Water
Forest
Systems
Helena-Lewis and
MT
Heritage
$8,000
Clark National
Forest
Helena-Lewis and
MT
Minor
$955,740
Clark National
Construct
Forest
ed
Features
Helena-Lewis and
MT
Road
$4,907,608
Clark National
Bridges
Forest
Helena-Lewis and
MT
Roads
$45,095,462
Clark National
Forest
Helena-Lewis and
MT
Trail
$69,444
Clark National
Bridges
Forest
Helena-Lewis and
MT
Trails
$6,112,010
Clark National
Forest
Helena-Lewis and
MT
Wastewater
$21,940
Clark National
Systems
Forest
Lolo National
MT
Buildings
$17,350,923
Forest
Lolo National
MT
Dams
$1,420
Forest
Lolo National
MT
Drinking
$618,148
Forest
Water
Systems
Lolo National
MT
Heritage
$0
Forest
Lolo National
MT
Minor
$303,601
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Lolo National
MT
Road
$5,867,533
Forest
Bridges
Lolo National
MT
Roads
$73,552,902
Forest
Lolo National
MT
Trail
$28,065
Forest
Bridges
Lolo National
MT
Trails
$4,134,945
Forest
Lolo National
MT
Wastewater
$186,773
Forest
Systems
Nez Perce-
ID
Buildings
$34,716,465
Clearwater
National Forest
Nez Perce-
ID
Dams
$368,382
Clearwater
National Forest
Nez Perce-
ID
Drinking
$1,297,082
Clearwater
Water
National Forest
Systems
Nez Perce-
ID
Heritage
$45,000
Clearwater
National Forest
Nez Perce-
ID
Minor
$255,536
Clearwater
Construct
National Forest
ed
Features
Nez Perce-
ID
Road
$7,166,532
Clearwater
Bridges
National Forest
Nez Perce-
ID
Roads
$91,446,468
Clearwater
National Forest
Nez Perce-
ID
Trail
$97,810
Clearwater
Bridges
National Forest
Nez Perce-
ID
Trails
$8,884,326
Clearwater
National Forest
Nez Perce-
ID
Wastewater
$626,887
Clearwater
Systems
National Forest
Dakota Prairie
ND, SD
Buildings
$110,705
Grasslands
Dakota Prairie
ND, SD
Dams
$1,006,459
Grasslands
Dakota Prairie
ND, SD
Drinking
$800
Grasslands
Water
Systems
Dakota Prairie
ND, SD
Heritage
$0
Grasslands
Dakota Prairie
ND, SD
Minor
$29,558
Grasslands
Construct
ed
Features
Dakota Prairie
ND, SD
Road
$3,921
Grasslands
Bridges
Dakota Prairie
ND, SD
Roads
$30,357,287
Grasslands
Dakota Prairie
ND, SD
Trail
$0
Grasslands
Bridges
Dakota Prairie
ND, SD
Trails
$428,503
Grasslands
Dakota Prairie
ND, SD
Wastewater
$6,000
Grasslands
Systems
Montana Aerial
MT
Buildings
$2,372,916
Fire Depot
Region 2--
Rocky Mountain
CO, KS,
$477,091,648
Rocky
Region Totals
NE, SD,
Mountain
WY
Bighorn National
WY
Buildings
$5,688,418
Forest
Bighorn National
WY
Dams
$275,477
Forest
Bighorn National
WY
Drinking
$85,439
Forest
Water
Systems
Bighorn National
WY
Heritage
$49,000
Forest
Bighorn National
WY
Minor
$1,451,896
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Bighorn National
WY
Road
$589,967
Forest
Bridges
Bighorn National
WY
Roads
$12,681,616
Forest
Bighorn National
WY
Trail
$0
Forest
Bridges
Bighorn National
WY
Trails
$1,915,142
Forest
Bighorn National
WY
Wastewater
$68,945
Forest
Systems
Black Hills
SD, WY
Buildings
$6,566,163
National Forest
Black Hills
SD, WY
Dams
$897,670
National Forest
Black Hills
SD, WY
Drinking
$1,102,103
National Forest
Water
Systems
Black Hills
SD, WY
Heritage
$200,600
National Forest
Black Hills
SD, WY
Minor
$1,050,420
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Black Hills
SD, WY
Road
$441,446
National Forest
Bridges
Black Hills
SD, WY
Roads
$32,163,815
National Forest
Black Hills
SD, WY
Trail
$35,028
National Forest
Bridges
Black Hills
SD, WY
Trails
$2,330,336
National Forest
Black Hills
SD, WY
Wastewater
$392,863
National Forest
Systems
Grand Mesa Uncomp
CO
Buildings
$9,242,988
** Gunnison
National Forest
Grand Mesa Uncomp
CO
Dams
$190,797
** Gunnison
National Forest
Grand Mesa Uncomp
CO
Drinking
$899,128
** Gunnison
Water
National Forest
Systems
Grand Mesa Uncomp
CO
Heritage
$86,216
** Gunnison
National Forest
Grand Mesa Uncomp
CO
Minor
$667,442
** Gunnison
Construct
National Forest
ed
Features
Grand Mesa Uncomp
CO
Road
$4,049,368
** Gunnison
Bridges
National Forest
Grand Mesa Uncomp
CO
Roads
$44,191,761
** Gunnison
National Forest
Grand Mesa Uncomp
CO
Trail
$0
** Gunnison
Bridges
National Forest
Grand Mesa Uncomp
CO
Trails
$6,209,948
** Gunnison
National Forest
Grand Mesa Uncomp
CO
Wastewater
$91,647
** Gunnison
Systems
National Forest
Medicine Bow-
CO, WY
Buildings
$9,181,056
Routt National
Forest
Medicine Bow-
CO, WY
Dams
$126,255
Routt National
Forest
Medicine Bow-
CO, WY
Drinking
$499,919
Routt National
Water
Forest
Systems
Medicine Bow-
CO, WY
Heritage
$585,450
Routt National
Forest
Medicine Bow-
CO, WY
Minor
$763,323
Routt National
Construct
Forest
ed
Features
Medicine Bow-
CO, WY
Road
$2,260,834
Routt National
Bridges
Forest
Medicine Bow-
CO, WY
Roads
$63,748,270
Routt National
Forest
Medicine Bow-
CO, WY
Trail
$14,600
Routt National
Bridges
Forest
Medicine Bow-
CO, WY
Trails
$4,056,263
Routt National
Forest
Medicine Bow-
CO, WY
Wastewater
$86,800
Routt National
Systems
Forest
Nebraska National
NE
Buildings
$1,982,720
Forest
Nebraska National
NE
Dams
$655,158
Forest
Nebraska National
NE
Drinking
$149,832
Forest
Water
Systems
Nebraska National
NE
Heritage
$109,033
Forest
Nebraska National
NE
Minor
$682,706
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Nebraska National
NE
Road
$60,739
Forest
Bridges
Nebraska National
NE
Roads
$3,983,380
Forest
Nebraska National
NE
Trail
$0
Forest
Bridges
Nebraska National
NE
Trails
$640,401
Forest
Nebraska National
NE
Wastewater
$11,668
Forest
Systems
Rio Grande
CO
Buildings
$5,565,704
National Forest
Rio Grande
CO
Dams
$154,231
National Forest
Rio Grande
CO
Drinking
$388,449
National Forest
Water
Systems
Rio Grande
CO
Heritage
$80,000
National Forest
Rio Grande
CO
Minor
$319,879
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Rio Grande
CO
Road
$1,383,018
National Forest
Bridges
Rio Grande
CO
Roads
$29,643,992
National Forest
Rio Grande
CO
Trail
$28,773
National Forest
Bridges
Rio Grande
CO
Trails
$2,324,870
National Forest
Rio Grande
CO
Wastewater
$38,622
National Forest
Systems
Arapaho-Roosevelt
CO
Buildings
$9,643,521
National Forest
Arapaho-Roosevelt
CO
Dams
$109,750
National Forest
Arapaho-Roosevelt
CO
Drinking
$3,298,473
National Forest
Water
Systems
Arapaho-Roosevelt
CO
Heritage
$264,750
National Forest
Arapaho-Roosevelt
CO
Minor
$920,014
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Arapaho-Roosevelt
CO
Road
$1,315,482
National Forest
Bridges
Arapaho-Roosevelt
CO
Roads
$20,952,906
National Forest
Arapaho-Roosevelt
CO
Trail
$5,558
National Forest
Bridges
Arapaho-Roosevelt
CO
Trails
$2,452,555
National Forest
Arapaho-Roosevelt
CO
Wastewater
$329,957
National Forest
Systems
Pike-San Isabel
CO, KS
Buildings
$14,825,699
National Forest
Pike-San Isabel
CO, KS
Dams
$403,610
National Forest
Pike-San Isabel
CO, KS
Drinking
$1,495,910
National Forest
Water
Systems
Pike-San Isabel
CO, KS
Heritage
$59,595
National Forest
Pike-San Isabel
CO, KS
Minor
$1,193,135
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Pike-San Isabel
CO, KS
Road
$1,617,872
National Forest
Bridges
Pike-San Isabel
CO, KS
Roads
$30,891,940
National Forest
Pike-San Isabel
CO, KS
Trail
$285,262
National Forest
Bridges
Pike-San Isabel
CO, KS
Trails
$3,665,841
National Forest
Pike-San Isabel
CO, KS
Wastewater
$600,289
National Forest
Systems
San Juan National
CO
Buildings
$7,572,490
Forest
San Juan National
CO
Dams
$87,973
Forest
San Juan National
CO
Drinking
$148,208
Forest
Water
Systems
San Juan National
CO
Heritage
$585,247
Forest
San Juan National
CO
Minor
$1,790,326
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
San Juan National
CO
Road
$846,023
Forest
Bridges
San Juan National
CO
Roads
$33,246,251
Forest
San Juan National
CO
Trail
$163,350
Forest
Bridges
San Juan National
CO
Trails
$3,563,263
Forest
San Juan National
CO
Wastewater
$84,171
Forest
Systems
Shoshone National
WY
Buildings
$4,295,397
Forest
Shoshone National
WY
Dams
Forest
$6,500
Shoshone National
WY
Drinking
$288,787
Forest
Water
Systems
Shoshone National
WY
Heritage
$15,200
Forest
Shoshone National
WY
Minor
$225,196
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Shoshone National
WY
Road
$931,579
Forest
Bridges
Shoshone National
WY
Roads
$9,007,450
Forest
Shoshone National
WY
Trail
$29,920
Forest
Bridges
Shoshone National
WY
Trails
$2,766,121
Forest
Shoshone National
WY
Wastewater
$122,829
Forest
Systems
White River
CO
Buildings
$20,927,879
National Forest
White River
CO
Dams
$418,796
National Forest
White River
CO
Drinking
$234,238
National Forest
Water
Systems
White River
CO
Heritage
$460,800
National Forest
White River
CO
Minor
$355,964
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
White River
CO
Road
$4,299,987
National Forest
Bridges
White River
CO
Roads
$21,478,297
National Forest
White River
CO
Trail
$1,145,832
National Forest
Bridges
White River
CO
Trails
$4,463,015
National Forest
White River
CO
Wastewater
$56,861
National Forest
Systems
Region 3--
Southwestern
AZ, NM
$320,262,246
Southwester
Region Totals
n
Region 3 Unit
Buildings
$14,522
Unassigned
Apache-Sitgreaves
AZ
Buildings
$2,783,777
National Forest
Apache-Sitgreaves
AZ
Dams
$266,400
National Forest
Apache-Sitgreaves
AZ
Drinking
$428,297
National Forest
Water
Systems
Apache-Sitgreaves
AZ
Heritage
$2,018
National Forest
Apache-Sitgreaves
AZ
Minor
$688,981
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Apache-Sitgreaves
AZ
Road
$1,038,118
National Forest
Bridges
Apache-Sitgreaves
AZ
Roads
$37,015,571
National Forest
Apache-Sitgreaves
AZ
Trail
$0
National Forest
Bridges
Apache-Sitgreaves
AZ
Trails
$2,479,199
National Forest
Apache-Sitgreaves
AZ
Wastewater
$180,173
National Forest
Systems
Carson National
NM
Buildings
$2,492,264
Forest
Carson National
NM
Dams
$106,150
Forest
Carson National
NM
Drinking
$374,307
Forest
Water
Systems
Carson National
NM
Heritage
$71,446
Forest
Carson National
NM
Minor
$231,912
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Carson National
NM
Road
$955,019
Forest
Bridges
Carson National
NM
Roads
$19,420,244
Forest
Carson National
NM
Trail
$1,100
Forest
Bridges
Carson National
NM
Trails
$1,045,432
Forest
Carson National
NM
Wastewater
$53,577
Forest
Systems
Cibola National
NM
Buildings
$4,939,524
Forest
Cibola National
NM
Dams
$175,141
Forest
Cibola National
NM
Drinking
$278,391
Forest
Water
Systems
Cibola National
NM
Heritage
$678,682
Forest
Cibola National
NM
Minor
$441,703
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Cibola National
NM
Road
$295,785
Forest
Bridges
Cibola National
NM
Roads
$13,805,343
Forest
Cibola National
NM
Trail
$0
Forest
Bridges
Cibola National
NM
Trails
$1,256,930
Forest
Cibola National
NM
Wastewater
$187,220
Forest
Systems
Coconino National
AZ
Buildings
$5,404,267
Forest
Coconino National
AZ
Dams
$141,143
Forest
Coconino National
AZ
Drinking
$506,794
Forest
Water
Systems
Coconino National
AZ
Heritage
$0
Forest
Coconino National
AZ
Minor
$279,598
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Coconino National
AZ
Road
$2,220,571
Forest
Bridges
Coconino National
AZ
Roads
$35,945,363
Forest
Coconino National
AZ
Trail
$0
Forest
Bridges
Coconino National
AZ
Trails
$1,641,135
Forest
Coconino National
AZ
Wastewater
$106,860
Forest
Systems
Coronado National
AZ
Buildings
$3,469,336
Forest
Coronado National
AZ
Dams
$331,855
Forest
Coronado National
AZ
Drinking
$2,434,441
Forest
Water
Systems
Coronado National
AZ
Heritage
$238,863
Forest
Coronado National
AZ
Minor
$2,358,430
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Coronado National
AZ
Road
$1,077,978
Forest
Bridges
Coronado National
AZ
Roads
$15,094,252
Forest
Coronado National
AZ
Trail
$0
Forest
Bridges
Coronado National
AZ
Trails
$1,845,666
Forest
Coronado National
AZ
Wastewater
$53,640
Forest
Systems
Gila National
NM
Buildings
$8,934,954
Forest
Gila National
NM
Drinking
$910,698
Forest
Water
Systems
Gila National
NM
Heritage
$203,069
Forest
Gila National
NM
Minor
$88,530
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Gila National
NM
Road
$1,247,983
Forest
Bridges
Gila National
NM
Roads
$19,240,212
Forest
Gila National
NM
Trail
$0
Forest
Bridges
Gila National
NM
Trails
$3,110,700
Forest
Gila National
NM
Wastewater
$207,595
Forest
Systems
Kaibab National
AZ
Buildings
$3,097,724
Forest
Kaibab National
AZ
Dams
$784,546
Forest
Kaibab National
AZ
Drinking
$254,183
Forest
Water
Systems
Kaibab National
AZ
Heritage
$152,059
Forest
Kaibab National
AZ
Minor
$831,768
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Kaibab National
AZ
Road
$205,104
Forest
Bridges
Kaibab National
AZ
Roads
$24,589,233
Forest
Kaibab National
AZ
Trails
$1,098,940
Forest
Kaibab National
AZ
Wastewater
$10,180
Forest
Systems
Lincoln National
NM
Buildings
$1,237,951
Forest
Lincoln National
NM
Drinking
$15,405
Forest
Water
Systems
Lincoln National
NM
Heritage
$64,500
Forest
Lincoln National
NM
Minor
$94,367
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Lincoln National
NM
Road
$284,675
Forest
Bridges
Lincoln National
NM
Roads
$16,094,529
Forest
Lincoln National
NM
Trail
$0
Forest
Bridges
Lincoln National
NM
Trails
$911,680
Forest
Lincoln National
NM
Wastewater
$178,480
Forest
Systems
Prescott National
AZ
Buildings
$1,077,537
Forest
Prescott National
AZ
Dams
$239,075
Forest
Prescott National
AZ
Drinking
$287,201
Forest
Water
Systems
Prescott National
AZ
Heritage
$124,300
Forest
Prescott National
AZ
Minor
$62,157
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Prescott National
AZ
Road
$49,598
Forest
Bridges
Prescott National
AZ
Roads
$1,449,654
Forest
Prescott National
AZ
Trail
$0
Forest
Bridges
Prescott National
AZ
Trails
$1,513,969
Forest
Prescott National
AZ
Wastewater
$332,767
Forest
Systems
Santa Fe National
NM
Buildings
$7,764,975
Forest
Santa Fe National
NM
Dams
$72,330
Forest
Santa Fe National
NM
Drinking
$238,885
Forest
Water
Systems
Santa Fe National
NM
Heritage
$682,516
Forest
Santa Fe National
NM
Minor
$415,085
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Santa Fe National
NM
Road
$1,202,227
Forest
Bridges
Santa Fe National
NM
Roads
$20,129,802
Forest
Santa Fe National
NM
Trail
$0
Forest
Bridges
Santa Fe National
NM
Trails
$1,555,768
Forest
Santa Fe National
NM
Wastewater
$210,281
Forest
Systems
Tonto National
AZ
Buildings
$4,153,314
Forest
Tonto National
AZ
Drinking
$687,641
Forest
Water
Systems
Tonto National
AZ
Heritage
$4,961,944
Forest
Tonto National
AZ
Minor
$1,593,062
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Tonto National
AZ
Road
$735,268
Forest
Bridges
Tonto National
AZ
Roads
$20,284,906
Forest
Tonto National
AZ
Trail
$1,000
Forest
Bridges
Tonto National
AZ
Trails
$1,579,496
Forest
Tonto National
AZ
Wastewater
$151,004
Forest
Systems
Region 4--
Intermountain
ID, NV,
$513,267,130
Intermounta
Region Totals
UT, WY
in
Region 4 Unit
Buildings
$510,692
Unassigned
Ashley National
UT
Buildings
$11,687,166
Forest
Ashley National
UT
Dams
$278,656
Forest
Ashley National
UT
Drinking
$1,071,097
Forest
Water
Systems
Ashley National
UT
Heritage
$67,512
Forest
Ashley National
UT
Minor
$744,309
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Ashley National
UT
Road
$548,031
Forest
Bridges
Ashley National
UT
Roads
$27,260,647
Forest
Ashley National
UT
Trail
$33,102
Forest
Bridges
Ashley National
UT
Trails
$1,817,060
Forest
Ashley National
UT
Wastewater
$175,845
Forest
Systems
Boise National
ID
Buildings
$6,302,105
Forest
Boise National
ID
Drinking
$890,648
Forest
Water
Systems
Boise National
ID
Heritage
$0
Forest
Boise National
ID
Minor
$405,315
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Boise National
ID
Road
$2,377,138
Forest
Bridges
Boise National
ID
Roads
$25,029,547
Forest
Boise National
ID
Trail
$8,002
Forest
Bridges
Boise National
ID
Trails
$3,498,329
Forest
Boise National
ID
Wastewater
$68,327
Forest
Systems
Bridger-Teton
WY
Buildings
$2,789,851
National Forest
Bridger-Teton
WY
Dams
$313,541
National Forest
Bridger-Teton
WY
Drinking
$1,531,967
National Forest
Water
Systems
Bridger-Teton
WY
Heritage
$0
National Forest
Bridger-Teton
WY
Minor
$382,328
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Bridger-Teton
WY
Road
$2,432,682
National Forest
Bridges
Bridger-Teton
WY
Roads
$29,121,237
National Forest
Bridger-Teton
WY
Trail
$83,300
National Forest
Bridges
Bridger-Teton
WY
Trails
$5,949,505
National Forest
Bridger-Teton
WY
Wastewater
$116,198
National Forest
Systems
Dixie National
UT
Buildings
$4,575,170
Forest
Dixie National
UT
Dams
$417,500
Forest
Dixie National
UT
Drinking
$1,180,572
Forest
Water
Systems
Dixie National
UT
Heritage
$20,000
Forest
Dixie National
UT
Minor
$1,052,979
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Dixie National
UT
Road
$1,169,318
Forest
Bridges
Dixie National
UT
Roads
$25,906,380
Forest
Dixie National
UT
Trail
$0
Forest
Bridges
Dixie National
UT
Trails
$2,981,382
Forest
Dixie National
UT
Wastewater
$561,078
Forest
Systems
Fishlake National
UT
Buildings
$657,759
Forest
Fishlake National
UT
Dams
$7,000
Forest
Fishlake National
UT
Drinking
$157,993
Forest
Water
Systems
Fishlake National
UT
Heritage
$0
Forest
Fishlake National
UT
Minor
$509,026
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Fishlake National
UT
Road
$72,007
Forest
Bridges
Fishlake National
UT
Roads
$10,575,772
Forest
Fishlake National
UT
Trail
$0
Forest
Bridges
Fishlake National
UT
Trails
$4,360,463
Forest
Fishlake National
UT
Wastewater
$853,941
Forest
Systems
Manti-Lasal
UT
Buildings
$965,908
National Forest
Manti-Lasal
UT
Dams
$92,560
National Forest
Manti-Lasal
UT
Drinking
$189,305
National Forest
Water
Systems
Manti-Lasal
UT
Heritage
$401,311
National Forest
Manti-Lasal
UT
Minor
$282,350
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Manti-Lasal
UT
Road
$214,448
National Forest
Bridges
Manti-Lasal
UT
Roads
$14,440,873
National Forest
Manti-Lasal
UT
Trail
$0
National Forest
Bridges
Manti-Lasal
UT
Trails
$1,631,198
National Forest
Manti-Lasal
UT
Wastewater
$6,517
National Forest
Systems
Payette National
ID
Buildings
$15,635,510
Forest
Payette National
ID
Drinking
$174,963
Forest
Water
Systems
Payette National
ID
Heritage
$1,900
Forest
Payette National
ID
Minor
$174,121
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Payette National
ID
Road
$646,182
Forest
Bridges
Payette National
ID
Roads
$23,393,794
Forest
Payette National
ID
Trail
$148,250
Forest
Bridges
Payette National
ID
Trails
$3,148,664
Forest
Payette National
ID
Wastewater
$6,760
Forest
Systems
Salmon-Challis
ID
Buildings
$40,249,383
National Forest
Salmon-Challis
ID
Drinking
$1,129,587
National Forest
Water
Systems
Salmon-Challis
ID
Heritage
$19,500
National Forest
Salmon-Challis
ID
Minor
$616,282
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Salmon-Challis
ID
Road
$2,310,770
National Forest
Bridges
Salmon-Challis
ID
Roads
$19,845,573
National Forest
Salmon-Challis
ID
Trail
$65,175
National Forest
Bridges
Salmon-Challis
ID
Trails
$5,915,674
National Forest
Salmon-Challis
ID
Wastewater
$648,587
National Forest
Systems
Sawtooth National
ID
Buildings
$12,127,509
Forest
Sawtooth National
ID
Drinking
$1,260,920
Forest
Water
Systems
Sawtooth National
ID
Heritage
$30,000
Forest
Sawtooth National
ID
Minor
$661,385
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Sawtooth National
ID
Road
$862,545
Forest
Bridges
Sawtooth National
ID
Roads
$14,947,506
Forest
Sawtooth National
ID
Trail
$1,456
Forest
Bridges
Sawtooth National
ID
Trails
$4,069,876
Forest
Sawtooth National
ID
Wastewater
$81,940
Forest
Systems
Caribou-Targhee
ID
Buildings
$3,765,298
National Forest
Caribou-Targhee
ID
Drinking
$493,229
National Forest
Water
Systems
Caribou-Targhee
ID
Heritage
$0
National Forest
Caribou-Targhee
ID
Minor
$606,523
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Caribou-Targhee
ID
Road
$1,699,244
National Forest
Bridges
Caribou-Targhee
ID
Roads
$38,182,424
National Forest
Caribou-Targhee
ID
Trail
$272,455
National Forest
Bridges
Caribou-Targhee
ID
Trails
$6,815,957
National Forest
Caribou-Targhee
ID
Wastewater
$93,000
National Forest
Systems
Humboldt-Toiyabe
NV
Buildings
$8,615,628
National Forest
Humboldt-Toiyabe
NV
Dams
$11,000
National Forest
Humboldt-Toiyabe
NV
Drinking
$2,474,189
National Forest
Water
Systems
Humboldt-Toiyabe
NV
Heritage
$607,625
National Forest
Humboldt-Toiyabe
NV
Minor
$1,186,642
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Humboldt-Toiyabe
NV
Road
$220,431
National Forest
Bridges
Humboldt-Toiyabe
NV
Roads
$33,425,496
National Forest
Humboldt-Toiyabe
NV
Trail
$0
National Forest
Bridges
Humboldt-Toiyabe
NV
Trails
$6,103,056
National Forest
Humboldt-Toiyabe
NV
Wastewater
$542,095
National Forest
Systems
Uinta-Wasatch-
UT
Buildings
$13,894,929
Cache National
Forest
Uinta-Wasatch-
UT
Dams
$395,200
Cache National
Forest
Uinta-Wasatch-
UT
Drinking
$2,075,973
Cache National
Water
Forest
Systems
Uinta-Wasatch-
UT
Heritage
$40,592
Cache National
Forest
Uinta-Wasatch-
UT
Minor
$4,073,958
Cache National
Construct
Forest
ed
Features
Uinta-Wasatch-
UT
Road
$631,752
Cache National
Bridges
Forest
Uinta-Wasatch-
UT
Roads
$34,826,855
Cache National
Forest
Uinta-Wasatch-
UT
Trail
$38,915
Cache National
Bridges
Forest
Uinta-Wasatch-
UT
Trails
$4,324,598
Cache National
Forest
Uinta-Wasatch-
UT
Wastewater
$899,308
Cache National
Systems
Forest
Region 5--
Pacific Southwest
CA
$894,955,732
Pacific
Region Totals
Southwest
Region 5
CA
Buildings
$527,675
Unassigned Unit
Angeles National
CA
Buildings
$15,211,848
Forest
Angeles National
CA
Drinking
$2,638,377
Forest
Water
Systems
Angeles National
CA
Heritage
$132,100
Forest
Angeles National
CA
Minor
$1,717,297
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Angeles National
CA
Road
$29,569
Forest
Bridges
Angeles National
CA
Roads
$9,802,608
Forest
Angeles National
CA
Trail
$174,816
Forest
Bridges
Angeles National
CA
Trails
$1,300,705
Forest
Angeles National
CA
Wastewater
$2,471,367
Forest
Systems
Cleveland
CA
Buildings
$24,951,619
National Forest
Cleveland
CA
Dams
$17,600
National Forest
Cleveland
CA
Drinking
$5,974,053
National Forest
Water
Systems
Cleveland
CA
Heritage
$100,000
National Forest
Cleveland
CA
Minor
$996,639
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Cleveland
CA
Road
$4,723
National Forest
Bridges
Cleveland
CA
Roads
$4,300,701
National Forest
Cleveland
CA
Trail
$0
National Forest
Bridges
Cleveland
CA
Trails
$564,442
National Forest
Cleveland
CA
Wastewater
$233,383
National Forest
Systems
Eldorado National
CA
Buildings
$42,036,548
Forest
Eldorado National
CA
Drinking
$1,000,106
Forest
Water
Systems
Eldorado National
CA
Heritage
$9,500
Forest
Eldorado National
CA
Minor
$297,304
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Eldorado National
CA
Road
$40,112
Forest
Bridges
Eldorado National
CA
Roads
$26,159,328
Forest
Eldorado National
CA
Trail
$38,132
Forest
Bridges
Eldorado National
CA
Trails
$1,461,611
Forest
Eldorado National
CA
Wastewater
$45,867
Forest
Systems
Inyo National
CA
Buildings
$4,070,414
Forest
Inyo National
CA
Drinking
$918,831
Forest
Water
Systems
Inyo National
CA
Heritage
$0
Forest
Inyo National
CA
Minor
$3,195,462
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Inyo National
CA
Road
$69,075
Forest
Bridges
Inyo National
CA
Roads
$6,066,996
Forest
Inyo National
CA
Trail
$217,249
Forest
Bridges
Inyo National
CA
Trails
$2,773,722
Forest
Inyo National
CA
Wastewater
$1,075,796
Forest
Systems
Klamath National
CA
Buildings
$37,971,575
Forest
Klamath National
CA
Dams
$7,400
Forest
Klamath National
CA
Drinking
$466,679
Forest
Water
Systems
Klamath National
CA
Heritage
$0
Forest
Klamath National
CA
Minor
$247,550
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Klamath National
CA
Road
$6,631,125
Forest
Bridges
Klamath National
CA
Roads
$42,490,969
Forest
Klamath National
CA
Trail
$145,073
Forest
Bridges
Klamath National
CA
Trails
$1,580,694
Forest
Klamath National
CA
Wastewater
$129,292
Forest
Systems
Lassen National
CA
Buildings
$6,727,998
Forest
Lassen National
CA
Dams
$34,039
Forest
Lassen National
CA
Drinking
$569,941
Forest
Water
Systems
Lassen National
CA
Heritage
$150,800
Forest
Lassen National
CA
Minor
$965,884
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Lassen National
CA
Road
$93,301
Forest
Bridges
Lassen National
CA
Roads
$33,534,718
Forest
Lassen National
CA
Trail
$395
Forest
Bridges
Lassen National
CA
Trails
$775,612
Forest
Lassen National
CA
Wastewater
$83,500
Forest
Systems
Los Padres
CA
Buildings
$22,772,624
National Forest
Los Padres
CA
Dams
$7,900
National Forest
Los Padres
CA
Drinking
$2,003,834
National Forest
Water
Systems
Los Padres
CA
Heritage
$35,445
National Forest
Los Padres
CA
Minor
$915,972
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Los Padres
CA
Road
$394,242
National Forest
Bridges
Los Padres
CA
Roads
$16,877,867
National Forest
Los Padres
CA
Trail
$3,500
National Forest
Bridges
Los Padres
CA
Trails
$2,458,809
National Forest
Los Padres
CA
Wastewater
$391,430
National Forest
Systems
Mendocino
CA
Buildings
$26,832,563
National Forest
Mendocino
CA
Dams
$12,648
National Forest
Mendocino
CA
Drinking
$267,528
National Forest
Water
Systems
Mendocino
CA
Heritage
$205,650
National Forest
Mendocino
CA
Minor
$359,266
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Mendocino
CA
Road
$1,709
National Forest
Bridges
Mendocino
CA
Roads
$14,781,295
National Forest
Mendocino
CA
Trail
$0
National Forest
Bridges
Mendocino
CA
Trails
$942,305
National Forest
Mendocino
CA
Wastewater
$9,627
National Forest
Systems
Modoc National
CA
Buildings
$3,695,401
Forest
Modoc National
CA
Dams
$68,862
Forest
Modoc National
CA
Drinking
$235,040
Forest
Water
Systems
Modoc National
CA
Heritage
$60,000
Forest
Modoc National
CA
Minor
$449,169
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Modoc National
CA
Road
$290,304
Forest
Bridges
Modoc National
CA
Roads
$26,112,251
Forest
Modoc National
CA
Trails
$217,814
Forest
Six Rivers
CA
Buildings
$19,765,656
National Forest
Six Rivers
CA
Drinking
$2,718,682
National Forest
Water
Systems
Six Rivers
CA
Heritage
$16,000
National Forest
Six Rivers
CA
Minor
$199,244
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Six Rivers
CA
Road
$945,484
National Forest
Bridges
Six Rivers
CA
Roads
$34,985,688
National Forest
Six Rivers
CA
Trail
$11,250
National Forest
Bridges
Six Rivers
CA
Trails
$690,751
National Forest
Six Rivers
CA
Wastewater
$85,203
National Forest
Systems
Plumas National
CA
Buildings
$16,307,368
Forest
Plumas National
CA
Dams
$12,500
Forest
Plumas National
CA
Drinking
$2,956,784
Forest
Water
Systems
Plumas National
CA
Heritage
$331,801
Forest
Plumas National
CA
Minor
$702,028
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Plumas National
CA
Road
$288,643
Forest
Bridges
Plumas National
CA
Roads
$27,673,908
Forest
Plumas National
CA
Trail
$4,335
Forest
Bridges
Plumas National
CA
Trails
$1,447,278
Forest
Plumas National
CA
Wastewater
$575,392
Forest
Systems
San Bernardino
CA
Buildings
$6,201,842
National Forest
San Bernardino
CA
Dams
$177,000
National Forest
San Bernardino
CA
Drinking
$379,446
National Forest
Water
Systems
San Bernardino
CA
Heritage
$52,600
National Forest
San Bernardino
CA
Minor
$391,597
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
San Bernardino
CA
Road
$32,870
National Forest
Bridges
San Bernardino
CA
Roads
$14,247,754
National Forest
San Bernardino
CA
Trail
$0
National Forest
Bridges
San Bernardino
CA
Trails
$1,129,135
National Forest
San Bernardino
CA
Wastewater
$192,100
National Forest
Systems
Sequoia National
CA
Buildings
$11,438,207
Forest
Sequoia National
CA
Dams
$614,638
Forest
Sequoia National
CA
Drinking
$2,665,533
Forest
Water
Systems
Sequoia National
CA
Heritage
$1,500
Forest
Sequoia National
CA
Minor
$891,520
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Sequoia National
CA
Road
$1,881,152
Forest
Bridges
Sequoia National
CA
Roads
$25,168,788
Forest
Sequoia National
CA
Trail
$256,300
Forest
Bridges
Sequoia National
CA
Trails
$1,803,156
Forest
Sequoia National
CA
Wastewater
$1,381,848
Forest
Systems
Shasta-Trinity
CA
Buildings
$26,129,162
National Forest
Shasta-Trinity
CA
Drinking
$1,372,798
National Forest
Water
Systems
Shasta-Trinity
CA
Heritage
$542,500
National Forest
Shasta-Trinity
CA
Minor
$3,378,729
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Shasta-Trinity
CA
Road
$4,694,154
National Forest
Bridges
Shasta-Trinity
CA
Roads
$49,340,979
National Forest
Shasta-Trinity
CA
Trail
$109,740
National Forest
Bridges
Shasta-Trinity
CA
Trails
$2,327,104
National Forest
Shasta-Trinity
CA
Wastewater
$1,201,791
National Forest
Systems
Sierra National
CA
Buildings
$62,001,396
Forest
Sierra National
CA
Drinking
$1,109,990
Forest
Water
Systems
Sierra National
CA
Heritage
$0
Forest
Sierra National
CA
Minor
$2,608,580
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Sierra National
CA
Road
$8,291,786
Forest
Bridges
Sierra National
CA
Roads
$18,850,703
Forest
Sierra National
CA
Trail
$676,125
Forest
Bridges
Sierra National
CA
Trails
$2,126,361
Forest
Sierra National
CA
Wastewater
$161,774
Forest
Systems
Stanislaus
CA
Buildings
$5,613,283
National Forest
Stanislaus
CA
Dams
$417,083
National Forest
Stanislaus
CA
Drinking
$1,775,722
National Forest
Water
Systems
Stanislaus
CA
Heritage
$1,199,033
National Forest
Stanislaus
CA
Minor
$285,563
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Stanislaus
CA
Road
$3,292,527
National Forest
Bridges
Stanislaus
CA
Roads
$19,188,101
National Forest
Stanislaus
CA
Trail
$78,460
National Forest
Bridges
Stanislaus
CA
Trails
$2,349,771
National Forest
Stanislaus
CA
Wastewater
$122,123
National Forest
Systems
Tahoe National
CA
Buildings
$15,501,522
Forest
Tahoe National
CA
Dams
$24,700
Forest
Tahoe National
CA
Drinking
$1,212,441
Forest
Water
Systems
Tahoe National
CA
Heritage
$20,000
Forest
Tahoe National
CA
Minor
$6,448,256
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Tahoe National
CA
Road
$448,413
Forest
Bridges
Tahoe National
CA
Roads
$26,829,070
Forest
Tahoe National
CA
Trail
$0
Forest
Bridges
Tahoe National
CA
Trails
$2,504,359
Forest
Tahoe National
CA
Wastewater
$42,063
Forest
Systems
Lake Tahoe Basin
CA
Buildings
$19,515,980
Mgt. Unit
Lake Tahoe Basin
CA
Dams
$3,901,259
Mgt. Unit
Lake Tahoe Basin
CA
Drinking
$1,523,306
Mgt. Unit
Water
Systems
Lake Tahoe Basin
CA
Heritage
$2,500
Mgt. Unit
Lake Tahoe Basin
CA
Minor
$1,002,843
Mgt. Unit
Construct
ed
Features
Lake Tahoe Basin
CA
Road
$1,690
Mgt. Unit
Bridges
Lake Tahoe Basin
CA
Roads
$3,853,392
Mgt. Unit
Lake Tahoe Basin
CA
Trail
$910
Mgt. Unit
Bridges
Lake Tahoe Basin
CA
Trails
$617,538
Mgt. Unit
Region 6--
Pacific Northwest
OR, WA (CA
$834,627,114
Pacific
Region Totals
* ID *)
Northwest
Deschutes
OR
Buildings
$19,473,598
National Forest
Deschutes
OR
Dams
$201,657
National Forest
Deschutes
OR
Drinking
$2,908,423
National Forest
Water
Systems
Deschutes
OR
Heritage
$10,000
National Forest
Deschutes
OR
Minor
$1,228,740
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Deschutes
OR
Road
$867,752
National Forest
Bridges
Deschutes
OR
Roads
$21,181,879
National Forest
Deschutes
OR
Trail
$6,878
National Forest
Bridges
Deschutes
OR
Trails
$3,663,064
National Forest
Deschutes
OR
Wastewater
$316,093
National Forest
Systems
Fremont-Winema
OR
Buildings
$13,081,848
National Forests
Fremont-Winema
OR
Dams
$59,200
National Forests
Fremont-Winema
OR
Drinking
$783,111
National Forests
Water
Systems
Fremont-Winema
OR
Heritage
$0
National Forests
Fremont-Winema
OR
Minor
$756,761
National Forests
Construct
ed
Features
Fremont-Winema
OR
Road
$2,069,057
National Forests
Bridges
Fremont-Winema
OR
Roads
$49,046,731
National Forests
Fremont-Winema
OR
Trail
$0
National Forests
Bridges
Fremont-Winema
OR
Trails
$2,220,160
National Forests
Fremont-Winema
OR
Wastewater
$468,200
National Forests
Systems
Gifford Pinchot
WA
Buildings
$29,343,512
National Forest
Gifford Pinchot
WA
Dams
$41,578,834
National Forest
Gifford Pinchot
WA
Drinking
$720,741
National Forest
Water
Systems
Gifford Pinchot
WA
Heritage
$6,600
National Forest
Gifford Pinchot
WA
Minor
$939,575
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Gifford Pinchot
WA
Road
$3,699,340
National Forest
Bridges
Gifford Pinchot
WA
Roads
$19,297,008
National Forest
Gifford Pinchot
WA
Trail
$34,426
National Forest
Bridges
Gifford Pinchot
WA
Trails
$2,524,803
National Forest
Gifford Pinchot
WA
Wastewater
$99,366
National Forest
Systems
Malheur National
OR
Buildings
$5,689,902
Forest
Malheur National
OR
Dams
$7,084
Forest
Malheur National
OR
Drinking
$456,654
Forest
Water
Systems
Malheur National
OR
Heritage
$84,000
Forest
Malheur National
OR
Minor
$13,873
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Malheur National
OR
Road
$2,621,862
Forest
Bridges
Malheur National
OR
Roads
$17,503,732
Forest
Malheur National
OR
Trail
$25,400
Forest
Bridges
Malheur National
OR
Trails
$2,173,439
Forest
Malheur National
OR
Wastewater
$2,000
Forest
Systems
Mt. Baker-
WA
Buildings
$9,981,698
Snoqualmie
National Forest
Mt. Baker-
WA
Dams
$12,418
Snoqualmie
National Forest
Mt. Baker-
WA
Drinking
$1,107,015
Snoqualmie
Water
National Forest
Systems
Mt. Baker-
WA
Heritage
$0
Snoqualmie
National Forest
Mt. Baker-
WA
Minor
$666,780
Snoqualmie
Construct
National Forest
ed
Features
Mt. Baker-
WA
Road
$1,974,233
Snoqualmie
Bridges
National Forest
Mt. Baker-
WA
Roads
$49,504,234
Snoqualmie
National Forest
Mt. Baker-
WA
Trail
$0
Snoqualmie
Bridges
National Forest
Mt. Baker-
WA
Trails
$2,712,189
Snoqualmie
National Forest
Mt. Baker-
WA
Wastewater
$431,370
Snoqualmie
Systems
National Forest
Mt. Hood National
OR
Buildings
$34,457,234
Forest
Mt. Hood National
OR
Dams
$307,222
Forest
Mt. Hood National
OR
Drinking
$346,334
Forest
Water
Systems
Mt. Hood National
OR
Heritage
$0
Forest
Mt. Hood National
OR
Minor
$147,241
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Mt. Hood National
OR
Road
$3,564,357
Forest
Bridges
Mt. Hood National
OR
Roads
$17,868,047
Forest
Mt. Hood National
OR
Trail
$4,500
Forest
Bridges
Mt. Hood National
OR
Trails
$1,930,708
Forest
Mt. Hood National
OR
Wastewater
$173,011
Forest
Systems
Ochoco National
OR
Buildings
$10,675,652
Forest
Ochoco National
OR
Dams
$24,996
Forest
Ochoco National
OR
Drinking
$82,042
Forest
Water
Systems
Ochoco National
OR
Heritage
$19,000
Forest
Ochoco National
OR
Minor
$171,449
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Ochoco National
OR
Road
$1,823,505
Forest
Bridges
Ochoco National
OR
Roads
$10,659,800
Forest
Ochoco National
OR
Trail
$27,900
Forest
Bridges
Ochoco National
OR
Trails
$587,181
Forest
Ochoco National
OR
Wastewater
$6,204
Forest
Systems
Olympic National
WA
Buildings
$3,499,359
Forest
Olympic National
WA
Drinking
$578,426
Forest
Water
Systems
Olympic National
WA
Heritage
$8,200
Forest
Olympic National
WA
Minor
$505,329
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Olympic National
WA
Road
$5,275,767
Forest
Bridges
Olympic National
WA
Roads
$19,357,686
Forest
Olympic National
WA
Trail
$77,184
Forest
Bridges
Olympic National
WA
Trails
$493,481
Forest
Olympic National
WA
Wastewater
$20,600
Forest
Systems
Rogue River-
OR
Buildings
$7,902,639
Siskiyou
National Forest
Rogue River-
OR
Dams
$113,200
Siskiyou
National Forest
Rogue River-
OR
Drinking
$2,767,290
Siskiyou
Water
National Forest
Systems
Rogue River-
OR
Heritage
$0
Siskiyou
National Forest
Rogue River-
OR
Minor
$696,953
Siskiyou
Construct
National Forest
ed
Features
Rogue River-
OR
Road
$12,043,385
Siskiyou
Bridges
National Forest
Rogue River-
CA *, OR
Roads
$50,137,735
Siskiyou
National Forest
Rogue River-
OR
Trail
$247,384
Siskiyou
Bridges
National Forest
Rogue River-
CA *, OR
Trails
$2,297,395
Siskiyou
National Forest
Rogue River-
OR
Wastewater
$1,717,088
Siskiyou
Systems
National Forest
Siuslaw National
OR
Buildings
$8,334,141
Forest
Siuslaw National
OR
Dams
$14,755
Forest
Siuslaw National
OR
Drinking
$888,293
Forest
Water
Systems
Siuslaw National
OR
Heritage
$0
Forest
Siuslaw National
OR
Minor
$335,484
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Siuslaw National
OR
Road
$918,300
Forest
Bridges
Siuslaw National
OR
Roads
$10,497,909
Forest
Siuslaw National
OR
Trail
$0
Forest
Bridges
Siuslaw National
OR
Trails
$306,924
Forest
Siuslaw National
OR
Wastewater
$279,545
Forest
Systems
Umatilla National
OR, WA
Buildings
$7,372,498
Forest
Umatilla National
OR, WA
Dams
$236,954
Forest
Umatilla National
OR, WA
Drinking
$1,070,891
Forest
Water
Systems
Umatilla National
OR, WA
Heritage
$0
Forest
Umatilla National
OR, WA
Minor
$86,111
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Umatilla National
OR, WA
Road
$2,306,646
Forest
Bridges
Umatilla National
OR, WA
Roads
$22,892,437
Forest
Umatilla National
OR, WA
Trail
$14,679
Forest
Bridges
Umatilla National
OR, WA
Trails
$2,398,509
Forest
Umatilla National
OR, WA
Wastewater
$869,367
Forest
Systems
Umpqua National
OR
Buildings
$6,168,665
Forest
Umpqua National
OR
Dams
$35,154
Forest
Umpqua National
OR
Drinking
$264,681
Forest
Water
Systems
Umpqua National
OR
Heritage
$4,000
Forest
Umpqua National
OR
Minor
$160,808
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Umpqua National
OR
Road
$4,238,804
Forest
Bridges
Umpqua National
OR
Roads
$26,183,415
Forest
Umpqua National
OR
Trail
$36,400
Forest
Bridges
Umpqua National
OR
Trails
$2,135,093
Forest
Umpqua National
OR
Wastewater
$1,280,080
Forest
Systems
Wallowa-Whitman
OR
Buildings
$10,967,001
National Forest
Wallowa-Whitman
OR
Drinking
$919,790
National Forest
Water
Systems
Wallowa-Whitman
OR
Heritage
$20,000
National Forest
Wallowa-Whitman
OR
Minor
$841,612
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Wallowa-Whitman
OR
Road
$5,806,734
National Forest
Bridges
Wallowa-Whitman
ID *, OR
Roads
$20,732,812
National Forest
Wallowa-Whitman
OR
Trail
$83,300
National Forest
Bridges
Wallowa-Whitman
ID *, OR
Trails
$5,096,781
National Forest
Wallowa-Whitman
OR
Wastewater
$143,030
National Forest
Systems
Okanogan-
WA
Buildings
$11,011,567
Wenatchee
National Forests
Okanogan-
WA
Dams
$8,025
Wenatchee
National Forests
Okanogan-
WA
Drinking
$2,774,041
Wenatchee
Water
National Forests
Systems
Okanogan-
WA
Heritage
$0
Wenatchee
National Forests
Okanogan-
WA
Minor
$1,832,152
Wenatchee
Construct
National Forests
ed
Features
Okanogan-
WA
Road
$8,841,350
Wenatchee
Bridges
National Forests
Okanogan-
WA
Roads
$74,670,153
Wenatchee
National Forests
Okanogan-
WA
Trail
$0
Wenatchee
Bridges
National Forests
Okanogan-
WA
Trails
$8,962,861
Wenatchee
National Forests
Okanogan-
WA
Wastewater
$339,794
Wenatchee
Systems
National Forests
Willamette
OR
Buildings
$4,793,138
National Forest
Willamette
OR
Dams
$5,000
National Forest
Willamette
OR
Drinking
$2,365,551
National Forest
Water
Systems
Willamette
OR
Heritage
$0
National Forest
Willamette
OR
Minor
$678,208
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Willamette
OR
Road
$5,241,651
National Forest
Bridges
Willamette
OR
Roads
$34,038,691
National Forest
Willamette
OR
Trail
$41,400
National Forest
Bridges
Willamette
OR
Trails
$2,852,945
National Forest
Willamette
OR
Wastewater
$370,395
National Forest
Systems
Colville National
WA
Buildings
$7,366,453
Forest
Colville National
WA
Dams
$1,100
Forest
Colville National
WA
Drinking
$208,443
Forest
Water
Systems
Colville National
WA
Heritage
$36,500
Forest
Colville National
WA
Minor
$127,078
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Colville National
WA
Road
$533,305
Forest
Bridges
Colville National
WA
Roads
$17,109,514
Forest
Colville National
WA
Trail
$199,800
Forest
Bridges
Colville National
WA
Trails
$943,946
Forest
Colville National
WA
Wastewater
$272,971
Forest
Systems
Columbia River
OR, WA
Buildings
$757,430
Gorge National
Scenic Area
Columbia River
OR, WA
Drinking
$246,164
Gorge National
Water
Scenic Area
Systems
Columbia River
OR, WA
Heritage
$1,003,700
Gorge National
Scenic Area
Columbia River
OR, WA
Minor
$126,125
Gorge National
Construct
Scenic Area
ed
Features
Columbia River
OR, WA
Road
$9,840
Gorge National
Bridges
Scenic Area
Columbia River
OR, WA
Roads
$323,539
Gorge National
Scenic Area
Columbia River
OR, WA
Trail
$14,779
Gorge National
Bridges
Scenic Area
Columbia River
OR, WA
Trails
$382,245
Gorge National
Scenic Area
Columbia River
OR, WA
Wastewater
$24,932
Gorge National
Systems
Scenic Area
Region 8--
Southern Region
AL, AR,
$617,866,943
Southern
Totals
FL, GA,
KY, LA,
MS, NC,
OK, PR,
SC, TX,
VA (WV *)
National Forests
AL
Buildings
$2,738,454
in Alabama
National Forests
AL
Dams
$171,881
in Alabama
National Forests
AL
Drinking
$178,782
in Alabama
Water
Systems
National Forests
AL
Heritage
$0
in Alabama
National Forests
AL
Minor
$3,682
in Alabama
Construct
ed
Features
National Forests
AL
Road
$3,515,489
in Alabama
Bridges
National Forests
AL
Roads
$25,472,133
in Alabama
National Forests
AL
Trail
$46,400
in Alabama
Bridges
National Forests
AL
Trails
$660,792
in Alabama
National Forests
AL
Wastewater
$32,152
in Alabama
Systems
Daniel Boone
KY
Buildings
$3,041,591
National Forest
Daniel Boone
KY
Dams
$262,947
National Forest
Daniel Boone
KY
Drinking
$214,641
National Forest
Water
Systems
Daniel Boone
KY
Heritage
$31,000
National Forest
Daniel Boone
KY
Minor
$2,893,661
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Daniel Boone
KY
Road
$139,546
National Forest
Bridges
Daniel Boone
KY
Roads
$20,454,185
National Forest
Daniel Boone
KY
Trail
$36,708
National Forest
Bridges
Daniel Boone
KY
Trails
$1,075,465
National Forest
Daniel Boone
KY
Wastewater
$451,741
National Forest
Systems
Chattahoochee-
GA
Buildings
$2,501,695
Oconee National
Forest
Chattahoochee-
GA
Dams
$444,371
Oconee National
Forest
Chattahoochee-
GA
Drinking
$116,634
Oconee National
Water
Forest
Systems
Chattahoochee-
GA
Heritage
$6,600
Oconee National
Forest
Chattahoochee-
GA
Minor
$584,929
Oconee National
Construct
Forest
ed
Features
Chattahoochee-
GA
Road
$3,027,760
Oconee National
Bridges
Forest
Chattahoochee-
GA
Roads
$29,057,083
Oconee National
Forest
Chattahoochee-
GA
Trail
$1,100
Oconee National
Bridges
Forest
Chattahoochee-
GA
Trails
$1,482,610
Oconee National
Forest
Chattahoochee-
GA
Wastewater
$171,226
Oconee National
Systems
Forest
Cherokee National
TN
Buildings
$3,869,585
Forest
Cherokee National
TN
Dams
$237,001
Forest
Cherokee National
TN
Drinking
$162,188
Forest
Water
Systems
Cherokee National
TN
Heritage
$0
Forest
Cherokee National
TN
Minor
$1,060,197
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Cherokee National
TN
Road
$363,365
Forest
Bridges
Cherokee National
TN
Roads
$21,134,481
Forest
Cherokee National
TN
Trail
$13,400
Forest
Bridges
Cherokee National
TN
Trails
$1,277,631
Forest
Cherokee National
TN
Wastewater
$67,531
Forest
Systems
National Forests
FL
Buildings
$2,485,586
in Florida
National Forests
FL
Drinking
$106,369
in Florida
Water
Systems
National Forests
FL
Heritage
$28,020
in Florida
National Forests
FL
Minor
$935,383
in Florida
Construct
ed
Features
National Forests
FL
Road
$4,797,706
in Florida
Bridges
National Forests
FL
Roads
$60,441,190
in Florida
National Forests
FL
Trail
$0
in Florida
Bridges
National Forests
FL
Trails
$1,347,432
in Florida
National Forests
FL
Wastewater
$31,099
in Florida
Systems
Kisatchie
LA
Buildings
$2,467,029
National Forest
Kisatchie
LA
Dams
$73,100
National Forest
Kisatchie
LA
Drinking
$1,076,638
National Forest
Water
Systems
Kisatchie
LA
Heritage
$0
National Forest
Kisatchie
LA
Minor
$754,362
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Kisatchie
LA
Road
$11,589,927
National Forest
Bridges
Kisatchie
LA
Roads
$32,932,392
National Forest
Kisatchie
LA
Trail
$119,655
National Forest
Bridges
Kisatchie
LA
Trails
$600,222
National Forest
Kisatchie
LA
Wastewater
$206,517
National Forest
Systems
National Forests
MS
Buildings
$5,858,676
in Mississippi
National Forests
MS
Dams
$120,501
in Mississippi
National Forests
MS
Heritage
$0
in Mississippi
National Forests
MS
Minor
$388,327
in Mississippi
Construct
ed
Features
National Forests
MS
Road
$711,552
in Mississippi
Bridges
National Forests
MS
Roads
$37,596,942
in Mississippi
National Forests
MS
Trail
$74,337
in Mississippi
Bridges
National Forests
MS
Trails
$712,423
in Mississippi
National Forests
MS
Wastewater
$17,157
in Mississippi
Systems
George Washington
VA
Buildings
$6,584,161
and Jefferson
National Forests
George Washington
VA
Dams
$1,195,768
and Jefferson
National Forests
George Washington
VA
Drinking
$127,209
and Jefferson
Water
National Forests
Systems
George Washington
VA
Heritage
$0
and Jefferson
National Forests
George Washington
VA
Minor
$1,195,025
and Jefferson
Construct
National Forests
ed
Features
George Washington
VA
Road
$1,149,834
and Jefferson
Bridges
National Forests
George Washington
VA, WV *
Roads
$40,086,227
and Jefferson
National Forests
George Washington
VA
Trail
$232,630
and Jefferson
Bridges
National Forests
George Washington
VA, WV *
Trails
$3,723,931
and Jefferson
National Forests
George Washington
VA
Wastewater
$383,028
and Jefferson
Systems
National Forests
Ouachita National
AR, OK
Buildings
$1,485,069
Forest
Ouachita National
AR, OK
Dams
$98,030
Forest
Ouachita National
AR, OK
Drinking
$62,798
Forest
Water
Systems
Ouachita National
AR, OK
Heritage
$49,591
Forest
Ouachita National
AR, OK
Minor
$326,302
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Ouachita National
AR, OK
Road
$1,201,080
Forest
Bridges
Ouachita National
AR, OK
Roads
$59,276,658
Forest
Ouachita National
AR, OK
Trail
$500
Forest
Bridges
Ouachita National
AR, OK
Trails
$1,583,277
Forest
Ouachita National
AR, OK
Wastewater
$101,265
Forest
Systems
Ozark-St. Francis
AR
Buildings
$2,766,971
National Forest
Ozark-St. Francis
AR
Dams
$734,916
National Forest
Ozark-St. Francis
AR
Drinking
$255,833
National Forest
Water
Systems
Ozark-St. Francis
AR
Heritage
$30,000
National Forest
Ozark-St. Francis
AR
Minor
$670,771
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Ozark-St. Francis
AR
Road
$111,698
National Forest
Bridges
Ozark-St. Francis
AR
Roads
$11,377,800
National Forest
Ozark-St. Francis
AR
Trail
$5,041
National Forest
Bridges
Ozark-St. Francis
AR
Trails
$1,096,775
National Forest
Ozark-St. Francis
AR
Wastewater
$25,628
National Forest
Systems
National Forests
NC
Buildings
$7,887,343
in North
Carolina
National Forests
NC
Dams
$460,916
in North
Carolina
National Forests
NC
Drinking
$695,384
in North
Water
Carolina
Systems
National Forests
NC
Heritage
$534,250
in North
Carolina
National Forests
NC
Minor
$2,017,939
in North
Construct
Carolina
ed
Features
National Forests
NC
Road
$1,118,414
in North
Bridges
Carolina
National Forests
NC
Roads
$45,101,204
in North
Carolina
National Forests
NC
Trail
$32,750
in North
Bridges
Carolina
National Forests
NC
Trails
$3,344,337
in North
Carolina
National Forests
NC
Wastewater
$209,061
in North
Systems
Carolina
Francis Marion-
SC
Buildings
$3,553,169
Sumter National
Forests
Francis Marion-
SC
Dams
$72,200
Sumter National
Forests
Francis Marion-
SC
Drinking
$701,890
Sumter National
Water
Forests
Systems
Francis Marion-
SC
Heritage
$900,000
Sumter National
Forests
Francis Marion-
SC
Minor
$317,884
Sumter National
Construct
Forests
ed
Features
Francis Marion-
SC
Road
$2,077,568
Sumter National
Bridges
Forests
Francis Marion-
SC
Roads
$42,964,196
Sumter National
Forests
Francis Marion-
SC
Trail
$0
Sumter National
Bridges
Forests
Francis Marion-
SC
Trails
$1,009,693
Sumter National
Forests
Francis Marion-
SC
Wastewater
$169,046
Sumter National
Systems
Forests
National Forests
TX
Buildings
$3,557,152
in Texas
National Forests
TX
Dams
$2,589,000
in Texas
National Forests
TX
Drinking
$150,087
in Texas
Water
Systems
National Forests
TX
Heritage
$0
in Texas
National Forests
TX
Minor
$525,964
in Texas
Construct
ed
Features
National Forests
TX
Road
$1,159,739
in Texas
Bridges
National Forests
TX
Roads
$37,021,426
in Texas
National Forests
TX
Trail
$121,670
in Texas
Bridges
National Forests
TX
Trails
$753,776
in Texas
National Forests
TX
Wastewater
$667,514
in Texas
Systems
El Yunque
PR
Buildings
$1,182,543
National Forest
El Yunque
PR
Drinking
$16,612
National Forest
Water
Systems
El Yunque
PR
Heritage
$53,800
National Forest
El Yunque
PR
Minor
$1,945,214
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
El Yunque
PR
Roads
$313,102
National Forest
El Yunque
PR
Trail
$3,600
National Forest
Bridges
El Yunque
PR
Trails
$33,415
National Forest
El Yunque
PR
Wastewater
$30,467
National Forest
Systems
Land Between the
KY, TN
Buildings
$7,646,875
Lakes NRA
Land Between the
KY, TN
Dams $54
Lakes NRA
Land Between the
KY, TN
Drinking
$727,372
Lakes NRA
Water
Systems
Land Between the
KY, TN
Heritage
$2,000
Lakes NRA
Land Between the
KY, TN
Minor
$128,038
Lakes NRA
Construct
ed
Features
Land Between the
KY, TN
Road
$562,023
Lakes NRA
Bridges
Land Between the
KY, TN
Roads
$16,349,447
Lakes NRA
Land Between the
KY, TN
Trail
$0
Lakes NRA
Bridges
Land Between the
KY, TN
Trails
$582,986
Lakes NRA
Land Between the
KY, TN
Wastewater
$164,830
Lakes NRA
Systems
Region 9--
Eastern Region
IL, IN,
$501,510,365
Eastern
Totals
OH, ME,
MI, MN,
MO, NH,
NY, PA,
VT, WI,
WV
Chippewa National
MN
Buildings
$3,643,067
Forest
Chippewa National
MN
Dams
$151,133
Forest
Chippewa National
MN
Drinking
$523,783
Forest
Water
Systems
Chippewa National
MN
Heritage
$0
Forest
Chippewa National
MN
Minor
$644,795
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Chippewa National
MN
Road
$2,015,482
Forest
Bridges
Chippewa National
MN
Roads
$26,495,968
Forest
Chippewa National
MN
Trail
$16,650
Forest
Bridges
Chippewa National
MN
Trails
$1,047,106
Forest
Chippewa National
MN
Wastewater
$156,094
Forest
Systems
Huron-Manistee
MI
Buildings
$4,646,900
National Forest
Huron-Manistee
MI
Dams
$141,611
National Forest
Huron-Manistee
MI
Drinking
$84,731
National Forest
Water
Systems
Huron-Manistee
MI
Heritage
$0
National Forest
Huron-Manistee
MI
Minor
$306,998
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Huron-Manistee
MI
Road
$1,052
National Forest
Bridges
Huron-Manistee
MI
Roads
$25,777,061
National Forest
Huron-Manistee
MI
Trail
$8,150
National Forest
Bridges
Huron-Manistee
MI
Trails
$3,147,838
National Forest
Huron-Manistee
MI
Wastewater
$53,271
National Forest
Systems
Mark Twain
MO
Buildings
$6,113,981
National Forest
Mark Twain
MO
Dams
$917,102
National Forest
Mark Twain
MO
Drinking
$373,380
National Forest
Water
Systems
Mark Twain
MO
Heritage
$175,597
National Forest
Mark Twain
MO
Minor
$630,307
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Mark Twain
MO
Road
$52,009
National Forest
Bridges
Mark Twain
MO
Roads
$28,647,991
National Forest
Mark Twain
MO
Trail
$57,685
National Forest
Bridges
Mark Twain
MO
Trails
$1,347,198
National Forest
Mark Twain
MO
Wastewater
$69,953
National Forest
Systems
Ottawa National
MI
Buildings
$2,546,211
Forest
Ottawa National
MI
Dams
$604,555
Forest
Ottawa National
MI
Drinking
$590,700
Forest
Water
Systems
Ottawa National
MI
Heritage
$12,000
Forest
Ottawa National
MI
Minor
$210,603
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Ottawa National
MI
Road
$170,181
Forest
Bridges
Ottawa National
MI
Roads
$23,237,898
Forest
Ottawa National
MI
Trail
$66,397
Forest
Bridges
Ottawa National
MI
Trails
$3,934,662
Forest
Ottawa National
MI
Wastewater
$117,874
Forest
Systems
Shawnee National
IL
Buildings
$6,397,614
Forest
Shawnee National
IL
Dams
$150,982
Forest
Shawnee National
IL
Drinking
$261,148
Forest
Water
Systems
Shawnee National
IL
Heritage
$0
Forest
Shawnee National
IL
Minor
$226,632
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Shawnee National
IL
Road
$1,218,063
Forest
Bridges
Shawnee National
IL
Roads
$6,235,295
Forest
Shawnee National
IL
Trail
$3,325
Forest
Bridges
Shawnee National
IL
Trails
$762,062
Forest
Shawnee National
IL
Wastewater
$154,564
Forest
Systems
Superior National
MN
Buildings
$7,431,083
Forest
Superior National
MN
Dams
$237,490
Forest
Superior National
MN
Drinking
$145,613
Forest
Water
Systems
Superior National
MN
Heritage
$0
Forest
Superior National
MN
Minor
$122,825
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Superior National
MN
Road
$1,060,838
Forest
Bridges
Superior National
MN
Roads
$27,341,068
Forest
Superior National
MN
Trail
$130,700
Forest
Bridges
Superior National
MN
Trails
$4,529,196
Forest
Superior National
MN
Wastewater
$42,573
Forest
Systems
Hiawatha National
MI
Buildings
$5,690,148
Forest
Hiawatha National
MI
Dams
$55,039
Forest
Hiawatha National
MI
Drinking
$94,219
Forest
Water
Systems
Hiawatha National
MI
Heritage
$326,000
Forest
Hiawatha National
MI
Minor
$39,298
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Hiawatha National
MI
Road
$1,321,122
Forest
Bridges
Hiawatha National
MI
Roads
$24,246,986
Forest
Hiawatha National
MI
Trail
$450,760
Forest
Bridges
Hiawatha National
MI
Trails
$1,792,726
Forest
Hiawatha National
MI
Wastewater
$26,842
Forest
Systems
Hoosier National
IN
Buildings
$230,295
Forest
Hoosier National
IN
Dams
$22,989
Forest
Hoosier National
IN
Drinking
$420,000
Forest
Water
Systems
Hoosier National
IN
Heritage
$0
Forest
Hoosier National
IN
Minor
$216,126
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Hoosier National
IN
Road
$190,078
Forest
Bridges
Hoosier National
IN
Roads
$2,164,872
Forest
Hoosier National
IN
Trail
$0
Forest
Bridges
Hoosier National
IN
Trails
$430,891
Forest
Hoosier National
IN
Wastewater
$826,300
Forest
Systems
Chequamegon-
WI
Buildings
$9,274,331
Nicolet National
Forest
Chequamegon-
WI
Dams
$894,141
Nicolet National
Forest
Chequamegon-
WI
Drinking
$75,569
Nicolet National
Water
Forest
Systems
Chequamegon-
WI
Heritage
$5,000
Nicolet National
Forest
Chequamegon-
WI
Minor
$264,673
Nicolet National
Construct
Forest
ed
Features
Chequamegon-
WI
Road
$4,628,573
Nicolet National
Bridges
Forest
Chequamegon-
WI
Roads
$103,102,919
Nicolet National
Forest
Chequamegon-
WI
Trail
$56,170
Nicolet National
Bridges
Forest
Chequamegon-
WI
Trails
$4,190,988
Nicolet National
Forest
Chequamegon-
WI
Wastewater
$143,641
Nicolet National
Systems
Forest
Wayne National
OH
Buildings
$598,201
Forest
Wayne National
OH
Dams
$1,392,811
Forest
Wayne National
OH
Drinking
$79,250
Forest
Water
Systems
Wayne National
OH
Heritage
$45,000
Forest
Wayne National
OH
Minor
$99,201
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Wayne National
OH
Roads
$1,518,585
Forest
Wayne National
OH
Trail
$0
Forest
Bridges
Wayne National
OH
Trails
$751,355
Forest
Wayne National
OH
Wastewater
$51,150
Forest
Systems
Midewin National
IL
Buildings
$15,473,955
Tallgrass
Prairie
Midewin National
IL
Drinking
$293
Tallgrass
Water
Prairie
Systems
Midewin National
IL
Heritage
$800
Tallgrass
Prairie
Midewin National
IL
Road
$1,200,823
Tallgrass
Bridges
Prairie
Midewin National
IL
Roads
$103,105
Tallgrass
Prairie
Midewin National
IL
Trail
$0
Tallgrass
Bridges
Prairie
Midewin National
IL
Trails
$50,544
Tallgrass
Prairie
Midewin National
IL
Wastewater
$0
Tallgrass
Systems
Prairie
Allegheny
PA
Buildings
$9,432,998
National Forest
Allegheny
PA
Dams
$836,737
National Forest
Allegheny
PA
Drinking
$211,544
National Forest
Water
Systems
Allegheny
PA
Heritage
$0
National Forest
Allegheny
PA
Minor
$1,198,970
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Allegheny
PA
Road
$1,292,203
National Forest
Bridges
Allegheny
PA
Roads
$24,495,783
National Forest
Allegheny
PA
Trail
$14,700
National Forest
Bridges
Allegheny
PA
Trails
$1,352,317
National Forest
Allegheny
PA
Wastewater
$125,360
National Forest
Systems
Green Mountain
NY, VT
Buildings
$1,187,273
and Finger Lakes
National Forests
Green Mountain
NY, VT
Dams
$7,050
and Finger Lakes
National Forests
Green Mountain
NY, VT
Drinking
$9,573
and Finger Lakes
Water
National Forests
Systems
Green Mountain
NY, VT
Heritage
$33,000
and Finger Lakes
National Forests
Green Mountain
NY, VT
Minor
$57,510
and Finger Lakes
Construct
National Forests
ed
Features
Green Mountain
NY, VT
Road
$246,865
and Finger Lakes
Bridges
National Forests
Green Mountain
NY, VT
Roads
$3,862,130
and Finger Lakes
National Forests
Green Mountain
NY, VT
Trail
$25,400
and Finger Lakes
Bridges
National Forests
Green Mountain
NY, VT
Trails
$1,738,181
and Finger Lakes
National Forests
Green Mountain
NY, VT
Wastewater
$13,090
and Finger Lakes
Systems
National Forests
Monongahela
WV
Buildings
$4,920,297
National Forest
Monongahela
WV
Dams
$1,864,610
National Forest
Monongahela
WV
Drinking
$368,926
National Forest
Water
Systems
Monongahela
WV
Heritage
$75,000
National Forest
Monongahela
WV
Minor
$553,977
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Monongahela
WV
Road
$1,793,986
National Forest
Bridges
Monongahela
WV
Roads
$31,733,627
National Forest
Monongahela
WV
Trail
$139,092
National Forest
Bridges
Monongahela
WV
Trails
$1,350,963
National Forest
Monongahela
WV
Wastewater
$481,795
National Forest
Systems
White Mountain
ME, NH
Buildings
$9,592,586
National Forest
White Mountain
ME, NH
Dams
$9,309,008
National Forest
White Mountain
ME, NH
Drinking
$1,092,901
National Forest
Water
Systems
White Mountain
ME, NH
Heritage
$72,000
National Forest
White Mountain
ME, NH
Minor
$278,851
National Forest
Construct
ed
Features
White Mountain
ME, NH
Road
$3,039,285
National Forest
Bridges
White Mountain
ME, NH
Roads
$7,547,563
National Forest
White Mountain
ME, NH
Trail
$345,691
National Forest
Bridges
White Mountain
ME, NH
Trails
$2,885,209
National Forest
White Mountain
ME, NH
Wastewater
$189,500
National Forest
Systems
Region 10--
Alaska Region
AK
$100,338,382
Alaska
Totals
Chugach National
AK
Buildings
$3,919,145
Forest
Chugach National
AK
Dams
$21,585
Forest
Chugach National
AK
Drinking
$170,065
Forest
Water
Systems
Chugach National
AK
Heritage
$50,000
Forest
Chugach National
AK
Minor
$487,357
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Chugach National
AK
Road
$264,660
Forest
Bridges
Chugach National
AK
Roads
$2,821,999
Forest
Chugach National
AK
Trail
$3,750
Forest
Bridges
Chugach National
AK
Trails
$3,347,342
Forest
Chugach National
AK
Wastewater
$28,132
Forest
Systems
Tongass National
AK
Buildings
$17,808,018
Forest
Tongass National
AK
Dams
$4,523
Forest
Tongass National
AK
Drinking
$324,389
Forest
Water
Systems
Tongass National
AK
Heritage
$10,016
Forest
Tongass National
AK
Minor
$396,480
Forest
Construct
ed
Features
Tongass National
AK
Road
$37,183,605
Forest
Bridges
Tongass National
AK
Roads
$27,345,723
Forest
Tongass National
AK
Trail
$200,348
Forest
Bridges
Tongass National
AK
Trails
$5,738,741
Forest
Tongass National
AK
Wastewater
$212,505
Forest
Systems
Other
Other Totals
$102,062,800
Forest Products
Buildings
$4,856,527
Laboratory
San Dimas
Buildings
$3,516,422
Technology and
Development
Center
Missoula
Buildings
$74,439
Technology and
Development
Center
Frenchburg Job
Buildings
$85,043
Corp Center
Jacobs Creek Job
Buildings
$230,663
Corp Center
Pine Knot Job
Buildings
$726,180
Corp Center
Cass Job Corp
Buildings
$45,726
Center
Ouachita Job Corp
Buildings
$29,171
Center
Blackwell Job
Buildings
$108,355
Corp Center
Trapper Creek Job
Buildings
$65,718
Corp Center
Timber Lake Job
Buildings
$701,188
Corp Center
Wolf Creek Job
Buildings
$651,139
Corp Center
Angell Job Corp
Buildings
$412,615
Center
Curlew Job Corp
Buildings
$260,739
Center
International
Buildings
$2,287,183
Institute of
Tropical
Forestry
International
Wastewater
$55,018
Institute of
Systems
Tropical
Forestry
Rocky Mountain
Buildings
$21,444,549
Research Station
Rocky Mountain
Drinking
$757,084
Research Station
Water
Systems
Rocky Mountain
Wastewater
$65,529
Research Station
Systems
Northern Research
Buildings
$18,938,415
Station
Northern Research
Drinking
$78,777
Station
Water
Systems
Northern Research
Road
$82,465
Station
Bridges
Northern Research
Wastewater
$138,065
Station
Systems
Pacific Northwest
Buildings
$15,072,737
Research Station
Pacific Northwest
Drinking
$415,906
Research Station
Water
Systems
Pacific Northwest
Wastewater
$335,584
Research Station
Systems
Pacific Northwest
Buildings
$14,177,965
Research Station
Pacific Northwest
Drinking
$555,940
Research Station
Water
Systems
Pacific Northwest
Wastewater
$150,907
Research Station
Systems
Southern Research
Buildings
$14,649,003
Station
Southern Research
Drinking
$3,500
Station
Water
Systems
Southern Research
Wastewater
$15,127
Station
Systems
Wood Education
Buildings
$354,445
and Resource
Center
Grey Towers
Buildings
$201,931
National
Historic Site
Grey Towers
Drinking
$450,500
National
Water
Historic Site
Systems
Grey Towers
Roads
$68,247
National
Historic Site
----------------
Grand
$5,242,592,725
Total
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Deferred maintenance values for passenger car roads and trails are based
on a statistically significant random sampling of these assets to
generate a national deferred maintenance cost per mile. These national
averages are not statistically valid at a regional or forest level,
but have been applied for estimation purposes. Deferred maintenance
values for high clearance vehicle and basic custodial care (closed)
roads cannot be estimated with a suitable degree of confidence and are
therefore not included.
*Roads and/or Trails may have segments located in multiple states that
may lie outside ofproclaimed unit boundaries.
** Editor's note: the table, as submitted, when referring to the Grand
Mesa, Uncompahgre & Gunnison National Forest shortened ``Uncompahgre
&'' to ``Uncomp''.
For Roads, Trails, and Road Bridges By State
------------------------------------------------------------------------
State
Roads
Trails
Road Bridges
Total
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AK
$30,167,722
$9,086,083
$37,448,265
$76,702,070
AL
$25,465,968
$645,423
$3,515,489
$29,626,880
AR
$65,004,771
$2,232,089
$1,219,489
$68,456,349
AZ
$133,929,957
$9,977,170
$5,326,637
$149,233,764
CA
$406,953,614
$27,000,212
$27,430,876
$461,384,703
CO
$199,488,371
$24,714,337
$13,511,750
$237,714,459
FL
$60,447,355
$1,317,739
$4,797,706
$66,562,800
GA
$29,057,083
$1,479,095
$3,027,760
$33,563,938
ID
$308,137,988
$39,290,149
$21,571,656
$368,999,793
IL
$6,338,400
$779,887
$2,418,886
$9,537,173
IN
$2,164,872
$430,282
$190,078
$2,785,232
KS
$2,892,192
$134,463
$0
$3,026,655
KY
$31,898,023
$1,532,881
$701,569
$34,132,472
LA
$32,932,392
$618,531
$11,589,927
$45,140,849
ME
$997,025
$215,141
$0
$1,212,166
MI
$73,261,945
$8,847,679
$1,492,355
$83,601,979
MN
$53,837,036
$5,136,494
$3,076,320
$62,049,851
MO
$28,647,991
$1,344,632
$52,009
$30,044,632
MS
$37,596,942
$726,101
$711,552
$39,034,595
MT
$397,467,099
$30,711,396
$29,978,886
$458,157,381
NC
$45,141,009
$3,334,688
$1,118,414
$49,594,112
ND
$28,575,225
$430,282
$3,921
$29,009,429
NE
$3,919,546
$295,819
$60,739
$4,276,104
NH
$6,550,538
$2,689,264
$3,039,285
$12,279,087
NM
$88,809,831
$7,637,510
$3,985,690
$100,433,031
NV
$29,210,265
$2,716,157
$220,431
$32,146,853
NY
$68,543
$134,463
$0
$203,006
OH
$1,518,585
$752,994
$0
$2,271,579
OK
$5,749,103
$403,390
$93,289
$6,245,781
OR
$273,358,196
$24,203,377
$41,511,893
$339,073,466
PA
$24,564,030
$1,344,632
$1,292,203
$27,200,865
PR
$313,102
$26,893
$0
$339,995
SC
$42,964,196
$995,028
$2,077,568
$46,036,791
SD
$28,651,535
$2,366,552
$0
$31,018,087
TN
$26,000,286
$1,479,095
$363,365
$27,842,747
TX
$37,251,330
$726,101
$1,159,739
$39,137,170
UT
$109,194,877
$14,844,738
$2,635,556
$126,675,171
VA
$37,763,444
$3,442,258
$1,149,834
$42,355,537
VT
$3,793,587
$1,586,666
$246,865
$5,627,117
WA
$189,148,028
$16,458,296
$20,323,995
$225,930,319
WI
$103,102,919
$4,168,359
$4,628,573
$111,899,852
WV
$34,056,410
$1,586,666
$1,793,986
$37,437,061
WY
$106,371,237
$13,016,038
$6,656,507
$126,043,783
---------------------------------------------------------
Grand Total.
$3,152,762,57
* $270,859,05
* $260,423,0
$3,684,044,6
0
3
62
85
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Deferred maintenance values for passenger car roads and trails are based
on a statistically significant random sampling of these assets to
generate a national deferred maintenance cost per mile. These national
averages are not statistically valid at a regional or forest level,
but have been applied for estimation purposes. Deferred maintenance
values for high clearance vehicle and basic custodial care (closed)
roads cannot be estimated with a suitable degree of confidence and are
therefore not included.
* Deferred maintenance totals for trails and bridges as shown in this
table may differ from FY 2018 national totals as this table excludes
assets that do not have a value for 'state' assigned in the system of
record.
By State and Transportation Asset Type
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
For Roads, Trails, and Road Bridges By State and Congressional District
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congressional
State
District
Roads
Trails
Road Bridges
Total
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AK
01
$30,167,722
$9,086,083
$37,448,265
$76,702,070
AL
01
$573,875
$0
$298,693
$872,568
02
$1,122,508
$26,893
$465,144
$1,614,545
03
$9,936,917
$457,175
$769,449
$11,163,541
04
$6,778,593
$161,356
$630,272
$7,570,221
05
$454,411
$0
$857,631
$1,312,042
07
$6,599,664
$0
$494,299
$7,093,963
AR
01
$1,549,978
$242,034
$423,976
$2,215,988
02
$20,364,769
$376,497
$298,095
$21,039,361
03
$1,927,594
$242,034
$35,513
$2,205,140
04
$41,162,430
$1,371,525
$461,905
$42,995,860
AZ
01
$112,081,190
$8,363,611
$4,236,474
$124,681,276
02
$54,757
$0
$1,382
$56,138
03
$847,221
$80,678
$0
$927,899
04
$4,556,246
$26,893
$101,297
$4,684,435
05
$2,668,069
$322,712
$31,771
$3,022,552
06
$19,320
$134,463
$7,817
$161,600
07
$1,586,871
$268,926
$19,103
$1,874,900
08
$12,116,284
$779,887
$928,793
$13,824,964
CA
01
$93,824,731
$1,855,592
$3,313,882
$98,994,205
02
$84,292,128
$5,055,817
$10,247,650
$99,595,595
03
$4,070,622
$3,415,365
$553,998
$8,039,985
04
$125,853,266
$2,958,191
$7,871,414
$136,682,871
08
$145,173
$26,893
$979
$173,045
11
$0
$0
$759,110
$759,110
14
$4,558,236
$0
$0
$4,558,236
17
$2,135,892
$537,853
$69,654
$2,743,399
18
$2,397,636
$0
$0
$2,397,636
19
$16,173,702
$2,474,123
$2,282,012
$20,929,838
20
$1,775,218
$53,785
$0
$1,829,003
21
$22,716,105
$3,280,902
$1,634,700
$27,631,707
22
$7,124,472
$1,048,813
$284,199
$8,457,484
23
$14,563
$0
$31,437
$46,000
24
$12,576,957
$1,586,666
$0
$14,163,623
25
$5,194,645
$2,554,801
$300,744
$8,050,189
26
$0
$510,960
$0
$510,960
27
$0
$0
$30,982
$30,982
28
$0
$26,893
$19,787
$46,679
33
$5,531,960
$0
$0
$5,531,960
35
$11,705,557
$134,463
$0
$11,840,020
37
$2,562,051
$26,893
$0
$2,588,944
41
$0
$591,638
$26,517
$618,156
42
$482,032
$0
$0
$482,032
43
$11,650
$0
$0
$11,650
44
$479,216
$80,678
$0
$559,894
45
$42,184
$322,712
$3,810
$368,705
48
$4,854
$0
$0
$4,854
49
$1,639,278
$215,141
$0
$1,854,419
52
$1,641,486
$242,034
$0
$1,883,520
CO
02
$21,226,446
$3,899,433
$1,538,089
$26,663,968
03
$148,481,717
$17,722,251
$11,091,150
$177,295,117
04
$13,616,409
$1,183,276
$52,762
$14,852,447
05
$16,154,576
$1,909,378
$829,749
$18,893,703
06
$9,223
$0
$0
$9,223
FL
01
$6,165
$0
$0
$6,165
02
$29,799,917
$376,497
$3,431,375
$33,607,789
03
$9,725,003
$510,960
$0
$10,235,963
04
$14,020,670
$134,463
$1,366,330
$15,521,463
08
$6,895,601
$295,819
$0
$7,191,420
GA
03
$1,861,915
$0
$0
$1,861,915
03
$0
$0
$13,813
$13,813
07
$463,100
$0
$0
$463,100
08
$1,646,239
$26,893
$4,870
$1,678,001
09
$16,015,816
$699,209
$2,957,349
$19,672,373
10
$6,163,403
$672,316
$48,407
$6,884,126
11
$2,366,568
$80,678
$3,322
$2,450,568
12
$540,041
$0
$0
$540,041
ID
01
$232,804,947
$23,073,886
$16,628,617
$272,507,450
02
$75,333,042
$16,216,263
$4,943,039
$96,492,343
IL
01
$195,628
$0
$12,135
$207,764
11
$103,105
$0
$0
$103,105
12
$2,840,989
$188,248
$96,586
$3,125,823
16
$0
$26,893
$1,255,904
$1,282,797
19
$3,198,678
$564,745
$1,054,261
$4,817,684
IN
07
$0
$0
$62,027
$62,027
08
$1,427,407
$215,141
$0
$1,642,548
09
$737,465
$215,141
$128,050
$1,080,657
KS
01
$2,892,192
$134,463
$0
$3,026,655
KY
01
$11,443,837
$457,175
$554,791
$12,455,803
05
$17,025,982
$806,779
$91,309
$17,924,070
06
$3,428,204
$268,926
$55,469
$3,752,599
LA
04
$5,310,459
$215,141
$9,118,841
$14,644,441
05
$21,556,825
$403,390
$2,471,086
$24,431,301
08
$6,065,108
$0
$0
$6,065,108
ME
01
$142,231
$0
$0
$142,231
02
$854,794
$215,141
$0
$1,069,935
MI
01
$66,599,807
$7,234,120
$869,484
$74,703,411
02
$6,662,138
$1,613,558
$0
$8,275,697
11
$0
$0
$622,871
$622,871
MN
07
$3,343,739
$26,893
$190,216
$3,560,847
08
$50,493,298
$5,109,602
$2,886,104
$58,489,004
MO
03
$538,827
$53,785
$0
$592,613
04
$1,250,274
$0
$0
$1,250,274
07
$5,565,940
$322,712
$0
$5,888,652
08
$21,176,447
$914,350
$52,009
$22,142,806
09
$116,503
$53,785
$0
$170,288
MS
01
$4,673,186
$80,678
$90,755
$4,844,619
02
$1,591,385
$80,678
$65,606
$1,737,669
03
$8,718,551
$188,248
$226,529
$9,133,328
04
$22,607,363
$376,497
$328,662
$23,312,523
05
$6,456
$0
$0
$6,456
MT
01
$397,467,099
$30,711,396
$29,978,886
$458,157,381
NC
01
$7,120,578
$80,678
$19,825
$7,221,082
02
$0
$26,893
$0
$26,893
03
$150,775
$188,248
$24,747
$363,770
06
$30,291
$0
$0
$30,291
08
$1,446,339
$188,248
$1,131
$1,635,718
10
$5,097,064
$107,571
$29,794
$5,234,428
11
$31,295,963
$2,743,049
$1,042,917
$35,081,929
ND
01
$28,575,225
$430,282
$3,921
$29,009,429
NE
03
$3,919,546
$295,819
$60,739
$4,276,104
NH
01
$1,642,016
$806,779
$593,554
$3,042,349
02
$4,908,523
$1,882,485
$2,445,731
$9,236,738
NM
01
$1,546,386
$591,638
$53,846
$2,191,870
02
$42,091,004
$4,544,856
$1,686,923
$48,322,784
03
$45,172,441
$2,501,016
$2,244,921
$49,918,377
NV
01
$0
$26,893
$0
$26,893
02
$29,210,265
$2,689,264
$220,431
$32,119,960
NY
01
$0
$26,893
$0
$26,893
23
$0
$107,571
$0
$107,571
31
$68,543
$0
$0
$68,543
OH
06
$1,459,610
$457,175
$0
$1,916,785
10
$17,543
$0
$0
$17,543
15
$41,431
$295,819
$0
$337,251
OK
02
$5,649,687
$0
$93,289
$5,742,976
03
$0
$403,390
$0
$403,390
06
$99,416
$0
$0
$99,416
OR
01
$4,113,534
$0
$0
$4,113,534
02
$167,956,246
$16,996,149
$20,974,819
$205,927,215
03
$1,511,144
$699,209
$542,237
$2,752,589
04
$87,000,415
$5,916,381
$16,805,076
$109,721,872
05
$12,776,857
$591,638
$3,189,761
$16,558,256
PA
05
$24,495,783
$53,785
$0
$24,549,569
10
$68,247
$0
$0
$68,247
15
$0
$1,290,847
$1,292,203
$2,583,050
PR
01
$313,102
$26,893
$0
$339,995
SC
01
$2,836,901
$349,604
$199,298
$3,385,804
03
$15,064,155
$376,497
$507,957
$15,948,609
04
$3,383,496
$80,678
$10,361
$3,474,535
05
$7,829,889
$188,248
$81,215
$8,099,352
06
$13,849,755
$0
$1,278,736
$15,128,491
SD
01
$28,651,535
$2,366,552
$0
$31,018,087
TN
01
$7,323,624
$591,638
$203,701
$8,118,963
02
$5,741,181
$322,712
$128,390
$6,192,282
03
$8,029,871
$430,282
$21,071
$8,481,225
07
$1,177,168
$134,463
$10,203
$1,321,834
08
$3,728,442
$0
$0
$3,728,442
TX
01
$2,295,793
$0
$478,548
$2,774,340
02
$31,635,313
$53,785
$0
$31,689,098
04
$127,425
$0
$0
$127,425
06
$0
$134,463
$199,312
$333,775
08
$2,265,089
$403,390
$428,154
$3,096,633
09
$0
$53,785
$0
$53,785
13
$229,905
$26,893
$53,725
$310,522
17
$697,806
$53,785
$0
$751,591
UT
01
$41,294,700
$3,200,224
$935,156
$45,430,081
02
$41,125,096
$6,454,234
$1,251,518
$48,830,847
03
$26,775,081
$4,975,139
$433,873
$32,184,092
04
$0
$215,141
$15,009
$230,150
VA
02
$23,689
$0
$0
$23,689
05
$82,426
$53,785
$5,579
$141,791
06
$23,517,384
$1,721,129
$803,911
$26,042,424
07
$249,317
$80,678
$0
$329,995
09
$11,367,023
$1,559,773
$328,479
$13,255,276
10
$2,523,605
$26,893
$11,865
$2,562,362
VT
01
$3,793,587
$1,586,666
$246,865
$5,627,118
WA
01
$643,195
$2,043,841
$764,922
$3,451,957
02
$28,095,470
$0
$2,685,239
$30,780,709
03
$18,722,744
$2,474,123
$3,145,959
$24,342,826
04
$14,187,226
$7,045,872
$4,940,120
$26,173,218
05
$59,522,698
$3,738,077
$3,565,076
$66,825,851
06
$19,357,686
$484,068
$3,857,479
$23,699,233
08
$48,619,009
$672,316
$1,358,995
$50,650,320
10
$0
$0
$6,205
$6,205
WI
07
$93,282,850
$2,258,982
$3,413,728
$98,955,560
08
$9,820,069
$1,909,378
$1,214,846
$12,944,292
WV
01
$4,833,815
$215,141
$951,591
$6,000,547
02
$12,970,398
$618,531
$302,409
$13,891,338
03
$16,252,196
$752,994
$539,985
$17,545,175
WY
01
$106,371,237
$13,016,038
$6,656,507
$126,043,782
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grand Totals.......................
$3,152,762,570
* $270,859,053
*/** $260,423,062
$3,684,044,685
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Deferred maintenance values for passenger car roads and trails are based on a statistically significant random
sampling of these assets to generate a national deferred maintenance cost per mile. These national averages
are not statistically valid at a regional or forest level, but have been applied for estimation purposes.
Deferred maintenance values for high clearance vehicle and basic custodial care (closed) roads cannot be
estimated with a suitable degree of confidence and are therefore not included.
* Deferred maintenance totals for trails and road bridges as shown in this table may differ from FY 2018
national totals as this table excludes assets that do not have a value for `Congressional district' assigned
in the system of record.
** Deferred maintenance values for road bridges is estimated based on the proportion of the Congressional
district's deferred maintenance compared to the state total deferred maintenance as of March 26, 2019, as data
for total deferred maintenance values by congressional district are dynamic and no longer available for
September 30, 2018 as of the date of publication of this report.