- [H.A.S.C. No. 116-37]
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.A.S.C. No. 116-37]
_______________________________________________________________________
HEARING
ON
NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
AND
OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND FORCES HEARING
ON
DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE
ACQUISITION AND MODERNIZATION
PROGRAMS IN THE FISCAL YEAR 2020
NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION PRESIDENT'S BUDGET REQUEST
__________
HEARING HELD
MAY 2, 2019
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
37-513
WASHINGTON : 2020
SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND FORCES
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey, Chairman
JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
PAUL COOK, California
RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
MATT GAETZ, Florida
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
DON BACON, Nebraska
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland
JIM BANKS, Indiana
FILEMON VELA, Texas
PAUL MITCHELL, Michigan
XOCHITL TORRES SMALL, New Mexico,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio
Vice Chair
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
KATIE HILL, California
JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine
Heath Bope, Professional Staff Member
Jesse Tolleson, Professional Staff Member
Caroline Kehrli, Clerk
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
Hartzler, Hon. Vicky, a Representative from Missouri, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces...........
3
Norcross, Hon. Donald, a Representative from New Jersey,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces.........
1
WITNESSES
Behler, Hon. Robert F., Director, Operational Test and
Evaluation, Department of Defense..............................
9
Daigle, Hon. Robert B., Director, Cost Analysis and Program
Evaluation, Department of Defense..............................
7
Holmes, Gen James M., USAF, Commander, Air Combat Command, and
Maj Gen David S. Nahom, USAF, Director of Programs, Office of
the Deputy Chief of Staff for Strategic Plans and Requirements,
Headquarters U.S. Air Force....................................
6
Ierardi, LTG Anthony R., USA, Director, Force Structure,
Resources, and Assessment (J8), Joint Staff....................
7
Roper, Hon. William B., Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for
Acquisition, Department of the Air Force.......................
5
Sullivan, Michael J., Director, Defense Weapon System
Acquisitions, Government Accountability Office.................
8
Winter, VADM Mathias W., USN, Director, F-35 Joint Strike Fighter
Program Office, Department of Defense..........................
10
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Behler, Hon. Robert F........................................
117
Daigle, Hon. Robert B........................................
86
Ierardi, LTG Anthony R.......................................
91
Norcross, Hon. Donald........................................
45
Roper, Hon. William B., joint with Gen James M. Holmes and
Maj Gen David S. Nahom.....................................
48
Sullivan, Michael J..........................................
95
Winter, VADM Mathias W.......................................
135
Documents Submitted for the Record:
[There were no Documents submitted.]
Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:
Mr. Carbajal.................................................
161
Mr. Gallego..................................................
161
Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:
Mrs. Hartzler................................................
166
Mr. Norcross.................................................
165
Mr. Scott....................................................
168
Mr. Wittman..................................................
167
DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE ACQUISITION
AND MODERNIZATION PROGRAMS IN THE
FISCAL YEAR 2020 NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION PRESIDENT'S BUDGET
REQUEST
----------
House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces,
Washington, DC, Thursday, May 2, 2019.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:01 a.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Donald Norcross
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DONALD NORCROSS, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM NEW JERSEY, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND
LAND FORCES
Mr. Norcross. Good morning. We will bring this hearing to
order. The subcommittee meets today to review the Air Force
acquisition and modernization programs in the fiscal year 2020
budget request.
I would like to welcome our distinguished panel today.
That includes the Honorable Will Roper, Assistant Secretary
of the Air Force for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics;
General Mike Holmes, the Commander of the Air Force Air Combat;
Major General Nahom, Director of the Air Force Programs for the
Deputy Chief of Staff for Strategic Plans; Lieutenant General
Tony Ierardi--did I get that right? Terrific. Director of
Structure--or Force Structure, Resources, and Assessments for
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; and Vice Admiral
Matt Winter, Director F-35 Joint Strike Program; the Honorable
Bob Daigle, Director of Cost Analysis and Program Evaluation
for Secretary of the Defense; the Honorable Bob Behler,
Director of Operational Test and Evaluation for the Department
of Defense; and Mr. Mike Sullivan, Director of the Defense
Weapon System and Acquisitions for the Government
Accountability Office, which I spent reading three of your
reports about midnight last night. And thank you, very
important.
I want to thank our witnesses for your service and your
time here today. Look forward toward your testimony. As we
review Air Force budget requests today, we want to review the
changes that have been made over this year's budget over last
year. And understand why the difference from what was
forecasted last year in fiscal 19 budget to this year.
We need to understand how the Air Force budget request
aligns with the objectives of the National Defense Strategy in
competing and deterring our near-peer adversaries.
What investments are being made to increase the combat
effectiveness, capacity, and capabilities of the Air Force
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance, or the ISR,
plat, as well as tactical combat and training aircrafts,
rotorcraft, and munitions.
What acquisition efficiencies and authorities are being
implemented to more quickly modernize and reduce the advantage
of many of our Air Force fleets of aircrafts under this
subcommittee's purview.
One of the most important, arguably controversial changes
we will talk about today relates to the Air Force decision to
start a new recapitalization of the F-15C fleet. This involves
advanced fourth-generation version of the F-15 now called F-
15EX to complement the fifth-generation F-22 and F-35
capabilities.
We need to understand what new capabilities and certainly
cost efficiencies the F-15EX can bring to the Air Force
tactical aircraft portfolio and why the Air Force has shifted
from what we heard for the last 4 years about fifth-generation
fighters and why that has shifted. We also want an update on
the F-35 program challenges in achieving significantly lower
operational and sustainment costs that continues to dog this
program.
The Air Force has told us they are going to reduce those
costs by 43 percent in order to afford owning and operating the
original inventories we had proposed. Forty-three percent is an
incredibly high number, but we certainly understand why that is
happening. We also want to understand how the Joint Program
Office will get control and fix the problematic ALIS [Autonomic
Logistics Information System] system.
We had a number of folks over the last 2 weeks brief us on
that and looking forward in the program we need an update on
the Block 4 development and its projected cost. In order to
fully understand these issues we must first understand the
capability and capacity of our tactical fighter industrial
base.
What is the F-35 Program Office doing to increase the
stability of the prime contractor's continuing problems with
supply chain and parts management for both new production and
fielded aircraft? And how does this factor in to supporting an
increase quantities of the future F-35A purchase?
If we start to build the new F-15EX program, what are the
production capacities and challenges anticipated by the Air
Force? How will the Air Force ensure that the costs are
controlled before committing to development and a production
contract over several years?
Fifth- and fourth-generation fighter aircraft [are] a
critical capability for our Air Force, and this subcommittee
will continue to support these programs. But we don't have an
unlimited budget. We don't have an unlimited budget.
We need to achieve real affordability, hard to define and
sometimes elusive, but we can do this. The ranking member and I
took an opportunity to travel, just a few weeks ago, to see the
F-35 production line and then immediately thereafter went to
the F-15 production line. And this is what makes you so proud
of America. What we can build. What we can do.
The facilities, the workers, were just remarkable. And very
much understood where they fit in to our national defense. Mrs.
Hartzler and I were impressed, I would even say inspired, and
it was an excellent chance to see firsthand some of the things
that we talk about here in this committee. And I want to
publicly thank all those who made it possible to get that
comprehensive look at these challenging programs. And certainly
that fall into our jurisdiction.
Similar to tactical aviation, the subcommittee is also
paying close attention to the ISR program, and efforts to
sustain modernized key capabilities. As everyone may recall,
last year's budget included a seismic shift in Air Force battle
management command [and] control modernization technology. The
long planned recapitalization of Joint STARS [Surveillance
Target Attack Radar System] aircraft was abandoned, and in its
place, a new concept--new concept existing yet to be defined
program, coined the ABMS, Advanced Battle Management System.
The committee remains concerned about the lack of formal
program structure, benchmarks, against which we would measure
this ABMS progress, as well as uncertainty surrounding Air
Force plans to provide effective and timely Ground Motion
Target Indicator intelligence, the GMTI.
The subcommittee is also focused on how the budget request
supports sustaining the Air Force big-wing ISR programs after
several budget cycles [of] uneven funding and support and
alternative planning--to support alternating plans to terminate
different programs.
The Air Force appears to agree that we need all the current
ISR capabilities it can muster. However, the service needs to
map out a recapitalization program for those big-wing aircraft
to ensure continued viability, relevance for the National
Defense Strategy and the near-peer threats.
I look forward to your testimony and discussing these
topics.
But before we begin with opening statements, I would like
to turn to my colleague, who we just did our travel out west to
a number of the bases, for her opening comments this morning.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Norcross can be found in the
Appendix on page 45.]
STATEMENT OF HON. VICKY HARTZLER, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MISSOURI, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND
FORCES
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
organizing that trip, too. It was very helpful and very
pertinent to what we are talking about today.
I would like to thank everybody who is here today and to
provide your testimony on the Air Force modernization efforts
and the fiscal year 2020 request.
The National Defense Strategy Commission concluded that,
quote, regardless of where the next conflict occurs, or which
adversary it features, the Air Force will be at the forefront,
end quote.
Modernization needs to be properly resourced to ensure the
Air Force remains relevant and ready, which is why we need to
work together to ensure a defense top line that shows real
growth.
If we fail to do so then we will erase all of the gains
that we have made over the past 3 years. We have a
distinguished panel of witnesses here today and, given their
expertise, I look forward to having a healthy discussion on the
appropriate fighter force structure required for the Air Force
to meet the objectives of the National Defense Strategy.
General Goldfein has stated that, quote, we are going to be
a mix well into the 2030s of fourth-gen and fifth-gen fighters
and they complement each other. One plus one, fourth gen plus
fifth gen, actually equals three fighters if they are used
correctly because they each make each other better, end quote.
During my recent travels with the chairman, touring the
fighter industrial base, and observing a recent Red Flag
exercise at Nellis Air Force Base, it appears clear to me we
will need a highly capable mix of fourth-generation and fifth-
generation aircraft complementing one another in order to meet
the objectives of the National Defense Strategy.
I understand the Air Force is striving for a 50/50 mix of
fourth-generation and fifth-generation aircraft by 2030 that
will meet that capability and capacity requirements.
General Goldfein has also stated that the F-15C fleet will
not make it to 2030. And that, begin quote, we have got to
refresh the F-15C fleet because I can't afford to not have that
capacity to do the jobs and the missions right. If that is the
case, then we need to focus on what is best for the F15-C fleet
and I look forward to discussing this critical issue today.
The F-22 was the planned replacement for the F-15C fleet
and the 2008 decision by the Office of the Secretary of Defense
to truncate the F-22 buy is now proving that was a budget-
driven, shortsighted decision with long-term consequences.
There is no doubt the capabilities the F-35 and fifth
generation brings to the battlefield against advanced threats
by peer competitors is critically needed to meet the goals and
objectives of the National Defense Strategy.
We all share concerns about rising F-35 operations and
support costs affecting long-term affordability which could
result in lower procurement quantities in the out-years.
For today, regarding the F-35 program, I am interested in
receiving updates and discussing the initial operational test
and evaluation that is ongoing; the acquisition plan and cost
estimates for the Block 4 modernization program; the findings
from the last Selected Acquisition Report from the Department
of Defense, which showed increases for both acquisition and
operation and support costs; the actions being taken to
increase availability of spare parts and improve overall
reliability and performance; and the actions being taken now,
in this budget request, to lower operation and sustainment
costs, to include ramping up organic depot capability,
improving the Autonomic Logistics Information System, or ALIS,
and improving the time associated for long lead parts.
The F-35 Joint Program Office along with the military
services appear to be very focused on reducing these costs;
however, significant challenges remain ahead. We look forward
to working with each of you and industry in a collaborative
manner to reach your objectives for this important program.
Today is also a good opportunity for the witnesses to
update us on what they are doing to mitigate physiological
episodes and how the Air Force is coordinating efforts with the
Navy.
I was pleased that the budget request fully funds A-10
modernization, to include the re-wing effort, and I expect the
witnesses to address this program, as well as touch on any
operational readiness challenges in the A-10 fleet.
And finally, I am interested to hear today from our
witnesses on the progress being made in the development of
advanced munition capabilities. In order for us to maintain
comparative advantage, we need to ensure that munitions and
weapons are being upgraded and developed.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this important
hearing today and I yield back.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you for your comments. Given our large
panel of witness today we ask they condense their opening
remarks to approximately 3 minutes or less. And without
objection, the formal written statements will be entered into
the record. Without objection. So ordered.
With that, we will begin our opening remarks with Dr.
Roper, followed by General Holmes, Mr. Daigle, General Ierardi,
Mr. Sullivan, Dr. Behler, Admiral Winter. That gives you 7 out
of 8, so, we have a great panel here with lots of knowledge.
But we also have a time factor. So thank you for being here.
STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM B. ROPER, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE
AIR FORCE FOR ACQUISITION, DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE
Secretary Roper. Chairman Norcross and Ranking Member
Hartzler, members of the committee, thank you very much for
holding a hearing on this important topic. I think it is fair
to say that we are very excited to talk with you about the
progress that we have made in this important portfolio. We are
also very interested to talk about the challenges that we face
and things that we can both work on together to overcome them.
We will talk a lot about programmatics and requirements and
specifics of programs but I want to just start by saying that
we come into this review looking at a strategic environment
again. You know, China is no joke. They have a plan, they have
capabilities to match us, both technologically, operationally,
and we have to regain the ability to compete with them over
time.
This committee has made important strides in giving us
authorities to work at a greater speed, with greater agility,
so that we do deliver capabilities at a speed of relevance for
our warfighters.
We are trying to make strides this year to increase our
connection with a broader defense industrial base, be able to
work with tech startups, be able to work with the entire
innovation base this country brings.
Because, ultimately, the bottom line is about giving the
warfighter that critical advantage in the fight that the
adversary doesn't have. I look forward to your questions today,
to discussing the progress that we have made in acquisition
reform.
But we are by no means done. We can never be satisfied with
the pace at which we move. We can never be satisfied with the
capabilities that we have. This will be a competition over
time. And I hope that you will find the Air Force is taking
this challenge seriously and that we have made progress in
becoming the competitive force that this nation needs.
Thank you.
[The joint prepared statement of Secretary Roper, General
Holmes, and General Nahom can be found in the Appendix on page
48.]
Mr. Norcross. General Holmes.
STATEMENT OF GEN JAMES M. HOLMES, USAF, COMMANDER, AIR COMBAT
COMMAND, AND MAJ GEN DAVID S. NAHOM, USAF, DIRECTOR OF
PROGRAMS, OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY CHIEF OF STAFF FOR STRATEGIC
PLANS AND REQUIREMENTS, HEADQUARTERS U.S. AIR FORCE
General Holmes. The light doesn't come on, so. How is that,
is it on now? Thanks. Okay, great, thanks.
Good morning, Chairman Norcross, Ranking Member Hartzler,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee. General Nahom
and I thank you for inviting us to join you today. And as part
of our thankfulness, we will combine our statement and just do
one.
I echo Dr. Roper's statement and I can attest to the
acquisition advancements we have made under the authorities
granted to us by the Congress. As the Commander of Air Combat
Command, I am responsible for training and equipping much of
the Air Force's fighter, rescue, command and control,
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, and cyber
forces, all with the goal of ensuring that we present
competent, effective, and lethal forces to combatant
commanders.
On behalf of the over 93,000 airmen in Air Combat Command,
I would like to thank you for ensuring that we received an on-
time budget for this fiscal year. It is incredibly important
for us in planning and execution stability, particularly as we
focus on sustaining the force we have while we transition to a
more modern force to meet the threats that Dr. Roper described.
Because of that budget, we are on track to meet the
readiness goals set by the Secretary of Defense and Secretary
of the Air Force and are able to begin rightsizing our force in
accordance with the objectives of the 2018 NDAA [National
Defense Authorization Act].
We do, however, face challenges in keeping these
investments on track as a result of the natural disaster damage
inflicted by hurricanes and floods at Tyndall and Offutt Air
Force Bases.
Moving forward, our 2020 national defense budget request
provides the modernization and sustainment funding we need to
grow into a stronger and more lethal force.
However, as Dr. Roper discussed, we can't remain dominant
against our peer competitors unless we also outpace them in our
acquisition process. Our aging Air Force is currently too small
to fight the wars of tomorrow.
We have made strides, but we must not lose sight of our
responsibilities to sustain what we have while we modernize for
the future.
I look forward to engaging with the Congress as we work
together to address these challenges and again, thank you to
the members of this subcommittee for your dedication to the Air
Force, our armed services, and the American people.
General Nahom and I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Norcross. Mr. Daigle.
STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT B. DAIGLE, DIRECTOR, COST ANALYSIS AND
PROGRAM EVALUATION, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
Mr. Daigle. Chairman Norcross, Ranking Member Hartzler,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to present to you today the results of the
Department's collaborative efforts on TACAIR [tactical
aircraft] mix.
I will keep my opening statement very short. I just want to
comment that I think this is a really good example of how the
budget process can work well.
In 2016, Congress tasked the Department to do a fighter
force mix study. The results of that study have since been
validated by service analysis and by operational testing. That
information informed the deliberations inside the budget
process, inside the building cycle, and resulted in an
agreement between the Air Force and the Navy and the Department
on the right way forward on TACAIR mix to meet the demands of
the National Defense Strategy.
I would like to thank your staffs, the staff of the Armed
Services Committee, for the collaboration over the last few
months following budget rollout; it has been a good team to
work with. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Daigle can be found in the
Appendix on page 86.]
Mr. Norcross. General Ierardi.
STATEMENT OF LTG ANTHONY R. IERARDI, USA, DIRECTOR, FORCE
STRUCTURE, RESOURCES, AND ASSESSMENT (J8), JOINT STAFF
General Ierardi. Chairman Norcross, Ranking Member
Hartzler, distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you
for your support to the men and women in uniform who serve our
nation and for the opportunity to address your questions
related to tactical air and land forces initiatives.
In his testimony in March to the House Armed Services
Committee, General Dunford discussed several challenges the
Joint Military Net Assessment identified including the joint
force's decreasing competitive advantage vis-a-vis our
adversaries.
The 2019 Joint Military Net Assessment, and a follow-on
competitive area studies assessment by the Joint Staff,
outlined capability, capacity, and readiness issues within the
tactical air portfolio that informed the Chairman's program
recommendations to the Secretary of Defense in preparations for
this year's budget submission.
The Chairman's recommendations focused on balancing the
capabilities we need for today's operations with the depth,
flexibility, and advanced technologies required to respond to
the challenges of the future. From the joint perspective,
fifth-generation capabilities remain essential to success
against near-peer competitors.
However, adapting the force we have today while we design
the force needed for those challenges tomorrow, requires a mix
of capabilities within the TACAIR portfolio.
In the short term, the fourth-generation aircraft fleet
provides essential capacity to meet the National Defense
Strategy demands while we continue to acquire and modernize our
fifth-generation aircraft.
In the long term, this portfolio transitions to a majority
of fifth-generation aircraft as we continue to acquire the F-35
through 2040. In the interim, we must maintain a relevant mix
of fourth-generation capability and capacity to meet the
demands across the National Defense Strategy as multiple
airframes exceed their service life over the next decade.
I would like to thank you again for the opportunity to
appear before this committee, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of General Ierardi can be found in
the Appendix on page 91.]
Mr. Norcross. Mr. Sullivan.
STATEMENT OF MICHAEL J. SULLIVAN, DIRECTOR, DEFENSE WEAPON
SYSTEM ACQUISITIONS, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
Mr. Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am here today to discuss the F-35 Lightning II
acquisition and sustainment programs, as well as the Advanced
Battle Management System. Development of the baseline F-35
weapon system was recently completed after 18 challenging
years.
While the cost of development increased by more than 50
percent and the services waited years longer than originally
planned, the aircraft is fully capable today, when able to fly,
to carry out all of its missions.
The remaining issues now are reliability and affordability.
The program tracks eight reliability metrics today for the
aircraft and is currently on track to meet four of them.
Meeting these targets is critical for maintaining the
aircraft's availability and mission capability goals within an
affordable 60-year life cycle.
The current estimate for that cost is over a trillion
dollars, and the Department is on record as stating that is not
affordable. The program is working now to revise its
reliability management plans and activities in hopes to make
continued success as they move forward.
The program has also initiated activities to modernize the
baseline aircraft with new capabilities, known as Block 4
modernization. The current estimated cost for this development
program is about $10.5 billion through 2024.
We have concerns that the program will sign development
contracts that lock in risk before it has completed an
independent cost estimate or technology readiness review, two
key activities that help to reduce risk prior to committing
large amounts of funding.
We also believe that the modernization program should be a
major defense acquisition program with its own cost and
schedule baselines to provide the Congress with transparent
program reporting.
With regard to the status of sustainment efforts, we have
concerns that those cost estimates continue to rise. A large
part of these rising costs are significant spare parts
shortages and limited repair capabilities.
For example, between May and November of 2018, the aircraft
was unable to fly about 30 percent of the time due to spare
part shortages. GAO [U.S. Government Accountability Office]
recently issued a report and made recommendations to improve
this condition. The Department concurred with those
recommendations.
The Air Force's Advanced Battle Management System
acquisition is still in its very early stages. It is planned to
eventually manage detection, identification, and tracking of
airborne, maritime, and ground relocatable targets.
The Air Force is currently in the midst of performing an
analysis of alternatives for delivering air-centric
capabilities and is using an existing analysis to assess best
alternatives for handling the ground target tracking
capabilities.
Because the program is so young, we only have very
preliminary observations on that. However, we plan to continue
to report on that program as things unfold.
That concludes my statement, I look forward to questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sullivan can be found in the
Appendix on page 95.]
Mr. Norcross. Mr. Behler.
STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT F. BEHLER, DIRECTOR, OPERATIONAL TEST
AND EVALUATION, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
Mr. Behler. Chairman Norcross, and Ranking Member Hartzler,
and other distinguished members of the subcommittee, I too am
honored to be here with this distinguished panel of witnesses
to address the status of tactical air and modernization
programs that fall under my oversight as the Director of
Operational Test and Evaluation.
I would like to focus my opening comments in two key areas:
the status of ongoing F-35 initial operational test and
evaluation, and the operational test infrastructure needed to
support emergent technologies for new weapons.
In January of 2018, I observed the start of F-35
operational evaluations with cold-weather testing in Alaska.
Working with the program office and the operational test
agencies, I approved additional operational evaluations, which
enabled IOT&E [initial operational test and evaluation] to
start 11 months early.
As of May, the test team has completed over two-thirds of
all the open-air IOT&E testing and weapons events.
Operational testing to date has included cybersecurity,
open-air test trials, which included F-35 deployments and
weapon employment.
The test team has compared the F-35 to fourth-generation
fighters against both legacy and modern surface-to-air threats.
As prescribed in the fiscal year 2017 NDAA, comparison testing
to examine the capabilities of the F-35A and the A-10C was
completed last month, March.
The existing test plan specifies two final phases in IOT&E
as open-air electronic warfare trials against robust, surface-
to-air threats, and simulated dense, modern surface and air
threats in the Joint Simulation Environment.
I have guarded optimism that the open-air testing will be
completed later this fall, followed by test trials in the Joint
Simulation Environment that will stress the F-35 against
validated models [of] real advanced world threats. The current
schedule projects IOT&E to be completed at the end of this
calendar year.
Before closing, I would like to briefly turn to the topic
of testing emergent technologies that are addressed in the
National Defense Strategy such as hypersonics and artificial
intelligence.
This is a very complicated challenge. Emergent technologies
will drive the need for new test infrastructure requirements.
Technologies like hypersonic weapon systems will require
advanced data collection, long-range tracking capacity, and
safety issues.
Weapons that use artificial intelligence and machine
learning will require new measurement methods that can
determine whether the computer will make the right decisions in
combat.
Thank you for your attention and your continuous support of
the service men and women. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Behler can be found in the
Appendix on page 117.]
Mr. Norcross. Admiral Winter.
STATEMENT OF VADM MATHIAS W. WINTER, USN, DIRECTOR, F-35 JOINT
STRIKE FIGHTER PROGRAM OFFICE, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
Admiral Winter. Chairman Norcross, Ranking Member Hartzler,
and the distinguished members of the subcommittee, I appeared
before you last month with the Navy and Marine Corps. I am back
here with my esteemed colleagues to talk about the U.S. Air
Force acquisition and modernization efforts, and how the F-35
participates in that and supports the National Defense
Strategy.
I continuously appreciate your insight, oversight, and
interest in the F-35 program. As we look at what has occurred
over this last year, considerable progress has been made, but
as we have heard, there is still plenty of challenges that we
must tackle together.
We have finished our Block 3 flight test, we have delivered
Block 3F warfighting capability, we have begun IOT&E, we have
definitized our Lot 11 production aircraft at an $89.2 million
F-35A. That is a 5 percent reduction over the previous lot.
We have increased our U.S. depot repair capacity but not to
the extent that we need to. We still have those challenges. We
have upgraded some of our international maintenance and repair
facilities in our European and Pacific region, and we have
established credible flying hour metrics, cost per flying hour
metrics, so we can get our hands around the total ownership
cost for the F-35, together.
We have also supported numerous U.S. service operational
activities across our U.S. services--the Marine Corps and Navy,
and United States Air Force--to include the United States Air
Force first combat employment that occurred this week in the
CENTCOM [U.S. Central Command] AOR [area of responsibility].
In terms of Air Force modernization and acquisition, the F-
35 remains the Air Force latest fifth-generation fighter and is
planned to operate alongside their fourth-gen and fifth-gen
aviation capabilities.
We see the F-35 truly as the quarterback of that joint
force. And with its ability to collect, analyze, and share that
data, it is a true force multiplier across the battlespace.
With over 400 aircraft fielded across all variants, the F-
35 is more affordable and more lethal than it has been in the
past. However, as I stated a month ago and I will tell you
today, I am not satisfied as the PEO [Program Executive
Officer] of the F-35 Joint Program Office.
We still face challenges in repair span times, industry's
ability to provide spare parts quality and on time, our
production flow and production line inefficiencies, and some of
the labor skills that are being drawn away from the military
enterprise into the commercial enterprise for aviation demand.
We are tackling these challenges together with a head-on
clear mandate to drive in that affordability, that quality, and
reliability across the enterprise.
This year's President's budget requests the resources to
achieve the goals of 80 percent MC [mission capable], to get to
an $80 million F-35A, and to get to an affordable cost per
flying hour and costs per tail per year for our U.S. services.
On behalf of the men and women of the F-35 enterprise, you
have my commitment to provide you the accountability and
transparency the taxpayer demands, and the affordable game-
changing capability the warfighter needs.
I thank you again for the opportunity to discuss the F-35
program and look forward to your questions.
Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Winter can be found in
the Appendix on page 135.]
Mr. Norcross. Thank you for all your testimony. The most
expensive system that the United States has ever attempted, and
we have some great results, but we have some challenges.
Getting under that $90 million for the type A is great, but
when the sustainment costs continue to be the numbers that we
are looking at and not being ready 30 percent of the time, we
have got some real challenges.
So, for the last 4 years in particular, we have been
hearing about fifth generation, fifth generation. And this year
it was dropped on our laps about an F-15 coming into play.
So, I want to start there. There is a number of other
issues we have to address. General Holmes, past couple years we
have been talking about the program that we are talking about
today. The service life of the F-15C appears to be a real
challenge at this point. Can you walk us through why this
committee--I am fielding questions from virtually everyone
saying, why are we only focus on fifth generation for years and
now, fourth generation?
Why don't you walk us through specifically what has changed
in the last 11 months for this decision to come before us.
General Holmes. Is that better? Thank you. I will try to
get better.
And to start, Mr. Chairman, I would go back to a couple of
things that you talked about in your remarks and in the
question. And the first is the limited budget that we face.
Now, we have tremendous needs across the Air Force and across
the armed services for improvements in modernization and
sustainment, and we have to balance all those across all our
portfolios.
And the second one I think is the health and the age of the
2,100 fighters that the National Defense Strategy requires for
the Air Force to be able to accomplish the missions that they
have asked us to do.
We have been on a path of purchasing less than 20 new
fighters a year since Desert Storm. So that is a 1 percent
replacement rate. That would put us on a 100-year
recapitalization schedule for our fighters. And so that is how
we get to a fighter force that averages more than 30 years old.
And the impacts of that are, our tremendous depot system
and the American people that you saw on the assembly lines and
also at the depots have worked miracles to keep those old
airplanes useful. But we are getting to the point where it
costs too much to do it. And the F-15C is a prime example of
that.
The airplane has structural problems that will require
replacement of major structural members, the longerons that run
lengthwise in the airplane, followed by the wings being
replaced, and then followed by bulkheads on the center
fuselage, which means it would be better to buy a new airplane
than to try to work through those repairs.
Mr. Norcross. That is important. Walk through. We
originally budgeted approximately a million per plane. After
the knowledge that came through on structural----
General Holmes. Yes, sir.
Mr. Norcross [continuing]. What did that take the number up
to?
General Holmes. Well, so, the exact number will depend on
the time that you go after, but that million per plane was
based on fuselage longerons. And as you add the wings and the
fuselage into it, the initial estimates we dealt with were in
the tens of millions per airplane.
I think as we work with the prime contractor now, you can
get that number probably down around $10 million or so per
airplane, but that is an approximation. You don't really know
until you open the airplanes up.
What we do know is that right now we have airplanes that
are failing the inspection and are being parked until we can
order the parts to begin that replacement process and our F-15
training unit at Klamath Falls in Oregon has nine airplanes
that they are unable to fly because of the structural
condition.
If you look across the rest of our fighter force, the F-15
is failing first. The A-10, as Ranking Member Hartzler, you
know, pointed out, faces problems with wings. For the F-16
fleet, it is service life extension program that will require
many airplanes to go into the depot to be repaired, which will
cut down the availability of the entire fleet.
For the F-22, it is engines and the depot capability to
support repairing and replacing engines to make up for the
extra flying time.
So, what that means is, that we need more airplanes per
year, and we are approaching a crisis point to get there.
And when we looked at the limited budget, as you pointed
out, Mr. Chairman, we determined, along with the analysis that
CAPE [Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation] did, and with the
Department that the most cost-effective way to begin acquiring
more than 48 fighters a year was to do a mixed buy of fourth-
and fifth-gen airplanes.
You know, why is it more cost effective? Matt, Vice Admiral
Winter, and his team have done a great job with Lockheed of
driving down the cost of the air vehicle itself and producing
an airplane that we are very happy with.
The guys flying the F-35 now are very pleased with the
performance of the air vehicle itself and it is achieving great
results at places like Red Flag, where Ranking Member Hartzler
visited, and some of you were along with her, and in its first
combat deployment.
We still face challenges in the sustainment cost as you
pointed out and as Vice Admiral Winter pointed out, that I hope
we will get to. But it will be multiple years to drive those
sustainment costs down to where they match the F-15.
And then as we bed down additional fighters, there are
additional costs that go with the beddown of the F-35 because
you need low-observable maintenance facilities, you need some
facilities that are not required for the F-15. There is
additional cost per location if you add F-35s.
So ultimately, the balance between cost and our urgent need
to meet capacity has led us to propose that we pursue a mixture
of both fourth- and fifth-gen airplanes as the most cost-
effective way to balance the capability that we need to acquire
in the future with the capacity that we have to have every day
to do the missions that the Secretary of Defense and our
national leaders ask us to do.
Mr. Norcross. So, what started this initial question is
that the F-22 was going to replace the F-15. That came up
short. Then the F-35, if it had originally ramped up we would
not be in this position; we are considerably behind. So of all
the inventory that the Air Force could have picked, why the F-
15EX?
General Holmes. Thank you, sir. I think partly it was
because of the F-15 being kind of the first airplane to fail,
the F-15C. And if we want to replace aircraft and have the
minimum impact on readiness across the Air Force, then
replacing like aircraft with a reasonably like aircraft offers
us the least reduction in readiness while we do it.
If an Air National Guard unit transitions from the F-15C to
the F-35, it takes about 3 years to fully train all the aircrew
members and the maintainers that work on the airplane in the
unit because a lot of them are part-timers, and they have to
schedule their training over a long period of time to be able
to work through that.
If you replace the F-15C with an F-15EX, much of the
airplane is the same, it is a very short training period to
transition maintainers. A very small training program to
transition aircrew members. And so it has the least impact on
reduction or the least impact on readiness, excuse me, of the
force during a transition.
And then we are able to take advantage of investment that
other nations had made in improving the F-15 airframe. Saudi
Arabia and Qatar had spent money to develop improvements to the
airplane that would now be available to us at a reduced or no
cost to incorporate. And for combination, I think for those two
reasons, we picked the F-15EX.
Mr. Norcross. And we are focused on this because this is a
major shift on the thinking. We are not anywhere near what the
original projections were in purchasing the F-35, for a variety
of reasons.
Would there be a scenario, given what we understand now for
the F-35 line, that you would have to almost double the
production in order for it to come in at a replacement rate
that would keep the F-15EX from coming online?
Do we see that ability with the parts, like, coming in
anywhere near what they need to? Is there anything we can do to
the F-35 line to prevent us from going to the F-15EX?
General Holmes. Mr. Chairman, I would probably ask for the
details of that question to go to my friend Vice Admiral Winter
in the Joint Program Office. But as we looked at the, what we
think of as the seven or eight elements that it takes to
actually field the weapon system of the F-35, producing the
aircraft itself is one part of that. It is then keeping up with
a simulator that matches the configuration of the airplane.
It is the AME [Alternate Mission Equipment], the other
equipment that goes on the airplane where you can hang bomb
racks and do those parts of it. It is the joint planning
system, it is the ALIS. It is all the different parts,
sustainment, depot of the system.
My concern would be bringing all of those eight elements
along at the same time because right now, the air vehicle is
out ahead of those other elements.
And so, producing more airplanes would be one part of it
but keeping up in all of those other areas, to me, would be the
challenge. But I think Vice Admiral Winter is more prepared to
answer that.
Mr. Norcross. And we need to be focused. I get more
questions on this issue than any other item. Why the shift. So,
we are not backing off of the F-35. Is that an accurate
statement?
Admiral Winter. That is an accurate statement, sir.
Mr. Norcross. Is there anything, in your opinion, we could
do, given the facilities, given the parts issue, the
sustainment cost, that we could focus on in order for us not to
also bring in that fourth generation?
Admiral Winter. So, Mr. Chairman, I will talk about the
business case that makes affordability a lucrative optic for F-
35, and I will allow General Holmes and others to talk about
would they not purchase F-15s.
But from an F-35 perspective, when we look at it
theoretically, and when I mean that, bill of material, what
does it cost to actually assemble an F-35. And we do that in a
propulsion--so, engine from Pratt & Whitney, and the airframe
and systems from Lockheed Martin.
When we look at our cost analysis for that, we can see a
bill of material that is in an affordable range below $80
million. We can see----
Mr. Norcross. That is for the purchase?
Admiral Winter. Yes. Yes, sir. I would start with the
purchase because if you don't buy them, you don't need to
sustain them. The fact that we are making that progress, and we
are seeing the actual progress, is encouraging. My challenge is
in the assembly.
So, the bill of material and the cost of the material keeps
coming down because of volume. But the ability for those
vendors and the supply chain to get those parts to the
production line at the time we need them as the airframe is
coming down the production line, is behind.
And so therefore, the cost, the labor cost of the human
beings putting these things together, is my biggest cost
increase. And so therefore, I am hitting a stagnant plateau
with Lockheed Martin because they are 600 parts a month behind,
on average; 600 parts not on the production line when I need
them. So the aircraft is going slower down the production line
than I need it to be. That drives cost.
And from that cost, I have to look across my portfolio. And
when I look at sustaining the 400-plus aircraft that are out
flying right now, I need parts to fix the airplane.
As Mr. Sullivan said, the reliability is getting better,
but it is not where it needs to be. So it is a multi-
dimensional interdependent problem that we are trying to solve.
Mr. Norcross. So, you are telling me the production line is
in competition with the repair line for those parts when they
become available.
Admiral Winter. I am saying the supply chain is----
Mr. Norcross. Yes.
Admiral Winter [continuing]. In competition, absolutely,
sir. That supplier that generates a widget is generating a new
widget for the production line, for our spares package, and we
still have them repairing the ones that are breaking in the
field.
Our initiative, to Ranking Member Hartzler's comment, we
are taking that demand off the supply chain by putting it into
our U.S. Air Force and Navy and Marine Corps depots here in the
United States so we can repair the broken parts, allowing the
supply chain to focus on generating new parts. But we are not
there yet.
Mr. Norcross. I know Mrs. Hartzler has some questions on
the F-15 and we will get back to some of my questions because
everyone here is very focused on this.
Mrs. Hartzler. Really, really good discussion, good
questions, Mr. Chairman. Just to follow up on some of this.
So, I wanted to give Dr. Roper, and Mr. Daigle also, an
opportunity to weigh in a little bit why the Air Force is
buying a new fourth-generation aircraft over the advanced fifth
generation.
Do you have anything you want to add? General Holmes gave a
good explanation, but do you have anything you want to add?
Secretary Roper. Ranking Member Hartzler, the number of
aircraft that are needed to keep our readiness comes to me as a
warfighter requirement.
So, the Air Force, working with others, look at the number
of fighters that we need to buy each year to make sure that we
have the capacity to go to war. And I think it goes without
saying, we want as many fifth-generation systems as we can
possibly have. We want to get the F-35 healed and fixed and
into full-rate production so that we can become an increasingly
fifth-generation force.
But because of issues in the past, we can't buy that number
of airplanes currently. And so, when the Commander of Air
Combat Command says, I need more than 48 fighters per year, the
Chief of Staff, we have to go look at the fourth-generation
line.
Now, General Holmes hit it exactly correct. The F-15C is
very difficult to sustain. I have been to Tinker Air Force Base
twice to go through the F-15C line in depot maintenance. It is
a hard aircraft to maintain, because over two-thirds of the
fleet is past its service life.
We are having to now replace parts that weren't intended to
be replaced. These are difficult to purchase, they have long
lead times, especially the longerons. And so we are past the
point the fighter was supposed to be.
Now, when you look at, is there an option to try to provide
the warfighter a solution other than try to extend the Cs
further in the future than they were meant to go, we can pivot
to what our foreign military sales have done on the F-15E line.
The upgrades that the Qataris and Saudi Arabia have done to
that line would be major defense acquisition programs in and of
themselves.
They have upgraded the radar, they have upgraded the
avionics, they have updated the electronic warfare and the
cockpit.
So this is a lot of foreign investment in that system that
our warfighters can benefit from.
So going back to Air Combat Command and our Chief of Staff,
I have two options to try to give them more than the 48 F-35s
that they are getting.
It is a plan to try to sustain the Cs at high cost, or
pivot to try to buy a much better aircraft that will be much
more sustainable.
And from the acquisition point of view, of course,
modernizing and benefiting from those over $2 billion of
foreign investment is an appealing plan.
Mrs. Hartzler. Very good, thank you.
Mr. Daigle, and I want you to expand a little bit more on,
you alluded to, in your comment, that this whole mix study
began in 2016 with Congress and the NDAA requiring this study.
And as a result of that, that is what has resulted in the
TACAIR mix that is being put forth.
So at what point in your study did you identify that we
wanted to have F-15s and F-35s this year?
Mr. Daigle. So the fighter force mix study and subsequent
analysis basically showed that as far as the eye can see, the
Department will need a mix of penetrating assets and standoff
assets. And this is common across any kind of portfolio we want
to look at.
If we look at ISR, we have some very high-end penetrating
stealthy ISR assets. We also have, for example, MQ-9s that are
not really useful in that kind of environment that are really
useful in permissive environments.
The same is true on the bomber fleet. We have, you know,
high-end penetrating bombers, we have standoff bombers that are
basically very large missile trucks, for lack of a better word.
So from our perspective, this is another version of that
same conversation of how do we match the capabilities that we
can procure to the mission sets that are generated under the
National Defense Strategy. And that is what the fighter force
mix did.
And it said, kind of as far out as the eye can see, that
some kind of mix is going to be appropriate. And then we get
into the affordability question. We have already talked in the
room a number of times about the sustainment cost of the F-35
vice the sustainment cost of fourth-generation platforms.
And, Chairman Norcross, if you go back to a question that
you asked about, could we ramp up. From the analysis that the
Department has done, the next marginal dollar wouldn't
necessarily go into increasing the richness, if you will, of
the tactical aircraft portfolio.
If we look at tomorrow's warfights, the things that really
matter are joint communications, space control. So, as long as
there is a delta in the costs of the planes, and the Department
doesn't see a pathway right now where we can get fifth-
generation sustainment costs down to what we are seeing on the
fourth-gen fleet, as long as that delta exists, then prudence
dictates buy the platforms that align to the mission set in a
way where you can kind of get as much capacity out of the
available dollars as you can, and then take any money that you
have left over and put it against the really highly critical
gaps in the warfighting portfolio.
And again, I would naturally look to cyber and space and
joint communications, joint battle management. Those things are
really the drivers for the effectiveness of the joint force
going forward based on the analysis that the----
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay. Very good.
Mr. Daigle [continuing]. That the Department has been
doing.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you. I would like General Holmes and
General Nahom to talk a little bit about how the F-15X and F-35
complement one another in their capability perspective and what
unique capabilities that F-15X bring into the tactical fighter
inventory, whether in terms of range, or payload, or standoff.
General Holmes. Yes, ma'am. So beginning with the statement
that, you know, there are environments that the F-35 can
operate in that the F-15EX can't. And that is a simple fact.
There are places that you wouldn't want to send the F15-EX that
you can send the F-35 as part of a team.
But in the environment, say, of the last couple of years of
combat over Syria, where we faced Russian air defenses and
Russian fighters, the combination of F-15s, A-10s, F-16s,
paired with an F-22 as a fifth-gen quarterback to be able to
detect threats that the others can't, to be able to pass
information to them that they wouldn't get on their onboard
systems, has made them more effective and kept them safer in
that environment.
And with the F-35 deployed there today, you will see the
same thing and the benefits of partnership.
When the F-35 gets more information than anybody else has
and then shares it across the network, then it makes the whole
team better. And then the capacity that is in the fourth-gen
fleet means that you can carry more weapons, you can stay out
there longer. And so they do complement each other.
And as Mr. Daigle pointed out, no matter where we go with
trying to get the 72 airplanes for the foreseeable future, we
are going to have a mix of fourth- and fifth-gen airplanes
flying together and fighting together to deter or counter the
threats that we face.
Mrs. Hartzler. General Nahom, do you have anything you want
to add?
General Nahom. No, ma'am. Just that that was really what we
looked at very closely with our friends in CAPE over the
summer. There is a difference in the costs of operating these
airplanes right now based on the numbers we looked at over the
summer. And it was trying to get to that capacity because when
you get into--even in the 2030s, 10-plus years from now, there
are missions we are going to rely on fourth-generation
airplanes to accomplish.
Certainly they can't do some of the missions as General
Holmes highlighted. But there are missions we are going to need
to get done and we are going to rely on fourth-generation
airplanes.
The F-15E, the A-10 for the next 10 years, and certainly
the later block F-16s. And a significant problem we had looking
at the portfolio as Dr. Roper highlighted, that we can't rely
on the F-15C to get us to that point. So it was about a fill in
that capacity.
Mrs. Hartzler. Very good. I have a few more but let us get
to some other members here. Thank you.
Mr. Norcross. Mr. Gallego.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had some questions
for Dr. Roper.
What is the length of the projected life extension of the
173 A-10 Thunderbolts that have received new wing sets, and of
the remainder that are planning to receive new wings?
Secretary Roper. Congressman, thank you for the question.
We are currently going through the source selection for those
wings right now. We are certainly hoping that we are going to
get to benefit from modern digital engineering practices so
that we will be able to do the re-winging quickly. The
specifics of how long we are going to be able to extend are
going to be based on the specific proposals that come from
vendors. But I am hoping for, you know, for at least 10 years.
So, I will take that for the record and once----
Mr. Gallego. Okay.
Secretary Roper [continuing]. We are through selection, I
will make sure I get you that information, sir.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 161.]
Mr. Gallego. Good. I also see in the hearing memo that the
remaining 108 A-10s in need of new wings will be delivered by
fiscal year 2022. When will the re-wing of those aircraft be
completed?
Secretary Roper. Again, Congressman, that does depend on
the specifics of the proposal. But we are incentivizing the
rapid re-winging as quickly as possible. That is one of the
performance metrics.
So, we know the warfighter needs to be able to fly those A-
10s so we are incentivizing speed in the selection, sir.
Mr. Gallego. And the warfighter on the ground needs their
air support.
Mr. Behler, I understand that you are moving forward on the
comparison testing between the F-35A and the A-10C. And that
testing the two planes' close air support, combat search and
rescue, and airborne forward air control capabilities was
completed in March at Edwards Air Force Base--almost messed it
up, in March at Edwards Air Force Base.
Do you have any initial results of this operational testing
that you would like to share with us? Mic.
Mr. Behler. Thank you very much for that question. We did
complete it last month. We are still, of course, analyzing the
data. The first testing was done last April. We got about two-
thirds of it done then. And then the A-10s had to go back to
the operation.
Brought them back in March and we were able to really
stress both airplanes. And the whole idea was basically to look
at the capabilities of both. I just want to make sure everyone
realizes, this is not a fly off, which was better, because they
both have awesome capabilities, kind of the same line of
comments that General Holmes had.
We stressed these both day and night against moving
targets, terrain where it is urban, we used the threats on the
ground were radar-guided SAM [surface-to-air] missiles, we had
MANPADS [man-portable air-defense systems], we had AAA [anti-
aircraft artillery]. So this was a very stressful environment.
When we had the combat search and rescue, we actually had a
downed crew member out there at nighttime. And during that
mission, we actually brought in either HH-60s or MC-22s to
recover the downed crew member.
So, it was a very, very stressful thing but, you know, I am
trying to--I have to stay within the operational security
aspects, because----
Mr. Gallego. Sure.
Mr. Behler [continuing]. We have airplanes in combat as we
speak with both of these. But I will just give you two very, I
think, important points that we were able to find so far
without analyzing all the data.
Is, the F-35, as we expected, has a big advantage in a high
threat scenario where the stealth and sensor fusion really
helps. In a lesser threat environment, we were able to put more
weapons on the wings of the F-35. So, we were able to get much
better loads on the aircraft.
The A-10C, as we thought, in a low threat environment, with
more fuel and more weapons, they really do a very good job. And
the other part about the A-10C is that they specialize avionics
for those three missions that you have mentioned.
And one thing that can't be overlooked is that there is 40
years of experience close to the ground with the A-10 and
training really matters. We had, in the second part of the
testing in March, we had A-10 pilots, former A-10 pilots, that
are now part of the F-35 force.
Mr. Gallego. Mr. Behler, just because I want to get a
couple more questions in, I am going to cut you off.
Mr. Behler. Okay.
Mr. Gallego. When will get the full report? As to the
committee.
Mr. Behler. Well, the committee will get the full report
with the Beyond LRIP [Low-Rate Initial Production] Report which
I hope is going to be at the end of this year. But we analyze
the data. I would be happy to come at the right forum and give
you the data as we see it when we have it.
Mr. Gallego. And who will be responsible for the final
report? Will be it OT&E or the F-35 Joint Operational Test
Team?
Mr. Behler. It will be me.
Mr. Gallego. It will be you.
Mr. Behler. I write the final report. It is called the
Beyond Low-Rate Initial Production Report.
Mr. Gallego. Okay. And then what action does the Department
intend to take based on this testing? Operational changes,
change the deployment of the aircraft, or changes in terms of
acquisition plans?
Mr. Behler. For the F-35 or?
Mr. Gallego. For the A-10C.
Mr. Behler. Well, I think--we did find something that we
are finding, and we found the other day when we flew the F-35
in combat, is when we flew the fifth gen and the fourth gen,
there was a very good synergy of the two platforms.
The F-35 works as a great quarterback. It is like a mini
AWACS [Airborne Warning and Control System] out there. Data
fusion, to be able to coordinate with the fourth gen really
provides a good performance.
I think the biggest thing that may come out of this is
developing new tactics to be able to do these missions and with
a fifth-gen, fourth-gen mixture.
Mr. Gallego. Okay. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Norcross. Mr. Cook.
Mr. Cook. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to get back to
the F-22. I am not happy at all, but that is ancient history.
It is gone. What I am unhappy about, I still always ask the
questions about the parts for the F-22. And here we go again.
Why have that aircraft if you don't have the parts for it?
It is just like the F-35. And I am showing my ignorance, but I
think that is unpardonable, because that is a great aircraft,
just as we are finding out about the F-35.
I had more questions about the F-35, it is too expensive,
and I was probably the biggest pain on this committee, which I
haven't changed at all.
But how can we ensure that that F-22, particularly in NORAD
[North American Aerospace Defense Command] and everything else,
and that is going to be one of our major points of--that they
have those parts. I am going to start asking over and over
again. Because I think there was C4 or C3 often, which means
not combat ready or not deployable.
General Holmes, by the way, thank you for Red Flag,
everybody on this committee should go there, it was fantastic.
General Holmes. Thank you, Congressman. I, you know, I
agree with you that the Air Force, we need to sustain the
aircraft that we have and what I would come back to is the
budget pressures that the Air Force was under with the Budget
Control Act and the tight budgets that we looked at, and going
back to the chairman's comment of a limited budget. Trying to
balance through that period.
Mr. Cook. Yes, I know, but a few of us here, Mike Turner
always raises hell for the Air Force if he has had a haircut or
not.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Cook. But there is a number of us that are strong
advocates, and you remember when the U-2 was going to be
killed, and General Scaparrotti said No, I need it in Korea.
And I think it was one of the best decisions. By the way, I
like the part where the U-2 is up--and that thing, the U-2 was
not as old as I am, but it is getting close, because I am lying
about my age every year.
Admiral Winter. Sir, if I could, this year we moved almost
half a billion dollars in----
Mr. Cook. I know, I know. And I love it. And just the fact
that you take the frame, you do it all over again, put all
the--I think that is, you know, a way to go. So, I am very,
very happy with it.
Admiral, on the F-35 variant with the machine gun, are the
problems over where that works external? I thought it was
something problem or kind of, and I am not an aviator,
obviously. I am a ground guy. But have we solved that with the
machine gun? External? Maybe that is a bad phraseology to the
aircraft. You know what I am talking about, I think.
Admiral Winter. Yes, Mr. Congressman, thank you. For the F-
35A, they have an internal machine gun, Gatling gun. And for
the F-35B and C, they have a pod----
Mr. Cook. Okay.
Admiral Winter [continuing]. That is on the center line
that is----
Mr. Cook. I am talking about the B and C, primarily.
Admiral Winter. Yes, sir. So, we have overcome the
manufacturing inefficiencies that were the initial concerns of
those gun pods with General Dynamics. And to date now, the
testing of those gun pods are meeting the specification. The
lethality evaluation is still ongoing by the operational
testers.
Mr. Cook. Good. My last question.
And, Mike, close your ears. The S-400 [Russian anti-
aircraft missile system], which as we know, we have had
discussions with some of our allies that are acquiring the F-35
and also the S-400, this is going to be a problem with NATO
[North Atlantic Treaty Organization] allies, I am afraid.
How concerned is anyone on this panel with the fact that we
have perhaps one of the greatest aircraft, and you look at the
screen, and no one detects us. It is going to change if we have
that interface of technology, what have you. Any? No one wants
to tackle that one at all? Probably smart reply. But yeah,
Admiral.
[Laughter.]
Admiral Winter. Well, sir, I will take the first stab.
First of all, the Department and the administration has been
very clear that an S-400 and an F-35 is incompatible, and we
are on the record for that. And senior administration continues
to have open dialogue with their counterparts in the government
of Turkey.
From an F-35 perspective, we have been given direction to
ensure that we can minimize any disruption from supply chain,
for example. In the event if anything occurs later this summer,
we are tracking to the first aircraft arrival which are those
two Turkish aircraft that are scheduled to fly into country in
November, which will not occur if they procure the S-400.
I stay out of the S-400, but from an F-35 perspective, I
can give you confidence that we are doing the appropriate
actions in advance to minimize production disruption and to
safeguard the technology that we have invested in. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cook. Thank you, Admiral. I am done.
Mr. Norcross. Mr. Brown.
Mr. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am an Army guy and
for those of you that didn't view the hearing yesterday, the
Army fielded only four people to handle Army modernization. I
see you have doubled the number here. I don't know what that
says about the Air Force capability or capacity or readiness,
but we are glad to have you here.
Let me ask you about the F-35 and specifically the
lifecycle sustainment plan. And in the plan, it outlines a
approach to getting to $25,000 cost per flight hour. And I
think everyone seems to be in agreement that we can get there
by 2025 and please correct me if I am wrong.
And my question is, how has the cost to operate the F-35
fleet come down since the first IOC [initial operating
capability]? My understanding is that the cost controlled by
the industry team have come down by about 15 percent over the
past 2 to 3 years, and what actions is the Department doing to
reduce the cost to operate and support the F-35.
And whoever is best equipped to field it, you will know
better than I would.
Admiral Winter. Mr. Congressman, I will start that from
the----
Mr. Brown. Okay.
Admiral Winter [continuing]. F-35 JPO perspective first.
First of all the lifecycle sustainability plan, the LCSP, as we
call it, I will tell you that the traditional document is one
that usually gives strategic guidance. This time, the
Department took a different tact, and it is truly an
implementation plan, with crisp actions, with followthrough,
and metrics to track our ability to truly get our hands around
the lifecycle costs of F-35. And we use the LCSP as our
document to move forward with.
From a specific ``25 by 25'' [$25,000 by 2025] I will tell
you that our current F-35A cost per flying hour is $44,000.
That is on the record. That is actuals from fiscal year 2018.
We have targets over the FYDP [Future Years Defense Program]
and we have been doing--over the next 5 years to understand how
we can actually march down the cost per flying hour to get to,
as I said in my opening statement, to an affordable cost per
flying hour for the United States services. Because they have
other demands for those resources outside of the F-35.
Right now, we are targeting a $34,000 cost per flying hour
for the F-35A in 2024. We know the levers, we know the
initiatives in spare parts, in what we call depot-level repair.
Being able to repair those parts. The ability for our service
members to actually conduct the maintenance on the flight line,
which reduces the turnaround times, and be able to give them
the tools and the maintenance plans to be able to do that work.
Mr. Brown. So, are we confident that we can get to 25 by
25?
Admiral Winter. I will go on the record, sir, that 25 by 25
is a target.
Mr. Brown. Okay.
Admiral Winter. I am targeting 34 in 24.
Mr. Brown. Okay.
Admiral Winter. So, it----
Mr. Brown. Let me, if I can, because I have another
question, and I don't have much time.
Admiral Winter. Yes, sir.
Mr. Brown. Like Representative Cook, oh he is no longer
here. I am not really a ground guy, but I love the ground guys.
I was rotary wing, so I am low and I am slow, and I like the A-
10. And I know that you have talked about the A-10 versus the
F-35 in terms of assessing its mission performance.
Moving away from that, given the conversation that we have
been having about F-35, F-15X, what does that mean for the A-
10? Are there, you know, and in terms of between now and when
we project to be the last flight hour of the A-10 and the
milestones between now and then, has any of that changed? And
when is the last flight hour of the A-10?
General Holmes. Thanks, Congressman. We like the A-10 too.
And when you do the analysis, it is our most cost-effective and
effective platform in that permissive environment to operate.
And we plan to keep the A-10, we plan to re-wing A-10s, we
plan to get to the rest of their structural issues and what we
call the hog back. And when you take care of wings and the hog
back, the airplane can fly a long time. Beyond the ability of
some of our other fourth generation----
Mr. Brown. And let me just say this in my last 30 seconds,
what I like about the A-10, aside from the performance
evaluation, and the cost, and the fact that it is in the
Maryland National Guard.
But what I really like about it is the F-35 is highly
sought after. And everyone is going to be competing for that
air time, and for that mission. But the guys on the ground, the
men and women on the ground, they know that the A-10 has really
a limited mission set--that it is close air support and that is
what they want.
So, I hope that the A-10, and I am picking up perhaps where
McSally left off when she went over to the Senate. I hope the
A-10 has a long life remaining in the fleet.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Daigle. Mr. Chairman, may I have 1 minute to respond? I
just want to go back to the cost per flying hour for the F-35.
The JPO estimates--in 2024 is $34,000 per hour. For the As,
our estimate's $36,000 per hour for the As, about the same.
The Department doesn't see a path to get to $25,000 per
flying hour by fiscal year 2025. There is a fair number of
studies going on right now that are going to provide some more
information to that.
But that is a target, and it is not our projections for
where we are actually going to be. And then after 2024, our
projections are that the cost per flying hour are going to
start to flatten out and increase a little bit because the
planes are starting to age, and we are going to have to bring
them back into depot and so the costs are going to increase at
that point, so.
Mr. Norcross. Mr. Gaetz.
Mr. Gaetz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And because I saw my
friend, the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Turner, scribing out his
potential rebuttal to Mr. Cook's comments about Turkey, I
wanted to echo Colonel Cook's concerns.
If Turkey wants to be treated like an ally, they need to
act like one. And I appreciate Admiral's statements about the
incompatibility of their plans with the S-400 and the F-35. But
I am increasingly concerned about Turkey's malign influence
campaign globally, and specifically in Venezuela.
And so, where they are extracting gold, they are bringing
it back to prop up the lira, and that is creating broader
instability. And so I think that the concerns with Turkey go
beyond just the S-400. I think there are other foreign affairs
concerns that we have with them, and I would be deeply
concerned about the delivery of the F-35 system to them at this
point given their broader bad behavior.
Moving more specifically to the subject of our hearing,
Admiral Winter, I represent the great folks with the 33rd at
Eglin Air Force Base that are engaged in the training mission
with the F-35. They have at times been concerned about the
delivery of parts so that they are able to complete the
training syllabus and get you your great aviators to go and
populate combat squadrons.
I have received more recent feedback that the standing up
of parts depots and the Congress' investment in additional
parts resources has been helpful. But can you provide an update
as to our expectations to deliver those parts, because what I
hate hearing from the 33rd is that, you know, they will send a
part for repair and then that part will head out to a combat
squadron and then we are kind of eating our seed corn.
And I know getting those parts to our combat squadrons is
important but if we are not training the next generation of
aviators, then ultimately that has an impact on the durability
of our mission. Admiral.
Admiral Winter. Mr. Congressman, thank you for that
question, and your concern is a valid one. Our training fleet
has been a priority behind our warfighter-coded--combat-coded
fleet. And as we ramp up our parts production and parts
delivery, we have gone back to the services, the Air Force,
Navy, and the Marine Corps, to ensure that those priorities are
aligned to their service priorities.
What is really bringing the training fleet back to full
capability is the modification from TR-1 to TR-2. So that is a
technical refresh of those older jets that are predominately
down at Eglin and being able to have the updated capacity for
computing, for displays, and for the radar and other systems
that will increase their reliability.
That will be completed by the middle of next year. Right
now, we are targeting June of 2020 of not all of just the
training, but for the entire fleet. That is a first order
effect of getting those, the 33rd specifically, up to the
reliability levels of the rest of the fleet. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Gaetz. I appreciate that. And one of the other benefits
that the 33rd has due to their location is that they are able
to access the Gulf Test Range in a lot of their work and in a
lot of the execution of the syllabus.
Can you speak to the importance within the training mission
of having access to the telemetry and radar systems that allow
our aviators to be well prepared when they head on to combat
squadrons?
Admiral Winter. Mr. Congressman, as the PEO for F-35, I
think that is more in the lanes of either General Holmes or
others.
Mr. Gaetz. Sure.
Admiral Winter. But we provide the compete capability and
the support for that training output.
Secretary Roper. Congressman, Yes, we are really struggling
with the mics here, but we are going to just try to push really
quickly to get in. So, I cannot underscore enough how important
our ranges are. I mean, we are dealing with a peer competitor
again, which means we are going to have to test in
operationally realistic environments. And they are going to be
places that we are going to trust simulation but there is
nothing better than getting data in the real world.
And so, the testing that we are able to do both in the Gulf
and in some of our other ranges is critical to getting
acquisitions correct. So, you will find us fierce champions of
keeping our ranges fully operational, fully funded so that we
get the benefits that they give Air Force acquisition and the
Department as a whole. Because we test more than----
Mr. Gaetz. And the Gulf Test Range offers unique
capabilities, right? Because it is the only place where we can
live fire over water and have munitions land on land, right?
Secretary Roper. Only place you can live fire over water,
you have got our program executive office for weapons is at
Eglin Air Force Base, so that is serendipitous. So, Eglin is a
very important base for us in the Air Force. It is important
for the nation.
Mr. Gaetz. And is it a good idea or a bad idea to launch
experimental missiles over oil rigs?
Secretary Roper. It is probably not a good idea,
Congressman.
Mr. Gaetz. Right, right. So, I think it is critically
important, as we are hearing you say, that in echoing Ms.
Hartzler's comments that, you know, our munitions development
is critical to execution of the National Defense Strategy to
meet our near-peer adversaries.
The only place we are able to do this particular type of
testing is the Gulf Test Range. And if 2020, if we do not take
action in the NDAA or otherwise, we are going to have oil rigs
there, instead of the weapons testing that we need to preserve
the country.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I yield back.
Mr. Norcross. Mr. Golden.
Mr. Golden. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just want to take a few
moments, gentlemen. First of all, thank you for the
conversation about the thinking behind your proposal for fifth-
gen, fourth-gen mixture. I appreciate that very much.
I want to echo the sentiments of Representatives Brown and
Gallego about the A-10 and just say that, you know, I hope that
you will continue to make sure that you maintain that asset and
that capability well into the future and think about it beyond
that. For the guy on the ground, the close air support is
awfully important.
That A-10 is impressive, you know, when you have some kind
of forward air controller out there with you, calling close air
support, and being able to get nice and tight. It makes a big
difference.
I know that doesn't figure into your testing, sir, but it
inspires confidence on the ground and the sound of that 30 mm
is just calming in its own special kind of way.
So, with that, let me just ask Mr. Behler, I would like to
join Mr. Gallego in any kind of briefing that you give when you
are ready to do that. So, thank you.
Mr. Behler. Yes, absolutely. And that should not be too
long from now that we will have the final results.
Mr. Norcross. Mr. Turner.
Mr. Turner. Thank you. I just want to begin by saying the
only rebuttal I have to Mr. Cook is he knows I have a 2 o'clock
haircut appointment today, so.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Turner. He just wants to claim credit for it, but he
already knows that I am having it cut at 2:00, so whatever.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Turner. The--not as a pressing issue as Turkey
obviously. Part of the problem I think that we have here with
the F-35 and the 15X discussion is that regardless of the fact
that the Air Force is saying that the recommendation for the
15X is not happening at the expense of the F-35, it is.
The Air Force is coming to us, requesting fewer F-35s in
the future. And my concern is that we are going to be repeating
the same mistakes that we have made before.
Admiral, as you know, our goal is more planes. The more
planes we buy, the cost goes down. We don't have an ability to
ramp up without having taken that step each and every year.
Both in our supply chain, I mean, we are an unreliable
purchaser.
So when we look to the supply chain and the need for people
to invest downstream, and they look forward as to what the
reliability of our commitment to purchase is, it is a riskier
invest.
So, each year, if we ramp up, our costs go down, the supply
chain gets a chance to respond. If we zig zag, if we go up and
down, if we have future projections that we don't meet, we are
affecting, we are causing our own problems in the delivery of
parts and in the ability of the production line to continue at
a faster pace.
Dr. Roper, you said that we are living currently with some
problems that were created in the past. Aren't we creating
those problems and continuing them in the future? Don't we need
to make a greater commitment to the F-35 for it to have the
sustainability in production, in supply chain, and in lowering
costs?
Secretary Roper. Congressman Turner, we are fully committed
to the F-35 and we are making those investments to get to full-
rate production. It is just a reality that the investments are
long lead. We have to get the total supply chain under control
and----
Mr. Turner. But isn't that true that it is a rolling long
lead? That if I don't make that decision this year, and then I
have to make it again next year, and then I have to make it
again next year, you institutionalize the inability of the
production line and of the supply chain to meet your needs.
Secretary Roper. Yes, yes, Congressman, you don't just look
at your supply chain for the immediate year. When we talk about
F-35 in the Department, we talk about the path to getting to
full-rate production and the investments that need to be made
in the supply chain to get to full rate. So, we are buying----
Mr. Turner. And so, you are currently planning on reducing
your planned buys of F-35As by 30 in the future year defense
plan and if I am in your supply chain and I look at that, and I
am making a decision for investment, you have just negatively
impacted my long-term plan which will not allow you in the
future to ramp up production in the supply chain, right?
Secretary Roper. So, Congressman, we are working very
diligently with Lockheed Martin to get to full-rate production
by Lot 15.
Mr. Turner. Doesn't that require that you buy them? I mean,
if you continue to project that you are going to reduce your
production, you can't get to full-rate production. And no one
is going to look at you as a reliable partner----
Secretary Roper. Congressman----
Mr. Turner [continuing]. By not taking that step of
commitment.
Secretary Roper. Yes, Congressman, I will certainly try to
allay your concerns. That we want to buy the max number of
planes that the line can produce in a healthy fashion. I am
sure Admiral Winter would be happy to go through some of the
issues that we are----
Mr. Turner. Well we actually had that hearing. We know that
there's extra capacity in the production line that can be met
right now.
Secretary Roper. But----
Mr. Turner. We know that.
Secretary Roper. But it has to be supported by the base----
Mr. Turner. Right.
Secretary Roper [continuing]. That can sustain that
production----
Mr. Turner. Dr. Roper--but we have had that--we have had
that meeting. We understand that the capacity is there. Now, if
you don't meet the full capacity this year, you are not going
to have an ability to increase capacity the following year,
because this is just stairstep. And if you flatline it, or if
you have a jagged commitment to purchases, you are going affect
that yourself.
General Holmes, it is great to hear you talking about the
A-10. You know, this is a very frustrating discussion to have
about the F-15X because, you know, there was no discussions
whatsoever about the F-15X just months ago.
But it is a 40-plus-year decision that you are making. Now
you sit in front of us and say how great the A-10 is but you
know the only reason you have the A-10 is because we had
hearings like this where the Air Force stood in front of us and
said we need to stop the A-10 and we would not let you.
Similarly, there have been programs where the Air Force has
said, we are going to go march this way, then we are going to
go march that way. How is it that a program gets--comes out of
thin air with just months? No requirements, no competition. A
40-year-plus decision gets just airdropped in the middle of the
Air Force long-range plan when there has been no discussion
about this previously.
General Holmes. Thank you, Congressman. Every year in my
term as the Air Force 5/8 [A5/8, Deputy Chief of Staff for
Strategic Plans and Requirements], the subject of more fourth
gen came up and the F-15X usually came up as part of that
discussion. And the reason is, is because it is a line that is
open. The A-10 line is not open. The F-15 line is open.
So, every year there are proposals that come in and every
year it has been considered. In the years prior to this year,
we had all the money that we could use was given to try to get
to 48 F-35s because of the limits on the budget.
And I do, I think there are a lot of people that are glad
we still have the A-10 but the reason the Air Force had a
discussion about the A-10 in the first place was because of the
Budget Control Act and limited budgets. It drove us to try to
make some choices and to bring choices to the Congress. I am
glad we still have the A-10.
This discussion has been made every year in the 3 years I
was the 5/8 and in the 2 years since then. The question is, why
this year? And I think the reason why this year is partly what
we talked about.
It is that the F-15C, we have more information it is not
going to make it. F-15Cs are parked now that we can't fly and
to try to get to 72 within the money that is available in the
Air Force budget, and the money that the Department of Defense
gives for the fighter portfolio, this was the way that we could
get to 72 airplanes. It was not affordable to get to 72
airplanes in the F-35.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Norcross. Mr. Carbajal.
Mr. Carbajal. Admiral Winter, the April 2019 GAO report
indicated that the F-35s were not meeting half of their
reliability and maintainability metrics, which obviously leads
to an expensive and less reliable asset that is costing a
sustainment cost of about $1.1 trillion.
This is challenging, especially when you consider the
supply chain problem that seems to exist. I understand that DOD
[Department of Defense] has taken steps to address this issue
and close the gap. But moreover, you mentioned that we are
behind 600 parts per month. This is obviously very alarming.
How are we addressing this? Can you provide us with an
update on this issue?
Admiral Winter. Mr. Congressman, absolutely, and thank you
for that question. I will make sure that I address the 600
parts to the production line, which aren't exactly tangential
to the reliability, maintainability improvement program. That
was the report subject by my colleague, Mr. Sullivan, which I
will say that, I appreciate the GAO's continued help and
engagement to ensure that we are keeping ourselves focused
across all lines of effort in the F-35.
From our spare parts and our production parts, our supply
chain is pressurized in being able to give the capacity of
output for spare parts and sustainment, and production line new
parts.
We have traced a couple of causal factors. One is the
slowness of our prime contractors to actually put out what is
called a purchase order. So being able to tell the supply chain
to start generating those parts.
We have helped our prime contractors to increase the
agility of their business systems to be able to do that.
Second, we have looked into our supply chain to determine
where the capacity barriers are, and we are providing resources
for them to increase capacity in the supply chain to generate
those new parts.
Third, we are removing their requirement to repair those
broken parts, and getting that stood up in our U.S. Air Force
and Navy depots so that we can get more parts to the flight
line for our maintainers to fix airplanes and more parts to the
production lines so we can reduce that backlog and keep the
production line moving forward.
Mr. Carbajal. So, if--to what extent has the problem now
been addressed though? Eighty percent, fifty percent, what kind
of success are we having?
Admiral Winter. So, sir, because of what I call the delta
growth, as we are ramping up the production so that the
capacity needed for more parts, because of the increased
production line, and the increased fielding of aircraft into
our warfighter's fleets.
The demand signal we can measure, but we do not have a
stable baseline of demand. That demand continues to move
forward. To give you a percentage of what we have accomplished
would be hard to calculate.
What I can tell you is that we have talked to the entire
supply chain, from Lockheed Martin in the airframe and Pratt &
Whitney in the propulsion system, and with consistent
engagement for their requirement to tell us where their
shortfalls are.
The majority of our supply chain is within the United
States. But there are areas of our supply chain that are in the
international domain that we need to continue to make sure that
that stays whole.
So, right now, my main focus to Lockheed and Pratt is to
make sure that their tiered suppliers, the first and second
tiered suppliers, are communicating where their shortfalls are.
That wasn't happening in the past. So I will take for the
record a percentage of the supply chain that has been engaged.
But I will tell you that the majority of that supply chain
has been engaged, and we have been identifying where those
bottlenecks are in the supply chain, and we are tackling them
as we get them identified.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 161.]
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Norcross. Mr. Bacon.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have a whole series of
questions so if we have time afterwards, maybe I can get a
second round in if time allows. Well, first of all, thank you
for being here.
I have worked with General Holmes and widely respected and
trusted and it is good to see you again. Especially with a
couple more stars on. So, congratulations. And my first
question is, what I think I heard from you today, was a strong
affirmation for the F-35, F-15 mix. But do I have that right?
General Holmes. Yes, sir. The F-35 is the future of the Air
Force. And to get us through this period, we need to pursue a
mix of airplanes and this is the most cost-effective way to do
it.
Mr. Bacon. You know, it seems to me we are in this
situation because we canceled the F-22 production around 2010.
Is that a fair judgment?
General Holmes. Congressman, I think that is certainly a
factor. That we canceled the F-22, and then we made decisions
to wait based on what we hoped could be accelerated in the F-
35, and it turned out it wasn't able to be accelerated.
Mr. Bacon. Right. What is our air-to-air superiority
requirement? And how much does the F-22 fulfill of that
requirement?
General Holmes. Right now, we have performed air
superiority requirements to [Off mic], certainly, on the front
lines in inter [Off mic]. We will continue to bring
modernization requirements as every day, our adversary gets a
little bit better, every day, it gets a little harder to
maintain that purpose. Looking for the shot that remains.
If you want to [Off mic] better the entire Air Force, then
[Off mic] air superiority [Off mic] for us to control the air
so that they can operate on the ground underneath it. So we can
take modernization [Off mic] critical [Off mic] its path to
work.
And at the same time, we are investing our money in new
technologies that will someday be a successor in the Armed
Forces' capability that will make sure we can do that into the
future.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. Go ahead.
Secretary Roper. And, Congressman, as we modernize the F-
22, one of the things that we are really excited about is
switching to open architecture. So, once we open up the
systems, that will give us a great tool to keep it current. We
will work software concurrently and modernization and
sustainment so that if the warfighters' needs shift between
modernization to sustaining and back to modernization, we will
have a production pipeline that can deal with that.
But open systems have to be our standard going forward. We
have to design things up front for sustainability.
Mr. Bacon. Right.
Secretary Roper. So, that is a lesson learned that we are
taking to all new programs, but I am excited to get it on F-22.
Mr. Bacon. Come back to the Echoes. This is like my third
question, I was going to come back to you on it. But I want to
ask Admiral Winter.
On the F-35, you know, we had this giant sensor, all these
sensors on the F-35. Are we making progress on getting that
data off the jet, real time, back to your operations center, so
that the follow-on sorties have that data before the F-35
lands.
Admiral Winter. Mr. Congressman, that is a great question.
Internally, from a tactics perspective, our multi-functional
advanced data link communication amongst F-35s is the primary
information exchange. And then our Link 16 conduit to other
non-F-35, not just airframe, but from surface ships to
satellites and everything in between.
From a data engagement on the aircraft itself, to be able
to come back from a mission planning, and more importantly,
from a threats-based affects to be able to update our mission
data files, we are challenged in being able to meet the
turnaround times that our warfighter needs.
General Holmes has made it crystal clear that we need to
get our mission data file reprogramming agility up to speed. We
need to get our simulators ahead of the aircraft software
releases, and we need to get our ALIS system up to speed to be
able to generate at scale the growing fleet.
We have initiatives, investment initiatives, supported by
this subcommittee, on all three of those efforts to get after
that. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Bacon. Yes. This is a real important issue, Mr.
Chairman. You have phase 2, phase 3, your best sensors are the
F-35, maybe the F-22, perhaps the B 21 in the future. But we
have to get that data off real time, because there is other
guys getting ready to go into the fight. And they can't wait 2
or 3 hours for the aircraft to land. So I think it is an
important problem to work on.
Dr. Roper, you already talked about this a little bit. You
know I have been a big advocate for the modular open system
architecture, or last cycle we were calling it SOSA [sensor
open systems architecture]. Now we are calling it MOSA [modular
open systems approach]. Are we making good progress when it
comes to EW [electronic warfare] and ISR with these open
architectures?
Secretary Roper. Congressman, we are. It is much easier to
do when you are in the design of a program. You make it one of
the criteria for the competitive award.
For programs that we already have designed from the past,
we are really having to work hard to get it into them as part
of the sustainability imperative. Things like F-22, the F-35
and Block 4 when they get TR-3 will have open systems on it.
It is a challenge because if the system wasn't designed for
it, you have to do a lot more work to put it in after the fact.
But in terms of lowering cost for sustainability and keeping
the warfighters' edge through the ability to modernize it, it
is completely worth it.
Mr. Bacon. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I am out of time, but if we have time to come
back later, I do want to talk about the light attack program.
Because there is some question about where we are at with that.
Medium-altitude ISR, want to have some information there. And
also some EW questions.
But, if we have time when we are done.
Mr. Norcross. Ms. Hill.
Ms. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all.
General Holmes, you just talked about the challenges on air
superiority to near peers. We just heard yesterday from
NORTHCOM [U.S. Northern Command] that the F-35's the best
possible way of combating the challenges that we are facing up
north in the Arctic Circle, from Russia.
And I am just curious, the thoughts around moving to the
15X. How are we looking for that in the long term? How are we
going to be able to keep the edge? Keep the warfighter's edge?
And I guess this question goes to anyone who wants to chime in
on it.
General Holmes. As I think I understand the question is
that if we invest in the F-15X instead of the F-35? How about
now? How about now? There we go, thank you. It is the impact of
F-15Xs in the homeland defense role vice the F-35.
We'll--right now our day-to-day alert of the United States
is covered by a mix of F-16s and F-15s. And as we go forward in
the future, we will have a mix I think of fourth and fifth gen
threats. For some of the scenarios, having a big airplane that
carries a big payload and an electronically scanned radar that
can find cruise missiles won't be in a threat environment that
requires that very sophisticated low observability of the F-35.
For some cases, where you are trying to move forward and
take on long-range bombers that are escorted by sophisticated
fighters, and shooting long-range cruise missiles, it will be.
So, I think you will see a mix of the forces presented to
the NORTHCOM just like you will see a mix in the forces we
present to other COCOMs [combatant commands] of fifth gen and
fourth gen, and they will have a requirement for both.
Ms. Hill. Okay. So, oh, go ahead.
Mr. Behler. I would like to add a comment about how we are
going to test these things. So, we have a Joint Simulation
Environment that is getting close to being complete and we will
be putting the F-35 in a test in there to fight against
simulated accredited threats like the J-20, J-21, surface-to-
air threats, electronic warfare, in an environment that we
can't do in open air.
So, going forward, as we develop the Block 4 and other
capabilities, the B-2 and other fifth-generation assets will
have to use this simulation environment to really look at the
capabilities that it has against the fifth generation.
I will add one more point, is that fifth-generation pilots
like to fight against fifth-generation threats. And today, we
do not have any fifth-generation full-size threats that we need
to think about in the future.
Ms. Hill. But aren't we going further out, isn't that the
long-term issue that we are doing to be dealing with, right?
Today we have got F-15s--I am sorry, F-15Es, F16s, where do we,
you know, I feel like we are going to be moving into a more and
more challenging environment.
We are not getting to a point where we are going to be
moving into fully functional fifth-generation and all-fifth-
generation fleet. And by the time that we are having this
conversation again, we are already going to be moving into
sixth generation.
So, you know, what does this mean for the long-term
sustainability, and then going back to what my colleague said
earlier, the supply chain, I think that is a real challenge
that we have when we are not making predictable procurement,
then how are we going to ensure that we do deal with those
challenges on an ongoing basis. Anyone.
General Holmes. I guess the--thank you, Congresswoman. The
one thing I would add is that as we said, we love the F-35, we
are committed to the F-35. We have not budged from our total
buy, and the total program, and our goals to acquire the F-35.
It is a question of when and how and how will we pay for it
and how will we continue to modernize the airplane to adjust it
to improving threats. Thank you, though, for your interest in--
--
Ms. Hill. So, can you talk about the cost per hour on the
F-15X? I know that you talked about trying to get it down to
$25,000 for the 35. What do we project as the cost per hour on
the 15X?
General Holmes. Mr. Daigle, you want to?
Mr. Daigle. Yes, I think I will say something. All right. I
will tackle that one, but first let me go back to the
operational side of the conversation.
Even in the high-end warfights, there will be, as General
Holmes said, instances of which you need penetrating aircraft
going forward.
But there will still be missions in the high-end fight
where you don't need those assets. Where you still need cruise
missile defensive air bases, for example, like. And in that
situation, for those missions, having a higher inventory of
weapons on the plane makes more sense than investing in the
stealthy aspects of that plane because you don't need them to
go forward.
The 15X cost per flying hour estimate, between 2020 and
2035, which is the way we did it in program budget review this
year, is $29,000 per flying hour. The F-18s, by way of example,
the F-18E/Fs right now are about $23,000 per flying hour. F-
15Es I think are sitting right around 34, but they are a little
bit older than the EXs would be.
Ms. Hill. Okay. Thank you. And then, General Holmes and
Lieutenant General Ierardi, I was hoping you could talk a
little bit about the role that the U-2 still plays in the
modern world knowing that there is probably some skeptics that
think that with drones and satellites, why are we still flying
these 50-year-old planes. But what makes their ISR capability
unique?
General Ierardi. Just from the joint perspective, I mean,
the balance of capabilities are important. So, you know, while
we develop enhanced capability in all domains--and we are
certainly pressing to do that--retaining the capability to do
things, to surveil and recon targets from all realms remains
important. Especially in the near term as we look out into the
2020s and the kinds of capabilities we will require.
Ms. Hill. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Norcross. Mr. Wittman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
our witnesses for joining us today.
I want to go to our Air Force members here. We have gotten
a sneak peek of a pretty exciting aircraft, the XQ-58A Valkyrie
UAV [unmanned aerial vehicle] platform that has a tactical
capability there. Pretty amazing in what it will do with both
defensive and offensive counter-air measures. Also being able
to soak up enemy fire. Also being able to take on enemy air
defenses.
Let me ask a question about how that platform, first of
all, is going to be integrated into the fight. And we look at
certain concepts, the whole idea, will it fight by itself, will
it integrate in with existing aircraft, will it kind of be a
wingman in that battlespace.
Secondly is, has it been developed so that--and we know
that systems out there like Link 16 where these systems get to
not only talk to each other, but talk to other systems out
there.
Is this, XQ-58A, is it being developed to work directly
with the F-35 and if so, how will that affect where you are
operating now in future contested airspace. And what will this
do to either change the way we fight or to give us additional
capabilities in what we do in that high-end fight.
General Holmes. Thanks, Congressman. And I am sure that Dr.
Roper may want to add something to this.
I would start by saying that we are testing some exciting
things and part of the reason we are testing these exciting
things is because of Dr. Roper coming over to join us as our
senior acquisition executive and bringing over some ideas and
helping our guys come up with new ones.
I think the test article of the Valkyrie as you spoke is a
test of a lower cost, more attritable, more affordable resource
that we are now flying, and we will have the chance to fit into
some of our concepts and see how it works.
It is a test article that still would have to have sensors,
would have to have the command and control system to make it
work, would have to work through the weapons part, and I think
the goal of flying it is to get it out there and test it and
experiment with our fourth- and fifth-gen existing airplanes
and with the things we might field in the future, and see how
they work.
I would also like to give a plug to the Air Force's
warfighter integration capability, an office that we have stood
up in our headquarters Air Force A5 that is focused on exactly
what you spoke of, sir, to come up with concepts for the future
on how to do these things better.
Secretary Roper. Congressman Wittman, you and I have spoken
about this many times. When I was in OSD [Office of the
Secretary of Defense], I thought there was a powerful role to
give a high-end fighter a wing man that you could take risk
with, that you could attrit, that would not necessarily have to
return and land. And the Valkyries platform that we have
started, and an OSD program called Avatar that we are now
promoting into a 6.4 or prototyping program called Skyborg.
The initiative is to do precisely what General Holmes said.
And that is to try to determine what sensors, what payloads,
what networking do we need to put on it to give the fighter
pilot a huge advantage flying against an enemy that does not
have the ability to take risk.
So we will learn this not just by doing technology
demonstrations, we are going to be working with the operator,
with the warfighter. And we are excited to see where this
program goes.
And in terms of where it goes, when the F-35 gets Tech
Refresh 3, it gets a system called open mission systems, which
would allow the F-35, if we so chose, to command and control
UAVs. So, the pilot would truly be able to quarterback a team
of systems. It sounds like the future, but it is here. And we
hope that the Valkyrie will help us get that over the goal
line.
Mr. Wittman. Well, the Valkyrie too is very, I think,
appropriate because we look at costs and how we get more per
our unit cost, as you and I have talked about, than our
adversaries get per their unit cost. We have to be able to do
more. We have the technology to do that.
The Valkyrie is one of those areas at a very low price.
About $3 million, roughly, per aircraft. If you make more, the
price goes down. I think it is particularly significant that
that is part of our strategy, too. Not only to invoke cost on
an adversary, but to save cost on our side.
One other thing, too, is as we talk about the F-15EX, will
the F-15EX be able to integrate in its air combat systems the
ability to work jointly then with the Valkyrie in that
airspace? Because if we are going to be investing in that
aircraft out in the future, and it can't integrate with another
future platform there that gives it an enhanced capability,
then you do have to question the investment that we are making
now with that F-15EX.
Secretary Roper. Congressman, that is what we are currently
working. So, I have given the authority to our program office
to develop an acquisition strategy. We have talked about the
importance of open mission systems. We think it is critically
important, if we pursue the F15-EX, to have it be an open
system. Not just for the sustainability, but for the option to
do the things you just mentioned, sir.
Mr. Wittman. Okay. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Mr. Norcross. That was the bell. I think we have about 10
minutes. So we are going to split the time between Mrs.
Hartzler and myself. A lot of great discussion. I want to hear
from the Joint Staff about the decision making on the F-15E.
What your view was it, why, and following up on Mr. Turner's
question, did this plane at this time, with capabilities that
are available, why was this one selected, and the view from
your end.
General Ierardi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Last year as the
NDS was--Secretary Mattis directed the NDS, National Defense
Strategy, but we also had a Joint Military Net Assessment that
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs had directed us to look at.
And this is, in shorthand, competitive areas that we assess
ourselves against our adversaries to understand the net
outcome.
In implementing the National Defense Strategy, the Chairman
also asked us to look at these competitive areas and what could
we do in the competitive areas which span the domains,
including the air domain, to enhance our competitive advantage
against our adversaries. And we, in the Joint Staff, looked at,
among other things, the requirement to have a mix of
capabilities that we thought would enable us to be successful
as we looked out to a 5-year period.
This occurred in the summer of last year in time to provide
some feedback into the program budget review in the fall. Our
perspective at the time was that first we needed to have the
fifth-generation capability for the high-end fight that we
envisioned that was captured in the National Defense Strategy
guiding the Department.
Second, we also saw that we had to have additional capacity
in terms of being able to meet the combatant commanders'
requirements in multiple locations, but also to reinforce a
main fight, if that happened, with more aircraft, more bombs,
the ability to have, while the F-35 program comes onboard over
the next several years, in greater quantities as we remain
committed to that program.
Filling that gap with F-15s, new F-15s, ones that could
carry greater ordnance, provide the combatant commanders in
multiple theaters with additional capacity, was something that
we saw as an important characteristic.
And so, as this came together in the fall in the program
budget review, we looked at this from the standpoint of a
balance of capabilities that was appropriate as we looked to
the future.
Mr. Norcross. So, what I heard is capacity was important.
General Ierardi. Capacity was important.
Mr. Norcross. So, did you look at doubling down additional
resources for F-35 issues out there as a possibility?
General Ierardi. It was a possibility. Cost was a factor.
Capacity was, in our assessment, a main factor but cost was a
factor. And given that balance, as we looked at some of the
numbers that CAPE was running in the Air Force, we thought that
a mix of aircraft was the best outcome.
Mr. Norcross. The F-15, let me just switch. Talk about some
of the systems; it is an active line. So, the F-15C of almost
30 years ago, and the one today. It was mentioned to us the
EPAWSS [Eagle Passive/Active Warning and Survivability System]
system and some of the radar because of the large diameter of
the fuselage was critical in this decision.
Can you touch base on that?
General Nahom. Yes. The, the F-15EX has got some
significant advantages over the C model just because of the
development that was done over the years. And as Dr. Roper
said, the Qataris and Saudi Arabia certainly helped us with the
investment.
The APG-82, the AESA [active electronically scanned array]
radar on the front, the EPAWSS system, as well as the internal
computer that is going to come off the line and it is going to
help support some of these systems.
It is going to have many additional weapon stations over
what a C model has, which is going to give it some magazine
depth, which will make it very unique in certain mission sets,
especially in the counter cruise missile and other missions
that this aircraft can do. That is going to give you advantages
over what a C model can do right now.
Just purely over 30-plus years of technological advancement
into the F-15C. Much of that enabled by our allies.
Mr. Norcross. Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you.
Mrs. Hartzler. Sure. Thank you. I am going to take 2
minutes and then yield the remaining 3 to Representative Bacon.
But the F-35 baseline, and this is going to Mr. Sullivan,
the baseline program was developed concurrently doing
development, production, and testing all at the same time which
led to much of the cost and schedule overruns and now the
program office is taking a new acquisition approach to Block 4,
referred to as continuous capability development and delivery.
Given your acquisition expertise, do you think this
approach can be successful? I can't--Yes.
Mr. Sullivan. We have concerns because when we look at it,
the first thing is it is a $10.5 billion estimated investment
today and that is not for the complete program. That would be
through 2024. They don't have independent cost estimate yet,
which would usually be done by CAPE. They have their own cost
estimate.
But we like the independent estimates to go with a complete
business case before you sign a contract that is going make a
major investment of this kind of money, $10.5 billion. We would
also like to verify the technologies that are going to go on
the Block 4. Block 4 is a lot of new software and some hardware
as well. They are going to do a Technology Refresh 3, putting
in new processors and things like that.
There is going to be work done on the weapons bay, there is
going to be new weapon integration on there. I think Small
Diameter Bomb II, and a couple of other weapons. So, it is not
a small thing, obviously, given that money.
So, we have made a recommendation that it should be its own
major defense acquisition program because of--it meets the
statute, you know, $10.5 billion is a lot of money----
Mrs. Hartzler. Yes.
Mr. Sullivan [continuing]. For one single investment. So we
would like to see it have its own baseline. Right now, it is
just part of the F-35's, you know, the baseline aircraft's
program. So, the $10.5 billion has been----
Mrs. Hartzler. Yes.
Mr. Sullivan [continuing]. Kind of put in with the
baseline, at this point.
Mrs. Hartzler. I thought that was a very interesting
proposal you mentioned that in your opening remarks.
Thank you. I yield the rest of my time to Representative
Bacon.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. I know we are getting pressed here
with our votes. I will try to be real quick and just try to
make our responses to the point.
But my first is Dr. Roper. On the light attack, the Air
Force expressed commitment to a light attack platform, and now
it sounds like it has sort of pulled back from that, despite
the fact there has been a lot of investments made there.
We heard from SOCOM [U.S. Special Operations Command] that
there is a definite requirement for a light attack platform. So
where are we at with the light attack?
Secretary Roper. So, Congressman, I will begin but I am
sure that General Holmes will want to give the requirements
point of view. From an acquisition point of view, light attack
was an interesting approach to take. To go out and start
working with industry, gain experimental data to determine what
performance could be gained with commercially available
aircraft.
I think we have learned a lot working with the two vendors
and we are proud to continue working with them. I believe we
will be purchasing a few of each aircraft and going out and
continuing to do operationally realistic tests and look at some
additional modernizations.
But I think we have also learned that there are other
aircraft that could do the light attack mission. That there is
a case for turbojets, there is a case for drones. And so rather
than do what acquisition so often does, is commit early, we
want to make sure that we have experimented with every option
so that when we make the choice to proceed, we do so with
confidence and having as much data on the table as we can have.
Mr. Bacon. General Holmes, anything to add?
General Holmes. Just the authorities that Congress gave us
let us go fast. And let us work through--trying to work through
these decisions much faster than we would have been able to in
the past and we are grateful for that.
As we look at a light attack airplane, the requirements are
a mix of what would the U.S. Air Force use, and then how would
we use that role, that airplane, to partner with our allies in
places that don't need the higher end air assets, and with
partners that can't afford one.
So, all the way through the program, we have looked at,
could we acquire an airplane that's also there is an interest
in some of our partners that can't afford to operate an F-35
and maybe not even an F-16 to be able to have an aircraft that
fits their requirements. And we did our business case analysis.
Most of the people that would pursue a turboprop airplane
already have one or are acquiring one.
And so we wanted to open the aperture and look at some
other aircraft types, and see if we can find one that is low
cost to communicate, is low cost to operate, but still meets
the requirements for our partners so that they can do things on
their own and we don't have to do it for them.
Mr. Bacon. I have an RC-135 question then I will have to
wrap up. We keep hearing--I get mixed signals from the Air
Force on medium-altitude manned ISR, but yet we know on a phase
0, phase 1, nothing can replace it right now. I think there is
an ACC [Air Combat Command] study that says exactly that, in
fact. I just want to hear your view on the commitment towards
the RC-135 program. Obviously important for our district.
General Holmes. And Air Combat Command as well, sir; that
is, you know, that is half of what we do. We are going to
continue to pursue a mix of modernized air systems, but we also
want to look at the other ways to gather that information.
As the threat gets better and better and better as you
understand very well, they are capable of pushing our air
assets off further and further, which makes it hard for them--
--
Mr. Bacon. [Inaudible.]
General Holmes. No, yes, sir. In this preparing the
battlefield stage, there is, right now, there is nothing to
take the place of the RC-135. Over time as we look at Advanced
Battle Management System and as we look at the ISR flight plan
that General Jamieson has put together, we will be gathering
that information in a mix I think of overhead space systems and
airborne sensors.
But for now, there is no substitute for the mix that we
have which is why we are not advocating this year to remove
anything from what we have.
The RC-135, as you know, is continuously updated by Big
Safari and a fantastic effort to keep it relevant. And we
believe those airframes are sustainable for at least the near
term, and we will be weighing, like we have with all of our
platforms, these big-wing platforms as they reach the end of
our service life, should we buy another big-wing platform or is
it time to invest in a way to do that capability in phase 1,
and phase 2, but also out into phase 3 and phase 4. And those
are the decisions that we are weighing as we go forward. Thanks
for the question and for your interest in the subject.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Norcross. First of all, I would like to thank the
witnesses. It was a great discussion. We have some very big
decisions ahead of us. And certainly my colleagues for hanging
in there.
We are adjourned, thank you.
[Whereupon, at 10:56 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================
A P P E N D I X
May 2, 2019
=======================================================================
=======================================================================
PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
May 2, 2019
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING
THE HEARING
May 2, 2019
=======================================================================
RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. GALLEGO
Secretary Roper. We project the 173 A-10s that recently received
new wing sets, as well as those that will receive new wing sets via the
recently awarded re-winging contract, will have a wing-service-life
that extends to 2030 and beyond depending on mission demands.
[See
page 18.]
______
RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. CARBAJAL
Admiral Winter. The F-35 Joint Program Office (JPO) completed its
supplier capacity analysis via a Special Tooling and Test Equipment
(STATE) initiative in March 2019. This initiative assessed F-35
production and sustainment ``new build'' demands for the next seven
years across the fleet to address parts shortfalls and supply chain
challenges. During this process, the JPO engaged with all 114 of its
major suppliers. Of these 114 suppliers, 92 (80.7%) suppliers were
determined to have no capacity constraints while 22 (19.3%) were deemed
to have capacity constraints. Additional validation occurred for these
22 suppliers by conducting joint technical reviews for alignment to
meet required demand. This initiative aligns with the new Life Cycle
Sustainment Plan approved in January and moves toward a more agile and
accelerated supply chain to meet the fleet demand as dictated.
Delivering STATE to our production line and fleet, following contract
award, is the metric of success. Contract award is currently scheduled
for third quarter 2019 with delivery to follow 18 to 24 months after
(approximately 2021).
[See page 29.]
?
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING
May 2, 2019
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. NORCROSS
Mr. Norcross. The subcommittee understands that the analysis of
alternatives (AOA) for ABMS is not formally considering Ground Moving
Target Indicator (GMTI) as a requirement. Rather, the service intends
to count the GMTI requirements analysis done under the prior JSTARS
recap AOA as part of the ABMS analysis. If the ABMS AOA isn't actually
examining GMTI, how will you ensure that the requirement is fully
considered and addressed?
Secretary Roper. The National Defense Strategy (NDS) directs a
renewed emphasis on operating in and developing capabilities for
unfriendly and contested environments. Potential adversaries are
fielding capabilities with the intention of keeping U.S. platforms away
from the fight so that they are unable to achieve their operational
mission. Within this contested environment, they are also fielding
capabilities over large areas that can hide and move quickly with the
intention of increasing the difficulty of finding, tracking, and
negating potential targets. Therefore in accordance with the NDS, ABMS
is a family of systems that aims to address these challenges and
achieve multi-domain command and control. GMTI is a critical component
of these capabilities and is included in our ongoing analysis.
Mr. Norcross. The subcommittee understands that Combat Rescue
Helicopter is scheduled for first flight later this month and a
Milestone C decision at the end of FY19. FY20 budget briefings indicate
that the Air Force intends to make two low rate initial production
awards in the next 12 months, one immediately after Milestone C and the
other in April 2020. That would bring the total LRIP buy to 22 aircraft
in a six-month period. Please describe how the service and the program
are going to manage any risk associated with this aggressive LRIP
procurement and what measures are in place to ensure production
milestones are met? Is the program capable of executing to this plan?
Secretary Roper. Yes, the Air Force is confident we can execute our
plan for the Combat Rescue Helicopter program. The Air Force program
office works closely with Sikorsky and the Defense Contract Management
Agency to manage program development and production risk, and will
continue to do so during production. The planned low rate initial
production (LRIP) award schedule reduces risk due to supplier base
performance and is based on their lead time requirements. Each
production lot will deliver sequentially in accordance with
appropriation law.
Mr. Norcross. The subcommittee understands that Combat Rescue
Helicopter is scheduled for first flight later this month and a
Milestone C decision at the end of FY19. FY20 budget briefings indicate
that the Air Force intends to make two low rate initial production
awards in the next 12 months, one immediately after Milestone C and the
other in April 2020. That would bring the total LRIP buy to 22 aircraft
in a six-month period. Please describe how the service and the program
are going to manage any risk associated with this aggressive LRIP
procurement and what measures are in place to ensure production
milestones are met? Is the program capable of executing to this plan?
General Nahom. Yes, the Air Force is confident we can execute our
plan for the Combat Rescue Helicopter program. The Air Force program
office works closely with Sikorsky and the Defense Contract Management
Agency to manage program development and production risk, and will
continue to do so during production. The planned low rate initial
production (LRIP) award schedule reduces risk due to supplier base
performance and is based on their lead time requirements. Each
production lot will deliver sequentially in accordance with
appropriation law.
The Air Force's planned LRIP schedule minimizes production gaps and
is based on production lot lead times to ensure timely delivery of
combat search and rescue capability. The Combat Rescue Helicopter
contract contains pre-negotiated fixed priced options for the low rate
production, each with a unique production lead time to allow the prime
contractor to contract with its supplier base for that lot's material.
To avoid a gap for supplier and Sikorsky production, LRIP lot 2 (FY20)
needs to be exercised seven months after LRIP lot 1.
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MRS. HARTZLER
Mrs. Hartzler. The EPAWSS electronic warfare suite upgrades were
originally planned for the F-15C and F-15E. The Air Force now plans to
purchase F-15EX aircraft to replace the F-15C, and no longer intends to
upgrade the F-15C with EPAWSS. If the current acquisition strategy to
purchase F-15EX is not realized, what is the Air Force's plan to ensure
F-15C aircraft receive needed upgrades such as EPAWSS to ensure the Air
Force receives capabilities that the F-15EX would otherwise provide?
Secretary Roper. If the current force structure strategy to procure
F-15EX is not realized, the Air Force would re-evaluate plans regarding
the sustainment and modernization of the F-15C/D fleet. If the Air
Force determines the F-15C/D fleet would have to be retained, then the
decision to not fund the Service Life Extension Program Longeron and
Service Life Extension Program Wings upgrades would have to be
reconsidered. Furthermore, significant and invasive re-wiring upgrades,
environmental control system modifications, and the addition of dual
Enhanced Global Positioning System/Inertial Navigation Systems would
have to be reconsidered. Additionally the Air Force would have to
decide whether to fund Eagle Passive/Active Warning Survivability
System, Active Electrically Scanned Array radars, Advanced Display Core
Processor II, Multifunctional Information Distribution System -Joint
Tactical Radio System, Mobile User Objective System radios, ALQ-128v2
electronic warfare countermeasure receiver, and other capability
upgrades planned to be resident in the F-15EX such as large area
displays and new high capacity data transfer modules. These plans would
have to account for significant aircraft downtime due to the extensive
modification/installations required if the plan is to bring the F-15C/D
fleet to an F-15EX-like configuration. Finally, the Air Force would
have to continue the full scale fatigue testing to identify what other
sustainment upgrades would be required to keep the F-15C/D fleet in
service and operationally effective. Current estimate to SLEP and
modernize the F-15C/D fleet to a configuration that is nearly
comparable to the expected F-15EX aircraft is approximately $11B.
Mrs. Hartzler. It's my understanding that the F-15X aircraft in
this year's budget are intended to replace legacy F-15C aircraft that
are rapidly aging out. The F-15C fleet is flown by Air National Guard
units around the country. In testimony earlier this year to the Senate
Appropriations Committee, the Chief of Staff of the Air Force, General
Goldfein noted that transitioning units across ``like-type'' aircraft--
in other words, from one model of F-15 to another--takes advantage of
common infrastructure, parts and equipment.
Would you elaborate on this and how do unit readiness and mission
conversion costs and schedules factor into this F-15X decision? For
example:
What is your estimate of the cost and time required to convert an
F-15C unit to F-15EX?
What is your estimate of the cost and time required to convert an
F-15C unit to an F-35 mission?
General Holmes. Conversion costs vary between locations. The costs
are less when converting units across ``like-type'' aircraft vs
converting different aircraft with different mission sets. For example,
we estimate that the readiness conversion for the F-15 C/D to F-15X
would be months, whereas it would be three years for an F-15C/D unit to
convert a unit to another weapon system like the F-35. As for the cost,
the F-15X should be able to use approximately 90% of the F-15 C/D
infrastructure and support equipment, and approximately 70% common F-15
parts. We would expect minimal use of operations and maintenance (O&M)
funds in the range of $10M-$20M and this would be refined during the
site surveys.
Converting an F-15C/D unit to an F-35 unit will require both
military construction (MILCON) and O&M funding in the $50M-$70M range.
A large part of the cost is constructing a 4-bay simulator,
modifications to squadron operations and aircraft maintenance unit
buildings, and power conversions in the hangars.
Mrs. Hartzler. How does the Air Force intend to field the new F-
15EXs? Will they be fielded across both the Active and Guard
Components? Which do you expect to receive aircraft first?
General Holmes. The AF intends to field the new F-15EX by
recapitalization of the F-15 C/D fleet across both Active and Guard
components. The first eight aircraft will go to test and to the Formal
Training Unit at Klamath Falls (Air National Guard); timing depends on
what is authorized in the National Defense Authorization Act. The first
three operational units will go to both Active Duty and the Air
National Guard. The exact bases will be determined through SecAF's
Strategic Basing Process.
Mrs. Hartzler. What steps should the F-35 program office take to
ensure that it continues to improve the air system's R&M performance
and meet the R&M metrics targeted performance levels?
Mr. Sullivan. In April 2019, we recommended that the Secretary of
Defense should ensure that the F-35 program office take the following
steps to improve the air system's R&M performance; 1. assess whether
the Operational Requirements Document's (ORD) R&M targets are still
feasible and revise the ORD accordingly, 2. as it revises its R&M
Improvement Program (RMIP), identify specific and measurable R&M
objectives in its RMIP guidance, 3. as it revises its RMIP, identify
and document which RMIP projects will achieve the identified objectives
of the RMIP guidance, and 4. prioritize funding for the RMIP. DOD
concurred with the recommendations. The F-35 program office is
addressing the first recommendation by reviewing requirements with
applicable stakeholders. Officials stated that they may revise the ORD
or lower-level documents. The program is also currently in the process
of revising its RMIP and has considered including more specific
objectives, including a focus on improving aircraft availability and
mission capability. To continue to improve the air systems' R&M
performance, the F-35 program office should implement the other
recommendations as well.
Mrs. Hartzler. You have reported that the Block 4 effort should be
designated as a major defense acquisition (MDAP) program in its own
right and that it is at risk of experiencing similar cost and schedule
growth that the F-35 baseline program saw during initial development.
Should the program be designated as an MDAP and what does the program
need to do to avoid similar cost and schedule growth on Block 4?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes, the F-35 program's Block 4 should be designated
as an MDAP for better transparency and oversight. In April 2016, we
reported that DOD was not planning to manage its Block 4 effort as a
separate MDAP, and that this approach does not align with weapon system
acquisition best practices, which would likely hinder transparency and
oversight. As a result, we recommended that the Secretary of Defense
hold a Milestone B review and manage the F-35 Block 4 as a separate and
distinct MDAP with its own acquisition program baseline and regular
cost, schedule, and performance reports to Congress. DOD did not concur
with the recommendation, citing that it views Block 4 as a continuation
of the existing F-35 acquisition program, its most closely managed
system. Furthermore, DOD stated that it plans to use existing F-35
oversight mechanisms, like regularly scheduled high-level acquisition
reviews, to manage its Block 4 efforts. We continue to stand by our
recommendation.
To avoid additional cost and schedule growth, the program should
complete its Block 4 business case, including an independent technology
readiness assessment, an independent cost estimate, and an approved
test and evaluation master plan, before making additional development
contract awards planned for May 2019. In April 2019, we recommended
that the Secretary of Defense take these actions, but DOD did not
concur. In its response to our recommendations, DOD stated that the F-
35 program office has adequate cost, schedule, and technical maturity
knowledge to begin the development of initial Block 4 capabilities.
Given our findings on DOD's management of MDAPs over the last 17 years,
we continue to stand by this recommendation. Specifically, we have
found that when programs enter development with insufficient knowledge,
negative effects often cascade throughout the acquisition cycle. The F-
35 Block 4 program has already awarded development contracts without a
full understanding of cost, schedule, and technical risks associated
with new development efforts. For example, without an independent
technology readiness assessment, the program has not identified
potential critical technology elements and, as a result, may be at risk
of delaying the delivery of new capabilities.
______
QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. WITTMAN
Mr. Wittman. As Congress evaluates the Department's proposal to buy
new F-15EXs, there has been a lot of discussion about the costs of
operating and sustaining the F-15EX vs. the F-35A. Some within the
Department are claiming F-35 sustainment costs are so high that we
won't be able to afford an all fifth-gen fleet, and therefore we must
begin purchasing F-15EXs. However, it is my understanding that F-35
sustainment costs are coming down, and that all parties involved,
including DOD, have signed a plan to get the F-35A to a $25,000 Cost
per Flight Hour by 2025. General Holmes, in your estimation, do you
think there would be a significant difference in the sustainment costs
of these two fleets (F-35A and F-15EX) as we approach 2025 and beyond?
General Holmes. The F-35 Joint Program Office (JPO) and Cost
Analysis and Program Evaluation (CAPE) have estimated a target F-35
Cost Per Flying Hour (CPFH) of $35K in FY24. That would be an
improvement over current F-35A CPFH. CAPE has provided an initial
estimated F-15E/X CPFH of $29K. Once F-15EX is procured and more data
becomes available the CPFH can be further examined to bring CPFH below
the initial CAPE estimate.
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT
Mr. Scott. The Chief of Staff of the Air Force, General Goldfein,
in his testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee (SASC) last
month, referred to the crews of the Air Force's Joint Surveillance and
Target Attack Radar System (JSTARS) Wings as ``our Ph.D.'s of Battle
Management.'' He went on to say they are ``the doctors of battle
management that we need to lead us into the future.'' Those ``doctors
of battle management'' have done an outstanding job of transforming the
JSTARS weapon from its original ``Fulda Gap scenario'' solution into
the most capable airborne battle management system in the inventory
today that can handle any situation ``from Stakeout to Shootout'' as
the operators like to say. With their demonstrated aptitude to rapidly
field new capabilities, please tell me how you are going to leverage
the significant investment in technology and human capital resident at
the 461st and 116th Air Control Wings and the JSTARS weapon system to
field and exercise new advanced battle management capabilities in order
to maintain its warfighting relevance as you move toward your longer
term objective Advanced Battle Management System (ABMS) solution?
Secretary Roper. I want to thank both Wings for what they do each
day to help protect our nation and for their willingness to partner
together to create and field the future. Early warfighter involvement
is critical to the success of achieving multi-domain command and
control and ABMS. We are reaching across the traditional and non-
traditional technical innovation base as well as the operational
community to ensure the best operationally viable capabilities are
provided to our airmen as expeditiously as possible. We have developed
a strong partnership with Team Robins and the two Air Control Wings,
including establishing an innovation team across both Wings to help
catalyze new concepts and leverage the team's valuable expertise and
creativity. Our Chief Architect has met with the team down in Georgia
and most recently in Nevada as part of the Air Force Weapons School
Integration Exercise. As potential adversaries pursue capabilities
intended to deny our freedom of maneuver and proximity as well as
present dispersed potential targets over large geographic areas, we
expect our partnership to grow as we work together to make the Air
Force both ready and lethal.
Mr. Scott. General Holmes, I understand that the latest Service
Life Assessment of the E-8C Joint Surveillance and Target Attack Radar
System (JSTARS) aircraft now project the aircraft going into the latter
half of the 21st century and that the number of aircraft now in
Programmed Depot Maintenance (PDM) have returned to the historic
average of four aircraft. Thank you for your efforts to ensure that
this critical asset remains available throughout the transition to the
Advanced Battle Management System (ABMS). Last year the Air Force
defined three increments of ABMS, with Initial Operational Capability
(IOC) of Increment 2 to occur in 2028. Now we are hearing about
retirements of E-8C JSTARS aircraft beginning in 2024, when the FY2018
National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) prohibits retirement of
JSTARS aircraft until IOC of Increment 2 and ABMS is being described as
a ``strategy.'' Please describe what sort of breakthroughs have
occurred that would allow for a revised timeline, when the ABMS
``Architect,'' Mr. Preston Dunlap, was hired only earlier this year in
2019, the Analysis of Alternatives has not yet been completed,
submitted to and verified by Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation
(CAPE) within the Office of the Secretary of Defense, and how the Air
Force Budget Requests put forth so far would replace the capability and
capacity of the JSTARS weapon system in just five years from today.
General Holmes. The Air Force ensured all E-8C aircraft were funded
through the FYDP and understands the need to sustain the E-8C JSTARS
aircraft well into the future. The E-8C will be an essential part of
the Bridge Strategy to Advanced Battle Management System (ABMS), and we
are planning sustainment and modernization to that effect. The Air
Force has not committed to any timeline yet for JSTARS retirement, but
we do not intend for any retirements until we demonstrate the needed
capability and capacity.
The National Defense Strategy (NDS) directs a renewed emphasis on
operating in and developing capabilities for unfriendly and contested
environments. Potential adversaries are fielding capabilities with the
intention of keeping U.S. platforms, especially larger and slower
platforms, away from the fight so that they are unable to achieve their
operational mission. Within this contested environment, they are also
dispersing capabilities over large areas where they can hide and move
quickly with the intention of increasing the difficulty of finding,
tracking, and negating potential targets. Further, we have the
opportunity to achieve significant gains by combining the power of
integration and interoperability with the application of modern
technology and algorithms. Therefore in accordance with the NDS, ABMS
is a family of systems that aims to address these challenges and
realize multi-domain command and control.
ABMS will be a family of capabilities, not a single platform or
program. The Chief Architect is conducting a family of systems review
to develop the ABMS architecture and is tasked with horizontally
integrating the various domains and families of systems and identifying
and pursuing areas that need further development or enhancement. We are
pursuing continuous agile technology development and fielding on
multiple parallel paths, in order to deliver capability faster. That
makes an Initial Operational Capacity designation problematic, but I
think we will all be able to agree in the future when we have provided
the needed capability and capacity.
We have already funded some battle management command and control
capabilities and are developing others that will field within the next
few years. For example, one of our main efforts will be to modify the
Control and Reporting Centers (CRC), a ground battle management command
and control (BMC2) asset to receive ground moving target indicator
(GMTI) data from airborne assets. We are adding SIPRNet classified
connectivity, additional work stations (and manpower) for GMTI
operations, and we are making changes to the software that will allow
CRC battle managers to generate and use GMTI tracks. We are also
building communication links between GMTI operators and Sensor
Operators and a link between the CRC, Army, and Marine MTI users.
Finally, we are also working a communication link between the CRC and
all-source intelligence data at appropriate levels of security so that
battle managers can take advantage of the additional power of all-
source intelligence data in their mission. In support of these efforts,
we are planning facility upgrades to incorporate even higher
classification data into the CRC and modifications to deployable CRC
BMC2 suites.