- MARKUP OF H.R. 1980, THE SMITHSONIAN WOMEN'S HISTORY MUSEUM ACT
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
MARKUP OF H.R. 1980, THE SMITHSONIAN WOMEN'S HISTORY MUSEUM ACT
=======================================================================
MARKUP
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
NOVEMBER 12, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available on the Internet:
https://www.govinfo.gov/committee/house-administration
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
38-612
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Committee on House Administration
116th Congress
ZOE LOFGREN, California, Chairperson
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois, Ranking
SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
Member
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARK WALKER, North Carolina
MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
PETE AGUILAR, California
MARKUP OF H.R. 1980, THE SMITHSONIAN WOMEN'S HISTORY MUSEUM ACT
----------
TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 12, 2019
House of Representatives,
Committee on House Administration,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 6:03 p.m., in Room
1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Zoe Lofgren
(Chairperson of the Committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Lofgren, Butterfield, Fudge,
Aguilar, Davis of Illinois, and Walker.
Staff Present: Sean Jones, Legislative Clerk; David Tucker,
Parliamentarian; Khalil Abboud, Deputy Staff Director; Peter
Whippy, Communications Director; Meredith Connor, Professional
Staff; Mariam Malik, Staff Assistant; Eddie Flaherty, Chief
Clerk; Courtney Parella, Minority Communications Director; Tim
Monahan, Minority Deputy Staff Director; Jesse Roberts,
Minority Counsel; and Jennifer Daulby, Minority Staff Director.
The Chairperson. A quorum being present, the Committee will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 4 and clause 2(h)(4) of House
Rule XI, the Chair announces she may postpone further
proceedings today if a recorded vote is ordered on the question
of approving a measure or matter or on adopting an amendment.
I am advised that our Ranking Member is in the elevator on
his way and that we should proceed so we will and I will do so
by making a few remarks.
Today, we are considering H.R. 1980, the Smithsonian
Women's History Museum Act. This legislation will establish a
comprehensive women's history museum within the Smithsonian
Institution.
I would like to commend our colleague from New York,
Representative Carolyn Maloney, whose tireless advocacy over
more than two decades laid the foundation for today's markup.
As a result of her hard work and the hard work of others, this
bill has 293 cosponsors, including 59 Republicans.
In fact, this bill is so popular that it was placed on the
Consensus Calendar, which was established at the beginning of
this Congress for bills with at least 290 cosponsors that have
not been reported out of committee. I applaud Congresswoman
Maloney's use of this new calendar, and I am pleased to now
exercise our Committee's jurisdiction during this markup.
It is impossible to tell the story of America without
telling the story of American women. From the days of our
Nation's infancy through today, the United States has benefited
from the contributions and sacrifices of women.
In colonial times, the Daughters of Liberty helped spark
the American Revolution. In our early days of independence,
Sacagawea guided Lewis and Clark on their infamous expedition.
In the lead-up to the Civil War, Harriet Tubman escaped from
slavery and guided dozens of slaves to freedom. A few decades
later, women like Susan B. Anthony dedicated their lives to the
fight for women's suffrage.
During World War II, 6.5 million women entered the labor
force to support the war effort. One of them was my mother, who
worked at the Douglas Aircraft plant in south San Francisco
making planes for the war effort. Later in the 20th century,
Rosa Parks sparked the Montgomery bus boycott and Sandra Day
O'Connor took the bench as the first woman appointed to the
Supreme Court.
In 2007, we elected our first woman Speaker of the House,
and, in 2019, we elected the same woman again. The American
people sent an unprecedented 117 women to represent them here
in Congress.
However, even with these and countless other
accomplishments by women in the U.S., historical accounts,
monuments, and museums disproportionately represent the
achievements of men while neglecting those of women. A variety
of studies have shown that history textbooks discuss the
accomplishments of men exponentially more often than those of
women.
As the report from the Commission established by Congress
to assess the need for a women's museum stated, of the 44
national memorials managed by the National Park Service, only 1
specifically honors the achievements of women. The
contributions and experiences of American women deserve
celebration and recognition, and I can think of few better ways
to do so than by establishing a women's history museum at the
Smithsonian.
The Smithsonian Women's History Museum Act mirrors the
highly successful National Museum of African American History
and Culture Act. Like that bill, this bill calls for a 50/50
split between Federal and non-Federal funding, a model that
worked very well for the African American History Museum. It
also expresses a preference for a museum site on the National
Mall.
I am hopeful that, today, nearly 100 years after women were
granted the right to vote, we will take the first step in
creating a museum to recognize these achievements and to
inspire future generations.
I would now like to recognize our Ranking Member, Mr.
Davis, for any comments he may like to offer.
[The statement of the Chairperson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Davis of Illinois. Thank you, Chairperson Lofgren.
Since its establishment in 1846, the Smithsonian has become
the world's largest museum, education, and research
organization. The Institution preserves and celebrates our
Nation's cultural heritage and advances scientific discovery in
multiple disciplines.
On behalf of the American people, Congress, the Board of
Regents, and Smithsonian management have a responsibility to
ensure the continued success of the institution for future
generations.
The Smithsonian has a broad mission--the increase and
diffusion of knowledge--and a bold strategic plan to support
that mission.
A critical goal in the plan is to reach one billion people
a year through a digital-first strategy. Making the
Smithsonian's rich collections, first-class research, and
empowering educational materials accessible to Americans across
the country, not just those that visit Washington, should be a
fundamental part of the Institution's strategy moving forward.
The Smithsonian, if able, should also have museums and
exhibits that allow every American to feel represented. I
believe a women's history museum, like what we are voting on
today, could help the Smithsonian accomplish that critical
goal, and I look forward to discussing this proposal today.
Thank you, and I yield back.
[The statement of Mr. Davis of Illinois follows:]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairperson. Thank you, Mr. Davis.
Without objection, the opening statements of all Members
will be included in the record.
The Chairperson. I now call up H.R. 1980. The clerk shall
report the title of the legislation.
The Clerk. H.R. 1980, a bill to establish in the
Smithsonian Institution a comprehensive women's history museum,
and for other purposes. Section 1. Short Title--
The Chairperson. Without objection, further reading of the
bill is dispensed with, and, without objection, the bill is
considered as read and open for amendment at any point.
[The bill follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairperson. Does any Member seek recognition?
Mr. Walker. Madam Chairperson, I have an amendment at the
desk.
The Chairperson. The gentleman is recognized, and the clerk
will report the amendment, and the gentleman is recognized for
five minutes in support of his amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment to H.R. 1980 Offered by Mr. Walker of
North Carolina----
The Chairperson. Without objection, the amendment is
considered as read.
[The amendment of Mr. Walker follows:]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairperson. Mr. Walker.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.
As this museum has been discussed in the past, Madam
Chairperson, many of my colleagues have expressed concern that
prominent women and conservative viewpoints will not be
properly depicted in museum programming. This amendment serves
to ensure that all viewpoints will be represented.
It is my hope that the museum will recognize women of all
backgrounds who have paved the way for others in all industries
and fields, including right here in the United States Congress.
The very first woman elected to Congress was a Republican,
Jeannette Rankin. Ms. Rankin was even elected before all women
in the United States had the right to vote. She said, ``I may
be first woman Member of Congress, but I won't be the last.''
She was right. Her words rang true. More than 300 women of
several different political parties have served in Congress
since 1917.
During this time, we have also seen the rise of figures
like Condoleezza Rice, Elaine Chao, and, on the Congress side,
Shirley Chisholm and Mary Norton.
As a father of two daughters, I am proud to honor the
achievements of these women and many others from both sides of
the aisle, as their hard work will give the next generation
limitless opportunities.
I urge my colleagues, on this amendment, to guarantee
diverse viewpoints and equal representation as the plans for
this museum move forward.
Thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairperson. Thank you.
Does any other Member wish to be heard on the amendment?
If not, I would simply say we are happy to accept this
amendment. It would not be the museum we want if everyone
wasn't represented, and we certainly approve of this amendment.
And we will move to a vote.
All in favor of the amendment will say aye.
All opposed will say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it.
The clerk can note this was a unanimous vote to accept the
amendment.
Mr. Davis of Illinois. Madam Chairperson, I move to strike
the last word.
The Chairperson. The gentleman is recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Davis of Illinois. The legislation before us today
establishes a comprehensive women's history museum within the
Smithsonian.
In the 113th Congress, I supported the legislation creating
the Commission which studied this issue. In its final report,
that Commission unanimously recommended the museum's creation.
Women have made significant contributions to the American
experience, and I agree with the commission that those
contributions deserve to be recognized in a dedicated national
museum.
With 293 bipartisan cosponsors, it is clear this
legislation has broad support within the House and is eligible
to be placed on the Consensus Calendar. I welcome this new
provision in House rules as a way for measures with broad-based
support to be considered. If it had been available in the past,
it would have been a helpful tool for me to use with some
legislation I have sponsored in the past. I speak from
experience that it is frustrating to see a bill with deep
bipartisan support be held hostage by a few individuals.
I will vote today to move this bill to the Floor, given
that so many of my colleagues support it. However, I do want to
note that I am concerned that the Committee has not held a
hearing specifically focused on this bill, as we did for
legislation establishing the National Museum of the American
Indian and National Museum of African American History and
Culture.
The Committee has a responsibility to fully examine both
the specific proposal as well as the Smithsonian's ability to
stand up a new museum while maintaining its existing facilities
and collections. To help ensure the success of the museum, we
and our colleagues must be cognizant of the scope of what that
endeavor and Federal commitment required--will be required for
its success.
I recognize the important work of the Commission and value
its report. However, their work should inform us but not
replace Congress's role to study the issue independently. While
this legislation and the topic of a new Smithsonian museum was
mentioned in a cursory way at the Committee's October 17
hearing, major issues were not explored in depth.
These issues include, first, the size. The museum size will
impact the location and cost of the museum. The Commission's
report and the CBO cost estimate envision a museum of under
100,000 square feet, significantly smaller than other
Smithsonian history museums. Is this adequate to cover the
scope and the breadth of a women's history museum? Would an
additional building be required for offsite collection storage,
and, if so, should it be authorized in this legislation?
The Smithsonian's response to my recent inquiry indicates
the size should be no less than 350,000 square feet, and I have
asked the CBO to revise its estimate based on this information.
If CBO's estimate of $190 million relies on a flawed assumption
of the museum's size, we have an obligation to correct it and
inform Members of the realistic figure for Federal costs to
support the museum.
Second, the location. H.R. 1980 directs the Board of
Regents to select from one of two sites or an alternate
location identified by the board within six months of
enactment. Has a comprehensive site assessment been conducted
to determine suitability for a museum of the appropriate size?
If not, is six months enough time for such an assessment to be
completed?
The two sites identified in the bill are under the
jurisdiction of the Architect of the Capitol and the National
Park Service. My question is, do these entities have any
concerns that should be addressed?
Third, I wonder about the capacity of the Smithsonian to
handle a new museum. As the Committee is aware and the
commission report noted, the Smithsonian faces several
facilities challenges: a deferred maintenance backlog of over a
billion dollars, a $900 million renovation of the National Air
and Space Museum, and 47 percent of collection storage space
identified as unacceptable. What is the Smithsonian's specific
plan and timing to address these issues, and how will the
addition of a new museum impact that plan?
Finally, the cost. What is the expectation of Federal
funding needed to address the maintenance backlog, support
ongoing facilities care, and provide for the construction and
operating costs of a new museum?
Absent a hearing in advance of this markup, I hope the
Committee can pursue any other appropriate mechanisms to
examine these issues, with the intention of providing a solid
foundation for the creation and making a reality the
Smithsonian Women's History Museum.
Thank you, Madam Chairperson, and I yield back.
The Chairperson. Thank you, Mr. Davis.
I think this is an important day in moving forward on this
issue. As you know, in past years, we have had hearings. And
you are right; we had a less detailed discussion with Secretary
Bunch. But I was taken by his comment, when he appeared before
us, that it took him 10 years to stand up the African American
Museum, and you don't get there unless you start. So, really,
this is a matter of starting.
We are going to have to keep oversight on this project. I
am sure there are things that will change. This is an
authorization, not an appropriation, so this doesn't mean this
is necessarily going to happen. It is subject to
appropriations. If we don't take this first step, we know it
won't happen.
And so this is a very important day for our Committee and
for our country to begin the process of this creation.
Mr. Davis of Illinois. Madam Chairperson, I move to strike
the requisite number of words.
The Chairperson. I am not quite finished.
Mr. Davis of Illinois. Okay.
The Chairperson. I will yield to you in a minute.
I just wanted to note also, because I don't think we
publicized this, but we have, Mr. Davis and I, reached out to
the Interior Subcommittee of the Appropriations Committee,
requesting robust funding in fiscal year 2021 to address the
Smithsonian's backlog of maintenance. It is time to step
forward and deal with that issue.
I remember, years ago, former Representative Vic Fazio was
first Ranking Member and then Chairman of this Committee, and
they decided they had to do something about the deferred
maintenance in the Library of Congress and in the Botanical
Gardens. And it was not cheap, but these buildings are held in
trust by us for the public. So they saved the Library, the
historic building, from further deterioration, as well as the
Botanical Gardens, and the public benefits from that today.
So I am hopeful that we can approach the Smithsonian
deferred maintenance backlog in that same spirit. I was
grateful that Mr. Davis joined me in sending that letter to the
Appropriations Committee.
And now I would happily yield to Mr. Davis for further
comments he might have.
Mr. Davis of Illinois. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.
And I, too, believe this is a historic day. And I do
believe that we will have nothing but a bipartisan vote and
bipartisan support to move this important legislation forward.
I felt it was just necessary for us to bring up some of the
concerns, and I look forward to addressing those through the
oversight process. I look forward to working with you,
advocating for this project to move forward with our
appropriate appropriations subcommittees and committee. And I
am excited to see the bipartisanship that we are going to be
able to exhibit tonight.
And I will yield back.
The Chairperson. Unless there are further requests to speak
or further amendments, the question is on H.R. 1980, as
amended.
All in favor will say aye.
All opposed will say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it.
The clerk will note that that has passed unanimously with
no ``no'' votes.
The Chairperson. The question is on reporting H.R. 1980, as
amended, favorably to the House.
All those who are in favor will say aye.
And we should note that our member Susan Davis, whose
flight was delayed from California, is here in time to cast her
vote for final passage of H.R. 1980.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it.
Without objection H.R. 1980, as amended is now reported
favorably to the House. Without objection, the staff is given
authorization to make technical and conforming changes,.
And there being no further business before the Committee,
thank you, Members, for participating in this great first day
and first big step forward on the creation of this women's
museum, and, without objection, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 6:20 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[all]