- COMBATING MONEY LAUNDERING AND OTHER FORMS OF ILLICIT FINANCE: HOW CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS LAUNDER MO- NEY AND INNOVATIVE TECHNIQUES FOR FIGHTING THEM
[Senate Hearing 115-405]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-405
COMBATING MONEY LAUNDERING AND OTHER FORMS OF ILLICIT FINANCE: HOW
CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS LAUNDER MONEY AND INNOVATIVE TECHNIQUES FOR
FIGHTING THEM
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
NATIONAL SECURITY AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND FINANCE
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON
BANKING,HOUSING,AND URBAN AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
ON
MODERNIZING THE UNITED STATES' ANTI-MONEY-LAUNDERING REGIME, EXPLORING
HOW CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS LAUNDER MONEY AND THE INNOVATIVE TECHNIQUES
THAT ARE AVAILABLE TO FIGHT THEM
__________
JUNE 20, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available at: http: //www.govinfo.gov /
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
33-424 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON BANKING, HOUSING, AND URBAN AFFAIRS
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho, Chairman
RICHARD C. SHELBY, Alabama
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
BOB CORKER, Tennessee
JACK REED, Rhode Island
PATRICK J. TOOMEY, Pennsylvania
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
DEAN HELLER, Nevada
JON TESTER, Montana
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
BEN SASSE, Nebraska
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
TOM COTTON, Arkansas
HEIDI HEITKAMP, North Dakota
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
THOM TILLIS, North Carolina
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
JOHN KENNEDY, Louisiana
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
DOUG JONES, Alabama
Gregg Richard, Staff Director
Mark Powden, Democratic Staff Director
Sierra Robinson, Professional Staff Member
Colin McGinnis, Democratic Policy Director
Dawn Ratliff, Chief Clerk
Cameron Ricker, Deputy Clerk
Shelvin Simmons, IT Director
James Guiliano, Hearing Clerk
Jim Crowell, Editor
______
Subcommittee on National Security and International Trade and Finance
BEN SASSE, Nebraska, Chairman
JOE DONNELLY, Indiana, Ranking Democratic Member
BOB CORKER, Tennessee
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
TOM COTTON, Arizona
HEIDI HEITKAMP, North Dakota
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
Ammon Simon, Subcommittee Staff Director
Nick Catino, Democratic Subcommittee Staff Director
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 20, 2018
Page
Opening statement of Chairman Sasse..............................
1
Opening statements, comments, or prepared statements of:
Senator Donnelly.............................................
2
WITNESSES
Dennis M. Lormel, President and CEO, DML Associates, LLC, and
Former Chief, FBI Financial Crimes Program.....................
4
Prepared statement...........................................
30
Responses to written questions of:
Chairman Sasse...........................................
54
Senator Warner...........................................
60
Tracy S. Woodrow, Senior Vice President and Bank Secrecy Act/
Anti-Money-Laundering Director, M&T Bank Corporation...........
6
Prepared statement...........................................
37
Responses to written questions of:
Chairman Sasse...........................................
61
Senator Warner...........................................
62
Chip Poncy, President and Co-Founder, Financial Integrity
Network, and Senior Advisor, Center on Sanctions and Illicit
Finance........................................................
8
Prepared Statement...........................................
42
Additional Material Supplied for the Record
Letter submitted by Fred R. Becker, Jr., President and Chief
Executive Officer, National Association of Federal Credit
Unions.........................................................
35
Letter submitted by Bill Cheney, President and Chief Executive
Officer, Credit Union National Association.....................
37
(iii)
COMBATING MONEY LAUNDERING AND OTHER FORMS OF ILLICIT FINANCE: HOW
CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS LAUNDER MO-
NEY AND INNOVATIVE TECHNIQUES FOR FIGHTING THEM
----------
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 20, 2018
U.S. Senate, Subcommittee on National Security and
International Trade and Finance,
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met at 2:35 p.m., in room SD-538, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Ben Sasse, Chairman of the
Subcommittee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN BEN SASSE
Senator Sasse. This hearing will come to order.
This is the third Banking Committee hearing on modernizing
our Nation's outdated anti-money-laundering regime. Today we
will explore how criminal organizations launder money and the
innovative techniques that are available to fight them.
I am pleased that Chairman Crapo is committed to examining
this topic because modernizing our anti-money-laundering
regime, AMLs, for the purposes of this hearing, is vital to
financial institutions in Nebraska and Indiana and across the
country. These vital institutions must spend millions of
dollars on sometimes unnecessary AML compliance efforts,
dollars that should be directed toward either more effective
anti-money-laundering activities or toward lending to local
businesses and farmers in States like Nebraska.
I have heard stories of financial institutions at home who
must file SARs or CTRs on fireworks sales, county fairs,
rodeos, softball leagues, and even churches running their
capital campaigns. Another financial institution must perform
enhanced due diligence on their local Rotary Club. We can and
must do better than this. We all want to stop money laundering,
but we should do it in the most effective and efficient way as
possible.
This discussion today will cover how to improve cooperation
and coordination with law enforcement officials and how to
incentivize and enable financial institutions to adopt
innovative AML techniques. This includes leveraging artificial
intelligence and machine learning while still preserving strict
AML rules targeting criminal activity.
We will be hearing from Dennis Lormel, president and CEO of
DML Associates and the former Chief of the FBI Financial Crimes
Program. Thank you for being here. Dennis will talk about how
criminal organizations launder money and avoid detection by
financial institutions and how financial institutions are
fighting back and how they should more effectively fight back.
We will also be hearing from Tracy Woodrow, senior vice
president, BSA officer, and anti-money-laundering director for
M&T Bank. Tracy will discuss the successes of financial
institutions in targeting criminal organizations and the
barriers that financial institutions face when trying to fight
these criminal organizations.
Finally, we will hear from Chip Poncy, the president and
co-founder of the Financial Integrity Network. Chip is stuck in
traffic in a protest in DC right now but should be here in the
next 15 to 20 minutes. He will be discussing how criminal
organizations launder money and avoid detection by financial
institutions and other major areas of crime that involve money
laundering.
Criminal organizations are constantly devising new ways to
launder money because they have monetary incentives to do so.
If financial institutions have any chance of stopping them, the
AML regimes must also be constantly innovating. We do not have
enough of that innovation right now. These innovations do
exist, and we will be hearing about some of the most cutting-
edge approaches to doing that today, including how financial
institutions can identify potential human traffickers by
looking at patterns in their financial transactions. But
financial institutions cannot and will not effectively adopt
these new innovations without more incentives to do so.
I believe our current AML system falls short in many
regards. Encouraging AML innovation includes evaluating our
fragmented system of regulatory compliance and its possible
negative impact on innovation. We should also be considering
how to better evaluate financial institutions by focusing more
on tangible outcomes rather than merely process measures.
As it happens, regulators can begin to move away from
simply measuring compliance with process-heavy risk management
requirements such as filling out the SARs. What is measured
ultimately improves. So if we measure mostly compliance by SAR
filings, financial institutions will just file more SARs. But
if we move toward measuring results, that is, actually
identifying and discovering the hidden resources funding human
traffickers and drug cartels, financial institutions may be
able to help identify more potential criminals. Suspicious
activity reports will always be a vital part of our financial
system, but producing them is not our main goal. Stopping crime
is.
Improving the system requires creating better feedback
loops between law enforcement and bank regulators. They may
also involve encouraging the use of no-action letters. At the
least, we should be giving financial institutions more
incentives and more flexibility to design their own AML systems
without fearing regulatory liability that could spring from
adopting more innovative and more effective AML techniques.
Finally, more information sharing, both with FinCEN and
other financial institutions, could be very useful for law
enforcement
purposes. But this must be done with the utmost attention to
privacy concerns, particularly in light of the recent cyber
breaches we have seen at the SEC, at Equifax, and at retailers.
Thank you again to the three of you for appearing in front
of this Committee, and I thank Senator Donnelly for agreeing to
work on this hearing with me. And I would like to hear what
Senator Donnelly has to say.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR JOE DONNELLY
Senator Donnelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding
today's hearing, and thank you to our distinguished witnesses
for appearing before the Subcommittee.
Today's hearing will explore how criminal organizations
launder money and avoid detection by financial institutions. We
will also discuss how to improve cooperation and coordination
between law enforcement and financial institutions and, most
importantly, ensure that our policies help us better identify
illicit finance and catch as many bad guys as possible.
The Bank Secrecy Act was enacted nearly 50 years ago to
enlist the financial services industry to help detect and
prevent money laundering and fraud. Since that time, the BSA
has become the cornerstone of U.S. anti-money-laundering policy
and has expanded numerous times.
The goal of money laundering is often to disguise the
illegal origins of criminal proceeds. The types of criminal
activities furthered by money laundering include human
trafficking, drug trafficking, arms trafficking, and financial
fraud.
Without an effective AML regime, criminal organizations
have an easier time moving and accessing financing, which
furthers their criminal activities. For example, money
laundering by drug traffickers like the Sinaloa cartel in
Mexico has a direct connection to the opioid crisis in my home
State of Indiana, where nearly 800 people died of opioid-
related overdose deaths in 2016.
The United States is undoubtedly committed to combating
illicit finance with robust AML laws and policies, but notable
gaps and vulnerabilities remain. Several reports have concluded
that the United States is among the easiest countries to create
an anonymous shell company which could allow persons to legally
open bank accounts and buy property. As a result, criminal
networks, corrupt dictators, and even terrorists can move money
through the United States as a legal business entity.
Recent rules from Treasury to ensure banks know their
customers will help, but criminals have an incentive to lie and
can hide behind a corporate veil. Additionally, even though
financial institutions are on the front line of identifying and
preventing money laundering, they receive very little feedback
from law enforcement on the millions of suspicious activity
reports filed each year. If financial institutions have a
better idea of what they should be looking for, we can improve
the efficiency and effectiveness of our BSA/AML system to more
accurately identify suspicious activity.
It is imperative we bolster cooperation and coordination
between financial institutions and law enforcement in order to
increase the hit rate of BSA reporting. That is how we can
catch more bad guys.
There are many tough questions for us to consider today. I
look forward to hearing from this panel.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Sasse. Thank you, Senator Donnelly.
First, we will hear from Dennis Lormel, the former Chief of
the FBI Financial Crimes Program and the current CEO of DML
Associates. Mr. Lormel, thank you.
STATEMENT OF DENNIS M. LORMEL, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, DML ASSOCIATES, LLC, AND FORMER CHIEF, FBI FINANCIAL
CRIMES PROGRAM
Mr. Lormel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Donnelly. Thank
you guys for holding this hearing. I think it is really
important, and I agree with the statements that you made coming
into this that there is a lot we can discuss.
I would like to clarify one thing, if I may. When you first
introduced us, you talked about that I was going to talk about
money laundering and how criminals launder money. I would just
like you to know, sir, that I do not represent criminals when
we launder money. I work with the financial institutions and
certainly with the Government to a great degree.
Senator Sasse. Thank you for clarifying that. We had Bureau
agents waiting outside the door.
[Laughter.]
Senator Donnelly. The Chairman and I were having a long
discussion about that.
Mr. Lormel. No, it is funny, sir, because sometimes when we
get into it, when I speak at conferences and things, that comes
up. People ask me, ``So do you actually launder money?'' And I
say, ``No. I work with the financial institutions.''
The lightness aside, this is a serious topic, so I
certainly appreciate the fact that you are holding this
hearing. I think there is a lot of discussion and a lot of
healthy discussion that needs to come.
I have been involved in this for 45 years. I spent 31 in
the Government, 28 with the FBI, and for the last 14 I have
worked in the financial services industry as a consultant with
a number of institutions on a lot of these issues. And I think
I have developed a very unique perspective in that I understand
the law enforcement side and I understand the benefits and
burdens side that banks have to deal with on an ongoing basis
in terms of regulatory compliance. So I look forward to
touching on that.
You said it. Make no mistake about it. This is very
serious. The BSA and BSA information is really vital to law
enforcement, and they do a good job with it.
Terrorist organizations, criminals, criminal organizations,
and bad actors rely on the financial system to access money,
and the one commonality they have, even though a lot of the
activity we are going to talk about and the different criminal
activity you talked about--the drug dealers, the human
smugglers, the human traffickers, trade-based money laundering,
the real estate issues--Senator, you mentioned the opioids.
There are so many different ways that that money can move, and
so it is important to put into
context who we are dealing with. We are dealing with
individuals, we are dealing with groups of individuals. We are
dealing with
organizations, domestic and international, transnational
criminal organizations. You are dealing with homegrown violent
extremists, and you are dealing with terrorist organizations.
So that landscape is so robust.
In my written statement that I submitted for the record, on
page 3, I have a diagram, and that is from a PowerPoint
presentation that I have done, and I certainly welcome to share
that PowerPoint with you. But, in any event, if you look at the
money-laundering cycle, when you look at all of these different
organizations, the one thing they have in common is they have
to launder money. And I believe that in most of these predicate
offenses, what you are going to find is that there is a good
deal of fraud and money laundering. So if you listed all of the
predicate offenses, everything we talked about, and put fraud
on the top and put money laundering on the bottom, I think that
represents kind of a sandwich, and the fraud and the money
laundering represent the bread, the gourmet bread that would be
on that sandwich. And for any successful organization, they
have got to be able to use fraud; they have got to launder the
money; and they do it through a lot of means.
So when you look at that diagram that I have, every
organization, regardless of what they are doing, they are going
to raise, move, store, and spend. And in some instances, they
are going to move and store and continue that cycle more and
more, and that makes it more challenging for law enforcement
because it seemingly legitimizes the money.
So if you look at money laundering, money laundering is a
three-step process: placement, layering, and integration. So
between the raise and move is the placement. The integration
comes in between the next two steps, the move and spend. And
then the integration--I am sorry. Layering was the next step.
And then the integration is that last step. And so all
organizations, regardless of how dissimilar they are, are going
to have that type of pattern of activity in how they are going
to launder money.
One thing I want to highlight here, because I know we have
limited time in the statements and we will get into more
discussion, but the problem of human trafficking. I think the
industry, banks have done a fabulous job in identifying
typologies. I want to point out that the Polaris Foundation
published a book last year, published a study last year with 25
specific typologies on human trafficking. I think that is a
terrific study.
One of the things I want to highlight, when we talk about
the--if I may, I have run a little long, if you do not mind,
sir.
Senator Sasse. Continue.
Mr. Lormel. One of the things that I think is important,
because you both cited it in your testimony, is making SARs
more efficient. And one of the ways we do that is through what
I call ``targeted monitoring.'' And if you look at human
trafficking, there have been tremendous initiatives in targeted
monitoring.
Back in 2010, JPMorgan Chase with Homeland Security
Investigations, they had a targeted monitoring project where
analysts from the banks met with analysts from Homeland
Security. They developed typologies and what Homeland Security
was seeing in terms of patterns of activity, and based on that,
over the baseline transaction monitoring that the banks have,
these teams of banks, they basically put together special
typologies, and from those typologies they had a terrific hit
rate in terms of suspicious activity reporting.
Just now, in January during the Super Bowl or in the run-up
to the Super Bowl, they replicated that, this time with a U.S.
bank, and that was a terrific case study. And just like that, I
think the FBI, the Financial Crimes Section and the Terrorist
Financing Operations Section each have ongoing working groups.
Unfortunately, the capacity to bring in more banks is not
there, but with the groups that they are working with, the FBI
is providing good feedback and good information for them to
develop the reportable SARs that are so valuable.
So on that note, thank you, sir, for letting me run a
little long, and, Chip, I have been dancing until you got here,
buddy.
[Laughter.]
Senator Sasse. We are going to go to Ms. Woodrow now, but,
Mr. Poncy, thank you for being here and glad you made it
through the protests.
Mr. Poncy. Thank you, Chairman.
Senator Sasse. Next up, Tracy Woodrow is senior vice
president and BSA officer and the anti-money-laundering
director at M&T Bank. Thank you for being here.
STATEMENT OF TRACY S. WOODROW, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT AND BANK
SECRECY ACT/ANTI-MONEY-LAUNDERING DIRECTOR, M&T BANK
CORPORATION
Ms. Woodrow. Good afternoon, and thank you for having me.
Chairman Sasse, Ranking Member Donnelly, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for holding today's hearing to discuss
the AML regime.
Since 2013, I have overseen M&T Bank's AML/counterterrorist
financing and sanctions compliance efforts. I also chair a
working group at The Clearing House Association that is
analyzing the resources that banks devote to these efforts.
At M&T I lead a team of over 300 professionals who are
dedicated to the detection and deterrence of money laundering
and terrorist financing, while ensuring that our customers can
conduct transactions in a safe, secure, and private manner. We
use a variety of tools in this effort and are beginning to
adapt new technologies to assist us with it.
For example, we are using flexible data analytics to
understand emerging risks and suspicious activity patterns. We
are also working directly with law enforcement to identify red
flags that may indicate suspicious activity and have
accomplished a great deal with this collaboration.
Finally, we are exploring the use of automation, artificial
intelligence, and shared utilities across financial
institutions to assist us in better assessing the huge amounts
of data and identifying unusual financial transactions.
Criminal organizations move money through the financial
system in many ways, including the use of cash, ACH, wires,
investments, and trade finance, as well as through emerging
technologies such as virtual currency and person-to-person
applications. They use shell companies to hide their identities
or to create the false
impression of legitimate business activity. And they use front
companies and money mules to hide the real people behind their
transactions. With so many varied and ever-changing techniques
to move illicit funds, it is critical that we never become
complacent or satisfied with yesterday's methods for
identifying suspicious activity.
With this in mind, I will highlight four particular areas
for potential reform.
First, the Treasury Department should establish priorities
for the AML regime, which could in turn form the basis for
financial institution supervision and examination. In turn, BSA
reporting requirements should be rationalized to allow
institutions to focus their resources on that which is most
useful to law enforcement, as required by the BSA.
Priorities should be based upon a data-driven review of the
SAR and CTR submissions to determine what information is truly
useful and whether that information could be provided to law
enforcement in a more modern and streamlined fashion.
It is difficult for financial institutions to know if their
SAR and CTR filings are useful to law enforcement. Based upon a
recent survey by The Clearing House members, a median of 4
percent of SARs and less than one-half percent of CTRs result
in any law enforcement contact after the filings. These numbers
indicate that there may be a disconnect between how financial
institutions are deploying their resources and law
enforcement's priorities.
Second, greater information sharing between law enforcement
and financial institutions should be encouraged. Law
enforcement has access to intelligence from many sources which
can help financial institutions to provide better leads. For
example, financial institutions can use such information as IP
or Internet addresses, geographic locations and addresses, and
information about suspected shell companies to develop targeted
leads to identify potential suspicious activity.
I have personally witnessed the improved speed, efficiency,
and investigative results that can be achieved when banks work
cooperatively with law enforcement. I think this should be the
norm, not an anecdotal success story.
Third, institutions should have the flexibility to explore
innovative technological solutions to AML compliance, either
individually or in concert with their peers. Illicit finance
often moves between multiple financial institutions as criminal
actors work to complicate and conceal their money trail.
Therefore, financial institutions should be allowed to safely
and securely share additional data with each other for the
purpose of detecting suspicious activity.
Finally, shell companies and front companies are often used
to conceal the real actors behind illicit transactions. I
support efforts to establish a nationwide framework for the
collection of beneficial ownership information by a trusted
Government body and to make that data available to law
enforcement and qualified financial institutions.
In conclusion, financial institutions are on the front
lines of the battle to keep money launderers and terrorist
financers from using the U.S. financial system to inflict harm
in our communities, and we are committed to this mission. I
applaud the Subcommittee's
interest in modernizing the regulatory regime to improve the
effectiveness of the work we do as AML professionals.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to your questions.
Senator Sasse. Thank you, Ms. Woodrow.
Chip Poncy is the president and co-founder of the Financial
Integrity Network. Thank you for being here. You have 5
minutes.
STATEMENT OF CHIP PONCY, PRESIDENT AND CO-FOUNDER, FINANCIAL
INTEGRITY NETWORK, AND SENIOR ADVISOR, CENTER ON SANCTIONS AND
ILLICIT FINANCE
Mr. Poncy. Chairman Sasse, thanks so much, and I apologize
to everyone for being late.
Chairman Sasse, Ranking Member Donnelly, thank you for
having me here and inviting me to testify. This hearing comes
at an important time. The United States has one of the most
effective AML/CFT regimes in the world. However, criminal
organizations and others continue to exploit vulnerabilities in
our financial system and in our anti-money-laundering regime.
Such illicit financial activity increasingly threatens our
national security, the integrity of the financial system, and
confidence in vulnerable global markets. Our efforts to combat
these threats have struggled to keep pace with three
interrelated developments.
The first of these is a significant expansion of money-
laundering predicates and corresponding AML responsibilities.
Our AML efforts now encompass practically all forms of serious
crime, including various types of fraud, drug trafficking,
corruption, terrorist financing, sanctions evasion, and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
This expansion of money laundering has naturally led to the
corresponding expansion of our broader AML efforts. We now have
a comprehensive AML/CFT regime that includes and relies upon a
complex web of key stakeholders, including Federal, State, and
local authorities, the private sector, and international
counterparts.
Across governments, here and abroad, this includes law
enforcement, regulatory authorities, national security,
intelligence, and policymaking communities.
Across the private sector, this includes not only banks but
an increasing range of nonbanking financial institutions,
financial service providers, and certain other gatekeepers to
an increasingly complex financial system. This complexity
requires clear AML/CFT governance that Congress can help
direct.
The second key development challenging our AML/CFT regime
is the constantly evolving nature of the financial system.
Particularly over the past generation, our system has become
increasingly complex, sophisticated, and intermediated. Such
heightened complexity and globalization have enabled greater
access to our financial system for illicit actors.
The third development challenging our AML efforts is the
increasing reliance on our AML/CFT regime to advance an
expanding set of national security interests. The financial
transparency that we achieve through sound AML implementation
is increasingly important. We rely on this transparency to
apply sanctions and targeted financial measures, financial
pressure campaigns against rogue actors. This is true with
respect to criminal organizations, but also terrorist groups,
corrupt elites, and hostile states.
These developments present opportunities and challenges.
The challenges are clear. As my written testimony explains,
criminals and other illicit actors exploit the complexities and
efficiencies of the globalized financial system in a variety of
ways. Money launderers place, layer, and integrate criminal
proceeds through cash-intensive businesses, formal and informal
payments systems, capital markets, real estate, digital
currencies, and virtually all forms of financial products and
services.
Terrorist groups continue to exploit our financial system
to raise, move, and use funds in support of various terrorist-
related activity. Corrupt elites launder stolen assets through
sovereign wealth funds, private banking accounts, and other
services. Weapons proliferators mask illicit trade and payments
through transshipment and front companies.
Understanding the details of any particular scheme requires
substantial subject matter expertise, expertise across various
types of financial crime, as well as across different illicit
groups and networks and the regions in which they operate. This
is a substantial investment.
However, virtually all forms of illicit finance seek
anonymity, obfuscation, and appearances of legitimacy to escape
detection. Anonymous companies and unregulated or
undersupervised parts of the financial system continue to
undermine our best efforts. These developments and well-
established vulnerabilities should guide efforts to strengthen
our AML/CFT regime. AML reform should close critical gaps and
strengthen our AML/CFT regime, including through the following
actions:
First, end the creation of anonymous companies in the
United States.
Second, strengthen oversight and supervision of vulnerable
and unregulated financial sectors.
Third, enhance the targeting of illicit financing networks.
Fourth, clarify expanded information sharing between and
among private sector financial institutions and Government
authorities.
And, fifth, encourage innovative approaches and the
application of new technologies to buildupon our current
foundation.
My written testimony lays out more detailed recommendations
that Congress should consider to enact these types of reforms.
I would be happy to discuss these or any questions you may
have.
Thank you again for your time and consideration. Apologies
again for being late.
Senator Sasse.
Thank you. Thank you to each of you for
your testimony and for being here.
Mr. Lormel, let us begin with you. Could you give some
specific examples of the way an organization like, say, MS-13
specifically tries to avoid detection in the financial system?
Mr. Lormel. Thank you, Senator. Groups like MS-13, so you
look at the group itself, and they operate--I would look at
them as a transnational group because they are certainly down
in South America, and there is a presence here in the United
States that is pretty big. So, traditionally, the gangs like
MS-13 are not as
organized as some of the more traditional transnational
criminal groups. But, nonetheless, as I pointed out, they are
going to have to use the system in certain ways.
So one of the things that they do is they control a
corridor or a channel, and a lot of illicit goods, drugs, human
trafficking is going to come through that corridor up through
Mexico into the United States. And so that is one of the things
they will do. And what they will look to do then is they will
set up either front companies or they have to get into the
financial system. A group like that I would assume is also
going to be heavily involved in the informal system and use
hawalas or illegal money remittance. I think the illegal money
remittance operation is one of the biggest problems we have in
the United States in terms of not identifying who the illegal
money remitters are. So I think there is going to be a lot of
cash smuggling, bulk cash smuggling through those chains. But
as these groups like MS-13 are maturing, they are going to have
to have business fronts, and they are going to have to have
access through the banks, and they are going to set up some
type of front or operation so that they can avoid detection.
That is the key.
Again, following my flow chart, they are going to follow
the pattern like that to get money in. And so as they get more
sophisticated, they are going to have a CFO, and that CFO is
going to be the one who is going to have that type of knowledge
and ability. And make no mistake about it. As dangerous as they
are on the street, they are going to have the capability and
they are going to build an infrastructure that is going to make
them that much more challenging to deal with.
Senator Sasse. So your CFO point is almost exactly where I
was going to go. I was going to sort of ask you if this is a
fair hypothesis about how to typologize this. There are
individual bad actors that meet the threshold of being cross-
border money launderers. There are large organizations that
have a centralized structure. And there are large organizations
that have a decentralized structure, I would assume?
Mr. Lormel. Yes.
Senator Sasse. And you are saying that the accounting
inside an organization like MS-13 is pretty decentralized, but
for your three steps, I guess after placement, from layering to
integration, you just presume that an organization like that as
it becomes more complicated, it has integration that will have
sophisticated accounting. I am curious about how far-thinking
the planning is about how you do that integration.
Mr. Lormel. I am not sure I follow. How far----
Senator Sasse. You said they are going to have a CFO.
Mr. Lormel. Right.
Senator Sasse. Talk us through what the step is right
before that and who the planner deciders are that you would
want sophisticated accounting versus decentralized money that
flows through the middle.
Mr. Lormel. So what you are going to have--and I think a
good example of this, there was a drug gang in San Juan, the
Menores gang or something to that effect, and virtually they
had job descriptions, and MS-13 is going to have the same
thing. So your street people are going to have their job
descriptions, you know, whether they are drug runners, whether
they are dealing with traditional organized crime, whatever
that is going to be, and they will be compartmentalized from
people in the more hierarchical sense of the organization.
Now, one of the challenges you are going to have with a
group like MS-13 is how independent and decentralized the
different cells are going to be around the country and then
when you go internationally. But at some point there is going
to be more of a structured business. They will have a business
model.
I wrote a paper a few years back on the business model for
a terrorist organization, and so I would look at that same
thing, that same type of manual, and basically what is it they
aspire to be and what kind of financing is it going to take to
get to that aspirational level, and then how are they going to
infiltrate the system to do that? And so that is important.
That is, again, what they are going to have and what they are
going to be doing, and so at some point that CFO or the C-
suite, so to speak, are going to be--they are going to have a
more global macro picture; whereas, the different groups may
have kind of a more limited micro picture.
Senator Sasse. Thank you. Do the other two of you want to
add anything on specific techniques that you see?
Ms. Woodrow. Thanks. I think whatever the organization is
that is trying to move the money, they are all moving it in
similar ways, using similar techniques. The idea is to hide
what you are doing, make it look as legitimate as possible.
There was a recent indictment in the Southern District of
Florida, and I thought it was an interesting case study in this
where you had probably multiple illicit actors outside the
United States based in Nigeria. They were committing frauds and
schemes against American persons, and when those American
persons would pay them, they needed to move their money back.
So they used a complicated web of money mules and front
companies in order to conduct transactions that looked, absent
any other information, like legitimate transactions. So you
might have a cash-intensive business that is receiving--that is
depositing cash. If your business normally accepts cash, that
could look routine and usual. They also had individuals that
they had hired, probably through a work-at-home scheme, where
they would solicit persons with clean records to use those
persons to access their accounts, then move the money through
that network to outside of the United States banks, generally
in more friendly countries that have a high level of ordinary
trade with the United States, and then finally to the illicit
actors behind the whole scheme.
And you see that pattern of obfuscation, so use of people
who do not have records, who do not have negative news
associated with them, in order to bring the money into the
system and then move it around between what looks like
legitimate business activity, but it is actually a front.
Senator Sasse. Thank you.
Mr. Poncy?
Mr. Poncy. Thank you, Chairman. I completely agree with
what Dennis and Tracy have said, and I am honored to be here
next to them. They are real experts in the field.
I would just add that the technique really depends on the
type of predicate offense we are talking about. The cash-based
predicates, like drug trafficking, the key challenge is how do
you get that cash into the system. So you are going to have
placement opportunities to disrupt, placement needs that invite
opportunities to disrupt, and we have controls for that that we
may not be fully exploiting. When you look at structuring
activities, that continues to, to my understanding, light up
the BSA database, and I am not sure that we have got enough
resources to hit all that. So there are techniques that are
tried and true and that will always be there around cash-based
predicates.
When you get to other forms of money laundering,
particularly with fraud, the money is already in the system, so
you are looking at wires, and you can say, well, it is third-
party wires or it is trade-based money laundering. The problem
is the wire rooms in our banks are--the straight-through
processing of the volumes of this are such that it is very
difficult without advance intelligence to say this is the wire
I am interested in.
And so one of the ideas that we have been kicking around
internally is to think through, much as we have expanded in
trade finance the need for banks and financial institutions to
look at trade finance documentation so that there is a better
understanding of the related parties and the markets and the
jurisdictions and actors that may be involved. We do not do
that when we talk about wire rooms and straight-through
processing because it would completely shut down the system.
Are there messaging formats that would be friendlier in
allowing us to run screens and continue to have straight-
through processing? Those sorts of techniques are innovative,
and trying to adapt to the reality that as our money-laundering
predicates have expanded past cash, we have to figure out a
better way to preserve straight-through processing, at the same
time get intelligence out of those systems that allow us to
direct our resources.
The final thing I would say is that no matter what the
organization is, the prevalence and sophisticated money
laundering and illicit finance of anonymous companies,
gatekeepers, front or straw persons, correspondence, and then
ultimately back to working into a target market like the United
States is prevalent. And so you have U.S. financial
institutions that are increasingly removed from the source of
the risk. If it is placed in a foreign market through a nonbank
financial institution, then it is corresponding into a local
bank that then corresponds with a dollar clearer in New York.
The New York institution has a very difficult time trying to
understand that pathway. And in trying to understand that,
without targeted intelligence, they are going to shut down the
system to try to look at all this. That intermediation is a
killer.
Senator Sasse. Senator Donnelly.
Mr. Lormel. Senator, if I may just one second, sir, going
back, if I was investigating and were looking at MS-13, one of
the things I would be looking at from an enterprise-wide
standpoint, having an enterprise-wide investigation, would be
to see if they were using funnel accounts. Basically if they
are operating in different regions, do they have some type of
funnel account operation where money is funneled through one
account to a central account? And that is what I would be
looking for, and that is what I would be looking for in
suspicious activity reports and, to a degree--well, CTRs would
not have that, but certainly I would be looking for patterns on
all of those things. But the funnel accounts would be my
starting point.
Senator Sasse. Thank you.
Senator Donnelly.
Senator Donnelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Although the United States has a strong anti-money-
laundering framework, authorities have one hand tied behind
their back due to lax business ownership transparency. Many
reports have concluded that the United States is among the
easiest countries to create an anonymous shell company. As a
result, criminal networks, corrupt dictators, and even
terrorists have been able to move money through the United
States as a legal business entity. Law enforcement officials
often have great difficulty identifying the beneficial owner.
This is deeply alarming, especially since illicit proceeds from
crime total as much as $300 billion or more in this country, or
2 percent of the economy, according to the DEA and other
estimates. If we cannot identify the bad guys, that means more
drug trafficking, human trafficking, arms trafficking, and
fraud.
Mr. Lormel and Mr. Poncy, could you please describe how
criminals exploit these shell companies and the lax corporate
transparency rules to evade AML detection?
Mr. Lormel. Thank you, Senator, and I am glad you brought
that point up, because when I finished, I am remiss because I
did not state that I wanted to mention there were four areas
that we needed to look at, and beneficial ownership is one of
them.
The other thing is I am concerned about, as an aside,
raising the thresholds on SARs and CTRs. I think that would be
problematic. I think we need to have better feedback
mechanisms, and I think we need to look at the regulatory
requirements versus regulatory expectations.
But in my written statement, sir, I did give a case study
or a case example of the Alavi Foundation. Our sanctions have
done a really good job against Iran, and so Iran has to get
into the financial services industry. They have to get into
that, and they use shell companies. And they have been very
good at that, and a classic case is they owned a building in
New York on Fifth Avenue through a bunch of front companies,
and it took the Government quite a long time to work around
that.
I know when I was in law enforcement, when you came into
that shell company environment and trying to work through who
is really pulling the strings behind that shell, and I would
think--to Senator Sasse's question about MS-13, I would be
looking for shell companies there. But that Alavi Foundation
with Iran is a classic example of the use of shell companies by
a foreign power, and certainly, you know, they are doing that
quite a bit. And just, again, it demonstrates the success of
our sanctions.
Senator Donnelly. Mr. Poncy?
Mr. Poncy. Thank you, Senator Donnelly. I could not agree
more. I think it is becoming increasingly clear that the
biggest threat to our anti-money-laundering and counter-illicit
financing
efforts is the threat posed by anonymous companies. Several of
those are created here, and there is plenty of testimony and
evidence to support that illicit actors continually use U.S.
anonymous companies or companies created in the United States
in particular because of the perception of legitimacy.
I can recall when I was at Treasury and certainly in my
private sector experience, where we see money-laundering-
related accounts pretty far away from the United States, held
in the names of U.S. companies, that provides a veneer of
legitimacy and behind which there is no accountable person to
hold responsible for the activities of the company.
The comments that I would have--and these are elaborated on
in my testimony--are first that anonymous companies are used
across every possible form of fraud in financial crime. That is
clear. Whether you are talking sanctions that are
jurisdictional against Iran, that are targeted against drug-
trafficking organizations, or you are talking about various
predicate offenses to money laundering, anonymous companies are
used throughout. That is the first point.
The second point is that what we see in our cases, and
whether in the Government or what we see in the private sector,
is a fraction of what we do not see, and this is what is so
frustrating. I think the notion that, you know, that we see, to
your point, a fraction of the 2 percent or 5 percent or
whatever the estimate is of illicit finance that people can
peg, what we are looking at may not even be statistically
relevant, which raises the question of where are all of these
bad actors and these illicit assets? And if we know out of the
evidence that we have that we cannot track and trace anything
through an anonymous company, it is pretty clear that getting
transparency over that technique or mechanism is essential to
turning the lights on, and particularly when we have gone out
to financial institutions appropriately and said, ``You need to
look through the legal entity accounts that you open and make
sure that you understand the beneficial owners.''
It is very hard for them to do that when the very
authorities that are telling them to do that are creating the
anonymous vehicles that present the problem.
Senator Donnelly. Let me ask one more question this round,
and it would go to something that Mr. Lormel mentioned. The
Iran-owned Manhattan high-rise is not the only example of high-
priced real estate being used for money laundering. According
to recent reports in the media and geographic targeting orders
from Treasury, it appears foreign money is frequently used in
all-cash purchases of expensive properties.
What are the AML risks of huge cash transactions in real
estate? And how can we better identify those transactions? Ms.
Woodrow, if you would go first, and then around the horn, so to
speak.
Ms. Woodrow. Certainly. Thank you. Well, real estate,
particularly in very high value markets, such as, for example,
Miami and New York, is an advantageous area to invest in, both
from an ordinary investor standpoint as well as from a money
launderer's standpoint. You have the ability as a money
launderer to invest a large sum of money in a single asset.
That asset can grow in value and also can be transferred.
Particularly in areas where there is a high velocity of
turnover, you can also kind of get wrapped up in the rest of
the legitimate activity and be less conspicuous.
Real estate is often also purchased in the names of LLCs or
trusts for very ordinary purposes, and money launderers are
able to use those same tools, those LLCs and those trusts, to
purchase the real estate and hide who they really are behind
it. This is where the gatekeepers come in.
So, ordinarily, money launderers are not going to try to go
to a bank and get a mortgage to pay for a $1 million high-rise
apartment because we are going to do due diligence, KYC, as
well as credit underwriting. They are going to try to buy the
property in cash or through a check or a wire. Those proceeds
tend to go to gatekeepers, such as real estate agents,
attorneys, title companies to hold the money while the sale is
pending.
That is the place where a bank may see the transaction. The
difficulty is those gatekeepers have escrow accounts where they
are holding all kinds of money for all kinds of different real
estate transactions. But that is where we might be able to
detect something is happening. Otherwise, the transaction is
going on without the use of a financial institution.
Senator Donnelly. Maybe we can get back to this later.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Sasse. Senator Heitkamp.
Senator Heitkamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
One of the concerns that I have, obviously, is economies of
scale. If you are a large financial institution, you can have a
fairly robust plan to protect our financial system from
nefarious financial transactions. But if you are a small bank,
if you are a regional or a small bank, it just gets tougher and
tougher, and these regulations are among their top concerns.
And so I guess I want to maybe get some advice from all of
you on how we can better resource our regional banks and our
community banks and our credit unions to accomplish the
purposes that we know are essential. And so we will start with
you, Mr. Lormel.
Mr. Lormel. Well, that is certainly a challenge. One of the
things that I am a big advocate for are working groups and
information sharing and partnerships. So to the extent we can
improve the information sharing, especially down at that level,
so what you have, Senator, are going to be kind of working
groups. There are national working groups, and certainly the
smaller banks are less inclined to be involved in those. So it
is at the grassroots level. It is at whatever jurisdiction they
are in and in their cities and things, is to work with--to get
involved with the working groups for law enforcement, because
you have to leverage--as you pointed out, they have limited
resources. So how do you leverage those resources? And for me
that is partnering and getting into a better sense of sharing
information to the extent that you can.
But I am also a big proponent--and I have written about
this in a couple of articles--of kind of like a SWAT approach,
in a sense. Even in a small institution where you have limited
resources, it is taking the extra step, and if you make the
analogy of a law enforcement SWAT team, for instance, they have
primary responsibilities and SWAT is their secondary or
collateral responsibility. So when you go back into the
institution here, you take one person or a team of people to
the extent that you can build it and have them specially
trained.
One of the things that I am really impressed with with
bankers is the commitment, and you talk to Tracy and their
staff, as to how dedicated they are to what they are doing. So
it is to be really familiar with a lot of these issues, and
issues particularly that would hit their bank and to be able
to, again, leverage your resources and capabilities and
responding and prioritizing to things.
Senator Heitkamp. I think that would not exactly give them
any comfort.
Ms. Woodrow?
Ms. Woodrow. Thank you for asking that question. As a
representative of a regional bank, I certainly feel that
pressure. And there is so much of a difference between the very
large money center banks and the community banks, credit
unions. We are all subject to the same law. We all have to
follow the same regulations. But the ability, the
sophistication, and the resources are very different.
I think that is one of the reasons why I feel it is
important that we allow banks of all sizes to experiment and to
collaborate with each other. So, for example, small banks,
community banks, and regional banks could get together and
collaborate on activities, collaborate on resources and
technology, rather than going it alone. And to do this, it is
important to make sure that we have that flexibility both from
a regulatory perspective and an examiner perspective, that they
are willing to allow us to do that, and from an information-
sharing perspective so that we could pool our resources and I
think be much more effective.
Senator Heitkamp. Mr. Poncy?
Mr. Poncy. Thank you, Senator. It is a great question and
one that we debated a lot when I was in Government and continue
to see in the private sector.
The first answer, which you probably heard and deserves
some more color, is this is the risk-based approach. So if you
are a small thrift or a community bank, you do not have the
same risks as a dollar-clearing money center bank. But you
still have the responsibility to understand the risks
associated with your customers, which if they are local you are
going to know them better, the products and services that you
offer, which, again, they would be fairly straightforward
banking products and less esoteric financial instruments, and
the markets in which you are transacting. You probably do not
have correspondent relationships with Kerplakistan.
So that should inform a targeted approach to risk
management that is very different for a local community bank
than it is for a global bank. That philosophical understanding
breaks down often in practice because it is challenging. And so
the first point I would make is that in implementing a risk-
based approach, there has to be more training--more training
about what a risk-based approach means, what the determinants
of risk are across customers' products, services, and markets,
and how those risks are evident in certain local communities in
ways that are vastly different than other places. That is the
first point.
The second is that with respect to managing those risks,
there should be greater attention and prioritization over what
we call ``utilities'' or ``consortium.'' So take training as an
example. Why isn't training provided in a regional platform or
a community bank platform in a more accelerated fashion? This
is an area where community banks can pool their resources to
get an education on this, and, again, something that we are
working on.
Another way to think about utilities is operational. Dennis
mentioned, and I fully agree, we have talked for years around
taking the Bank Secrecy Act Advisory Group, which sits at
Treasury, as basically a central policymaking group exempt from
FACA, and localizing those around prosecutor offices and
saying, Why don't we have local SAR review teams meeting on a
regular basis with the filers in that community that help those
community banks understand this is what your local
investigators are seeing, this is what your prosecutors are
interested in? It creates much more of a public-private sector
partnership. So the utilities are a second idea.
The last one just looks at shared risk management as a
principle. This gets to Senator Donnelly's point about real
estate. It is very difficult for community banks to absorb all
the responsibility of risk management when a lot of those risks
are coming through financial service sectors that distance the
bank from the underlying risk. Almost every bank I can think of
has escrow accounts, to Tracy's point, whether it is for real
estate or for law firms or for other purposes. And we see money
laundering through those accounts.
There is a case in my testimony that is literally
incredible about over $300 billion that were laundered through
a top law firm in the United States, an escrow account, to buy
real estate on behalf of the alleged, under DOJ's civil
complaint, the former Prime Minister of Malaysia. That is an
astounding case. That is an astounding case. How does that
happen at a top bank and a top law firm? Because we do not have
controls on those sorts of intermediary accounts. Community
banks do not have that exposure, but they have those types of
accounts that can introduce it.
So that is a shared risk management responsibility that
requires banks to--or, sorry, requires authorities to give
banks some relief by sharing that risk management
responsibility with others that introduce that risk.
Senator Heitkamp. I think just speaking from a position as
a former law enforcement officer, I think you would have a hard
time convincing law enforcement officers and prosecutors to
share intel more broadly to nonlaw enforcement folks, and that
creates a real challenge because you want to avoid the subpoena
that is going to tell you you did something wrong, but law
enforcement is not going to want to broadly broadcast, you
know, what they are currently looking at and where they go.
If I can just get a few more minutes, I want to talk about
artificial intelligence. There has been a lot of talk about
whether artificial intelligence is going to be the great
equalizer. It was interesting. During a Banking hearing
recently, I made the claim that perhaps on compliance burdens
it will, again, skew to the larger banks. And, actually, a
regional bank officer who was testifying said, no, she thought
that it might actually bring costs down and allow you to
balance, depending upon what product is out there that is going
to provide that kind of compliance check.
So if we looked at--you know, this is a function we are
asking banks to take on for the betterment and the security of
our country. It is not something that, you know, is part of
their business model, but it is a critical component of making
sure that we are safe and secure. And so when we look at
artificial intelligence, does it make sense to look at products
which can be deployed and look at shared costs for that kind of
technology that will lower costs for smaller financial
institutions but achieve a better result consequently? Mr.
Poncy?
Mr. Poncy. Senator, you are hitting on, I think, one of the
most exciting ideas in AML in a long time, and I agree with
everything you said. I would just point to the relationship
between the potential of these new technologies to include
artificial intelligence and the need for data. The data that
you need to drive AI systems so that you have real fidelity in
the results and understand that this is a bad apple and this
one looks like a bad apple but it is actually legitimate
requires pooling of information at the moment, is constrained
by information-sharing restrictions or ambiguities. There is a
section in my testimony--and I know we have talked about it in
other places--about the need to clarify and strengthen
information-sharing allowances, if not requirements, so that
financial institutions can do exactly what you are saying, that
they can take their transactional information, their customer
information, their counterparty information, throw it onto a
platform with the right kinds of controls around it, where
these types of artificial intelligence systems can exploit that
data to learn what good looks like and what bad looks like.
Once those models are established, those can be migrated to
other platforms.
We do not know enough, frankly, at least in my view, to
know what is the best way to do this, but clearly the next step
is to encourage pilots around these sorts of enterprises, and
that can be done with stronger information sharing allowances
or requirements and incentives to banks and others to play.
Just two more points because they are related. One is if
you think about this from a bank perspective, if you are the
general counsel of a bank and you hear this conversation, you
can think this is really exciting, we should do it. But what
happens if I put my information into that platform because I
want to do the right thing, and then there is an investigation
stemming from my voluntary or at least my proactive approach to
compliance and risk management that all of a sudden exposes my
bank to an enforcement action? I cannot do that as a general
counsel in good faith as a fiduciary to my institution, create
that exposure. So what kind of downside protection are you
going to give me? We cannot give safe harbor. We have all been
there before. But we can be creative in thinking about
protections that incentivize institutions by giving them
downside risk management.
On the upside, if I am going to be putting my information
into this platform and dedicating analysts to that, do I get
any credit for that? Because that is not necessarily in my exam
manual. It is not necessarily part of my exam process. And
these are resources that have an opportunity cost.
So if I am playing in that space, what sort of credit do I
get for that? I know that sounds petty, but it is not, because
if you are sitting there running these programs, you have to
make these choices, and this is where congressional direction
can really help.
Senator Heitkamp. I do not think it is petty. I think that
we are asking banks and financial institutions to perform a
function that does not add any value to them but adds value to
the country and the security of the financial system as a whole
but also the security of our country against human traffickers,
against money launderers, you know, the whole nine yards.
So a tough topic, but I am really concerned about what is
going to happen to our small community banks as we have put
more and more regulatory burden on them, more regulatory burden
and a high-risk regulatory burden.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Sasse. Thank you, Senator.
Let us go back to this question from the beginning of
Senator Heitkamp's questioning about the feedback loops. And,
Ms. Woodrow, you talked about this in your opening statement,
your stat that only 4 percent of the time do SARs ever result
in the bank hearing anything back. Can you unpack that a little
bit? A, how do we know that? And then, B, let us move toward
best- and worst-case scenarios about what, say, regional banks
understand about what is happening on the other side of their
regulatory filings?
Ms. Woodrow. Certainly, Senator. Thank you. Anecdotally, we
have always heard from our peers that very few SARs result in
law enforcement getting back to the bank in any way, whether it
be through a subpoena or a request for SAR backup
documentation. So through The Clearing House, we decided to get
some data, and we took a poll of our membership, and I also
contributed to that. And that is where we got the 4 percent
number, and that was consistent with what I was seeing as well.
What we find are that it is very seldom that we do get
feedback. Now, sometimes we do get direct feedback if law
enforcement is able to use our investigation to successfully
pursue a criminal conviction. I have to say law enforcement is
incredibly grateful to that effort, and we have had great
responses from the FBI, from local law enforcement, from the
U.S. Attorney's Offices, and we relish that feedback and are
able to use that to go back and talk to our staff about, OK,
this was what we saw and we thought it might be suspicious, and
here is what law enforcement had to say about it. So that is
hugely important to us.
And, also, those communications with law enforcement as to
what they are seeing, there is a communication that the
district attorney of New York provides. They had a meeting and
provided us with some IP addresses where potentially terrorist
financing activity was occurring. We were able to take those IP
addresses and run them against our bank's systems to see if any
of our customers had accessed their accounts in those
locations. That triangulation of information is so incredibly
pertinent to what we do and allows us to really shift through
the millions and millions of transactions that we are dealing
with on a yearly basis. And, you know, the bigger the bank, the
more that becomes a challenge.
Senator Sasse. It seems to me that those feedback loops
matter for three reasons. You are leading 300 people, is that
what you said, in your organization?
Ms. Woodrow. Yes, over 300.
Senator Sasse. If they are just sitting on the other side
of a black box doing a regulatory job as opposed to feeling any
connection to a larger mission with law enforcement and for the
social good, if they do not have any sense of whether or not
their work matters, they are inevitably going to be less
innovative in trying to figure out ways that this next
generation of more data, enhanced data-saturated world is going
to have some of you all giving new ideas about how this should
happen, but also aiding law enforcement in the case of those
current investigations, which are complicated, but where you
may know IP or specific computer locations of these
institutions.
Mr. Lormel, on the FBI side, so when you were at the Bureau
running this section, can you give us a perspective on is there
more information that the 300 folks reporting to Ms. Woodrow
could be supplying to you if those feedback loops were tighter?
Mr. Lormel. Absolutely, yes. And one of the things, when I
ran the Financial Crimes Program at the FBI, I met frequently--
and, beyond that--I started the terrorist financing operations
at the FBI, and particularly after 9/11, I met on a very
frequent basis with Jim Sloan, who was then the Director of
FinCEN, and Jim and I would sit for hours and have this
discussion about what can we do to put a feedback mechanism in
place that is consistent.
In my written testimony, I give you some examples of some
of the working groups, and on those working group levels, there
is tremendous feedback. But this is a significant issue, and it
is a significant problem. And if we could put a consistent
feedback mechanism where there is an automatic feedback loop
back to the financial institution, I think there is tangible
and intangible value there. Certainly the tangible value is
what benefit they are going to get, but also the intangible. I
think if I were able to contact FinCEN and say, hey, your SAR
did this, this, and this, those folks who do that, their morale
is going to be a lot better because they are going to have a
better sense of accomplishment. And I made the comment before
and I really means this. One of the things that--I really enjoy
working in this space with people like Tracy because they are
very dedicated, just like we were in law enforcement, and they
really want to do the right thing. And the more we give them
that ammunition and if we can put that feedback mechanism in
place, I think that would be one of the biggest benefits to
anything we can do to enhance the BSA.
Senator Sasse. Thank you.
Mr. Poncy, I am going to ask you about this as well, but I
am going to defer to Senator Donnelly first, but in my next
round I will come back to you.
Senator Donnelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to ask you about virtual currencies, which are an
alternative to cash that criminals may use for illicit
transactions. Bitcoin, Ripple, and Etherium provide anonymity,
are lightly regulated, with limited AML controls. This is to
everybody. To what extent do you believe criminal networks,
terrorist groups, and rogue nations utilize cryptocurrencies as
a means for moving money anonymously?
Mr. Lormel. I will start out on that. I think the more
these systems mature, the more they are going to be used. I
think on the front end--I have listened recently to some law
enforcement presentations, and law enforcement feels pretty
comfortable, especially with Bitcoin and the blockchain, that
they can identify transactions, and so there is a deterrent
there by virtue of that, and I think there are some good cases
out in California on that. But the more comfortable they get in
that space and the more that they can get around and create
anonymity or a sense of anonymity, you are going to see more
and more of that activity happen. And if you liken Bitcoin and
virtual currency to regular currency, to cash, the more
comfortable the bad guys get with that and the more cash-like
they think and act, the more they will use this as a case.
There was a case in New York, and I apologize, I do not
recall the girl's name. She was recently arrested in New York
as a sympathizer and providing material support to the Islamic
State. She was a healthcare worker, and she went to Syria, and
she wound up teaming up with the Islamic State in some camps
over there using the facade of aid. But my point is when she
came back to the United States, she committed all types of
credit card frauds and things, and she purchased Bitcoin, and
she used the Bitcoin to--she used the Bitcoin, and she
converted the Bitcoin back to cash, and she sent that money
over to Syria. And the FBI has made a good case, and I speak
about it because I know that she has been indicted, so there
are charging documents there.
Ms. Woodrow. Thank you. Bitcoin is something--and other
virtual currencies--that we have been looking at a lot over the
last year. We did notice amongst our customer base that the
transactions between customers and Bitcoin brokers had
increased quite substantially, particularly in the later half
of last year. So trying to sort out which of those are just
ordinary transactions done by ordinary people, either because
they are interested or because they think it is a good
investment or whatever their purpose, from those that are
listed is particularly tough because we lose a little bit of
the trail once it goes into the distributed ledger, because we
are not seeing it. We can see very clearly sometimes when there
is money movement between financial institutions, a little bit
different on the virtual currency side.
Virtual currency brokers in the United States are deemed to
be money services businesses by FinCEN, so they should also
have an AML program as well as Know Your Customer. The
difficulty is those that are operating outside the United
States. And, remember, this is a virtual environment, so
maintaining jurisdiction over the actors is a real challenge.
They could be literally anywhere on the planet. But it is
something that we are seeing more of. I certainly am familiar
with dark web websites where you buy literally any type of
illicit good or service you can think of. Those are almost
always transacted in virtual currencies.
Senator Donnelly. OK. Let me ask you a different question,
Mr. Poncy. If CTR/SAR thresholds were increased above current
levels, how do you think that would impact law enforcement and
their investigations?
Mr. Poncy. Thanks, and Dennis is the best person I know to
opine on this, but----
Senator Donnelly. He was going to be next.
Mr. Poncy. OK, good. I am going to take a little bit
different direction, but it is consistent, I think, with where
Dennis is thinking. To me, raising thresholds is sort of a
derivative question to the primary issue of how do you get law
enforcement access to more data and how do you do that in a way
that is less costly to financial institutions, because that is
what is really going on here. Reports are expensive, and you
have industry that continuously is saying, look, you know,
inflation rates have gone up, and our SARs are going through
the roof, and this is all expensive, and how are you using
this, and can we get some relief here. That is the
conversation, and law enforcement is saying the more data the
better because financial information is becoming increasingly
important to everything we do. And so we do not want to do
anything that is going to turn off the pipe because we do not
know which data you have that may be relevant to what we are
looking at now or what we are looking at down the road, so do
not turn anything off. And both sides are right, but there is a
solution for both, which is given the current technologies that
are coming online, we can collect and manage and analyze bulk
data better than ever before.
So if you imagine a scenario where we have straight-through
processing of bulk data coming in to FinCEN or the BSA which
Congress required us to study in 2004, 14 years ago, on cross-
border wires, all cross-border wires going into this database,
law enforcement would love that, to see anybody who is sending
money into the United States or getting money from the United
States. That is a huge data set. And building that sort of
straight-through processing certainly is expensive, but once
you have that done, imagine that the business as usual expense
of that is significantly less than processing individual
transactions and making determinations of whether to file this
or not, just get it in.
The second way to think about accelerating data access for
law enforcement and reducing costs for financial institutions
is to do what other financial centers have done, which, in
addition to doing cross-border wire reporting in bulk form, is
to think about reporting all accounts. If you have a customer
account, send an account-opening form to FinCEN and have that
form--if you have got that information as law enforcement, a
lot of the need for additional data is addressed, and then
these conversations get----
Senator Donnelly. I apologize. I have limited time. I have
to pass it to Dennis and then back to the Chairman.
Mr. Lormel. Thank you, Senator. What Chip is saying--and I
like those ideas--I think that is a long-term look. In the
immediate term, I am a firm believer that we cannot raise the
SAR threshold or the CTR threshold. I think the information at
that level right now is invaluable to law enforcement.
Senator Sasse gave me the example of let us talk about MS-
13. I would think if we were able to go back and do a study on
that, you are going to see a lot of CTRs. You are going to see
suspicious activity reports. And I can go back to when I was in
the Bureau, Zacarias Moussaoui, when I ran the Terrorist
Finance Operations Section, he came into the United States, he
had $35,000 in cash on him when he came in. And Jeff Breinholt
is sitting here, who I worked with at the Department of Justice
at the time, and we were shocked that he actually filed a CMIR,
or he filed the appropriate papers with Customs coming into the
country. But then he went and withdrew money from--cash out of
a bank account, $14,000. That is intelligence that we would
lose if we raised that threshold to $30,000.
You know, I realize that we are talking about a smaller
percentage, but people like that are so dangerous. And so I
think--and I think you really need to task law enforcement to
give you some statistics on this. I talked to the Bureau when I
was coming up here to testify. I was able to talk to my former
counterparts who took my positions, and they are firm believers
that we need the threshold at that level. And I will certainly
defer to them in terms of their ability to give you the proof.
Senator Donnelly. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Sasse. Thank you, Senator.
Let us stay here a little bit, and I think there is
probably a debate that is worth teasing out. Maybe a few
distinctions for some rookies.
So there is cross-border stuff. There is intra-U.S. stuff.
There are small organizations and large organizations. And then
there are cases where we have some reason to be suspicious
versus mere quantification. Maybe there is no distinction that
is worth drawing here, too, which is a lot of this we are
thinking about because of the regulatory compliance burden of
data that may not ultimately be used, and then there is a
separate conversation which is about personally identifiable
information and the fact that building a big database in a
world where, let us face it, we, public sector and private
sector, are pretty terrible at cyber defense right now. And so
the bigger database you create, the more that is going to be a
target for future hacking, and we have seen that with Equifax
and others, and you have seen obviously the reports today that
many people in the intelligence community have known about for
some time, but the Chinese hack of OPM 3 years ago, now we see
specific records of that showing up in financial fraud today
that abused personal information.
So there are a whole bunch of distinctions there, but it
seems like one question that is worth teasing out is of the
$10,000 threshold--and I think this was set in 1970. Is that
right? So the inflation-adjusted view of that would be $65,000,
$70,000 today. If we did not have that--and obviously we have
lots of small financial institutions who do not want to be
doing these reports right now. I think one of the critical
questions we should be asking is how much of the information
that is between that $10,000 and $65,000 threshold that comes
in from small institutions is actually used. What do we know?
Mr. Poncy. I think you have got a great handle, Senator, on
these issues that are----
Senator Sasse. You are not technically under oath, but
lying is still ill advised.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Poncy. You have teased out exactly all the difficult
debates around what appears to be a fairly straightforward
question. There is just one additional one I would add. In
terms of that delta of between $10,000 and $65,000, what is
relevant? I completely agree with Dennis that there needs to be
a study of--because that is discoverable, right? That is a
discoverable question as to the value of that information,
which I know Treasury has, with law enforcement, I think,
released some sort of an RFP or study to try to get their arms
around this. But we need that data.
The additional issue that I think is important to recognize
is that while the inflation threshold would jump dramatically
to the mid-60s, there is also a very different role of cash in
today's economy, particularly in the United States. So it is a
bit of an offset in the sense that who is placing $10,000 in
cash these days and why? Right? I mean, take your traditional
laundromats--no pun intended--restaurants, gas stations, et
cetera. I remember as a kid--and this is obviously a small
sample size, but you paid cash wherever you went on this sort
of stuff, or maybe a checkbook. Everyone has a credit card,
right? And you are doing Apple Pay and other things. Who is
depositing $10,000 of cash and why? That is a more important
question now than it was in 1970 by a long shot.
So it offsets that immediate instinct to look at the
inflation threshold and go there because cash is more rare now
and is a bigger marker than it used to be, in my view.
Senator Sasse. Please.
Ms. Woodrow. I would love to address the cash question. So
I think one would assume, based upon, you know, how we
transact, we are using our credit cards all the time, that cash
would not be as prevalent, and it is something that every year
I have to do a risk assessment for my institution and figure
out where are the products and services and areas where I want
to focus my effort. And so I looked at the use of cash over
time, and what I saw was something interesting. Cash deposits
and withdrawals had only gone down by 4 percent over a 4-year
period, which was much less than I had thought. Businesses are
still using cash, whether it be small businesses that are
operating on close margins, they just do not have the time to
wait for a check to clear, or they do not have the technology
to accept things like PayPal and others, or, you know, bars,
restaurants, et cetera, still a very cash--at least in my
institutions, still a lot of cash.
What we also saw was that ACH transactions have gone
through the roof, so particularly with the person-to-person
payment applications, the Venmos, PayPals, and other types of
work.
So I still think cash is an issue. In my own institution,
we file over 120,000 CTRs a year. Now, most of them are
straight-through processed, so I would not consider it my
biggest concern from a resources standpoint, but not all of
them are. There is some manual intervention.
The SAR threshold, it is $5,000, if you know who your
suspect is. It costs, for each investigation that results in a
SAR, anywhere from a few hundred dollars to a few thousand
dollars. And that is whether you are filing a SAR on a $5,000
transaction, a $100,000 transaction, or a $1 million
transaction. So I think it is important that that analysis be
done of what are the SARs and CTRs that are being used, and for
those which are not being used very much, can we think about a
more efficient way of providing information to law enforcement
that is not this heavily manual process that is meticulously
examined, has to be meticulously documented every time?
Senator Sasse. I have follow-up questions, but I want to
let Mr. Lormel get in.
Mr. Lormel. Just one comment, Senator. I think, as I
mentioned a little earlier, to me one of the biggest problems
we have in the financial services industry are the illegal
money remitters that are operating as the ice cream shop or
some grocery store or whatever, and they are actually involved
in illegal money remittance. That is where you are going to see
a lot of cash transactions. And I think in those, if I were
still running the Financial Crimes Program, I would be looking
to do a special where you had kind of a nationwide takedown of
these--to promote awareness to the nature of this problem, I
think, you know, from what I had seen. And we went back--and
this goes back to when I was in the Bureau. This is a
consistent problem, and it was interesting when Tracy said that
she has only seen a decline of 4 percent in cash. That tells me
that those illegal money remitters are still up and running and
flourishing.
Senator Sasse. I want to let Senator Donnelly have the
floor back, but just one quick one that I am sure is not easy.
You are good? OK. Then how big--what is the shape of the curve
in our assumptions about who the money launderers in America?
If we had a 35,000-foot view at FinCEN or at the Bureau and we
could rank-order the biggest money launderer in America to some
mom-and-pop, you know, illegal lemonade stand, do we think that
there is an 80/20 curve that the big guys are a really big
share of this? Or is most of it small and medium size? That
would drive the way we would actually do our analysis in our
fusion centers.
Mr. Lormel. That is a terrific question, and the FBI in the
last couple of years, they stood up a money-laundering unit
again. When the financial crisis came, they disbanded that
unit, but they have got that up and running. And one of the
things that they are targeting, Senator, are the facilitators,
the money-laundering facilitators. We started the hearing, and
I joked about not being a money launderer. But, quite frankly,
there are a lot of people like me out there who do this, and
they facilitate. And Tracy talked about the gatekeepers.
And so what the FBI is doing is they are targeting that
level, so that is a high level of people, and one of the
challenges we have societally is that you are going to see
those money launderers at all those levels. But, clearly, there
are a level of more advanced and more sophisticated money
launderers.
Senator Sasse. Thank you.
Mr. Poncy. Thank you, Senator. Again, great question. My
last few years at the Treasury Department, we had a team that
was focused on what we called ``3PML,'' third-party money
launderers, to get to exactly your question. Is there what I
would chronically call a ``Keyser Soze of money laundering''
that we do not see? Or is this happening where every criminal
enterprise just self-launders because it is easy and they do
not want to pay a premium for it? You know, how does this work?
And at least in my experience and what I recall is that there
really was not good data on this.
So we pushed really hard with the interagency through a
number of law enforcement and intelligence agencies to stand up
efforts to try to understand 3PML. What we found--and it is
frustrating--is that sophisticated investigations that are
inevitable with any third-party money laundering, a guy who is
good at this and is worth chasing, he is not going to stay here
very long. So those investigations tend to be the ones that are
thwarted, and so that is why our data is not that great.
If you start to really examine the incentives for
investigators, for prosecutors, for analysts to pursue those
investigations, those incentives go downhill real fast, because
the minute that you see you have got an investigation that is
going to take years, take you to three jurisdictions that do
not do what we do, if they do they will not give you the
information, if you get there they will already be gone. You
realize it is an expensive investigation, chewing up resources,
opportunity costs and predicates, there is violent crime in
your district right now, those are cases that just are
difficult to make.
And if you then look at metrics that law enforcement is
considering, arrests, indictments, confiscations, prosecutions,
sentencing, et cetera, these metrics, right? They do not stack
up to incentivize those sorts of investigations.
So I will defer to Dennis all day on this, but it was very
clear to me that we did not have the type of dedicated funding
for sophisticated financial investigations that we would need
to answer that question with confidence, and one of the
recommendations I have in my testimony is to create protected
resources for the law enforcement community to stand up,
dedicated units to go after third-party money laundering, with
prosecutors, with investigators, with travel budgets, that
allow them to start to answer that question in a systematic
way.
Senator Sasse. We have a series of votes coming up, so we
are going to have to wind up in about 10 minutes. But before we
ask the sort of King for a Day questions for you all to go back
through your top three recommendations about what you would
like to see happen, could we unpack just once more our theory
about how much of this money is cross-border? Of everything we
care about, if we were much better at seeing money that moved
in and out of the United States, does that solve most of our
problem? Or do we think lots of the problem is intra-U.S.
domestic money laundering?
Mr. Lormel. I think it is more the transnational problem,
certainly, and that does not diminish the problem in-country.
But I would say it is more the cross-border issues.
Ms. Woodrow. I think it really depends on the underlying
crime. Cross-border is certainly a substantial part, whether it
comes to international drug trade, terrorist financing,
international frauds.
From a regional or a community bank perspective, we are
going to see a lot of that happening domestically, but
eventually it is going to reach itself outside the borders.
Mr. Poncy. I fully agree, and in my testimony I have a
number of pages dedicated to explaining how during my time in
Government transnational organized crime literally became a
national
security threat. I think it was 2011 when we officially
recognized that, and that action was years in coming, where,
again, I go back to anybody worth chasing is not here that
long. They may have a market that they have to hit here,
whether it is a drug market or it is a financial service or
dollarization, but they are going to get in and get out because
we are a deterrent in the sense that our AML/CFT regime is
good. But just as every business these days is considering
international connectivity from customers to suppliers to
vendors, et cetera, the same is true for transnational
organized crime. These are opportunistic groups that take
advantage of globalization the same way that legitimate
businesses do. And so as the whole world has gone global in
terms of, again, their connectivity in a sophisticated,
specialized global economy, TCOs, transnational criminal
organizations, have done the same thing. To me it just puts
more and more pressure on something that, notwithstanding the
sort of Tomorrowland idea of cross-border reporting being too
far off, that was supposed to be done years ago. In fact, there
is a proposed rule that is already 2 or 3 years dated where
systems studies have already been done. That can be turned on
if it is resourced, if it is prioritized, and then we can test
this, right? And we can actually get that data and start to
see, to Dennis' point, where are funnel accounts. It is hard to
see that at any individual institution because, again, anybody
worth catching is not going to structure all this in one place.
They are going to go to different institutions, they are going
to go to different geographies. And until you start to see
cross-border, oh, look at this, all of this is going to that
counterparty, that jurisdiction, that financial institution,
now I can see that, that is a funnel account offshore, which,
if I were back, that is what I would be doing all day. We
cannot see that, and it is within our grasp, and it is within
our grasp in a way that is cost-effective.
Senator Sasse. Mr. Lormel, it seems like you had a point on
funneling as well?
Mr. Lormel. I was in agreement with Chip on that. That was
well said, Chip.
Senator Sasse. Great. If we could just maybe limit
yourselves to 2 or 3 minutes each, but we will go in the order
that we began and do your sort of top three, or whatever the
right number is, your King for a Day high-priority
recommendations list, please?
Mr. Lormel. Yes, sir. Thank you.
First, one thing we did not talk about was regulatory
requirements versus regulatory expectations, so that would be
something I would look at. I think one of the things that
hamstrings the banks is the burden of the expectation versus
what is required, the feedback mechanism. I really think if we
can have a consistent feedback mechanism, that would be
important.
The reporting thresholds, you know, I will defer to law
enforcement to defend that, but I am an ardent believer that we
need to keep the thresholds where they are. And beneficial
ownership, we really need to do something about beneficial
ownership.
So thank you. Thank you for holding this hearing. I think
this was very thoughtful.
Senator Sasse. Thank you.
Ms. Woodrow?
Ms. Woodrow. Thank you, and I do appreciate the time and
attention to this really important topic. I think if I was to
look at my priorities, improving consistency across the
different banking regulators through a national strategy,
whether that is led by FinCEN or another agency, improving that
data sharing between law enforcement and financial
institutions, help us get the information that we need to
target our monitoring to what law enforcement really wants to
see.
Third, allowing the sharing between banks so that we can
collaborate and combine our resources and expertise.
And then I am in agreement with my co-panelists here on the
importance of the transparency with regard to legal entities.
Senator Sasse. Thank you.
Ms. Woodrow. Thank you.
Senator Sasse. Mr. Poncy?
Mr. Poncy. I was trying to jam as many as I could into
three points, so I was furiously scribbling to try to get ten
inside of three. I was not really successful.
The first, anonymous companies. Absolutely we should be
ending anonymous companies created in the United States. It is
way overdue. There is plenty on the record for that. How you do
that is an interesting question, but the how cannot prevent us
from ever getting there. We are just going to have to
prioritize and get it done. Reasonable people can disagree on
what good looks like, but we should not let great prevent good
from happening, which is really where we are.
Two is pilots. We do not know a lot about the questions
that you have asked, and I think we need to create a market to
get data. That is about information sharing. That is about new
technologies. That is about systematic reporting, including
cross-border reporting. We need pilots to get up and running so
that we can see what good looks like.
Third, we really do need to invest in protected financial
investigative teams that can go after sophisticated money
launderers without having to worry about metrics that
chronically put pressure on those budgets. And there is a part
in my testimony that leans on the fact that--this is a
potential wormhole, but our best financial investigative
expertise has always been in IRS, and it has never been a
popular agency for reasons you probably understand better than
I. Does it need to stay that way? CPAs that also carry guns and
badges, can they be more liberalized to work on sophisticated
financial investigations to support the Bureau, to support DHS,
to support others? They cannot do that without resources. They
may never get there in IRS. But they can get there in Treasury.
So there are ways to restructure this in ways that allow us to
finance our best financial investigators, to support our best
law enforcement agencies without that hang-up of the IRS, and
that is an interesting conversation.
So those would be the three that I would pursue.
Senator Sasse. Very helpful on that last point. What we see
across the IC, places where we are getting better in a world
with more and more cyber crime and cyber risk generally, is a
move away from an assumption about bureaucratic centrality and
priority over other bureaucracies and fusion centers that are
starting with what data do we have and what data do we need,
and then you build your human capital around something that
begins with strategy and data access.
Thank you to all three of you for being here. We appreciate
it. We are going to leave the record open--I think what I am
officially supposed to say--for Senators who wish to submit
questions for the record. Those questions are due on Wednesday,
June 27th, and I encourage our witnesses, if you receive
questions, to respond promptly.
I thank you for your cooperation and assistance, and this
hearing is concluded.
[Whereupon, at 4:03 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[Prepared statements and responses to written questions
supplied for the record follow:]
PREPARED STATEMENT OF DENNIS M. LORMEL
President and CEO, DML Associates, LLC, and Former Chief, FBI Financial
Crimes Program
June 20, 2018
Good afternoon Chairman Sasse, Ranking Member Donnelly and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. My name is Dennis M. Lormel.
I have been engaged in the fight against money laundering and illicit
finance for 45 years. Between my law enforcement experience and my
private sector consulting experience, as a subject matter expert, I
have developed a unique perspective regarding the benefits and burdens
of the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA). Having served for 31 years in the
Government, 28 years as a Special Agent in the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI), I was the direct beneficiary of BSA reporting.
Now, having been in the private sector, working as a consultant and
subject matter expert, primarily with the financial services industry,
I have become sensitive to the burdens and challenges of BSA reporting
encountered by financial institutions. Those burdens and challenges are
driven in part by regulatory requirements and expectations, as well as
by the lack of consistent feedback mechanisms from law enforcement
regarding the value of BSA reporting. Make no mistake, BSA reporting is
essential to law enforcement's ability to defend our national security
and the economy from the threats posed by terrorism,
counterintelligence and criminal adversaries. Therefore, having a
thoughtful discussion about how to meaningfully enhance and not
diminish the effectiveness and efficiency of BSA reporting is
critically important to all stakeholders.
Money laundering and other forms of illicit finance are an
extremely important topic, especially when placed in context with BSA
reporting requirements and expectations. I had the privilege of
testifying before the Senate Banking Committee on January 9, 2018. As
Subcommittee Members may recall, that hearing addressed ``Combating
Money Laundering and Other Illicit Finance: Opportunities to Reform and
Strengthen BSA Enforcement.'' I applaud the Subcommittee for holding
this hearing to delve deeper into this important topic. The reality is
that terrorists, terrorist organizations, spies, criminals and criminal
organizations invariably rely on the financial system to move and
access funding. The one commonality that terrorists, spies and
criminals share is the need for funding. Without adequate funding, bad
actors are much less likely to succeed with their nefarious activities.
Therefore, the more effective and efficient we can make BSA reporting,
the more challenging and disruptive it will be for bad actors to move
and access needed funding.
I would like to refer to my written statement from the January 9,
2018, hearing as a framework to build on with my testimony today. As I
stated in that session: ``In using the financial system, criminals and
terrorists are confronted with distinct contrasts. On one hand, the
financial system serves as a facilitation tool enabling bad actors to
have continuous access to funding. On the other hand, the financial
system serves as a detection mechanism. Illicit funds can be identified
and interdicted through monitoring and investigation. Financing is the
lifeblood of criminal and terrorist organizations. At the same time,
financing is one of their major vulnerabilities.''
By understanding how criminals and terrorists launder money and
avoid detection; how financial institutions succeed in targeting them;
how law enforcement can leverage financial intelligence derived from
financial institution; and how the funding flows involving various
criminal activities can differ or be similar; financial institutions
position themselves to better detect and not facilitate money
laundering. Once suspicious activity has been identified and reported,
law enforcement is better positioned to interdict and disrupt said
criminal activity. The more productively financial institutions and law
enforcement can collaborate with each other and share information, the
more effective and efficient BSA reporting will be.
You asked me to provide my perspective today on how criminal
organizations launder money and avoid detection by financial
institutions to include the following topics:
Money laundering issues relating to narcotics trafficking,
trade-based money laundering, human trafficking, and real
estate money laundering;
The development and implementation of money laundering
typologies to fight crimes such as, but not limited to, human
trafficking;
Effective means of cooperation and coordination with law
enforcement officials;
How to improve information sharing between individual
financial institutions and with law enforcement.
Background
Before addressing the four bullet points above, it is important to
establish who we are dealing with; in what context we are dealing with
them; discuss the nexus between money laundering and fraud, and how
that relates to predicate offenses or specified unlawful activities;
and visualize the flow of funds as to how bad actors use the financial
system.
Who are we dealing with regarding the myriad of criminal offenses?
We are dealing with individuals, groups of individuals, domestic
criminal organizations, transnational criminal organizations, homegrown
violent extremists and terrorist operatives, and terrorist
organizations. Bad actors usually have the advantage of being more
proactive. BSA reporting is inherently reactive. This gives the bad
actors an advantage, which is a challenge for financial institutions
and law enforcement. Another challenge is that the different categories
of bad actors set forth above will interact with each other if it is in
their mutual best interest. This is particularly true with
transnational criminal organizations and terrorist organizations. This
is referred to as the convergence between criminals and terrorists.
There is a nexus between fraud and money laundering. Fraud and money
laundering are interconnected. The proceeds of fraud and other
predicate offenses or specified unlawful activities need to be
laundered. Taking this a step further, if you list most predicate
offenses, which would include drug trafficking, trade-based money
laundering, human trafficking, and real estate fraud; they will most
likely contain elements of fraud and require money laundering. If you
list predicate offenses and placed fraud on the top of the list and
money laundering at the bottom of the list and envision the list to be
a sandwich, the predicate offenses would represent the meat. Fraud and
money laundering would be the gourmet bread. A great sandwich requires
great bread. Successful criminal activity requires fraud and money
laundering.
It is important to visualize the flow of funds. Regardless of the
nature of the predicate offense, and how similar or different they are,
and how similar or different they flow through the financial system,
the process is the same. Criminals and terrorists raise, move, store
and spend funds. This is the basic funding flow. When criminals raise
money the source of funds will be illicit. When terrorists raise money
the source of funds will be legitimate or illegitimate. Funds are then
moved either through the formal or informal financial systems. Funding
will be stored and will either continue to be stored or continue to be
moved and stored and then spent. This is where funding flows for
different criminal activity may differ more significantly. Following
the moving and storage flow the funds are spent. Money laundering is a
three step process: placement, layering and integration. When money is
raised and moved, this is the placement stage of money laundering. When
money is moved and stored, it is the layering stage of money
laundering. The more the money is moved and stored the more seemingly
legitimized the funds become. When the money flows from being stored to
spent, it represents the integration stage of money laundering. This is
where funding is accessed as being seemingly legitimate in furtherance
of nefarious purposes. As funds flow through the moving and storing
phases, this is where financial institutions are facilitation tools or
detection mechanisms. Below is a flow chart visualizing the funding
flow described above. The funding flow below the funding streams box
relate more directly to terrorist financing, although it could relate
to transnational criminal organizations as well. The rest of the
funding flow is consistent for criminals and terrorists alike.
The main distinction between terrorist financing and criminal money
laundering is that terrorist financing tends to be linear and criminal
money laundering tends to be circular. In that regard, in terrorism,
the spend or funding access flows linearly to support a terrorist
activity. In criminal money laundering, the spend or funding access
flows back to the criminal or criminal enterprise in a circular manner.
Money laundering issues relating to narcotics trafficking, trade-based
money laundering, human trafficking, and real estate money
laundering
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) is an international
governmental body that serves as the standard bearer for combating
money laundering. The FATF 40 Recommendations set out a comprehensive
and consistent framework of measures which countries should implement
in order to combat money laundering and terrorist financing.
Recommendation 3, of the FATF 40 Recommendations, states that
``countries should apply the crime of money laundering to all serious
offenses with a view to include the widest range of predicate
offenses.'' Regardless of differences in the myriad of predicate
offenses, law enforcement should include charges of money laundering
when pursuing criminal prosecution in activities to include narcotics
trafficking, trade-based money laundering, human trafficking and real
estate money laundering. This reinforces why BSA reporting is so
important.
When assessing money laundering issues regarding narcotics
trafficking, trade-based money laundering, human trafficking and real
estate money laundering, the starting point is the scope of the crime
problem. Drug trafficking has long been and continues to be the most
prolific global crime problem. Human trafficking has evolved to become
the second most significant global crime problem. It is difficult to
quantify trade-based money laundering. However, trade-based money
laundering is, in a sense, a growth industry. Trade based money
laundering is a global problem but centered more regionally where there
are free trade zones. There are many real estate related frauds. For
purposes of this discussion, much attention has been placed on the
purchase of highly expensive real estate in select geographic regions
around the world. Much of this real estate is purchased through shell
companies or nominees and is paid for in cash.
The next consideration to assess is who we are dealing with, how
are they likely to touch the financial system and where are the touch
points geographically. Drug trafficking is more inclined to include
domestic and transnationalcriminal organizations. Terrorist
organizations will also engage in the sale of narcotics as a source of
income. Human trafficking will more likely involve groups of
individuals and both domestic and transnational criminal organizations.
Trade-based money laundering will more likely involve individuals,
groups of individuals and transnational
criminal organizations. For the most part, real estate money laundering
involves individuals or groups of individuals. The key from an anti-
money laundering (AML) perspective is to understand and identify the
touch points individual criminals and groups have with financial
institutions.
Narcotics trafficking and human trafficking groups can overlap by
using the same supply chain or channels and involve the same groups. To
the extent narcotics and human trafficking operations overlap, they
will more likely have similar distribution flows. In any event,
narcotics trafficking and human trafficking are more likely to have
greater similarities. Trade based money laundering is more unique to
other criminal activity in that it relies more on false invoicing and a
wider variety of commodities. Real estate money laundering is more
unique to itself because it relies more on individuals and not
organizations and involves cash to purchase expensive fixed real
estate. Thus there is no supply chain or channel in these real estate
money laundering schemes. It should be noted that there could be
exceptions to these norms.
When you understand the crime problems in terms of scope and
geography, and in combination with who you are dealing with, you can
begin to visualize the funding flow in terms of how the bad actors
raise, move, store and spend their ill-gotten gains. An important key
is to simplify the funding flow as much as possible. From an AML
perspective, drug trafficking is not only the most prolific crime
problem, it also represents the broadest exposure to financial
institutions ranging from smurfs or mules structuring transactions
under the $10,000 currency transaction report (CTR) threshold to the
multi-million dollar movement of drug funds. To further complicate this
challenge, drug traffickers exploit a variety of facilitation tools,
such as shell companies, to avoid AML detection. Transnational drug
trafficking organizations frequently engage in trade-based money
laundering to move and convert large sums of money, cross border
between countries, from one currency to another. One such common scheme
is referred to as the Black Market Peso Exchange (BPME). This is where
money brokers are used by drug traffickers to convert U.S. dollars or
Euros to pesos through the sale of commodities, such as clothing or
electronic equipment. As will be discussed later, patterns of funding
activity or typologies involving human trafficking have been more
predictable for financial institutions and law enforcement. Trade based
money laundering presents a significant AML challenge for financial
institutions to identify. Under and over invoicing is extremely
difficult for financial institutions to identify. Trade and shipping
documents tend to be less automated and more paper centric making
analysis more difficult. As mentioned above, drug trafficking
organizations rely on BPME, a form of trade-based money laundering, to
convert the proceeds of drugs sold in the United States or Europe from
dollars and Euros into pesos in Mexico and Colombia through the trade
of commodities by money brokers. By their nature, BPME schemes are
difficult for financial institutions to identify through traditional
AML monitoring.
An example of a significant BPME case was Operation Fashion Police.
In a major takedown in Los Angeles on September 10, 2014, nearly 1,000
Federal, State and local law enforcement officers seized approximately
$100 million in cash, arrested nine subjects and searched dozens of
businesses in the city's downtown fashion district alleged to have
laundered money for Mexican drug cartels. Three fashion businesses were
indicted. One was indicted for accepting bulk cash and funneling money
through 17 businesses. The other two companies were indicted for
structuring deposits of bulk cash to avoid reporting requirements. From
reviewing the statements of facts in Federal charging documents, it
appears that considerable evidence was developed from CTRs and
suspicious activity reports (SARs). As a result of this case, FinCEN
issued a Geographic Targeting Order (GTO) covering the Los Angeles
fashion district.
With respect to real estate money laundering, FinCEN issued and
subsequently renewed GTOs in six major metropolitan areas in the United
States regarding the all cash purchase of luxury real estate. The GTOs
required U.S. title insurance companies to identify natural persons
behind shell companies used to make the all cash purchases. This crime
problem demonstrates the significance of the money laundering risk
presented by the issue of beneficial ownership.
The development and implementation of money laundering typologies to
fight crimes such as, but not limited to, human trafficking.
Human trafficking is a heinous crime problem. I believe that AML
professionals are dedicated and motivated to protect their financial
institutions from the threat of money laundering and the risks
associated with being exploited as a facilitation tool by bad actors.
Two areas where this is particularly true are human trafficking and
terrorist financing. As mentioned above, patterns of activity or
typologies
involving human trafficking have been more predictable for financial
institutions and law enforcement.
Before focusing more specifically on human trafficking, we should
look more broadly at developing typologies to identify suspicious
activity for criminal offenses. The BSA requires financial institutions
to establish AML programs reasonably designed to identify and report
suspicious activity. This starts with identifying red flags associated
with each criminal activity. Red flags are generic warning signs. They
are indicators that there might be suspicious activity. There are many
lists of red flags regarding criminal activities available to financial
institutions. From the list of generic red flags, I encourage financial
institutions I work with to take
generic red flags more specific to their institutional risk and to
customize them to their institutional risk environment.
One mechanism to develop money laundering typologies is to review
Federal court charging documents such as an indictment, plea agreement,
criminal information and search warrant. In the affidavit supporting
the charging document there will be a statement of facts. The statement
of facts frequently sets forth the alleged typology used to commit the
criminal offense. This is one mechanism where financial institutions
can enhance the scenarios they use for transaction monitoring.
With respect to human trafficking, there are multiple sources of
red flags available to financial institutions. Other red flag guidance
is available from FATF, Homeland Security Investigations (HSI), the FBI
and other viable sources. It should be noted that the Polaris Project
has written a great reference guide about human slavery (trafficking),
entitled ``Typologies of Modern Slavery.'' In addition, human
trafficking is widely discussed at industry AML training conferences.
Training is one of the core pillars of an AML program. Human smuggling
typologies and warning signs are frequent topics.
The Association of Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialists
(ACAMS) has made human smuggling a long-time priority. They started a
working group in 2010 with a group of major banks and HSI. Bank
analysts and HSI analysts developed patterns of activity or typologies
consistent with human smuggling. JPMorgan Chase had a team of special
investigators who conducted targeted transaction monitoring and
identified potential suspicious activity. ACAMS gave JPMorgan Chase and
HSI a special award in recognition of their outstanding collaboration.
Another outstanding example of public and private sector partnerships
occurred in January 2018, in the run up to the Super Bowl. The ACAMS
Minneapolis Chapter held a half day learning event focused entirely on
human slavery/trafficking. I was proud to be the first speaker. U.S.
Bank, HSI and the U.S. Attorney's Office in Minneapolis collaborated to
develop typologies to identify human sex trafficking specifically
related to travel for the Super Bowl. These types of initiatives have a
great impact on crime problems like human trafficking. I must give a
cautionary comment that this type of initiative is not as easy as it
sounds. It can be costly. There are regulatory concerns and other
impediments that must be overcome. The September issue of ACAMS Today
magazine had a detailed article about the Minneapolis learning event.
Effective means of cooperation and coordination with law enforcement
officials
The most effective means of cooperation and coordination between
financial institutions and law enforcement is through sustainable
public and private partnerships. In addition to cooperation and
coordination, these partnerships must include communication.
Establishing viable partnerships begins with perspective. You must
understand the perspective of your partner and overcome any impediments
caused by differences in perspective. For example, the primary
perspective of financial institutions is to protect the integrity of
the institution, whereas the primary perspective of law enforcement is
to develop evidence to obtain criminal prosecutions and to disrupt
terrorist activity. At times, these perspectives can clash. In
understanding perspectives and working through potential impediments,
you must develop win-win situations for each partner. It's important to
understand that a win-win situation may not be a best-case scenario but
rather a good-case scenario. Once that has been established you can
leverage the capabilities and capacity of partners to attain that good-
case scenario in order to establish the win-win situation. When that
foundation is established, partners can develop sustainable, innovative
and impactful proactive measures to support law enforcement
investigative initiatives.
The targeted monitoring projects described above involving JPMorgan
Chase, and subsequently U.S. Bank, with HSI, are outstanding examples
of public and private sector partnerships. Financial institutions
conduct baseline transaction monitoring, which is inherently reactive.
The rate of SARs used to predicate or enhance law enforcement
investigations from baseline transaction monitoring is low. This is
where we must improve the effectiveness and efficiency of SAR
reporting. Targeted monitoring projects result in a more proactive
approach and a higher SAR utilization rate. Other outstanding examples
of meaningful public and private sector partnerships is where both the
FBI's Financial Crimes Section and Terrorist Financing Operations
Section (TFOS) have ongoing national bank working groups in which they
provide targeted information and feedback to participating financial
institutions. The information sharing and feedback result in better
quality BSA reporting.
As I stated in the January 9, 2018, hearing: ``One of the most
productive examples of public and private sector partnership, and
information sharing, is the Joint Money Laundering Intelligence Task
Force (JMLIT) in the United Kingdom (U.K.). JMLIT was formed by the
government National Crimes Agency (NCA) in partnership with the
financial sector to combat high end money laundering. JMLIT was
established as a business-as-usual function in May 2016. It has been
developed with partners in government, the British Bankers Association,
law enforcement and more than 40 major U.K. and international banks.
I'm hopeful that the United States can assess and work through
information sharing and privacy concerns in order to replicate the U.K.
JMLIT model.''
How to improve information sharing between individual financial
institutions and with law enforcement
As I stated in the January 9, 2018, hearing: ``As an extension of
public and private partnerships, we should consider how to improve
information sharing. The PATRIOT Act provided us with information
sharing vehicles such as Section 314(a) where financial institutions
can share financial information with law enforcement and Section 314(b)
where financial institutions can share information with each other.
Efforts should be made to enhance Section 314 information sharing in
the current environment. In addition, any proposed enhancements to the
BSA should consider additional information sharing mechanisms. The more
we can do to enhance information sharing, the more meaningful
information will be for law enforcement and the more detrimental to
criminals and terrorists. During their plenary session in June 2017,
the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) stressed the importance of
information sharing to effectively address terrorist financing. I have
always been a huge proponent of information sharing to the extent
legally allowable.''
Law enforcement outreach is extremely important. At the grassroots
or jurisdiction and/or field office level, there are informal working
groups. Each of the 94 U.S. Attorney's Offices in the United States has
law enforcement SAR review teams. An Assistant U.S. Attorney in each
Judicial District leads the SAR review team. SAR review teams involve
personnel from Federal law enforcement. In most SAR review team
locations, Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Criminal Investigations plays
a lead role. Depending on the jurisdiction, SAR review teams will also
include State and local law enforcement agencies. Financial
institutions, at the grassroots level, should participate with law
enforcement at the jurisdiction level. Federal law enforcement agencies
also have outreach programs at the national level and/or initiative
specific level. This is exemplified by the working groups the FBI
Financial Crimes Section and TFOS host at FBI Headquarters.
Feedback to financial institutions from law enforcement regarding
the value of BSA reporting, particularly the value of SARs, is
inconsistent. There are a number of inherent impediments to
establishing a feedback mechanism. Such include the nature of criminal
investigations. From the point a SAR is filed to the point a case is
concluded, it could be a period of one or more years. If a case is a
Grand Jury investigation, information cannot be disclosed by law
enforcement. In addition, law enforcement lacks the resources to
consistently provide feedback. There are always new cases to move
forward with and investigators don't have time to provide feedback.
Impediments aside, there are no excuses for not providing feedback. As
noted in discussing targeted monitoring initiatives, in those
situations, consistent feedback from law enforcement is provided and
the quality of financial institution BSA reporting is outstanding.
Countering the Threat by Enhancing BSA reporting from a law enforcement
perspective
From my perspective, which includes my law enforcement experience
and my private sector consulting experience, there are four issues that
must be addressed in proposed legislation to improve or enhance BSA
reporting effectiveness and efficiency. The first is less tangible or
measurable and more challenging. The other three are more tangible.
However one of those three is less measurable. The first is regulatory
requirements versus regulatory expectations. The other three, which are
more tangible are, the CTR and SAR reporting thresholds, feedback
mechanisms and beneficial ownership. I believe the reporting threshold
and beneficial ownership are more measurable, whereas feedback
mechanisms are not currently very measurable.
Basically, the flow of BSA reporting from financial institutions to
law enforcement is extremely beneficial. However, when the filters of
regulatory requirements and regulatory expectations are applied,
especially the uncertainty of regulatory expectations, there is a drag
or reduction in the flow and possibly the quality of BSA reporting. In
keeping with the theme of the flow of information, we must consider the
inconsistent feedback from law enforcement to financial institutions.
Below is a flow chart which demonstrates the process of the
dissemination of information.
If the space between the black and red arrows could be reduced, the
real or perceived regulatory impediments would diminish and improve the
flow of BSA reporting to law enforcement. An example of regulatory
expectations is where financial institutions make a decision not to
file a SAR. A frequent complaint I hear from AML compliance
professionals is that they have to provide their regulators with more
documentation for no-SAR decisions versus SAR filings. Consequently,
financial institutions file SARs they otherwise would not, because of
real or perceived regulatory expectations. These filings are not
warranted. The time taken by financial institutions to document the no-
SAR decision or to file SARs to merely satisfy regulators, coupled with
the time required by law enforcement to review these SARs is time
wasted and is counterproductive.
If a consistent feedback mechanism could be developed from law
enforcement and financial institutions, the broken line on the above
flow chart would become more connected and would improve feedback and
more importantly, the quality of BSA reporting. I believe a feedback
mechanism should be developed and implemented through FinCEN which is
initiated by law enforcement. I further believe that SAR feedback would
improve the quality of SAR submissions. I also believe that a SAR
feedback mechanism would improve the morale of AML professionals who
are involved in the SAR process. They would have a greater sense of
accomplishment and satisfaction that their work contributes to law
enforcement successes. Make no mistake; SARs play a significant role in
law enforcement investigations. I believe that the FBI is assessing how
to develop a more consistent SAR feedback mechanism.
My greatest concern about potential BSA enhancement legislation is
any consideration to increase BSA CTR and SAR reporting thresholds.
That would be devastating to law enforcement. With the current threat
environment, especially with the terrorism threat of homegrown violent
extremists, law enforcement needs as much financial intelligence as is
legally available. Likewise, when you take into consideration the
bandwidth of drug trafficking, the nuances of human trafficking and the
challenge of trade-based money laundering, coupled with the variations
of financial crimes, especially Ponzi schemes, raising BSA reporting
thresholds will greatly diminish law enforcements capability to respond
to these and other crime problems and to protect our national security
and economy.
Financial intelligence, derived from financial institutions,
enables law enforcement to better protect us. AML professionals have
told me that increasing BSA reporting thresholds for CTRs and SARs
would not likely save money and does not cause a burden. This is
because financial institutions have automated systems set at the
current thresholds. According to the FBI, and I have not been able to
verify the statistics, if the CTR threshold is raised from the $10,000
threshold to $30,000, the FBI would lose 78 percent of financial
intelligence derived from CTRs. In addition, the FBI advised that if
the SAR threshold were raised to $50,000 they anticipate an 80 percent
loss in SAR filing intelligence. Finance is one of the biggest
vulnerabilities of criminals and terrorists. The significant loss of
any financial intelligence is a troubling detriment to law enforcement.
The BSA is intended to support law enforcement, not to deter it.
I was advised by FBI executives that the FBI conducts data analysis
of BSA filings, including CTRs and SARs, to enhance existing cases and
to predicate new investigations. All FBI main subjects are searched
against BSA data on a monthly basis. According to the FBI, they average
hits on 4,000 BSA filings per month. The FBI also proactively uses data
analysis to identify new cases. The FBI refers to this as targeted
suspicious activity reports (TSARs). Searches are run using search
terms for money laundering, terrorist financing, human trafficking,
fraud, corruption, Transnational Organized Crime and other schemes. I
have also heard IRS case agents, making case study presentations, at
recent conferences, discuss how they run similar BSA data checks to
enhance their investigations. The loss of CTR and SAR reporting,
especially above 50 percent would be extremely detrimental to law
enforcement investigations.
I have been advocating for beneficial ownership legislation since
2012. I have testified at hearings or briefed Congressional members and
staff dating back to October 2001, about the vulnerabilities shell
companies present to our financial system. This is especially true in
dealing with the threat of terrorism, spies and criminals. As an
example, Iran has been able to circumvent sanctions by using shell
companies to provide them with access to the financial system. In one
specific case, shell companies were used to allow the Alavi Foundation,
Assa Corporation and the 650 Fifth Avenue Company (a partnership of
Alavi and Assa) to hide the Iranian ownership of the 36 story building
at 650 Fifth Avenue in New York City.
Perhaps the most compelling reason to enact beneficial ownership
legislation comes from the 2016 Mutual Evaluation of the United States
conducted by FATF. FATF found that the United States has a well-
developed anti-money laundering regime. However, FATF noted that the
system has serious gaps that impede timely access to beneficial
ownership information.
Conclusion
Our threat environment is extremely concerning. Finance is one of
the most important vulnerabilities to bad actors, and consequently, the
threat environment. We must do whatever we can to exploit the
vulnerability of bad actors and not allow them to succeed. When we
consider enhancements to BSA reporting we must ensure we get it right.
Those enhancements must be in the best interest of our country. That
means ensuring law enforcement has the tools they need to protect
national security and our economy.
Thank you for taking the time to hold this hearing and for
affording me the opportunity to share my perspective on this important
topic.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF TRACY S. WOODROW
Senior Vice President and Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money-Laundering
Director, M&T Bank Corporation
June 20, 2018
Chairman Sasse, Ranking Member Donnelly, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for holding today's hearing to discuss the U.S.
anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism regime
and its impact on the way U.S. banks employ technology to counter
illicit financial activity. My name is Tracy Woodrow and I am a Senior
Vice President, Bank Secrecy Act Officer and Anti-Money Laundering
Director at M&T Bank. M&T Bank is a U.S. regional bank with
approximately 780 domestic banking offices in eight States and the
District of Columbia. Since 2013, I've overseen the bank's AML/CFT and
sanctions compliance efforts. I also chair a working group at The
Clearing House \1\ that is analyzing the resources banks devote to AML/
CFT and sanctions compliance. We are seeking to understand whether the
current legal and regulatory regime is effectively addressing present-
day illicit finance risks and enabling banks to use their resources to
proactively identify illicit activity. I will present some of the
findings from this working group during my testimony as well as some
insights regarding the resources M&T devotes to such efforts.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The Clearing House is a banking association and payments
company in the United States and is currently owned by 25 large
commercial banks. The Association is a nonpartisan advocacy
organization dedicated to contributing quality research, analysis and
data to the public policy debate.
\2\ The Clearing House has conducted a survey of its members that
is intended to provide an empirical basis upon which to assess current
BSA/AML/OFAC requirements. TCH expects to release the results of that
survey shortly.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As M&T's BSA/AML Officer, I lead a team of over 300 professionals
who are dedicated to the cause of detecting and deterring money
laundering and terrorist financing, while ensuring that our customers
can conduct transactions in a safe, secure and private manner. We use a
variety of standard tools in this fight, including rules-based
monitoring, customer screening, enhanced due diligence for higher risk
customers, and tips sent to us from fellow bank employees. In addition,
we are beginning to use more modern, innovative tools. For example, we
are using flexible data analytics to understand emerging risks and
patterns of similar suspicious behaviors across customer groups. In
some cases, we are working directly with law enforcement to identify
red flags that may indicate suspicious activity in the communities we
serve and have achieved great success in cases where we have worked
collaboratively with law enforcement to thwart criminal activity. We
are also exploring the use of automation, artificial intelligence and
shared utilities across financial institutions as tools which may allow
us to better assess huge amounts of data and identify unusual financial
transactions.
While we have achieved significant success in the fight against
money laundering, which in some cases has led to the detection of
illicit finance and ultimately criminal convictions, I believe that the
financial industry can be even more effective. Increased effectiveness
can be achieved if we are given the tools and flexibility to increase
innovation, focus on the most serious risks and collaborate closely
with law enforcement and peer institutions. Criminal actors who seek to
use the U.S. financial system to do harm in our communities are well
financed, highly motivated and agile. To effectively combat this
threat, we must continue to evolve and strengthen our anti-money
laundering regime. We must re-evaluate the expectations placed on
financial institutions so that we do not inadvertently place a higher
value on the ability to precisely and comprehensively document the
evaluation of routine transactions than we place on the ability to
provide meaningful information to law enforcement.
As you are aware, the Bank Secrecy Act was passed by Congress in
1970 and has been added to, but not significantly reformed, by the
legislature since. The Act requires financial institutions to provide
law enforcement with leads that are of a ``high degree of
usefulness''\3\ while also setting basic requirements for AML/CFT
programs at financial institutions, including (i) the development of
internal policies, procedures and controls; (ii) designation of a BSA
or compliance officer; (iii) ongoing training requirements; and (iv) a
robust audit or independent review function. The Act also introduced
the requirement to file Currency Transaction Reports (``CTRs'') on cash
transactions over $10,000. Legislation enacted since the Bank Secrecy
Act, including the USA PATRIOT Act, have added requirements to file
reports on suspicious transactions (``SARs''), verify the identity of
bank customers and to conduct enhanced due diligence on a subset of
those customers--notably correspondent banks, private banking clients,
foreign senior political officials and other customer categories that
have been deemed higher risk. Most recently, the requirement to
identify ultimate beneficial owners of legal entity customers has been
added through regulation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See 31 U.S.C.  5311 which states that ``[i]t is the purpose of
this subchapter [the BSA] to require certain reports or records where
they have a high degree of usefulness in criminal, tax, or regulatory
investigations or proceedings, or in the conduct of intelligence or
counterintelligence activities, including analysis, to protect against
international terrorism.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Criminal organizations move money through the financial system in
many ways. They use all forms of finance including cash, ACH, wires,
investments and trade finance--and now, even emerging technologies such
as virtual currencies and person-to-person funds transmittal
applications. They use shell companies to hide identities or to create
the false impression of legitimate business activity. They use front
companies and money mules to hide the real people behind the
transactions. With so many varied and ever-changing techniques to move
illicit funds, it is critical that financial institutions, law
enforcement and banking regulators never become complacent or satisfied
with yesterday's methods of identifying this activity.
It is also important to ensure that financial institutions are
using their compliance resources efficiently and effectively. Under the
current regime, banks like M&T are required to perform extensive
evaluations of customers and transactions. We are required to carefully
document every aspect of these evaluations and to compile large amounts
of supporting documentation, even where it is determined that no
suspicious activity is present. This focus on documentation of that
which is not suspicious results in a huge amount of resources devoted
to satisfying the intense focus of our regulators to such matters,
resources that could be used to further the mission of detecting
illicit activity.
Each year M&T files thousands of SARs \4\ and tens of thousands of
CTRs.\5\ However, feedback from law enforcement regarding the quality
or usefulness of these filings is rare. At my institution, we receive
post-SAR filing followup requests for information on a SAR (such as a
subpoena or other legal process) from law enforcement about 5 percent
of the time. Followup on CTR filings almost never occurs. Results of a
survey recently conducted by The Clearing House indicate that our
experience is not unique. In discussions with some law enforcement
agencies, it appears that the lack of consistent agency policy or
legislative authorization makes law enforcement reluctant to provide
feedback on SAR filings, possibly due to concerns about the
confidential nature of SARs, and there is no official mechanism through
which to provide feedback.\6\ Thus, it is difficult to know whether our
filings provide law enforcement with leads that are of a ``high degree
of usefulness,'' as required by the statute. Therefore, we are
compelled to calibrate our monitoring systems to the only tangible data
we have--our decision to file a SAR. As a result, we fine-tune our
systems to reflect our own work product, rather than to reflect law
enforcement's priorities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ In 2017, U.S. depository institutions such as banks, thrifts,
savings and loans and credit unions alone filed 916,353 SARs. Many more
were filed by nonbank financial institutions such as money services
businesses, casinos and securities firms. See ``SAR Stats,'' available
at: https://www.fincen.gov/fcn/Reports/SARStats. Accessed June 14,
2018.
\5\ From 2012-2014, the average number of CTRs received per year by
FinCEN was 15,283,950. See FATF Anti-money laundering and counter-
terrorist financing measures, Mutual Evaluation of the United States,
December 2016, pg. 54; available at: http://www.fatf-gafi.org/media/
fatf/documents/reports/mer4/MER-United-States-2016.
\6\ Disclosure of the existence of a SAR to unauthorized persons
may result in criminal penalties. 31 U.S.C.  5322. While this
prohibition should not apply to a communication between a bank that
filed a SAR and law enforcement as they are both authorized persons,
the strict nature of the SAR confidentiality rule leads some to err on
the side of caution in the absence of explicit permission.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Let me give you an example of the resources M&T expends on its SAR
filings. We use both automated and manual processes to monitor for
suspicious activity, which trigger tens of thousands of alerts each
year that are investigated further by AML compliance employees, who
ultimately make a determination to either close out the alert or
designate it as a case in need of further review. If an alert becomes a
case, resources will then be devoted to investigating the case which,
depending on the activity under investigation, could take anywhere from
a few hours to a few weeks to conclude. Once an investigation is
complete, we make a determination to either file a SAR or document our
decision not to file a SAR. Of the thousands of cases we investigate,
only 39 percent become SARs. However, each investigation must be
meticulously documented to meet regulatory expectations. On average, an
investigation consists of seven pages of narrative text and 50
attachments, which average 250-280 pages total, regardless of whether
that investigation results in a SAR.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Attachments to an investigation may include copies of account
statements, results of internet and database searches on the customer
and transaction counterparties, Secretary of State filings for legal
entities and documents evidencing transaction reviews.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is why I believe it is essential for policymakers to reform
the AML/CFT regime so that institutions are able to deploy resources
more efficiently and improve efforts to provide useful information to
law enforcement, national security and intelligence officials. This
change should be founded on greater coordination and communication
between the public and private sector. The U.S. Department of the
Treasury should establish annual priorities for the regime, which could
in turn form the basis for financial institution supervision and exams.
Within this effort, it could also rationalize the broad reporting
requirements implemented under the BSA, which would allow institutions
to further tailor the resources they deploy to AML/CFT priorities. In
addition, greater information sharing between law enforcement and
financial institutions would allow institutions to calibrate their
monitoring systems and to detect suspicious activity that is meaningful
to law enforcement. Furthermore, institutions should have the legal and
regulatory flexibility to explore innovative technological solutions to
AML/CFT compliance, either individually or in concert with their peers.
Finally, Congress should consider changes to beneficial ownership rules
in order to facilitate more transparency and the collection of
consistent data to prevent companies from obscuring their ownership,
thereby providing them with the means to hide illicit proceeds. I will
address each of these recommendations in the remainder of my testimony.
Treasury Should Set Priorities for, and Rationalize, the Regime
As I noted previously, The Clearing House recently surveyed its
members to better understand the resources institutions are devoting to
AML/CFT compliance in the United States. Of the 19 TCH members surveyed
(with assets ranging from 50 billion to over 500 billion dollars), 17
institutions employ a total of over 14,000 individuals, with 14
institutions collectively spending nearly $2.4 billion on AML/CFT
compliance. With all of these resources invested in compliance, 18
institutions reported that they collectively filed more than 640,000
SARs and 17 institutions indicated that they filed 5.2 million CTRs in
2017. Furthermore, a median of 14 respondents indicated some form of
law enforcement contact (including subpoenas, national security letters
or requests for SAR backup documentation) on only 4 percent of the SARs
they filed in 2017, whereas 10 institutions reported hearing from law
enforcement on roughly 0.44 percent of the CTRs they filed.
Institutions of all sizes are devoting substantial resources to
AML/CFT compliance, yet, in the current regime, little feedback is
provided to determine whether those efforts are useful or reflect law
enforcement's priorities. Moreover, the absence of specific measures of
effectiveness, has led some to focus on the auditability of procedures
and level of documentation of decisions as an inexact proxy for
effectiveness, which encourages financial institutions to invest
heavily in activities that reduce criticism of records, rather than in
activities aimed at identifying suspicious activity in innovative ways.
Furthermore, U.S. financial institutions often have more than one
regulator examining their AML program, with each individual regulator
having their own priorities and viewpoints. At M&T alone, we have five
regulators that evaluate us for compliance with AML laws and
regulations. This is why it is important for Treasury, working with law
enforcement, to establish a process for prioritizing the matters
investigated by financial institutions subject to the BSA. This
prioritization effort would convene relevant public sector actors that
are the end users of the BSA information financial institutions provide
to the Government--notably law enforcement, national security and
intelligence officials, regulators and other stakeholders, with the
resulting priorities forming the basis for AML/CFT examinations at
covered institutions. Such a process would further encourage banks to
devote resources to activities that proactively address regime
priorities, rather than focusing their resources on proxies like
auditability and documentation. It would also ensure greater AML exam
consistency across financial institutions and amongst examining
agencies. I understand that FinCEN, a division of the Treasury
Department, has begun to have these discussions with relevant
stakeholders, an effort that should be encouraged and expanded.
In addition, the Treasury Department, in consultation with law
enforcement and the Federal banking agencies, should conduct a review
of the current BSA/AML reporting regime with the goal of de-
prioritizing the investigation and reporting of activity of limited law
enforcement or national security consequence to allow financial
institutions to reallocate resources to higher value AML/CFT efforts.
Analysis of how SAR data is actually used by law enforcement could lead
to the streamlining and automation of data submissions, rather than the
current highly manual and cumbersome reporting process for some types
of suspicious activity. This review is possible because FinCEN has data
that banks do not have--namely, information as to what SARs are
accessed by law enforcement and at what frequency. Such a review could
also investigate how to modernize, tailor and clarify BSA reporting
requirements while increasing law enforcement feedback within the
system. For example, the review may find that provision of data to law
enforcement in a streamlined format, rather than the narrative format
required by the SAR form, may actually be more useful as law
enforcement increasingly uses modern tools to ``data mine'' the SAR
database, rather than performing manual SAR reviews. Thus, a data-
driven review of SAR usefulness may both enable institutions to better
calibrate their monitoring system to provide law enforcement with
higher value information and provide that information in a more
efficient and useful manner. Again, I understand that FinCEN is working
on such an analysis and I hope that the results will be shared with a
broad group of constituents so that meaningful and workable changes can
be identified and implemented.
The Public and Private Sector Should Exchange More Information
As this hearing is meant to focus on barriers to successful illicit
threat identification and mitigation, it is important to highlight that
one of the greatest barriers to an effective regime is the lack of
communication between the public and private
sector--notably between law enforcement and financial institutions. I
have already described how feedback from law enforcement with respect
to SAR filings can help
financial institutions to better target their transaction monitoring
toward better identifying suspicious activity. Financial institutions
can also use investigative data provided by law enforcement such as IP
addresses, geographic locations, names of
suspected foreign shell companies and other items to develop targeted
leads on potential suspicious activity.
There are examples of this type of information sharing in the
United States, but the examples tend to be ad hoc and not consistently
applied across financial institutions.\8\ For example, some law
enforcement agencies and prosecutor's offices have held industry
outreach conferences with select banks to share high-level information
from recent cases as examples of certain typologies of illicit finance.
FinCEN has issued periodic Advisories to notify financial institutions
of high-level red flags associated with some kinds of criminal
activity. FinCEN has also recently embarked on an effort to share more
detailed information with some banks in the United States, through a
program called ``FinCEN Exchange.'' In addition, law enforcement
agencies can seek information regarding specific AML/CFT suspects
through the USA PATRIOT Act's 314(a) provisions and other legal means.
However, there remains a need for greater and more routine sharing and
collaboration between the industry and law enforcement to better
address the illicit finance risks facing our country. More routine
sharing of specific and actionable information to a broader set of
financial institutions could improve the effectiveness of the entire
regime. Expansion of 314(a) to allow broader secure and confidential
sharing with participant banks, which should be able to voluntarily
participate based upon their risk profile and individual circumstances,
would facilitate this communication.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ The U.K.'s Joint Money Laundering and Intelligence Taskforce
(JMLIT) and Canada's Project Protect are two international examples of
such efforts. For more information on JMLIT, Project Protect and other
public-private sector information sharing partnerships, see Nick J
Maxwell and David Artingstall, The Role of Financial Information-
Sharing Partnerships in the Disruption of Financial Crime, Occasional
Paper, Royal United Services Institute for Defence and Security
Studies, October 2017, available at rusi.org/sites/default/files/
201710_rusi
_the_role_of_fisps_in_the_disruption_of_crime_maxwwell_artingstall_
web_2.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Financial Institutions Should have the Flexibility to Adopt Innovative
Technologies
In addition to setting AML/CFT priorities, rationalizing regulatory
requirements, and improving public-private sector information sharing,
it is important for institutions of all sizes to be able to embrace the
innovative technologies available to them to better detect and report
on suspicious activity. We must be cognizant of the fact that money
laundering happens at banks of all sizes with differing levels of
resources and sophistication. We also know that illicit finance often
moves between multiple financial institutions as criminal actors work
to complicate and conceal the money trail. Therefore any effort to
encourage technological innovation within the industry should be
flexible enough for institutions of all sizes to investigate them
further--whether through a shared utility model or as an individual
investor.
Congress should explore whether expansion of the ``safe harbor''
language within Section 314(b) of the USA PATRIOT Act, which presently
provides a legal pathway for financial institutions to share
information on potential money laundering or terrorist financing
investigations with each other in certain circumstances, could
facilitate these efforts.\9\ Explicitly allowing banks to share
information with each other under 314(b) for the purpose of working to
detect potential suspicious activity would help to ensure that such
efforts do not encounter legal or regulatory hurdles to innovation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Section 314b of the USA PATRIOT Act allows participant
financial institutions to share information ``regarding individuals,
entities and organizations engaged in or reasonably suspected based on
credible evidence of engaging in terrorist acts or money laundering
activities.'' This permission to share confidential information is
known as a ``safe harbor.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress Should Pass Beneficial Ownership Legislation
Finally, I support Congressional efforts to establish a nationwide
framework for the collection of beneficial ownership information by a
trusted Government body and to provide that data to qualified financial
institutions and law enforcement. During my time at M&T, my team has
investigated instances where shell companies appear to have been used
to attempt to obfuscate the real actors behind transactions to move
funds secretly to illicit actors. Based upon discussions with law
enforcement and former prosecutors, shell companies are routinely used
for this purpose. While the new CDD rule requires banks to ask their
legal entity customers to certify as to their ownership, banks cannot
independently verify that the information provided is accurate. A
nationwide secure database of ownership information would be a useful
investigative tool.
Conclusion
AML/CFT reform is needed to make the U.S. regime more effective and
to allow institutions, like M&T, to redeploy or invest their limited
resources in efforts and technology that will allow them to provide
information that is of greater utility to law enforcement. I applaud
the Subcommittee's interest in this important topic. Discussions such
as these will assist in allowing banks to continue to support law
enforcement's efforts to keep our communities safe and to cutoff the
flow of illicit funds through the U.S. financial system. I thank you
for the opportunity to testify and look forward to your questions.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHIP PONCY
President and Co-Founder, Financial Integrity Network, and Senior
Advisor, Center on Sanctions and Illicit Finance
June 20, 2018
Chairman Sasse, Ranking Member Donnelly, and other distinguished
Members of the Senate Banking Subcommittee on National Security and
International Trade and Finance, I am honored by your invitation to
testify before you today.
This hearing on money laundering and innovative techniques to
counter such criminal activity comes at an important time. Today's
criminal organizations continue to exploit the U.S. and international
financial system to launder criminal proceeds and finance illicit
activities ranging from terrorism to the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. Such exploitation capitalizes on the growing
complexities of the international financial system and weaknesses in
institutional, jurisdictional, and global counter-illicit financing
regimes. Some of these weaknesses stem from a failure to implement
global standards designed in large part by U.S. leadership to combat
crossborder money laundering and other financial crime. Other
weaknesses stem from outdated approaches to combating these threats.
Congressional attention and action is urgently needed to address these
challenges.
In recent years, Congress has indicated interest in strengthening
the U.S. anti-money laundering and countering the financing of
terrorism (AML/CFT) regime to meet these challenges. Over the past year
alone, several hearings in both the Senate and the House have focused
on systemic reform to modernize U.S. efforts to combat money laundering
and all forms of illicit financing activity. I am hopeful that my
testimony today will assist this Subcommittee in supporting and
accelerating these reform interests.
Such reform should be grounded in an understanding of how money
laundering, financial crime, and corresponding AML/CFT regimes have
evolved to become clear matters of national and collective security.
Such reform should also be informed by an understanding of how criminal
organizations and other national security threats continue to exploit
the financial system to launder criminal proceeds and finance illicit
activity. Such reform should close critical gaps in the U.S. AML/CFT
regime, including by ending the creation of anonymous companies in the
United States. Finally, such reform should encourage innovative
approaches and capitalize on new technologies to buildupon and improve
U.S. and global AML/CFT frameworks.
The United States has one of the most effective AML/CFT regimes in
the world. Yet many of the global and systemic challenges to AML/CFT
regimes abroad also confront our own AML/CFT regime. These challenges
present opportunities for criminal organizations and other threats to
launder money and finance illicit activities that undermine our
collective security, the integrity of our financial system, and
corresponding confidence in our markets. Our capability and willingness
to address these challenges at home will substantially impact our
credibility and capability in driving other countries to do the same--
and in holding accountable those countries that fail to meet such
standards. Given the increasingly globalized nature of organized crime
and illicit finance, our AML/CFT reform efforts must consider these
important ramifications.
My testimony today focuses on each of these points as follows:
Section I summarizes the modern evolution of money
laundering and financial crime and the growing importance of
AML/CFT regimes in combating these threats to protect our
collective security and safeguard the integrity of the
financial system.
Section II presents characteristics of money laundering,
terrorist financing, and other financial crime and describes
how these threats chronically exploit systemic challenges to
financial transparency and accountability.
Section III outlines reforms that Congress should pursue to
modernize and secure a more effective and sustainable AML/CFT
regime. Such reforms should capitalize on U.S. leadership that
has guided and galvanized a common commitment to combating
money laundering and financial crime across nearly all
financial centers and jurisdictions over the past several
generations.
My testimony draws in large part from prior testimony that I have
provided before other Congressional committees and subcommittees
considering these issues over the past 3 years. As with such prior
testimony, I am grateful for the incredible dedication of my partners,
colleagues, and friends at the Financial Integrity Network, the Center
on Sanctions and Illicit Finance, the Treasury and across the U.S.
Government, and in the global AML/CFT community--including the other
expert witnesses who are testifying before you today. The primary basis
of my testimony is the experience that I have gained in working with
these experts and stakeholders to help shape and implement AML/CFT
policy over the past 16 years in the U.S. Government, the international
community, and the private sector.
I. The Modern Evolution of Money Laundering, Financial Crime, and the
AML/CFT Regime
Since the initial adoption of the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) almost 50
years ago--and particularly since the terrorist attacks of 9/11--money
laundering, financial crime, and AML/CFT regimes have evolved
dramatically. This evolution is fundamentally characterized by an
expansion of money laundering and AML/CFT scope, stakeholder interest,
and objectives. This evolution is also characterized by the growing
complexity, importance, and globalization of money laundering and AML/
CFT regimes.
Understanding this evolution, described in greater detail below, is
critical to understanding how modern criminal organizations launder
money and finance other illicit activity. Such an understanding also
provides an essential basis for prioritizing and guiding AML/CFT reform
efforts.
(i) Expanding substantive scope, stakeholder interest, and objectives
As described in greater detail below, the expanding scope,
stakeholder interest, and objectives of money laundering, financial
crime, and corresponding AML/CFT regimes is reflected by:
a.
The expansion of money laundering predicate offenses to encompass
virtually all forms of serious criminal activity;
b.
The increasing reliance of sanctions compliance and broader risk
management on effective implementation of AML/CFT regimes; and
c.
The emergence of national security and financial integrity
objectives of AML/CFT regimes.
a. Expansion of money laundering predicate offenses. Our AML/CFT
regime, launched with the introduction of the BSA, initially focused on
reporting bulk cash movements to assist in tax compliance, the
criminalization of drug money laundering, and the detection and
confiscation of drug trafficking proceeds. Through the expansion of
predicate offenses, our AML/CFT regime now encompasses practically all
serious criminal activity--including various forms of fraud,
corruption, terrorist financing, sanctions evasion, and WMD
proliferation achieved through the violation of export controls or
smuggling.
This expanded scope has significant consequences for traditional
AML risk management across our financial system, as these different
types of predicates expose additional financial products, services,
relationships, institutions, markets, and sectors to different kinds
and degrees of illicit financing risk. It also expands the range of law
enforcement agencies that rely upon financial information to pursue
various criminal networks that launder their proceeds through our
increasingly globalized financial system.
b. Increasing reliance of sanctions compliance and broader risk
management on effective implementation of AML/CFT regimes. The scope of
AML/CFT regimes has also expanded as sanctions compliance has
increasingly relied upon and blended with AML/CFT risk management. It
is often impossible to know whether any given financial account or
transaction may involve a sanctioned party, activity, or jurisdiction
without performing robust due diligence driven by AML regulatory
requirements.
As sanctions programs have become more complex, their effective
implementation relies upon more sophisticated development, integration,
and application of underlying AML programs to assess and manage
sanctions risk. Consequently, sanctions policy, targeting, compliance,
and enforcement authorities--as well as sanctions compliance programs
and officers in financial institutions--have become increasingly
reliant upon and integrated into AML/CFT regimes and AML compliance
programs.
This reliance presents challenges and opportunities for integrating
the governance, implementation, and enforcement of AML/CFT regimes with
sanctions compliance and risk management.
c. Expanding objectives of AML/CFT regimes. The objectives of AML/
CFT regimes have also evolved, consistent with the expansion of such
regimes' scope and stakeholder interests. Following the terrorist
attacks of 9/11, Congress expanded the purpose of the BSA ``to require
certain reports or records where they have a high degree of usefulness
in criminal, tax, or regulatory investigations or proceedings, or in
the conduct of intelligence or counterintelligence activities,
including analysis, to protect against international terrorism.'' While
this expansive criminal justice, tax compliance, regulatory,
intelligence, and counterterrorism set of objectives is more important
than ever, it is also incomplete.
Protecting the integrity of the financial system has also become an
essential objective in its own right. Such integrity is fundamental for
the financial system to maintain not only the security of the customer
assets it holds, but also the confidence of markets and the general
public as an industry protected from criminal abuse. In addition to law
enforcement and other investigative and intelligence authorities,
financial institutions--together with the customers, markets, and
global economy they service--are direct beneficiaries of AML/CFT
regimes. Financial institutions are end users of BSA/AML recordkeeping
and reporting, relying on such information to identify and manage all
manner of illicit financing risk for purposes of protecting the
integrity of the financial system.
This reality is evident in the way we talk about actions taken
under various AML/CFT authorities--both under our own AML/CFT regime,
and in concert with AML/CFT authorities abroad. Such actions are
intended in large part to protect the integrity of the financial
system.
Recognizing this expansive objective underscores the primary role
of financial institutions in both implementing and informing our AML/
CFT regime. It also underscores the importance of establishing robust
public-private partnerships, including at policy and operational
levels, to effectively implement and inform our AML/CFT regime.
Perhaps most importantly, AML/CFT regimes have evolved more broadly
into a financial security regime, essential to protecting our national
and collective security. The financial transparency and accountability
created through AML/CFT regimes enable effective development and
implementation of sanctions policies and other targeted financial
measures to combat a growing array of national and collective security
threats. Such transparency and accountability also generate financial
information that intelligence and national security communities
increasingly rely upon to identify and disrupt these threats.
(ii) Heightened complexity and importance
As criminal organizations, money laundering activities, and
corresponding AML/CFT regimes have expanded across scope, stakeholder
interest, and objectives, they also have become more complex and
important. This is true for public sector authorities, the private
sector, and the general public.
a. Heightened complexity of transnational crime and corresponding
AML/CFT regimes. The heightened complexity of AML/CFT regimes has
inevitably followed the globalization and increased sophistication and
intermediation of the financial system and the criminal organizations
that exploit it. This includes within and across financial products and
services; banks, nonbank financial institutions, and designated nonbank
financial businesses and professions; and countries, sub-national
jurisdictions, and supra-national jurisdictions.
In combating various forms of illicit finance, AML/CFT authorities
and financial institutions are increasingly challenged to understand
and keep pace with these evolving complexities of the modern financial
system. Such an understanding is required as a baseline for identifying
and combating all manner of illicit finance that exploits the
vulnerabilities presented by such a complex financial system.
The heightened complexity of AML/CFT regimes has also been driven
by the globalization of criminal and illicit financing networks and the
blending of illicit financing risk--including across money laundering,
terrorist financing, sanctions evasion, bribery and corruption,
proliferation finance, tax evasion, and state and nonstate actors.
Addressing such heightened complexity requires more specialized and
integrated expertise across the core stakeholders of AML/CFT regimes.
Such expertise, in turn, demands targeted and integrated training about
how the financial system works, how illicit actors abuse it, and the
particular roles and responsibilities that stakeholders must fulfill to
effectively combat such abuse.
b. Heightened importance of transnational crime and corresponding
AML/CFT regimes. As AML/CFT regimes have expanded and become more
complex, they also have become more important--for law enforcement,
national and collective security, and the integrity of the financial
system itself.
The heightened complexity and globalization of criminal and illicit
financing networks has made financial information more important than
ever before to law enforcement agencies pursuing serious criminal
activity. Federal law enforcement agencies have repeatedly testified
that the BSA database is among the most important sources of
information they have in combating various forms of serious and
organized crime, from drug trafficking and fraud to tax evasion and
terrorist financing.
In addition, the post-9/11 development and integration of CFT
strategies and policies into the AML regime and the rise of
transnational organized crime have attached clear national security
importance to our AML/CFT regime. As sanctions and other national
security authorities have become more reliant upon financial
information and disruption in the post-9/11 era, the AML/CFT regime has
become a crucial foundation for applying financial and economic
pressure as an instrument of national and collective security. This is
evident in the financial and economic pressure, isolation, and
disruption campaigns the United States has led against al Qaeda, Iran,
ISIS, North Korea, and rogue financial institutions such as Banco Delta
Asia or Liberty Reserve. It is now difficult to think of any response
to a national or collective security threat that does not involve a
significant financial element reliant on implementation of AML/CFT
regimes.
The pervasive rise of transnational organized crime has also
emerged as a clear threat to our national security. This is most
evident in our 2011 National Security Strategy to Combat Transnational
Organized Crime, including Executive Order 13581. Quite simply, we now
need national security authorities to complement traditional law
enforcement authorities to combat this threat. Given the expansion of
AML predicates across the full spectrum of transnational organized
criminal activity, our AML/CFT regime has clearly become an integral
part of protecting our national security, including through the use of
national security authorities to attack criminal activities through the
expansion and leveraging of AML/CFT regimes.
Finally, as discussed above, our AML/CFT regime is crucial to
protecting the integrity of the financial system itself. This
importance is underscored by the rise of cybercrime, identity theft,
and other forms of fraud that increasingly and systematically target
our financial institutions and our financial system as a whole.
(iii) Globalization of money laundering, financial crime, corresponding
AML/CFT regimes, and the broader financial integrity and
security mission
For the past three decades, the United States has led the
globalization of AML/CFT regimes in regions and jurisdictions around
the world, including with its partners in the G7, the G20, the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF), nine FATF-Style Regional Bodies
(FSRBs), the World Bank, the IMF, and the United Nations. This
sustained effort and commitment has been grounded in the recognition of
the growing transnational and ultimately global threat presented by an
expanding range of money laundering and other illicit financing. This
effort has also created a truly global framework essential for
combating serious criminal activity, protecting our national and
collective security, and safeguarding the integrity of the
international financial system.
After 9/11, the global CFT campaign led by the United States became
an instrumental factor in accelerating a global understanding of the
importance of AML/CFT regimes to our collective security. Combating
financial crime, protecting the integrity of the financial system, and
promoting effective implementation of sanctions against threats to our
national and collective security have since become central to
Treasury's mission and to that of finance ministries around the world.
Together with partner jurisdictions and organizations around the world,
the United States has led a global commitment to expanding AML/CFT
regimes and strengthening their implementation to advance these
objectives.
This commitment is evident in the rapid evolution of the global
counter-illicit financing framework. This framework continues to drive
development and implementation of comprehensive jurisdictional AML/CFT,
counter-proliferation, and financial sanctions regimes. This framework,
largely led by the work of the FATF, manages jurisdictional
participation in conducting the following sets of activities:
Developing typologies of illicit financing trends and
methods;
Deliberating counter-illicit financing policies and issuing
global counter-illicit financing standards;
Conducting and publishing regular peer review assessments
of jurisdictional compliance with the FATF's global standards;
and
Managing follow-up processes that both assist jurisdictions
and hold them accountable in implementing the FATF standards.
Through the FATF network of assessor bodies, the overwhelming
majority of countries around the world are incorporated into this
counter-illicit financing framework.
The global standards issued by the FATF and assessed through this
global framework cover a broad range of specific measures to protect
the integrity of the financial system from the full spectrum of illicit
finance--including money laundering, terrorist financing, proliferation
finance, serious tax crimes, and corruption. These global standards
create a conceptual and technical roadmap for countries and financial
institutions to develop the capabilities required to advance and secure
the integrity of the global financial system.
Implementing the FATF global standards requires a whole-of-
government approach in collaboration with the private sector,
particularly financial institutions. It is a massive undertaking. And
it is essential to combat transnational organized crime, safeguard the
integrity of the financial system, and protect our national and
collective security.
Peer review assessments over the past several years demonstrate
that most countries have taken substantial steps toward implementing
many if not most of the requirements covered by the FATF global
standards. Collectively, this work represents a tremendous
accomplishment in creating a firm global foundation for financial
integrity and security, based on effective development and
implementation of comprehensive AML/CFT regimes.
Nonetheless, these comprehensive jurisdictional assessments also
reveal a number of deep-seated, systemic challenges to AML/CFT regimes.
These challenges, discussed and addressed in the next two sections, are
also evident from consistent typologies and cases of money laundering
and illicit finance, as well as from U.S. enforcement actions taken
against financial institutions in recent years.
II. Financial Vulnerabilities Exploited by Criminal Organizations and
Other Collective Security Threats
Strengthening our AML/CFT system against money laundering and other
financial crime requires an understanding of how such illicit activity
is perpetrated. The details of such methods and schemes will depend on
the particular form of financial crime and the criminal or other
illicit organizations involved. This requires subject matter expertise
across various types of illicit finance as well as various illicit
actors and groups and the regions in which they operate. However, all
forms of money laundering and financial crime exploit vulnerabilities
in the financial system and in AML/CFT regimes. Many of these
vulnerabilities represent challenges to financial transparency and
accountability based on the evolution of the financial system and AML/
CFT regimes as described in Section I.
In the sub-sections below, I will briefly outline characteristics
of money laundering, terrorist financing, and other forms of illicit
finance. I will then explain and provide examples of how these
characteristics drive all manner of illicit financing to exploit
vulnerabilities stemming from systemic challenges to financial
transparency and accountability.
(i)
Characteristics of money laundering, terrorist financing, and
other forms of illicit finance
Criminal organizations generally launder money by placing,
layering, and integrating the proceeds of their criminal activity into
the international financial system and, ultimately, the global economy.
Terrorist organizations may finance their operations through various
criminal activities or noncriminally derived funds (e.g., state
sponsorship, charitable donations, or taxes on local populations under
terrorist control), but they commonly exploit the financial system to
efficiently move such funds in support of terrorist activity, actors,
or networks. Both criminal and terrorist organizations escape detection
through techniques that facilitate anonymity and obfuscate meaningful
financial investigation into the source or destination of their funds.
In addition, these organizations generally seek to create a perception
of legitimacy with respect to their financial transactions, laundered
proceeds, and their beneficiaries.
These features of anonymity, obfuscation, and apparent legitimacy
also commonly characterize other forms of illicit finance, including
proliferation financing, sanctions evasion, and tax evasion.
Depending on the specific criminal activity and organization, money
laundering and other forms of financial crime may assume any one or
combination of a variety of particular methods or techniques. Some of
these may be especially relevant to cash-based predicates (e.g.,
structured cash placements by drug trafficking organizations). Others
may be more prevalently associated with noncash-based predicates or
schemes (e.g., third-party wire transfers in a financial fraud scheme).
More specific money laundering predicates or types of illicit financing
may have more particular characteristics--such as the involvement of
senior government officials or related parties (generally known as
politically exposed persons, or PEPs) in significant corruption-related
money laundering cases.
Effectively combating sophisticated financial crime networks today
requires a significant investment to understand detailed methods and
techniques associated with different illicit financing typologies
employed by different criminal organizations and illicit actors.
Targeted investigative, intelligence, and analysis resources are
necessary to understand the financial operations of particular
criminal, terrorist, or other illicit groups. As the scope, complexity,
and importance of this work has grown, corresponding investments in
AML/CFT regimes are required to address these needs.
Yet the general characteristics of money laundering and other
financial crime described above drive all manner of illicit finance to
exploit systemic challenges to financial transparency and
accountability.
(ii)
Exploitation of systemic challenges to financial transparency
and accountability
Despite variances in specific money laundering and illicit
financing methods, criminal organizations and other collective security
threats consistently exploit vulnerabilities stemming from systemic
challenges to financial transparency and accountability. These
challenges emerge largely from the complexities of the international
financial system discussed in Section I above. They also emerge from
weaknesses in the implementation or approach of AML/CFT regimes.
Three particular financial transparency and accountability
vulnerabilities chronically exploited by all manner of illicit finance
include:
(a)
Anonymous companies created in the United States and other
jurisdictions that fail to adopt meaningful beneficial
ownership disclosure and maintenance requirements for legal
entities;
(b)
Financial intermediation coupled with inadequate AML/CFT
coverage of the financial system; and
(c)
Information-sharing constraints that prevent financial
institutions and counter-illicit financing authorities from
identifying, pursuing, and capturing illicit financing networks
and assets increasingly spread across multiple financial
institutions and jurisdictions.
These vulnerabilities, and examples of how they are exploited by
criminal organizations and other illicit financing actors, are briefly
discussed below.
a. Anonymous Companies
For far too long, anonymous companies created in the United States
and abroad have masked and enabled terrorist organizations, human
traffickers, drug smugglers, and proliferators of weapons of mass
destruction to access and exploit the international financial system.
The range of abuse does not end there. Money laundering, tax evasion,
grand scale corruption, sanctions evasion, fraud, and organized crime
at large are regularly perpetrated or enabled on a worldwide basis
through the systematic creation and use of anonymous legal entities.
Even as the United States continues to enhance and expand its financial
tools and power to combat money laundering and various national
security threats, these efforts are increasingly undermined by such
exploitation of anonymous legal entities.
The continual creation of such legal entities right here at home
may represent the most dangerous systemic vulnerability that the United
States presents today to the global counter-illicit financing mission.
Closing this vulnerability requires congressional action to reform
company formation processes in the United States. In accordance with
global standards that our country has urged others to adopt, such
reform efforts must generally require the collection, maintenance, and
disclosure of
accurate beneficial ownership information for certain legal entities
created under laws in the United States.
Beneficial ownership requirements for legal entities will provide
immensely valuable information for law enforcement and other counter-
illicit finance authorities. As elaborated below, an abundance of
testimony and evidence over the past several years demonstrates that
investigations of legal entities implicated in all manner of criminal
activity are all too often frustrated by a lack of meaningful
beneficial ownership information.
In certain higher risk scenarios, financial institutions should
verify the beneficial ownership information obtained from their legal
entity customers through independent corroboration of the beneficial
owner's status. This presents significant challenges for financial
institutions that lack independent sources of information about their
legal entity customers. To assist financial institutions in conducting
such verification, countries should demand beneficial ownership
information as a condition for granting legal status to those entities
formed under their authorities. For these reasons, the FATF global
standards clearly require jurisdictions to impose beneficial ownership
disclosure and maintenance requirements for legal entities formed under
their authorities. Yet many jurisdictions fail to require companies to
disclose their beneficial ownership as a condition of obtaining or
maintaining their legal status. Of those jurisdictions that do require
such disclosure, few have meaningful verification or enforcement
processes to ensure the credibility of the beneficial ownership
information they collect.
Cases demonstrating criminal and other illicit abuse of such
anonymous legal entities created in the United States and elsewhere are
all too common. For decades, law enforcement and others have presented
many of these cases to Congress as a basis for enacting company
formation reform. Significant cases involving such abuse have been
listed in various testimonies and preambles to draft legislation,
including in a hearing earlier this year by the House Financial
Services Committee. My own testimony in that hearing included prominent
reporting of the following cases of criminal organizations laundering
funds or financing illicit activity through anonymous legal entities
created in the United States:
Members of Venezuela's cabinet used an Andorran bank to
launder $2.5 billion in bribes. The money was concealed in 37
accounts under the name of Panamanian shell companies before
being moved to tax havens such as Switzerland and Belize. (El
Pais)
Between 2011 and 2014 well-connected Russians used 5,140
shell companies that had accounts with 732 banks in 96
countries to move $20.8 billion out of Russia. The anonymous
companies signed ``loan agreements'' between themselves and
used fake ``defaults'' to obtain orders from corrupt courts
that allowed them to transfer the money out of Russia.
(Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project)
Reuters reported that 118 U.S.-based shell companies in 25
States served as ``phantom companies'' for an Armenian crime
ring whose members posed as medical providers and billed
Medicare for than $100 million.
Convicted cocaine trafficker Darko Saric used the names of
associates to register at least four companies in Delaware.
Profits from cocaine smuggled from South America to Europe were
channeled through those shell companies and were then used to
invest in businesses in Saric's native Serbia. (Organized Crime
and Corruption Reporting Project)
According to the Panama Papers, a single Nevada firm formed
over 2,400 shell companies, all headquartered at the same
residential address and used by customers to evade over $30
million in Federal taxes.
Corrupt FIFA official Chuck Blazer is alleged to have used
five shell entities, registered in the United States and the
Cayman Islands, to hide the bribes he extracted from companies
seeking to do business with the global soccer association.
Among other frauds, Blazer, hiding behind a shell company,
would make himself the beneficiary of ``consulting agreements''
in order to receive illegal commissions on broadcasting rights.
(EDNY Indictment)
In a $6 million human trafficking scheme, a Moldovan gang
ran employment companies that supplied hundreds of foreign
nationals to hotels, resorts, and casinos across the United
States. The gang hid their real identities behind a web of
shell companies registered in Kansas, Missouri, and Ohio.
(International Bar Association)
Kingsley Iyare Osemwengie of Las Vegas, Nevada, was part of
a sophisticated drug trafficking organization that diverted
legitimate medicine such as oxycodone into the black market. He
laundered profits through six bank
accounts, including those for two Nevada shell companies: High
Profit Investment and First Class Service. (The Oregonian)
Teodoro Nguema Obiang Mangue, the vice president of
Equatorial Guinea, was convicted of money laundering and
embezzlement of more than $100 million, which was hidden in
California-based shell companies. (Time)
On June 17, 2017, the U.S. Department of Justice reported
that Malaysian sovereign wealth Fund officials and their
associates diverted more than $4.5 billion using fraudulent
documents and representations to launder funds through a series
of complex transactions and shell companies with bank accounts
located in the United States and abroad. Among other purchases,
conspirators used a New York shell company, headquartered at an
accommodation address, to purchase a $4.5 million apartment.
The shell company was itself a wholly owned subsidiary of a
private wealth-management firm, so that the transaction was
completely anonymous. (DOJ Complaint)
As widely reported last year, hackers allegedly tied to
North Korea stole $81 million from accounts maintained by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York for the Central Bank of
Bangladesh. The hackers used the SWIFT messaging system to send
more than three dozen fraudulent money transfer requests for
the benefit of invented individuals and entities in the
Philippines, who then laundered it through casinos. (Reuters)
The Islamic Republic or Iran Shipping Lines, or IRISL, a
state-owned enterprise, has used a web of shell companies
stretching across Europe and Asia to obscure the true ownership
of its fleet by changing the country of registration and names
of companies and owners in order to evade sanctions. (The New
York Times)
Over a period of 6 years, Zhongxing Telecommunications
Equipment Corporation (ZTE) engaged in a scheme to ship more
than 20 million U.S.-origin items to Iran. ZTE used multiple
avenues to evade U.S. sanctions and export control regulations,
including establishing shell companies and falsifying customs
documents. (U.S. Department of the Treasury)
Room 2103, Easey Commercial Building, Wan Chai, Hong Kong,
is the registered office of Unaforte Limited, a company accused
by the United Nations of violating sanctions North Korea. When
CNN visited the office, it found neither Unaforte nor its
listed company secretary, Prolive Consultants Limited. Instead,
room 2103 was home to a seemingly unrelated company: Cheerful
Best Company Services. (CNN)
A 2017 asset forfeiture suit against Velmur Management, a
Singapore-based ``real estate management firm'' with no
physical office space, shows how a layered network of shell
companies with access to the U.S. financial system was used to
allow North Korea to buy $7 million in petroleum from a Russian
company. Velmur would receive payments made on behalf of North
Korea and transfer them to the Russian seller. (DOJ Complaint)
On August 22, 2017, OFAC designated Mingzheng International
Trading Limited, a China- and Hong Kong-based front company,
for its involvement in evading sanctions and laundering funds
on behalf of North Korea.
Thompson Reuters reported that former Ukrainian Prime
Minister Pavlo Lazarenko, once listed as the 8th most corrupt
leader in the world, ultimately controlled a shell company
that, itself acting through other shell companies, owns an
estimated $72 million in real estate in Ukraine.
Jose Trevino Morales, the brother of two kingpins of
Mexico's infamous Zetas drug cartel used their main shell
company, named ``Tremor Enterprises'' and registered in Texas,
to launder at least $16 million over the course of 3 years.
(CNBC)
Mihran and Artur Stepanyan used several anonymous companies
to distribute over $393 million in drugs and launder the
profits. (U.S. Department of Justice)
In 2014, Business Insider reported that Semion Mogilevich,
listed on the FBI's list of the Ten Most Wanted Fugitives, used
a vast network of Russian shell companies to cheat the U.S.
stock market and steal over $150 million from investors in the
United States and overseas.
These and numerous other high-profile cases present a strong
argument against allowing the ongoing creation of anonymous legal
entities, whether in the United States or abroad.
The far more powerful argument lies in the cases we do not see.
For decades, law enforcement officials have testified before
Congress and other authorities about their consistent inability to
pursue high priority cases involving anonymous legal entities that
present a dead end for investigators. Similarly, sanctions authorities
and compliance officers in financial institutions around the world
struggle to track the myriad of shadow companies ultimately created and
controlled by designated national and collective security threats.
For these reasons, it is entirely unclear just how pervasive the
exploitation of anonymous companies is. What is clear is that the
ability to pursue investigations implicating such companies is severely
limited by incorporation practices in the United States and other
jurisdictions. What is also clear is that this limitation contributes
to the broader inability of law enforcement to identify and pursue the
overwhelming majority of illicit financing activity. Various estimates
of money laundering, testimony from law enforcement, and the official
recognition of organized crime as a national security threat all
demonstrate that we may be losing the battle against transnational
organized crime and illicit finance in the criminal justice domain.
To reverse this sobering trend, we must assist rather than hinder
the efforts of law enforcement and other counter-illicit financing
authorities responsible for identifying, tracking, and tracing illicit
actors that access and exploit the international financial system and
global economy. Congressional legislation to end the creation of
anonymous legal entities in the United States through company formation
reform is essential to do this.
b. Financial Intermediation and AML/CFT Coverage of the Complete
Financial System
Financial transparency is complete only to the extent that it
applies across the entire financial system. All financial
institutions--including nonbanking financial institutions such as
broker dealers, investment advisors, and money services businesses--
should be subjected to effective AML/CFT regulation, examination, and
supervision. In addition to nonbank financial institutions, certain
industries that can operate as de facto financial institutions or that
facilitate access to financial services for their customers may present
systemic vulnerabilities to illicit finance. Such industries include
casinos, real estate agencies, dealers in precious metals and stones,
lawyers, accountants, and trust and company service providers.
Failure to extend meaningful AML/CFT regulation to these nonbank
financial institutions or vulnerable industries can allow illicit
financing networks to obtain the financial services they need without
detection. Once illicit actors gain access to any part of the financial
system, the highly intermediated nature of the system facilitates their
access to other parts, including by sector or geography.
Any unregulated or under-regulated financial sector or vulnerable
industry also puts more pressure on those sectors that are regulated.
It is much more difficult to detect illicit financing risks that are
intermediated through another financial institution or through a
customer or account that represents unknown third-party interests.
Correspondent relationships with unregulated financial institutions or
vulnerable industries that lack AML/CFT controls allow criminals to
access even well-regulated financial institutions through the back
door.
For this reason, correspondent relationships are generally
considered high risk under FATF global standards, even between
financial institutions that are well-regulated for AML/CFT.
Correspondent relationships with financial institutions that lack
AML/CFT regulation may be prohibitively high risk. The same may also be
true of accounts with businesses from other vulnerable industries that
lack AML/CFT regulation.
In light of these concerns, FATF global standards direct countries
to extend AML/CFT preventive measures across all financial sectors and
vulnerable industries, including the legal and accounting professions.
Covering all of these sectors and industries can challenge considerable
political interests and entails substantial costs. As a result, many
countries, including the United States, lack full AML/CFT coverage of
their financial systems or vulnerable industries. These gaps in
coverage put more pressure on banks and other sectors that are covered
and present systemic challenges to financial transparency.
Cases demonstrating criminal exploitation of these systemic
vulnerabilities through financial intermediation are also common,
including those involving unregulated gatekeepers such as law firms
holding escrow accounts for underlying client interests. A particularly
prominent case in recent years is the civil forfeiture action involving
the 1Malaysia Development Berhad Sovereign Wealth Fund (1MDB). Founded
in 2009 by Prime Minister Najib Razak, 1MDB was created as a
development fund to boost Malaysia's economy. However, a multinational
investigation involving the United States Department of Justice
indicates that high-level officials at 1MDB and their associates
misappropriated more than $3.5 billion from the development fund
between 2009 and 2015.
In this case, law firms provided relatively anonymous channels for
laundering a significant portion of misappropriated funds. Between
approximately October 21, 2009, and October 13, 2010, 11 wire transfers
totaling approximately $368 million were sent from a shell company
account in Switzerland to an Interest on Lawyers Trust Account (IOLTA)
held by a prominent global law firm headquartered in the United States.
Participants in the scheme then withdrew funds transferred to the
IOLTA, which were then used to purchase assets and invest in business
interests for their personal benefit. Purchases included luxury real
estate, a Beverly Hills hotel, a private jet, and a major Hollywood
motion picture.
In this case, criminals were able to launder money through a law
firm not subject to the AML requirements applicable to the financial
services industry. Through IOLTA accounts, members of the 1MDB scheme
could do an end-run around customer due diligence and suspicious
activity reporting requirements, bringing criminal proceeds into the
United States through a de facto back door correspondent. To decrease
these risks, gatekeeper accounts held for the benefit of third parties
(such as IOLTAs) should be required to comply with basic AML
requirements such as CDD and AML programs, in accordance with global
standards.
c. Information-Sharing Constraints
Illicit financing networks, like the business of most enterprises,
almost always implicate more than one financial institution. Whether in
the process of raising, moving, using, or laundering funds associated
with illicit activity, such networks almost invariably transact across
multiple financial institutions. For the illicit financing networks of
most pressing concern, transactions also often cross multiple
jurisdictions. Identifying, tracking, and tracing these networks
therefore depends critically upon information-sharing across financial
institutions and across borders.
FATF global standards require or encourage countries and financial
institutions to share information in many ways. However, implementation
of such information-sharing measures is routinely constrained or
prohibited by data protection, privacy, or business interests, or by
liability concerns associated with these interests. Many counter-
illicit financing professionals in governments and in financial
institutions consider data protection and privacy to be the ``new bank
secrecy'' that was the genesis for much of interest in creating the
FATF almost three decades ago.
The systemic challenge posed by these information-sharing
constraints is perhaps most evident in the risk management programs of
global banks and large financial groups. FATF global standards direct
countries to require such banks and financial groups to develop risk
management programs that cover their entire enterprise. The wide scope
of these programs is deliberately aimed at identifying and addressing
illicit financing risks across all branches and affiliates of the bank
or financial group, wherever located. Yet data protection, privacy, and
other restrictions in many countries prohibit such banks or financial
groups from sharing much of the information that is relevant or even
essential to such enterprise-wide risk management programs. These
restrictions apply even when the information sought is intended to be
kept entirely within the financial group's enterprise.
Even more problematic for these institutions, information-sharing
requirements and prohibitions from different countries can conflict
with one another, making it impossible to comply with the laws or
expectations of different financial centers in which global banks and
financial groups operate.
Information-sharing challenges associated with financial
intermediation and illicit finance are not limited to cross-border
scenarios or to risk management programs. Even within jurisdictions,
many of the same constraints prevent financial institutions from
sharing information that can be critical in identifying or addressing
illicit financing risks. This presents opportunities for countries,
including the United States, to begin addressing these challenges
through domestic information-sharing enhancement processes, in
partnership with their financial institutions.
The sensitivity of financial information and the legitimate
interests behind data protection and privacy raise important
considerations for policymakers in determining how best to address
these information-sharing challenges. Although more work is needed to
better understand these challenges and how best to overcome them, it is
clear that the lack of proactive or even reactive information-sharing
between and among financial institutions presents a systemic challenge
to financial transparency.
It is also clear that criminal organizations and actors exploit or
benefit from these information-sharing weaknesses to launder
substantial amounts of money. The Madoff Ponzi Scheme securities fraud
case exemplifies how poor information-sharing creates blind spots where
money launderers can act for years without
consequence. Between 1986 and 2008, one of the largest global banks
headquartered in the United States maintained accounts for Madoff's
company and invested proprietary and customer funds in derivative
securities products based on Madoff's own fund. Due to legal
information-sharing ambiguities, a lack of formal policies and
procedures, and a stove-piping of due diligence functions, the bank's
individual lines of business, geographic regions, and compliance units
failed to effectively communicate with each other. Thus, while
individual branches, compliance officers, and executives understood
that their customer could be orchestrating a multi-billion dollar
international fraud scheme, either this information would not be shared
with other offices or, when sharing occurred, the offices and personnel
who received this information would not act upon it.
As with the examples provided above demonstrating criminal
exploitation of other systemic transparency challenges, numerous other
cases reflecting criminal exploitation of information-sharing barriers
exist. These cases collectively show that criminal organizations and
other illicit actors--regardless of their specific methods and
characteristics--will continue to launder money and perpetrate other
financial crimes by exploiting systemic challenges to financial
transparency and accountability.
III. Congressional Action Required To Encourage Innovation and Enhance
the Effectiveness and Sustainability of AML/CFT Regimes
The evolution of money laundering, financial crime, and AML/CFT
regimes--coupled with the consistent criminal exploitation of systemic
vulnerabilities described in Section II--provides a clear basis and
direction for modernizing and reforming AML/CFT regimes. Such reform
should fundamentally encourage innovation to enhance the effectiveness
and sustainability of AML/CFT regimes in combating the full range of
illicit financing activity and actors. In the United States, these
efforts should include Congressional action amending the BSA.
In a hearing before the House Financial Services Subcommittee on
Terrorism and Illicit Finance last November, I outlined a comprehensive
approach for Congress to lead such BSA modernization and reform. My
testimony offered detailed recommendations for Congress to consider in
developing legislation.
These recommendations were broadly guided by the following three
fundamental principles of AML/CFT reform:
Promote more complete, effective, and efficient financial
transparency, including by facilitating systemic reporting and
sharing of information at a lower cost to financial
institutions;
Exploit such financial transparency and information more
effectively and consistently by investing in targeted financial
investigative and analytic capabilities; and
Create an inclusive and clear management structure that
empowers Treasury to govern the ongoing development and
application of our expanded AML/CFT regime.
In accordance with these three fundamental principles of AML/CFT
reform, my recommendations for congressional action may be summarized
as follows:
1.
Expand the objectives of the BSA to explicitly include protecting
the integrity of the international financial system and our
national and collective security.
2.
Swiftly enact company formation reform to require the systemic
reporting and maintenance of beneficial ownership information
for legal entities created or doing business in the United
States pursuant to an effective and workable framework.
3.
Restructure and enhance financial investigative expertise at
Treasury, including with respect to the Criminal Investigative
Division of the Internal Revenue Service.
4.
Provide protected resources to law enforcement, the intelligence
community, and counter-illicit financing targeting authorities
to pursue illicit financing activity and networks.
5.
Direct Treasury to enhance financial transparency in a
methodical, systematic, and strategic manner that: (i)
addresses longstanding and substantial vulnerabilities in our
financial system; and (ii) pursues reporting obligations based
on straight-through processing that leverages new technologies,
provides more bulk data for counter-illicit financing
authorities, and ultimately reduces burdens on financial
institutions.
6.
Clarify, expand, and strengthen, information-sharing between and
among financial institutions and governmental authorities under
Section 314 of the USA PATRIOT Act to encourage the broadest
innovation and application of new technologies to combat
illicit finance.
7.
Direct and provide resources for Treasury to strengthen, expand,
institutionalize, and lead consultations with the AML and
broader counter-illicit financing community--including
financial sectors and other industries covered by AML/CFT
regulation--in establishing and implementing priorities for
U.S. AML/CFT policy.
These recommendations are discussed in detail in my prior testimony
before the House Financial Services Subcommittee on Terrorism and
Illicit Finance. In addition, my testimony before the Senate Committee
on the Judiciary in February earlier this year provides a detailed
explanation and proposal for company formation reform. This proposal
would preserve effective and pragmatic company formation processes in
the United States while addressing the national security threat
presented by anonymous companies through beneficial ownership
collection and reporting requirements.
The urgency and importance of such reform is grounded in an
understanding of the expanding role that our AML/CFT regime plays in
protecting our national security and financial system from an expanding
range of complex threats. We must be clear-eyed about the resources
required to advance and protect such complex and important interests.
We must also be attentive to the fair distribution of costs and
responsibilities across the beneficiaries of our AML/CFT regime--
including AML/CFT and national security authorities, financial
institutions and other vulnerable industries, the customers they
service, and the general public. And we must focus on directing our
AML/CFT policies and resources in a manner that drives efficiency and
effectiveness. Congressional action and leadership is essential to
securing interests.
Thank you for time and consideration of these issues. I look
forward to any questions that you may have.
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF CHAIRMAN SASSE FROM DENNIS
LORMEL
Q.1. What incentives do financial institutions have to develop
innovative AML techniques and consult typologies to stop human
trafficking and fight MS-13? Are financial institutions ever
punished for leveraging these techniques? For example, could a
regulator punish a financial institution that found that human
traffickers were using their services because the financial
institution did not find the criminal activity earlier? How can
this issue be fixed?
A.1. The questions you pose above buildupon each other. I will
address each in progression. However, I'd like to first set the
stage with a broad overview of the primary issue central to
each question. Financial institutions are faced with regulatory
requirements and regulatory expectations. What is required and
what is expected or perceived to be expected often places
financial institutions in precarious situations. From my
perspective, that places financial institutions in the position
of being less proactive and less willing to be innovative. As I
frequently state in training I provide, the regulations are
written in black and white. However, the interpretation or
perceived interpretation of the regulations can be extremely
gray. What is required and what is expected can become blurred.
As a result, financial institutions are less inclined to be
innovative. Regulators do not provide leadership or real
guidance. Their response is usually that it is up to the
financial institution to manage their risk and to have an anti-
money laundering (AML) program that is reasonably designed to
identify suspicious activity. That poses the question of how do
you define ``reasonably designed.'' That is where requirements
and expectations tend to become more subjective. In addition to
the issue of regulatory requirements versus regulatory
expectations, there could be a significant cost consideration
for developing and implementing innovative technologies.
Regarding incentives to develop innovative technologies and
typologies to identify human trafficking and fight MS-13,
incentives are outweighed by real or perceived regulatory
expectations. We need to distinguish between human trafficking
and the fight against MS-13. MS-13 is one of the most notorious
street gangs in the Western Hemisphere. They are involved in a
myriad of criminal activities. Among their criminal activities,
MS-13 is engaged in human trafficking, especially sex
trafficking involving young women from the Northern Triangle of
Central America including the countries of El Salvador,
Guatemala and Honduras. Unfortunately, human trafficking is a
much broader problem than the trafficking activities involving
MS-13. Financial institutions are more inclined to look at the
broader human trafficking issue, without specific focus on MS-
13. Regardless, financial institutions should be monitoring for
touch points they may have to facilitate human trafficking and
activity involving MS-13. AML compliance professionals are
extremely dedicated and committed to disrupting human
trafficking and transnational criminal activity. One incentive
AML professionals share, on a more personal level, is doing the
right thing. From an institutional level, incentive should be
to ensure your institution maintains an AML program reasonably
designed to identify and report suspicious activity. Financial
institutions serve as facilitation tools or detection
mechanisms. In detection, they protect the integrity of their
institution. In facilitation, they risk reputational and
financial harm. Innovation, such as targeted monitoring, where
you identify specific typologies, and set monitoring rules to
specific typologies can enhance the hit rate of identifying
suspicious activity regarding human trafficking. This is in
addition to the baseline transaction monitoring. Unfortunately,
there is little incentive for financial institutions to develop
such proactive measures.
With respect to if financial institutions are ever punished
for leveraging these techniques, the answer goes back to
regulatory requirements versus regulatory expectations. I'm not
sure I would characterize the concern of financial institutions
about being punished as opposed to being questioned or second
guessed and potentially becoming the subject of regulatory
action because the technology upgrade either alerts more or
less transactional activity as being potentially suspicious.
One of the concerns here, again either real or perceived, is
that the regulators would want the financial institution to run
both the old technology and the new technology side by side to
assess why more or less transactional activity gets flagged as
potentially suspicious. In addition to regulatory concern, this
would present the financial institution with additional cost
and resource requirements, which could be prohibitive.
This leads to the next part of your question as to whether
a regulator could punish a financial institution for
identifying the human trafficking activity they facilitated
earlier. Real or perceived, the regulatory expectation is that
the regulators would take an adverse action. The real issue is
whether the earlier transactional activity was adequately
monitored and the financial institution had a reasonably
designed AML program. It would appear logical that enhanced
technology would improve transaction monitoring that the
financial institution should be credited for. Unfortunately,
even if the financial institution was credited for the enhanced
technology, they would be expected and/or required to take
remedial action to identify the earlier transactions that were
missed. Thus, taking innovative steps and enhancing technology
in this scenario serves as a deterrent and not an incentive.
Finally, how can this issue be fixed? In my view, this will
require the regulators to provide leadership and/or guidance in
incentivizing innovation and technology enhancements and
working with financial institutions who strive to improve their
AML programs. Where remediation is required to identify the
earlier missed transactions, it should be done in a manner less
detrimental than is currently experienced, unless the financial
institution was not acting in a reasonable manner.
Q.2. Do smaller financial institutions have sufficient
incentives and resources to use artificial intelligence
technology? What can be done to make it easier for smaller
financial institutions to use such technology?
A.2. Much like described in the above responses, from an AML
perspective, there is little or no incentive for smaller
financial institutions to take steps to enhance their
technology. From the cost and resource perspective, it's even
more prohibitive and challenging for smaller financial
institutions to be innovative. Incentives must be developed to
encourage financial institutions, large and small, to become
more innovative.
This leads to another industry-wide AML vulnerability. In
part, because of real or perceived regulatory expectations,
financial institutions tend to be more conservative and
predictable. Bad actors, who are proficient in gaming the
system and identifying systemic vulnerabilities, exploit those
institutional vulnerabilities to facilitate their illicit
activity. This is exacerbated by the fact that AML programs and
fraud detection are inherently reactive. We must do more to
become innovative and proactive. This requires more forward
thinking that should be spurred on through meaningful
incentives.
Q.3. What would it look like for a Federal AML regime to better
prioritize particular law enforcement targets? What--if any--
AML priorities should be de-emphasized? How could a system
still ensure that a basic level AML competence was met so that
still-important law enforcement priorities did not fall through
the cracks?
A.3. As with your first group of questions, let me respond
first, more broadly, and then more specifically to each related
question. There is no easy answer to better prioritizing or de-
emphasizing crime problems. You need to assess this from both
the law enforcement and financial institution perspectives.
From the law enforcement perspective, crime problems must be
prioritized at a national level from a program perspective and
at the local or grass roots level from the local or grass roots
problems encountered in that jurisdiction. Criminals and crime
problems evolve. Crime problem surveys or assessments must be
conducted at the national and local or grass roots levels in
order to monitor current and emerging crime trends. These
surveys or assessments cannot be static and must be ongoing to
better identify emerging trends. At the financial institution
level, financial institutions must conduct ongoing risk
assessments to assess their institutional risk and to identify
potential touch points with national and local or grass roots
crime problems and priorities. Risks and potential criminal
touchpoints will be institution specific in accordance with an
institutions customer base, geographic footprint, and product
and service offerings. Financial institutions should be
familiar with the general law enforcement crime problem
priorities at the national and local or grass roots level. In
terms of prioritizing law enforcement crime problem priorities,
each law enforcement agency has different or similar priorities
in accordance with their investigative jurisdiction and
mandate. The major national priorities are terrorism, drugs,
and human trafficking. In my experience, every crime problem,
which goes beyond terrorism, drugs and human trafficking, other
than violent crimes, all have elements of fraud and require
money laundering. Thus, in my experience, fraud and money
laundering are linked together and are ingrained in all such
criminal activity or predicate offenses. Financial institutions
not only need to be familiar with relevant crime problems but
also, importantly, the facilitation tools used in furtherance
of such criminal activities. Included as facilitation tools are
shell companies (beneficial ownership), the internet,
electronic mechanisms, informal and illegal money remitters,
correspondent banks and other facilitation tools.
It is incumbent that law enforcement, at all levels, and
financial institutions establish, and maintain sustainable
partnerships and working groups to share information and to
understand the crime problems and law enforcement priorities,
at the national and local or grassroots levels. In working with
law enforcement, financial institutions should develop
typologies for crime problems that are more specific to their
institutional risk. Such typologies should be used for targeted
monitoring initiatives and to enhance baseline transaction
monitoring.
With respect to a Federal regime to better prioritize
particular law enforcement targets, it would be extremely
challenging and unproductive to develop a viable single
national regime. This is due to the number of law enforcement
agencies, varying jurisdictions and priorities and how these
crime problems would touch financial institutions. The bottom
line here is there can be no one size fits all policy, its
contingent on risk, which impacts law enforcement agencies and
financial institutions differently.
De-emphasizing AML priorities cannot be uniform across the
financial services industry. De-emphasis of AML priorities
should be left to the discretion of each financial institution
on a risk-based assessment.
In terms of law enforcement priorities falling through the
cracks with financial institutions' AML programs, I do not
consider that as a problem or concern. Overall, law enforcement
publishes crime problem priorities through their websites and
outreach programs. As I mentioned earlier, it is incumbent that
law enforcement and financial institutions establish
partnerships and working groups to share information and better
understand crime problems and systemic vulnerabilities. There
are a number of national and grassroots working groups that
serve as great models for success. An example at the national
level includes the FBI's Terrorist Financing Operations Section
(TFOS), national working group that they refer to as the Bank
Security Advisory Group (BSAG). It involves a number of
financial institutions meeting bi-annually with representatives
of TFOS, regarding terrorist financing and through ongoing
information sharing to develop typologies. An example of a
local or grassroots working group is monthly meetings held by
the Northern Virginia SAR (suspicious activity reports) Review
Team. The SAR Review Team holds monthly meetings to discuss
typologies and crime problems specific to the local Northern
Virginia regional area. These are two examples of many such
working groups. It would be very difficult, if not impossible,
to template such groups. They need to be specific to the
investigative mandate of the law enforcement side and the risk
or touch points to involved financial
institutions.
Q.4. One potential hurdle to creating an effective feedback
loop between law enforcement officials and financial
institutions is that law enforcement officials are reluctant to
share information about ongoing investigations.
Is that a legitimate concern that should prevent law
enforcement officials from sharing information with financial
institutions?
A.4. I am a huge proponent for developing consistent and broad
feedback mechanisms. When I ran the FBI's Terrorist Financing
Operations Section, I frequently met with then FinCEN Director
James Sloan to develop viable and consistent feedback
mechanisms. We were always confronted with a number of
impediments to set up a consistent and broad feedback
mechanism. That said, impediments should not be an excuse to
develop meaningful feedback mechanisms.
There are legitimate concerns regarding law enforcement
sharing information about ongoing investigations. If the
investigations involve grand jury material, that information
cannot be shared during an ongoing investigation. Likewise, any
classified information developed during an investigation cannot
be shared. Depending on the sensitivity of an investigation
there could well be safety and security issues for law
enforcement personnel, particularly in undercover scenarios or
in situations involving confidential informants or cooperating
witnesses. In situations where information could be shared or
feedback provided, consideration should be given to doing so.
In most situations involving ongoing investigations, it would
be more likely not appropriate to share information.
Q.4.a. How could those concerns be mitigated?
A.4.a. For the most part, as explained in the prior response,
these concerns cannot be mitigated. Where there could be room
for information sharing or feedback could be in situations
where indictments or convictions or other legal process has
been issued and information is in the public record through
court filings. The fact a SAR was filed should not be disclosed
but information and evidence developed as a result of the SAR
filing could be in the public domain. In such cases, feedback
should not be a problem other than investigative resource
considerations.
Q.4.b. Even if law enforcement officials could not provide
feedback about SARs relating to ongoing investigations, could
they at least provide feedback about SARs relating to completed
investigations?
A.4.b. Feedback regarding completed investigations should
result in fewer impediments and could be more viable. However,
there are certain considerations to take into account. First is
how time consuming might this be and does law enforcement have
the time to provide such feedback or are they dealing with
other matters that must be prioritized? Hence, are they
legitimately lacking the capacity to provide feedback? This
impediment should not be a consistent issue. The greater
challenge is that the investigation could have gone on for one
or more years and the feedback may no longer be relevant or as
relevant or law enforcement does not keep track of the
importance of SARs at that point in time.
Q.4.c. What--if any--other mechanisms should be developed to
improve the feedback loop between law enforcement officials and
financial institutions?
A.4.c. At the national level, law enforcement and FinCEN should
assess how to develop a consistent feedback mechanism. In
speaking to officials at the FBI, I understand the Financial
Crimes Section in the Criminal Division, is looking at this
issue. What should be noted here and could be modeled after are
the various public private partnerships, working groups and
crime problem specific initiatives that involve meaningful
feedback. I alluded to the FBI, TFOS working group. Meaningful
information and feedback occurs there. As I stated in my
testimony on June 20, 2018, great examples of feedback include:
The Association of Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialists
(ACAMS) has made human smuggling a long-time priority. They
started a working group in 2010 with a group of major banks and
HSI. Bank analysts and HSI analysts developed patterns of
activity or typologies consistent with human smuggling.
JPMorgan Chase had a team of special investigators who
conducted targeted transaction monitoring and identified
potential suspicious activity. ACAMS gave JPMorgan Chase and
HSI a special award in recognition of their outstanding
collaboration. Another outstanding example of public and
private sector partnerships occurred in January 2018, in the
run up to the Super Bowl. The ACAMS Minneapolis Chapter held a
half day learning event focused entirely on human slavery/
trafficking. I was proud to be the first speaker. U.S. Bank,
HSI and the U.S. Attorney's Office in Minneapolis collaborated
to develop typologies to identify human sex trafficking
specifically related to travel for the Super Bowl. These types
of initiatives have a great impact on crime problems like human
trafficking. I must give a cautionary comment that this type of
initiative is not as easy as it sounds. It can be costly. There
are regulatory concerns and other impediments that must be
overcome. The September issue of ACAMS Today magazine had a
detailed article about the Minneapolis learning event.
Q.4.d. Should policymakers consider reforming Section 314(b)?
If so, how?
A.4.d. As noted earlier in my responses, I am a huge proponent
of information sharing. I believe that policymakers should
consider reforming or enhancing both Section 314(b), which is
the sharing of information between financial institutions, and
Section 314(a), which is information sharing between law
enforcement and financial institutions.
With respect to Section 314(b), I would encourage
policymakers to assess the percentage of participating
financial institutions by asset size. My sense is less small
banks participate in the Section 314(b) program. I would want
to know why institutions, especially small institutions, do not
participate. It is likely it is due to concern for cost and the
lack of resources to handle the requests. I would also consider
how to incentivize banks to participate in the Section 314(b)
program.
Q.4.e. Should policymakers consider reforming Section 314(a)?
If so, how?
A.4.e. With respect to Section 314(a), I would encourage
policymakers to go back and assess the original intent for
Section 314(a). My understanding from interaction with
individuals involved in the process, the intent was that
information sharing be both ways.
Section 314(a) currently only has information going from
financial institutions to law enforcement. Would it be viable
for law enforcement to also provide information to financial
institutions? This is definitely a question that policymakers
should assess. If an information sharing mechanism can be
developed through Section 314(a) from law enforcement to
financial institutions, it may offset the SAR feedback
mechanism to an extent.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR WARNER FROM DENNIS
LORMEL
Q.1. I'm concerned by the apparent growing use of
cryptocurrencies by bad actors to evade sanctions and anti-
money laundering laws. Whatever their other potential benefits
may be, cryptocurrencies are attractive to cybercriminals, drug
cartels, darkweb consumers, and countries like Iran, North
Korea and Russia, that are interested in evading sanctions. One
recent study of Bitcoin transactions found that darknet
marketplaces such as Silk Road and AlphaBay, were the source of
almost all of the illicit bitcoins laundered through conversion
services. A significant percentage of Bitcoin conversion
services work to conceal where they operate, which complicates
finding the right foreign governments to partner with to ensure
AML/CFT enforcement.
A.1. I firmly believe we should embrace technology and the use
of cryptocurrency. At the same time, we must demand
transparency and accountability. Criminals have been fast to
embrace new technologies in order to circumvent transparency
and reporting requirements. Unfortunately, AML compliance and
fraud prevention are inherently reactive, while bad actors are
not restricted by regulations and can be proactive.
Q.2.a. Are FinCEN's existing cryptocurrency policies adequate
to combat AML/CFT using cryptocurrency?
A.2.a. Cryptocurrency poses a significant challenge for
regulators and law enforcement. That's because of the unknown
and the challenge the inherent reactive nature of AML
compliance. As cryptocurrency and technology advance we must
continuously and objectively assess the effectiveness of
regulations and our ability to deal with emerging criminal
challenges.
I believe FinCEN's existing policies and authority are
adequate but must continuously be assessed and enhanced. My
bigger concern is whether FinCEN and the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) possess the resources necessary to meet and
address the continuously emerging crime problems posed by
cryptocurrency and the ability to use the dark web. Neither
FinCEN nor the IRS have an abundance of resources to address
the evolution of the problem. The crime problem is likely to
evolve faster than the adequacy of regulations or the capacity
to deal with the crime problem. That is why we must ensure
FinCEN, the IRS and other regulators and law enforcement
agencies have the resources and capacity to address this
emerging problem.
Q.2.b. If not, what more could FinCEN be doing to combat this?
A.2.b. I believe FinCEN currently has adequate capacity but
must continuously assess the emerging problems posed by bad
actors and realistically and proactively address impediments,
resource constraints and emerging trends.
Q.2.c. And if not, does FinCEN have adequate authority to
address the issue?
A.2.c. In my opinion, FinCEN currently has adequate authority
to address the issue but that capacity must continuously be
assessed and enhanced because it can and will be overwhelmed
much faster than can be dealt with.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF CHAIRMAN SASSE FROM TRACY S. WOODROW
Q.1. Much of the future of AML efforts seems to be in
artificial intelligence and machine learning. In the healthcare
context, I hear about how researchers have used machine
learning and artificial intelligence to identify diseases and
predict when they will occur, using data points that humans
would have never put together. How have financial institutions
or law enforcement officials been able to use similar
techniques to identity money laundering and how much more
progress can be made in this front?
A.1. Responses not received in time for publication.
Q.2. What incentives do financial institutions have to develop
innovative AML techniques and consult typologies to stop human
trafficking and fight MS-13? Are financial institutions ever
punished for leveraging these techniques? For example, could a
regulator punish a financial institution that found that human
traffickers were using their services because the financial
institution did not find the criminal activity earlier? How can
this issue be fixed?
A.2. Responses not received in time for publication.
Q.3. Do smaller financial institutions have sufficient
incentives and resources to use artificial intelligence type
technology? If not, what can be done to make it easier for
smaller financial institutions to use such technology?
A.3. Responses not received in time for publication.
Q.4. I worry that law enforcement officials and regulators
provide to financial institutions an insufficient indication of
their priorities in the AML context. In practice, many
financial institutions feel as if they must spend as many
resources on minor crimes as they do human and drug
trafficking. If everything is a priority, nothing is a
priority. Financial institutions need to be able to focus their
resources on human and drug traffickers without getting in
trouble if they comply with fewer process-based regulatory
requirements along the way.
A.4. Responses not received in time for publication.
Q.5. Is there a lack of regulatory and law enforcement
prioritization in the money laundering context? If so, how does
this impact our AML regime?
A.5. Responses not received in time for publication.
Q.6. What are the most prominent examples of a lack of
prioritization in our AML regime?
A.6. Responses not received in time for publication.
Q.7. What would it look like for a Federal AML regime to better
prioritize particular law enforcement targets? What--if any--
AML priorities should be de-emphasized? How could a system
still ensure that a basic level AML competence was met so that
still-important law enforcement priorities did not fall through
the cracks?
A.7. Responses not received in time for publication.
Q.8. One potential area that involves lack of prioritization is
the current process of filing suspicious activity reports.
Financial institutions in my State spend a lot of resources
filing these reports, and rarely seem to get feedback on what
is useful and what is not. This makes it hard for them to
understand the point of our SARs system. What is the cost of
our current SARs system for the average financial institution?
Is there anything policymakers can do to right-size the SARs-
based regulatory requirements without undermining law
enforcement priorities? For example, in certain instances
should financial institutions be able to file only the
underlying data and not spend the time necessary to prepare a
broader report justifying the SAR?
A.8. Responses not received in time for publication.
Q.9. One potential hurdle to creating an effective feedback
loop between law enforcement officials and financial
institutions is that law enforcement officials are reluctant to
share information about ongoing investigations.
A.9. Responses not received in time for publication.
Q.10. Is that a legitimate concern that should prevent law
enforcement officials from sharing information with financial
institutions?
A.10. Responses not received in time for publication.
Q.11. How could those concerns be mitigated?
A.11. Responses not received in time for publication.
Q.12. Even if law enforcement officials could not provide
feedback about SARs relating to ongoing investigations, could
they at least provide feedback about SARs relating to completed
investigations?
A.12. Responses not received in time for publication.
Q.13. What--if any--other mechanisms should be developed to
improve the feedback loop between law enforcement officials and
financial institutions?
A.13. Responses not received in time for publication.
Q.14.a. Should policymakers consider reforming Section 314(b)?
If so, how?
A.14.a. Responses not received in time for publication.
Q.14.b. Should policymakers consider reforming Section 314(a)?
If so, how?
A.14.b. Responses not received in time for publication.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR WARNER FROM TRACY S. WOODROW
I'm interested in the ways in which technology can aid AML
compliance efforts.
Q.1. What are some of the innovative technologies that you've
seen that hold some promise for either the Government or the
private sector?
A.1. Responses not received in time for publication.
Q.2. Are you aware of privacy-enhancing technologies that
facilitate the sharing of information between parties without
revealing personal identifying information?
A.2. Responses not received in time for publication.
Q.3. What are the barriers to either the Government or the
private sector adopting these technologies?
A.3. Responses not received in time for publication.
Q.4. What can we be doing as legislators to ensure that we
promote technological innovation in this sector?
A.4. Responses not received in time for publication.