- PROTECTING CONSUMERS AND COMPETITION: AN EXAMINATION OF THE T-MOBILE AND SPRINT MERGER
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
PROTECTING CONSUMERS AND COMPETITION: AN EXAMINATION OF THE T-MOBILE
AND SPRINT MERGER
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
FEBRUARY 13, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-5
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-688 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
GREG WALDEN, Oregon
ANNA G. ESHOO, California
Ranking Member
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
FRED UPTON, Michigan
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York, Vice
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
Chair
BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
SCOTT H. PETERS, California
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DARREN SOTO, Florida
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
------
Professional Staff
JEFFREY C. CARROLL, Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Deputy Staff Director
MIKE BLOOMQUIST, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Chairman
JERRY McNERNEY, California
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
Ranking Member
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
PETE OLSON, Texas
DARREN SOTO, Florida
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
ANNA G. ESHOO, California
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
BILLY LONG, Missouri
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
BILL FLORES, Texas
DORIS O. MATSUI, California, Vice
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Chair
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
PETER WELCH, Vermont
GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
TONY CARDENAS, California
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hon. Mike Doyle, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................
2
Prepared statement...........................................
3
Hon. Robert E. Latta, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Ohio, opening statement.....................................
4
Prepared statement...........................................
5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
8
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................
9
Prepared statement...........................................
10
Witnesses
Marcelo Claure, Executive Chairman, Sprint Corporation...........
12
Prepared statement...........................................
15
Answers to submitted questions...............................
237
John Legere, Chief Executive Officer, T-Mobile US................
28
Prepared statement...........................................
30
Answers to submitted questions...............................
239
Chris Shelton, President, Communications Workers of America......
52
Prepared statement...........................................
54
Answers to submitted questions...............................
253
Carri Bennet, General Counsel, Rural Wireless Association, Inc...
63
Prepared statement...........................................
65
Answers to submitted questions...............................
260
Doug Brake, Director of Broadband and Spectrum Policy,
Information Technology and Innovation Foundation...............
78
Prepared statement...........................................
80
Phillip Berenbroick, Senior Policy Counsel, Public Knowledge.....
93
Prepared statement...........................................
95
Answers to submitted questions...............................
266
Submitted Material
Letter from Andrea Rice, Missouri Farm Bureau, to Marlene H.
Dortch, Secretary, Federal Communications Commission, submitted
by Mr. Long....................................................
151
Report of the Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau, Federal
Communications Commission, ``2017 Atlantic Hurricane Season
Impact on Communications,'' August 2018, submitted by Mr.
Pallone \1\
Letter of February 4, 2019, from John Legere to Ajit Pai,
Chairman, Federal Communications Commission, submitted by Mr.
McNerney.......................................................
154
Ex parte filing of February 4, 2019, by DLA Piper to Marlene H.
Dortch, Federal Communications Commission, submitted by Mr.
McNerney.......................................................
155
Letter of September 17, 2018, from Greg Ellis, Vice President,
Environment and Energy Policy, Indiana Chamber of Commerce, to
Marlene H. Dortch, Secretary, Federal Communications
Commission, submitted by Mrs. Brooks...........................
159
----------
\1\ The report has been retained in committee files and also is
available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF16/20190213/108895/
HHRG-116-IF16-20190213-SD007.pdf.
Article of October 25, 2018, ``Why 5G is out of reach for more
people than you think'' by Shara Tibken, CNET, submitted by Mr.
Lujan..........................................................
160
Report of the Vermont Department of Public Service, ``Mobile
Wireless in Vermont,'' January 15, 2019, submitted by Mr. Welch
169
Map, 4G LTE coverage in Vermont, submitted by Mr. Welch..........
179
Article of January 24, 2019, ``VT officials suspected cellphone
coverage maps were too good to be true. They were right.,'' by
April McCullum, Burlington Free Press, submitted by Mr. Welch..
180
Maps, ``Distribution of Sprint and T-Mobile's postpaid and
prepaid stores'' in Newark, NJ; Pittsburgh, PA; Toledo, OH; and
Portland, OR, submitted by Mr. Doyle...........................
183
Article of February 11, 2019, ``T-Mobile's Compelling Case For
Driving Innovation and Competition,'' by Henry Waxman and Billy
Tauzin, Morning Consult, submitted by Mr. Doyle................
187
Statement of Consumer Reports by George P. Slover, Senior Policy
Counsel, February 13, 2019, submitted by Mr. Doyle.............
189
Blog post of February 12, 2019, ``Why INCOMPAS is Opposing the
Merger Between T-Mobile and Sprint,'' by Chip Pickering,
INCOMPAS, submitted by Mr. Doyle...............................
198
Report of the Democracy Reform Task Force, ``The Republican
Culture of Corruption,'' by Mr. Sarbanes, Chair, September 18,
2018, submitted by Mr. Doyle \2\
Report of the Office of Inspections, Office of Inspector General,
General Services Administration, ``Evaluation of GSA's
Management and Administration of the Old Post Office Building
Lease,'' January 16, 2019, submitted by Mr. Doyle \3\
Letter of February 12, 2019, from Mr. Cardenas, et al., to John
Legere, Chief Executive Officer, T-Mobile US, Inc., and Michel
Combes, Chief Executive Officer and President, Sprint Corp.,
submitted by Mr. Doyle.........................................
202
Letter from the National Diversity Coalition to Mr. Pallone, et
al., submitted by Mr. Doyle....................................
208
Letter of February 12, 2019, from Matthew Kandrach, President,
and Gerard Scimeca, Vice President, Consumer Action for a
Strong Economy, to Mr. Pallone, et al., submitted by Mr. Doyle.
213
Statement of J. Kenneth Blackwell, February 12, 2019, submitted
by Mr. Doyle...................................................
215
Letter of February 12, 2019, from Colin A. Hanna, President, Let
Freedom Ring, to Mr. Pallone, et al., submitted by Mr. Doyle...
217
Letter of February 12, 2019, from Beau Brunson, Senior Policy
Advisor, Consumers' Research, to Mr. Pallone, et al., submitted
by Mr. Doyle...................................................
219
Letter of February 12, 2019, from Richard M. Manning, President,
Americans for Limited Government, to Mr. Pallone, et al.,
submitted by Mr. Doyle.........................................
227
Letter of February 13, 2019, from Grover G. Norquist, President,
Americans for Tax Reform, to Mr. Doyle and Mr. Latta, submitted
by Mr. Doyle...................................................
229
Letter of January 25, 2019, from Ms. Eshoo, et al., to Ajit Pai,
Chairman, Federal Communications Commission, and Makan
Delrahim, Assistant Attorney General, Antitrust Division,
Department of Justice, submitted by Mr. Long...................
231
Letter of February 13, 2019, from Grover G. Norquist, President,
Americans for Tax Reform, et al., to Mr. Doyle and Mr. Latta,
submitted by Mr. Doyle.........................................
234
----------
\2\ The report has been retained in committee files and also is
available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF16/20190213/108895/
HHRG-116-IF16-20190213-SD012.pdf.
\3\ The report has been retained in committee files and also is
available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF16/20190213/108895/
HHRG-116-IF16-20190213-SD013.pdf.
PROTECTING CONSUMERS AND COMPETITION: AN EXAMINATION OF THE T-MOBILE
AND SPRINT MERGER
----------
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 2019
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
Hon. Mike Doyle (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Doyle, McNerney, Clarke,
Loebsack, Veasey, McEachin, Soto, O'Halleran, Eshoo, DeGette,
Butterfield, Matsui, Welch, Lujan, Schrader, Cardenas, Pallone
(ex officio), Latta (subcommittee ranking member), Shimkus,
Scalise, Bilirakis, Johnson, Long, Flores, Brooks, Walberg, and
Walden (ex officio).
Staff present: Billy Benjamin, Systems Administrator;
Jeffrey C. Carroll, Staff Director; Sharon Davis, Chief Clerk;
Jennifer Epperson, FCC Detailee; Evan Gilbert, Press Assistant;
Tiffany Guarascio, Deputy Staff Director; Alex Hoehn-Saric,
Chief Counsel, Communications and Technology; Jerry Leverich,
Counsel; Dan Miller, Policy Analyst; Joe Orlando, Staff
Assistant; Tim Robinson, Chief Counsel; Chloe Rodriguez, Policy
Analyst; Mike Bloomquist, Minority Staff Director; Robin
Colwell, Minority Chief Counsel, Communications and Technology;
Kristine Fargotstein, Minority Detailee, Communications and
Technology; Margaret Tucker. Fogarty, Minority Staff Assistant;
Stephen Keegan, Minority Intern, Communications and Technology;
and Peter Kielty, Minority General Counsel.
Mr. Doyle. Well, good morning. Before we get started, I
want to express my condolences to Congresswoman Debbie Dingell
on the loss of her husband, John. John was a dear friend and
mentor to me and many members of this committee. His passion
for oversight, accountability, legislative process, and his
lifetime of public service is an example to all of us. His
passing is a great loss to our Nation, to Congress, and this
committee, which he loved so much.
John, may you rest in peace.
The Chair will now recognize himself for 5 minutes.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE DOYLE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
Welcome to the Subcommittee on Communication and
Technology's hearing on ``Protecting Consumers and Competition:
An Examination of the T-Mobile/Sprint Merger.'' This hearing is
noteworthy because the last time a merger hearing was had
before this subcommittee was almost 9 years ago. And in that
time there have been numerous mergers within this
subcommittee's jurisdiction that have gone without a hearing.
I believe it is the duty of this subcommittee to allow our
members to publicly discuss and debate the merits of these
transactions and to question the relevant stakeholders. The
merger before us today is between two of our country's national
wireless providers, T-Mobile and Sprint. These companies have
acted as disrupters, competitors, and low-cost options in the
wireless marketplace.
T-Mobile's ``uncarrier`` strategy has ended anticonsumer
practices such as data caps, restrictive contracts and much
more. They have also worked hard to build a robust national
network that by some accounts is the fastest in the Nation. For
its part, Sprint has been a leader in roaming agreements for
rural providers and wholesale access for prepaid and Lifeline
providers. Sprint has worked hard to bring its networks to
within one percent of Verizon's in terms of network
reliability, or so their commercials say so.
Consumers have also benefited from Sprint positioning
itself as the best value. They are offering a plan right now
where new customers can get a year of free service when they
switch from another carrier, which sounds amazing. However,
this hearing isn't about the benefits that both of your
companies have brought to the market. It is about the
extraordinary impact that your combined company could have on
the public and the marketplace if this merger goes through.
We will hear today from the Communication Workers of
America, from the Rural Wireless Association, and Public
Knowledge. They claim that this merger will have negative
impacts on low-income consumers, rural providers, and jobs in
the wireless industry.
CWA's testimony suggests that this merger will result in up
to 30,000 job losses in the industry and a reduction in
industry pay by as much as $3,000 per employee. The Rural
Broadband Association's testimony argues that rural consumers
will pay more. They claim that Sprint charges 20 times less
than T-Mobile or other national carriers for roaming
agreements. These agreements allow customers of rural carriers
who build their own networks in the most rural communities to
use their phones throughout the country. What guarantees do
rural providers have that they won't face increased costs if T-
Mobile doesn't adopt Sprint's practices?
And Public Knowledge's testimony states that consumer
prices will go up due to the reduction in the number of
national carriers from four to three. They argue that the
merger would hit low-income consumers the hardest because the
number of carriers offering wholesale access would drop from
three to two.
Sprint, AT&T, and T-Mobile sell access to their networks to
prepaid and Lifeline providers who then sell that service under
their own brands. What remedy do these carriers or their
customers have if the New T-Mobile decides that it wants to get
out of the wholesale business or drastically raise rates?
To that end, the FCC found in their Communications
Marketplace Report that the wireless market concentration was
currently at 3,100 HHI. HHI measures how competitive a market
is with a higher number meaning it is less competitive. The
Justice Department's Horizontal Merger Guidelines state that a
market with an HHI above 2,500 is highly concentrated. So we
really aren't starting from a great spot. An increase of 200
points would raise significant concerns about competition.
This merger is expected to result in a market power
increase of 280 points for the postpaid market and 2,014 points
for the prepaid market. That would take the prepaid market from
where it is right now at 2,467, which is just under DOJ's
threshold, to 4,481, a level that raises lots of red flags.
These kinds of numbers have historically resulted in higher
prices for consumers, less competition, and less innovation.
I appreciate both executives' statement that they believe
that this merger will benefit consumers and result in lower
prices and their commitments to an accelerated deployment of 5G
and promises of expanded rural broadband. These are national
objectives that are important to me and many members of this
committee. However, I have seen a lot of mergers in this
industry and others and it is hard to think of one where
consolidation didn't result in people losing their jobs, prices
going up, and innovation being stifled.
I look forward to hearing from the testimony from our two
telephone companies that wish to merge and from the other
panelists.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Doyle follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Mike Doyle
Before we get started, I want to express my condolences to
Congresswoman Dingell on the loss of her husband. John was a
dear friend and mentor to me and many here. His passion for
oversight, accountability, legislative progress, and his
lifetime of public service is an example to us all. His passing
is a great loss to our Nation, the Congress, and this committee
which he loved so much.
Welcome to the Subcommittee on Communication and
Technology's hearing on Protecting Consumers and Competition,
an Examination of the T-Mobile/Sprint Merger. This hearing is
noteworthy because the last merger hearing before this
subcommittee took place nearly 9 years ago. In that time, there
have been numerous mergers within this subcommittee's
jurisdiction that have gone without a hearing. I believe it is
the duty of this subcommittee to allow our Members to publicly
discuss and debate the merits of these transactions and to
question the relevant stakeholders.
The merger before us today is between two of our country's
national wireless providers, T-Mobile and Sprint. These
companies have acted as disruptors, competitors, and low-cost
options in the wireless marketplace.
T-Mobile's ``uncarrier'' strategy has ended anticonsumer
practices such as data caps, restrictive contracts, and much
more. They have also worked hard to build a robust national
network that, by some accounts, is the fastest in the Nation.
For its part, Sprint has been a leader in roaming
agreements for rural providers--and wholesale access for pre-
paid and Lifeline providers. Sprint has worked hard to bring
its network to within one percent of Verizon's in terms of
network reliability--or so their commercials tell me! Consumers
have also benefited from Sprint positioning itself as the best
value. They are offering a plan right now where new customers
can get a year of free service when they switch from another
carrier, which sounds amazing.
However, this hearing isn't about the benefits that both of
your companies have brought to the market. It is about the
extraordinary impact that your combined company could have on
the public and the marketplace if this merger goes through.
We will hear today from the Communication Workers of
America, the Rural Wireless Association, and Public Knowledge.
They claim that this merger will have negative impacts on low-
income consumers, rural providers, and jobs in the wireless
industry.
C-W-A's testimony suggests this merger will result in up to
thirty thousand job losses in the industry--and a reduction in
industry pay by as much as three thousand dollars per employee.
The Rural Broadband Association's testimony argues that
rural consumers will pay more. They claim that Sprint charges
20 times less than T-Mobile or the other national carriers for
roaming agreements. These agreements allow customers of rural
carriers, who build their own networks in the most rural
communities, to use their phones throughout the country. What
guarantee's do rural providers have that they won't face
increased costs if T-Mobile doesn't adopt Sprint's practices?
And Public Knowledge's testimony states that consumer
prices will go up due to the reduction in the number of
national carriers from 4 to 3. They argue that the merger would
hit low-income consumers the hardest because the number of
carriers offering wholesale access will drop from 3 to 2.
Sprint, AT&T, and T-Mobile each sell access to their
networks to pre-paid and Lifeline providers, who then sell that
service under their own brands. What remedy do these carriers,
or their customers have if the new T-Mobile decides it wants to
get out of the wholesale business or drastically raise rates?
To that end, the FCC found in their Communications
Marketplace Report that wireless market concentration was
currently at 3,100 H-H-I. H-H-I measures how competitive a
market is--with a higher number indicating less competition.
The Justice Department's horizontal merger guidelines state
that a market with an H-H-I above 2,500 is highly
concentrated--so we really aren't starting from a great spot.
An increase of 200 points would raise significant concerns
about competition.
This merger is expected to result in a market power
increase of 280 points for the postpaid market and 2,014 points
for the pre-paid market. That would take the pre-paid market
from where it is now at 2,467, which is just under the D-O-J's
threshold, to 4,481--a level that raises lots of red flags.
These kinds of numbers have historically resulted in higher
prices for consumers, less competition, and less innovation.
I appreciate both executives' statements that they believe
that this merger will benefit consumers and result in lower
prices--and their commitments to an accelerated deployment of
5G and promises of expanded rural broadband. These are national
objectives that are important to me and many members of this
committee.
However, I've seen a lot of mergers in this industry and
others, and it's hard to think of one where consolidation
didn't result in people losing their jobs, prices going up, and
innovation being stifled.
I look forward to hearing from the panel.
Mr. Doyle. And with that I yield to the ranking member, Mr.
Latta, for 5 minutes.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT E. LATTA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OHIO
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And if I could
just take a point of personal privilege also to express my
deepest sympathies to our friend and colleague Debbie Dingell
on the loss of Chairman Dingell. And the chairman loved this
committee. You know, this room is named after him.
And I had the privilege of getting to know him in my days
not only on this committee, but when I first got to Congress.
Again he loved this committee, he loved this House, but most of
all he loved his district, the State of Michigan, and all that
he did for it. So with that, I wish the Dingells my deepest
sympathies on the loss of the chairman.
And again, Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for convening
our panel of witnesses today. And to our witnesses, thanks very
much for being here. We appreciate your time. I look forward to
hearing your expertise and different perspectives as we discuss
the future of the telecommunications marketplace and learn more
about the proposed merger of T-Mobile and Sprint.
With any talk of merger comes a long list of potential
benefits and drawbacks, and this one is no different. I
understand from the CEOs of T-Mobile and Sprint, who are with
us today, that there are many proconsumer outcomes possible if
the merger is approved. These potential benefits range from
providing mobile broadband to millions of unserved and
underserved Americans living in rural areas to helping the
United States win the global competitiveness race to 5G.
But I also understand from several of the witnesses
representing groups here today that the combined company could
pose some harm to consumers. Some of the potential drawbacks
include the possibility to eliminate jobs or increase the price
that consumers pay for access to wireless service.
Our role in this committee is not to weigh the merits of
these arguments and determine if this merger is in the public
interest. Congress gave that role to the FCC, who along with
the DOJ performs a more traditional antitrust assessment on the
merger, and these two agencies will ultimately determine if the
merger is going to be approved. Our role in this subcommittee
is to provide policies that advance the telecommunications
market, including expanding access to broadband to all
Americans.
One way to do this, especially for rural America and many
areas in my district, is to build 5G networks. In areas where
the broadband is not currently deployed, 5G networks can help
connect Americans to high-speed internet for the very first
time. And, in areas where broadband is already available, 5G
networks provide a competitive alternative. This proposed
merger reportedly will promote these objectives, and I look
forward to hearing more about the ways in which companies plan
on doing that.
But I also am interested in hearing from all of our
witnesses today. This will be an enlightening discussion. The
final decision about whether this proposed merger of these two
companies is in the public interest is up to the FCC. Again I
look forward to hearing from all of our witnesses today and
your testimony and your responses to our questions.
And, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the hearing today, and I
yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Latta follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Robert E. Latta
Good morning, and welcome to our panel of witnesses. Thank
you for making the time to be here today. I look forward to
hearing your expertise and different perspectives as we discuss
the future of the telecommunications marketplace and learn more
about the proposed merger of T-Mobile and Sprint.
With any talk of a merger comes a long list of potential
benefits and drawbacks, and this one is no different. I
understand from the CEOs of T-Mobile and Sprint, who are here
with us today, that there are many proconsumer outcomes
possible if the merger is approved. These potential benefits
range from providing mobile broadband to millions of unserved
or underserved Americans living in rural areas to helping the
United States win the global competitiveness race to 5G. But, I
also understand from several of the other witnesses
representing groups here today that the combined company could
pose some harm to consumers. Some of these potential drawbacks
include the possibility to eliminate jobs or increase the price
that consumers pay for access to wireless service.
Our role on this subcommittee is not to weigh the merits of
these arguments and determine if this merger is in the public
interest. Congress gave that role to the FCC who, along with
DOJ, performs a more traditional antitrust assessment on the
merger, and these two agencies will ultimately determine if the
merger is approved.
Our role on this subcommittee is to promote policies that
advance the telecommunications market, including expanding
access to broadband to all Americans. One way to do this,
especially for rural America and many areas in my district, is
to build 5G networks. In areas where broadband is not currently
deployed, 5G networks can help connect Americans to high-speed
Internet for the first time. And, in areas where broadband is
already available, 5G networks will provide a competitive
alternative.
This proposed merger reportedly will promote those
objectives, and I look forward to hearing more about the ways
in which the companies plan on doing that. But, I am also
interested in learning about some of the potential unintended
consequences of the merger. This will be an enlightening
discussion, but that is all it will be. The final decision
about whether this proposed merger of these two companies is in
the public interest is up to the FCC.
I look forward to hearing your testimony and responses to
our questions.
Mr. Doyle. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Pallone, chairman of the full committee, for 5
minutes for his opening statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Doyle. Today is our first
hearing since the loss of our chairman, John Dingell. It is
fitting that this room is named the John Dingell Room. After
all, over 28 years as the top Democrat on this committee and
over his nearly 60 years in the House, he fought to ensure the
committee maintained its broad jurisdiction, had deliberative
debates, followed regular order, conducted robust oversight,
and produced legislation in the public interest.
And in keeping with John's tradition, today we focus our
microscope on the proposed merger of two of the four large
nationwide wireless phone carriers, T-Mobile and Sprint.
Collectively, these companies directly employ more than 80,000
people and serve more than 130 million customers.
These companies are no stranger to merger discussions. In
2011, a struggling T-Mobile was almost purchased by AT&T but
was blocked by the Obama administration, and T-Mobile
nevertheless went on to flourish. T-Mobile and Sprint attempted
to merge 2 years later, but abandoned the deal after
competition concerns were raised by regulators. Now once more
the parties are seeking approval to merge.
This hearing marks the first time in 8 years that the
committee has met to evaluate the consequences of a merger. For
too long the House and this committee paid little attention to
that responsibility, but now we resume the practice of
reviewing major acquisitions so we can fulfill our obligation
for the people to determine how this proposed consolidation
will affect consumers, workers, public safety and network
resiliency, competition, and future innovation.
For the last 8 years, major industry consolidation occurred
without significant oversight, and the consequences of that
have been borne by consumers and hardworking Americans. In the
past we have seen mergers jack up consumer prices, cut away
meaningful choices, and outsource, undercut, and eviscerate
good-paying jobs.
We have seen previous merger conditions that weren't met or
weren't enforced. We have seen the public interest in all its
forms undermined, and that is why we must look carefully at
these issues before a merger is approved. In this case, the
transaction is currently being reviewed by the FCC as well as
the Department of Justice. As part of our oversight
responsibility we must make sure that the FCC is carefully
reviewing the facts and keeping consumers' best interests in
mind when deciding the fate of the merger.
I know we are going to have many hard questions today
because the facts surrounding this merger are so much in
dispute. For example, Mr. Legere says that New T-Mobile won't
raise consumer prices. But others say his company's filings
acknowledge consumers could see price hikes, some argue by up
to 15 percent, with the merger being particularly hard on the
poorest consumers.
How can we be sure that consumers who can least afford to
pay more are not harmed by the merger? T-Mobile filed the
letter committing not to raise prices with the FCC. Putting
aside whether that is sufficient, there is a serious question
as to whether the Trump FCC would be willing to impose any
conditions in a merger order.
Mr. Legere says that the merger of T-Mobile and Sprint will
be a net job creator on day one, but the Communications Workers
of America say we should expect the loss of 30,000 jobs. The
truth will have long-term implications for American families
across the country. And Mr. Legere says that New T-Mobile will
create a world-class 5G network, but opponents say that both T-
Mobile and Sprint have committed to investors to deploying 5G
networks as separate and independent companies. 5G deployment
is important, obviously, and valuable to consumers and the
economy, and whether the merger expedites 5G rollout merits
consideration.
And Mr. Legere also says that the merger of T-Mobile and
Sprint will help New T-Mobile compete with AT&T and Verizon,
all while new entrants and cable companies begin to compete in
wireless. But smaller carriers worry the merger might snuff out
existing and new competitive players that rely on wholesale
access to T-Mobile and Sprint's networks. To this end, we must
understand not only how the merger affects the current wireless
marketplace but also the marketplace of the future.
And, finally, Mr. Legere says that the merger of T-Mobile
and Sprint will help New T-Mobile build out robust rural
broadband, while others argue that New T-Mobile will shut down
25,000 cell towers across the country. And I would like to
understand whether this is accurate and whether it will have a
negative effect on the resiliency of the wireless network
during disasters.
So, Mr. Chairman, there are a lot of conflicting opinions
on the impact of this merger which is why this hearing is so
important and I hope that Members will get the straight answers
here today. And I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.
Today is our first hearing since the loss of our chairman,
John Dingell. It is fitting that this room is named the John D.
Dingell Room. After all, over 28 years as the top Democrat on
this committee and over his nearly 60 years in this House, he
fought to ensure the committee maintained its broad
jurisdiction, had deliberative debates, followed regular order,
conducted robust oversight and produced legislation in the
public interest. We will all have an opportunity to remember
and pay tribute to our chairman this Friday morning at a
special committee meeting.
In keeping with his tradition, today, we focus our
microscope on the proposed merger of two of the four large,
nationwide wireless phone carriers: T-Mobile and Sprint.
Collectively, these companies directly employ more than 80,000
people, and serve more than 130 million customers.
These companies are no stranger to merger discussions. In
2011, a struggling T-Mobile was almost purchased by AT&T, but
was blocked by the Obama administration, and T-Mobile
nevertheless went on to flourish.
T-Mobile and Sprint attempted to merge 2 years later but
abandoned the deal after competition concerns were raised by
regulators. Now, once more, the parties are seeking approval to
merge.
This hearing marks the first time in 8 years that the
committee has met to evaluate the consequences of any merger.
For too long, this House and this committee shirked that
responsibility. But now, we resume the practice of reviewing
major acquisitions, so we can fulfill our obligation for the
people to determine how this proposed consolidation will affect
consumers, workers, public safety and network resiliency,
competition, and future innovation.
For the last 8 years major industry consolidation occurred
without any oversight, and the consequences of that negligence
have been borne by consumers and hardworking Americans. In the
past, we've seen mergers jack up consumer prices, cut away
meaningful choices, and outsource, undercut, and eviscerate
good paying jobs.
We've seen previous merger conditions that weren't met or
weren't enforced. We've seen the public interest, in all of its
forms, undermined, and that is why we must look carefully at
these issues before a merger is approved.
In this case, the transaction is currently being reviewed
by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) as well as the
Department of Justice. As part of our oversight responsibility,
we must make sure that the FCC is carefully reviewing the facts
and keeping consumers' best interests in mind when deciding the
fate of the merger.
I know we're going to have many hard questions today,
because the facts surrounding this merger are so in dispute.
For example, Mr. Legere says that New T-Mobile won't raise
consumer prices. But others say his company's filings
acknowledge consumers could see price hikes-some argue by up to
15 percent-with the merger being particularly hard on the
poorest consumers.
How can we be sure that consumers who can least afford to
pay more are not harmed by the merger? T-Mobile filed a letter
committing not to raise prices with the FCC. Putting aside
whether that is sufficient, there is a serious question as to
whether the Trump FCC would be willing to impose any conditions
in a merger order.
Mr. Legere says that the merger of T-Mobile and Sprint will
be a net job creator on day one, but the Communications Workers
of America say we should expect a loss of 30,000 jobs. The
truth will have long term implications for American families
across the country.
Mr. Legere says that New T-Mobile will create a world-class
5G network, but opponents say that both T-Mobile and Sprint
have committed to investors to deploying 5G Networks as
separate, and independent, companies. 5G deployment is
important and valuable to consumers and the economy and whether
the merger expedites 5G roll-out merits consideration.
Mr. Legere says that the merger of T-Mobile and Sprint will
help New T-Mobile compete with AT&T and Verizon all while new
entrants and cable companies begin to compete in wireless. But
smaller carriers worry the merger might snuff out existing and
new competitive players that rely on wholesale access to T-
Mobile and Sprint's networks. To this end, we must understand
not only how the merger affects the current wireless
marketplace but also the marketplace of the future.
And Mr. Legere says that the merger of T-Mobile and Sprint
will help New T-Mobile buildout robust, rural broadband, while
others argue New-T-Mobile will shutdown 25,000 cell towers
across the country. I would like to understand whether this is
accurate and whether it will have a negative effect on the
resiliency of the wireless network during disasters.
There are a lot of conflicting opinions on the impact of
this merger--which makes this hearing so important. I hope that
Members will get the straight answers here today.
I yield back.
Mr. Doyle. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Walden, ranking member of the full committee,
for 5 minutes for his opening statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And as you all have
said, I know we all have the Dingell family in our thoughts and
our prayers on this difficult week. John Dingell taught us all
how to be legislators. He was a legend in many respects, and
nobody, despite everybody's attempt, has ever been able to do
the yes-or-no questioning as effectively as Mr. Dingell did. We
have all tried to emulate that.
And so he is missed. He will never be forgotten. And I am
glad we are all honoring his life, his work, his service, and
remembering Debbie in our prayers.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to echo my colleagues' warm
welcome to all of our witnesses today and to thank you all for
making the time to come share your thoughts with the
subcommittee. We have generally avoided hearings focused on
specific transactions in an effort to allow the regulators who
are actually responsible for assessing them to do their work as
much as possible free from intense political influence. It has
been my hope that experts at the FCC and the Department of
Justice who as we speak are reviewing this transaction and its
potential impact on public interest and competition will
continue their analysis without undue political pressure.
Now in a district like mine which would stretch from the
Atlantic to Ohio, it is a district that gives new meaning to
word ``rural.'' We have coverage gaps that engulf huge areas of
the map in places with as few as one person for every square
mile. For Americans in some of these areas who have been
awaiting the promise of broadband for far too long with the
connectivity, educational, and economic empowerment it brings,
any news on this front is great news for celebration.
So we have been appreciative of T-Mobile's rapid build-out
efforts in Central Oregon and as a result of its newly acquired
600 megahertz licenses. With this committee's bipartisan work
last year to keep the repack on track with an additional
billion dollars for reimbursement of broadcasters' moving
expenses, more and more districts are realizing the benefits of
groundbreaking incentive auction that we made possible through
the action of this committee.
The hope is finally becoming reality in many of our areas
of the country and I think it is well worth noting T-Mobile's
efforts so far in delivering on its promises and in some cases
ahead of schedule.
Turning to the particular transaction at issues today,
experts including some of our witnesses are painting some very
different pictures of the potential effects of this proposed
merger. Going forward we do want to see consumers paying less
and getting more data. We want to see more choices and we want
to see intensified competition in the wireless and in-home
broadband markets. We want to see faster rural development and
we want to see better service. And we need America to lead in
the global race on 5G deployment, reaping economic benefits and
transformative services for all Americans.
As we consider the testimony of our witnesses, we need to
take a holistic view. Instead of focusing on a particular
metric like those who insist the Government must intervene to
preserve four nationwide wireless operators at all costs, we
have to consider scale and operational efficiencies in that
equation and the rapidly changing characteristics of the
wireless marketplace, especially the convergence of
functionality with nontraditional competitors such as global
and satellite operators.
With almost 50 percent of digital video now consumed on
smart phones, wireless service is not what it once was. And
with the advent of 5G, the capabilities are evolving at an
exponential rate. So it is important for us as legislators to
adjust our expectations to this new reality and resist the call
for artificial market constraints that may not make any sense
in a 5G world.
I look forward to the witnesses today and their
perspectives on each of these issues and I want us to be the
world's fastest and best 5G ecosystem, secure, affordable and
accessible to every American.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden
I'd like to echo my colleagues' warm welcome to all the
witnesses here today and thank you all for making the time to
come share your thoughts with the subcommittee today. We have
generally avoided hearings focused on any specific transaction
in an effort to allow the regulators who are responsible for
assessing them to do their work, as much as possible, free from
intense political influence. It is my hope the experts at the
FCC and DOJ--who as we speak are reviewing this transaction,
and its potential impact on the public interest and
competition--will continue their analysis in this vein.
In a district like mine that gives new meaning to the word
``rural,'' coverage gaps engulf huge areas of the map, in
places with as few as one person for every square mile. For
Americans in some of these areas, who have been awaiting the
promise of broadband for far too long, with the connectivity,
educational and economic empowerment it brings, any news on
this front is cause for great celebration.
So we have been appreciative of T-Mobile's rapid build out
efforts in Central Oregon as a result of its newly acquired 600
MHz licenses. With this committee's bipartisan work last year
to keep the repack on track with an additional $1 billion for
reimbursement of broadcasters' moving expenses, more and more
districts are realizing the benefits of the groundbreaking
incentive auction that we made possible. The hope is finally
becoming a reality in these areas. And I think it's well worth
noting T-Mobile's efforts so far in delivering on its promises,
in some cases ahead of schedule.
Turning to the particular transaction at issue today,
experts including some of our witnesses here are painting some
very different pictures of its potential effects. Going
forward, we want to see consumers paying less for more data. We
want to see more choices and intensified competition in the
wireless and in-home broadband markets. We want to see faster
rural deployment and better service. And we need America to
lead in the global race to 5G, reaping economic benefits and
transformative services for all Americans.
As we consider the testimony of these witnesses, we need to
take a holistic view, instead of focusing on a particular
metric--like those who insist that the Government must
intervene to preserve four nationwide wireless operators at all
costs. We have to consider scale and operational efficiencies
in that equation, and the rapidly changing characteristics of
the wireless marketplace, especially the convergence of
functionality with nontraditional competitors such as cable and
satellite operators. With almost 50 percent of digital video
now consumed on smartphones, wireless service is not what it
once was, and with the advent of 5G the capabilities are
evolving at an exponential pace. So it's important for
legislators to adjust our expectations to this reality and
resist the call for artificial market constraints that may not
make any sense in a 5G world.
I look forward to hearing the perspectives of each of our
witnesses as we consider the current state of the marketplace
overall and how best to reach the objective so important to us
all--the world's fastest and best 5G ecosystem, secure,
affordable, and accessible to every American.
Mr. Walden. With that I would yield the balance of my time
to the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Long.
Mr. Long. Thank you. I would like to take a point of
personal privilege here for just a minute too, maybe stop the
clock for me for a second if we could, on John Dingell.
Two planeloads of us loaded up yesterday morning out at
Andrews to attend John's funeral in Dearborn, and we circled
Detroit for about an hour, after an hour delay here, and were
told we had 5 minutes of fuel left or we could go to Pittsburgh
and refuel and go back and we would miss the funeral.
So I know that Anna Eshoo was on that flight; Mr. Walden
that just yielded to me, he was chairman and now ranking member
of the committee; Chairman Upton, who was Committee E&C and had
his office across from John for years. He and John Lewis, who
is a legend in his own time, were supposed to speak at the
funeral, and Speaker Pelosi happened to be on the same flight,
or I happened to be on the same plane with them.
So at 30,000 feet, John Lewis led us in a tribute and we
had our own service for John Dingell at 30,000 feet yesterday,
and it was quite moving. Chairman Upton spoke, Speaker Pelosi,
John led us in prayer and spoke, and it was a pretty moving
tribute. So we did what we did to get to Big John's funeral.
I was born in 1955. John Dingell was sworn into Congress in
1955. He followed his father. His wife, Debbie, of course
follows him today. She is doing an excellent job, and thoughts
and prayers go out to Debbie and the family.
With that, I will start my minute that Greg yielded to me.
Today's hearing gives us the opportunity to hear about how the
American public can benefit from the proposed merger of T-
Mobile and Sprint. The U.S. telecommunications market has
changed dramatically in recent years. In order to foster
innovation and growth in any industry it is important that we
ensure that there is a fair and competitive marketplace.
I am excited to hear how the third- and fourth-largest wire
carriers in the United States plan to combine their spectrum
resources to deliver a more robust, nationwide, wireless
broadband network for consumers, drive innovation and
investment, and better compete with the top two wireless
providers.
Investments in next generation broadband networks are
important to reach unserved communities like mine in Southwest
Missouri and help close the digital divide. I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses on how the New T-Mobile drive for
innovation will help close that digital divide, benefit the
U.S. economy to provide consumers with more choices at lower
cost.
And I would like to submit for the record two documents: an
op-ed from the Missouri Times written by the head of the
Missouri Farm Bureau demonstrating support for the merger in
Missouri, and also a letter in support of the merger to the FCC
from myself and several of my colleagues. And with that I yield
back.
Mr. Doyle. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Walden. And, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back, but I
just want to say for the record we have another subcommittee
going on in important health issues upstairs, so some of us
will have to go up and back.
But, again, thank you for being here.
Mr. Doyle. I thank the ranking member.
The Chair would like to remind Members that, pursuant to
committee rules, all Members' written opening statements shall
be made part of the record.
I would now like to introduce our witnesses for today's
hearing. First, we will have Mr. Marcelo Claure, executive
chairman of Sprint Corporation; next, Mr. John Legere, chief
executive officer and president of T-Mobile US; next, Mr. Chris
Shelton, president of the Communications Workers of America;
then we will have Ms. Carri Bennet, general counsel of the
Rural Wireless Association; Mr. Doug Brake, director of
Broadband and Spectrum Policy for the Information Technology
and Innovation Foundation; and last but not least, Mr. Phillip
Berenbroick, senior policy counsel with Public Knowledge.
I want to thank all the witnesses for joining us today. We
look forward to your testimony. At this time, the Chair will
recognize each witness for 5 minutes to provide their opening
statement, but before we begin I want to explain our lighting
system. In front of you, of the witnesses, is a series of
lights. The light will initially be green at the start of your
opening statement. The light will turn yellow when you have 1
minute remaining, and please wrap up your testimony at that
point. The light turns red when your time has expired.
Mr. Claure, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENTS OF MARCELO CLAURE, EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN, SPRINT
CORPORATION; JOHN LEGERE, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, T-MOBILE US;
CHRIS SHELTON, PRESIDENT, COMMUNICATIONS WORKERS OF AMERICA;
CARRI BENNET, GENERAL COUNSEL, RURAL WIRELESS ASSOCIATION,
INC.; DOUG BRAKE, DIRECTOR OF BROADBAND AND SPECTRUM POLICY,
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION FOUNDATION; AND PHILLIP
BERENBROICK, SENIOR POLICY COUNSEL, PUBLIC KNOWLEDGE
STATEMENT OF MARCELO CLAURE
Mr. Claure. Before we begin, I want to pay my respect to
Chairman Dingell and his longstanding service to his country.
It is an honor to be here today and I am grateful for the
opportunity to speak with you. I would like to take the
opportunity to explain why Sprint's proposed merger with T-
Mobile will be great for the American consumers, will be great
for Sprint employees, and will be great for our country.
I will go into details in a moment, but before I do so I
want to tell you a little about me. First, I am an immigrant. I
immigrated to the United States as a young man from Bolivia. I
had very little money. I went to small university in Boston and
I received a priceless education.
Second, I am an entrepreneur. After I graduated college I
founded a company called Brightstar. I started selling phones
out of my car and I gradually grew Brightstar into the largest
mobile phone distribution and supply chain services company in
the world. We worked very hard and grew over $10 billion in
sales and thousands of employees. I am most proud that we made
Brightstar the largest Hispanic-owned business in the history
of our country.
In 2014, I sold Brightstar to Softbank, immediately after
that I became Sprint's CEO. At that time, Sprint, a Kansas
company, was near financial distress. In 2013, the company lost
$5 billion and in the previous 10 years Sprint lost over $25
billion and we had approximately $31 billion in debt. A great
company with tens of thousands of jobs across the U.S. was at
risk.
Beginning in 2014, we undertook a massive and painful
transformation of the company. We worked hard the same way we
did at Brightstar, from the ground up. We reduced our expenses
close to $6 billion through cost reductions, employee layoffs,
and some unwanted transfer to jobs overseas. We didn't want to,
but we had to.
Today, Sprint is no longer in financial dire straits, but
we face some significant challenges. Despite our success we
were unable to fix our main challenge, the quality of our
network. We could not fix our network because of our poor
financial condition and our lack of low band spectrum. Because
of our network quality, Sprint still struggles to attract lots
of new customers, and many customers that we are acquiring
leave at a faster pace than our competitors. Customers today
are not willing to sacrifice quality.
Today, the U.S. wireless market has become a duopoly.
Verizon and AT&T have close to 70 percent market share and they
control 93 percent of the cash flow generated from the
industry. As a result, it is very hard to invest and compete at
the same level. Today, we are at a technological inflection
point. Over the next few years 5G is coming, a new standard of
connectivity. It is going to completely change the way we
connect and the way we live our lives.
But Sprint doesn't have the resources to build a 5G network
to provide the necessary competition against the AT&T and
Verizon duopoly. We estimate that we will need close to 20 to
25 billion dollars just to offer 5G in our limited coverage
area. And because we don't generate any cash flow, we would
have to raise more debt and to pay for that debt we would have
to increase our prices to the American consumer.
The only company that can build the world's best 5G network
is a combination of Sprint and T-Mobile and we can only do this
if this merger is approved. As a combined company, we are
committed to invest nearly $40 billion over the next 3 years to
build the world's best 5G network with nationwide coverage. How
can we do this together? It is simple. It is the marriage of
two necessary and complementary 5G pieces.
Sprint has high capacity spectrum which have acquired over
many years. T-Mobile has brought national coverage spectrum. It
is capacity plus coverage. Today, we can build the world's most
advanced, covering every corner in America in urban, suburban,
and rural areas. We cannot take lightly that America needs to
lead the world in 5G. China has made it a priority to win the
5G race. They are investing billions.
When a country has the best network with the latest
technology it brings massive economic stimulus, explosive job
growth, and a new wave of entrepreneurs. America is a land of
innovators and disrupters. Let's keep it this way. My story
validates this. Letting another country take the leadership
away from the U.S. will cost irreparable damage. This is an
opportunity for a lifetime.
In addition, yes, we are committed to lower prices. When we
merger two companies we will create eight times the network
capacity that we would have on our own. We will have to beat
AT&T and Verizon on price to fill this capacity. This makes
financial sense, it is good business, and most importantly it
is our commitment.
Lastly, it is true that most mergers do not create jobs.
This merger is the opposite. This is a growth story. This new
company will create new jobs, blue-collar, white-collar jobs,
jobs in urban, suburban, and rural America. We will need
skilled network engineers, construction crews, enterprise sales
teams, call center jobs that we are going to bring back from
overseas, and new sales reps for the new stores that will be
opening.
I can't thank you enough for allowing me to speak today. As
I mentioned, I am grateful to this country, and as an American
entrepreneur I hope you will approve this merger. I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Claure follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Doyle. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Legere for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF JOHN LEGERE
Mr. Legere. Thank you, Chairman Doyle, Ranking Member
Latta, and other members of the subcommittee for inviting
Marcelo and me and the rest of the panel here today. Before I
begin my remarks, let me offer condolences to Congresswoman
Dingell on the loss of her husband, John Dingell, a towering
figure in the House and a leader in this committee.
I appreciate the opportunity to tell you about the
tremendous benefits of the proposed T-Mobile/Sprint merger and
the progress we are making towards making it a reality. So,
first, what will this merger deliver? It will deliver a
supercharged uncarrier which can ensure U.S. leadership in 5G,
increase competition, and create American jobs.
First and foremost, the New T-Mobile will make sure America
wins the global 5G race. This is so important because 5G will
unlock new capabilities that will fuel innovation and job
creation well beyond anything we have seen so far. 5G will
completely transform the way Americans live, work, travel, and
play. 5G means real-time navigation, downloading a movie in
seconds, instant language translation, and much more. Nearly
every business in America will be able to use 5G to
revolutionize how they create and deliver goods and services.
Best of all, with this transaction the benefits of 5G won't
just flow to big cities. Combining Sprint and T-Mobile will
produce a faster, broader, deeper network that is truly
nationwide. It will benefit consumers and businesses everywhere
including rural America. Neither company could achieve this on
its own.
Second, New T-Mobile will have the capital, the scale, and
the network to supercharge competition, unleashing significant
benefits for consumers that includes keeping prices low. The
combined company will continue the T-Mobile tradition of
disrupting the wireless space and we will disrupt in-home
broadband with new wireless broadband options freeing millions
from the stranglehold of big cable.
Budget-conscious customers have the most to gain because
they consume the most data. They have the most to gain when
data costs less. It will be a huge leap across the digital
divide. Our opponents are wrong when they claim that the merger
will lead to higher prices. In fact, the opposite is true.
Consumers will win with lower prices and better services. How?
Our costs will drop sharply and our network capacity will
expand tremendously. I am so confident that the merger will
lower prices that we are willing to put our money where our
mouth is. Last week we committed in writing to regulators that
we will make available the same or better rate plans as those
offered by T-Mobile or Sprint for the next 3 years.
Third, this merger will be a tremendous jobs creator at New
T-Mobile and across our country. Our merger will be jobs-
positive from day one and going forward. The build-out of our
5G network, investment in new customer care centers, and
expansion into new businesses like video distribution,
broadband, and enterprise services means thousands more jobs
than the two standalone companies would have needed.
In the first year we will have thousands more employees
than the standalone companies combined. By 2024 we will have
11,000 more employees. Our critics are wrong about the impact
on jobs. I have looked at their arguments and supposed analyses
and they do not make sense. They ignore the facts. They don't
account for any areas where jobs will grow, like network
integration or new customer call care centers.
And by the way we have heard this story before. They said
we would cut 10,000 jobs when T-Mobile merged with MetroPCS. In
fact, we expanded jobs by thousands. Let me say this to every
T-Mobile and Sprint employee working in one of our stores
today, each of you will be offered a job with the New T-Mobile.
Our opponents have also lobbed false allegations that this
transaction will allow Huawei and ZTE into U.S. networks. Let
me be clear. There is no Huawei or ZTE equipment in our network
today and there never will be. Not today, not tomorrow, not
ever.
Many have already recognized the tremendous benefits of
this merger. CFIUS and Team Telecom have completed the national
security review and approved the transaction. Sixteen of 19
States have completed their reviews and found the transaction
to be in the public interest, and nearly 200 organizations,
companies, government officials, and community leaders publicly
support the transaction. I am particularly honored that
Congresswoman Eshoo, Congressman Schrader, Congressman Long,
and 10 other Members have signed a bipartisan letter of
support.
To those that doubt us, I would simply say this: We are the
uncarrier. My management team and I believe on delivering on
our promises and we know if we do not we will lose the
credibility and the trust of our customers and employees. I can
promise to you the New T-Mobile team will deliver for
consumers, American workers, and for our country. Thank you,
and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Legere follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Legere.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Shelton for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF CHRIS SHELTON
Mr. Shelton. Chairman Doyle, Ranking Member Latta, Chairman
Pallone, Ranking Member Walden, and members of the committee,
first, let me offer CWA's condolences on the passing of
Chairman Dingell to all of you and to his family.
My name is Chris Shelton. I am the president of the
Communications Workers of America. We represent 700,000
employees in telecommunications and other industries including
more than 45,000 in wireless.
Let's tell it like it is. This merger would kill American
jobs and raise prices on American consumers to enrich two
foreign companies, Deutsche Telekom from Germany and SoftBank
from Japan. Our analysis shows that 30,000 Americans would lose
their jobs. More than 25,000 of those jobs would be in retail
stores all across the country, some owned directly by Sprint
and T-Mobile, others owned by independent retailers. The other
job cuts would be in headquarters.
Sprint and T-Mobile compete with each other for the same
type of customers, often low-income households, which is why
their stores are located near each other's sometimes right
across the street. You will see in Newark, New Jersey how close
the stores are together.
You can see from the maps how Sprint and T-Mobile stores
tend to be right next to each other. This is especially true
for the prepaid brands, Boost and MetroPCS, which tend to be
concentrated in lower income areas. So if the companies merge,
why would they keep two neighboring stores open? Chances are,
they won't. Rather, then the merger will mean pink slips for
30,000 wireless workers across the country. You heard the CEO
of T-Mobile say that they will add jobs. Pardon my language,
but that is just bull. Without binding and enforceable
commitments, and I mean commitments that have no loopholes,
such promises are just cheap sales and talk and are easily
broken.
First, T-Mobile doesn't differentiate between internal
employees and contractors, short-term, temporary hires or long-
term employees. Upgrading towers, for example, usually is done
by temporary contractors not full-time employees. Second, Mr.
Legere talks about call centers, but both companies have a long
history of off shoring call center jobs, moving them to the
Philippines, Mexico, and other non-U.S. locations.
Third, T-Mobile has a track record of buying companies and
then cutting jobs. After it acquired Iowa Wireless in 2018, it
closed all Iowa Wireless call centers and more than 90 percent
of its retail locations. It closed every single store in rural
Iowa. Finally, trusting Sprint and T-Mobile with American jobs
is like trusting a vampire at a blood bank. These are two of
the worst companies in the United States when it comes to labor
law and the treatment of workers.
In recent years, T-Mobile has been charged with more labor
law violations per worker than even Walmart. Violations include
surveillance of employees and prohibiting workers from talking
to each other about internal workplace investigations even
regarding sexual harassment complaints. And what about the
people lucky enough to stay employed? The merger would drive
down wages for all wireless retail market workers, in some
cases by as much as $3,000 per year.
Fewer firms competing for skilled labor means that each
firm will pay its workers less; employers compete for that
skilled labor with wages and benefits. Take away competition
and the remaining companies can throttle down employees'
compensation while jacking up prices on consumers. Both are
symptoms of the same disease, too much market concentration.
If Sprint and T-Mobile had not fought their workers who
wanted a union perhaps the employment and wage impact would not
be as bad, but they did and it is. To sum up, 30,000 fewer
jobs, lower wages by as much as $3,000 per year,
disproportionate harm to low-income communities, higher prices
for all consumers, all to help a state-owned German company and
a Japanese billionaire make more money.
Members of the committee, that is not in the public
interest. It is economic treason. Thank you and I look forward
to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shelton follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Shelton.
Ms. Bennet, you are now recognized for 5 minutes. Please
make sure your microphone is on and pull the microphone towards
you. Yes, thank you.
STATEMENT OF CARRI BENNET
Ms. Bennet. Chairman Pallone and Doyle, Ranking Members
Walden and Latta, and members of the subcommittee--my feet
don't touch the ground either, just saying that.
My name is Carri Bennet and I am with the Rural Wireless
Association, and I first want to express my condolences to all
of you all for your loss of Chairman Dingell. May his memory be
a blessing.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify today to discuss
the impact that the proposed T-Mobile/Sprint merger will have
on rural America. RWA opposes this merger. We have heard a lot
of promises from T-Mobile over the years that have not been
met, so we have no reason to believe that T-Mobile will follow
through on their new promises if they are allowed to reduce
competition.
In short, this merger is bad for competition. It is bad for
consumers especially in rural areas who will experience fewer
choices, price increases, and substandard service. It should be
denied. T-Mobile has a poor track record in rural America.
Let's face it. T-Mobile is making a lot of promises about how
they will expand coverage in rural America and improve service
for these Americans, but they have a long track record of doing
just the opposite and we have no reason to believe that this
will change if the merger is approved. In fact, we think it
will get a lot worse.
I am going to run through three examples of T-Mobile's
behavior that have my members concerned. Roaming. Roaming
arrangements are important to rural Americans. Roaming keeps
urban, suburban, and rural Americans connected. Sprint has
historically worked with rural carriers to ensure rural
Americans have robust mobile wireless service. T-Mobile has
not. In fact, according to our members, T-Mobile's roaming
rates are 20 times higher than Sprint's and T-Mobile's existing
roaming agreements are one-sided.
T-Mobile will frequently enter into unilateral roaming
arrangements under which rural carrier subscribers can roam on
T-Mobile's network with no possibility of T-Mobile subscribers
roaming on the rural carrier's network. In such cases, T-Mobile
has simply determined that it is better for its own customers
to do without coverage in rural areas, rather than pay the
rural carrier for network access.
This means that in those areas T-Mobile's customers cannot
be reached and are basically off the grid, all because T-Mobile
chooses to restrict access. Do we really want a New T-Mobile's
100 million-plus subscribers which would be more than one third
of the market share to be unable to access rural carrier's
networks across the country?
Next, rural call completion. Less than a year ago, the FCC
found that T-Mobile failed to correct ongoing problems with
delivery of calls to rural consumers. In fact, T-Mobile
admittedly inserted false ringtones into these calls so that
the caller believed the call was ringing on the other end when
it wasn't.
Aside from blatantly breaking the law, T-Mobile's actions
severely hindered rural consumers from running their
businesses, communicating critical information to family and
friends, and reaching emergency service personnel. This callous
behavior in an effort to save money underscores the fact that
T-Mobile's treatment of rural Americans is not in the public
interest and harms rural telephone companies who would have
received payments for terminating those calls. We believe that
T-Mobile's destructive behavior will continue perhaps even more
aggressively once its rival, Sprint, is eliminated.
Last, false broadband mapping claims. Our members have
serious concerns about T-Mobile's broadband maps submitted in
the FCC's Mobility Fund proceeding. That Fund was created to
provide $4.5 billion to mobile carriers over the next 10 years
to help connect rural Americans who lack quality wireless
broadband service. To make sure they know where the money is
needed the most, the FCC asked wireless carriers to submit maps
indicating where each carrier offers qualifying 4G broadband
coverage.
According to testing done by our members, when T-Mobile
submitted its data the company vastly overstated its rural
coverage to make its reach even seem bigger than it was. When
rural carriers went to test T-Mobile's claims 95.8 percent of
the tests showed speeds below the threshold demanded by the FCC
or no 4G broadband service at all. In many of the places where
T-Mobile certified it had coverage cell sites had not been even
put into operation.
If left unrectified, carriers will be denied funds causing
a loss of service to rural consumers who rely on this funding
to connect. The FCC is currently reviewing this issue. But
before the FCC can make a public interest determination
regarding this proposed merger, it must first find that T-
Mobile has been honest in its dealings with the FCC. Our
members' drive tests strongly suggest otherwise. The FCC should
not approve a merger if an unresolved enforcement proceeding is
pending.
I thank you so much for your time and I look forward to
answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bennet follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Doyle. Thank you very much.
Mr. Brake, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF DOUG BRAKE
Mr. Brake. Thank you. Chairman Doyle, Ranking Member Latta,
and members of the subcommittee thank you for inviting me to
share the views of the Information Technology and Innovation
Foundation, or ITIF, on the pending merger of T-Mobile and
Sprint.
First, let me briefly echo the condolences to the Dingell
family. He was a real legend and will be missed by all of us
and all the members as well as his Twitter followers
everywhere.
With that, ITIF strongly believes that a combination of
Sprint and T-Mobile would bring about a better future for
American businesses and consumers compared to one which each
company attempted to continue alone. In my written testimony I
explore several reasons to support this merger. In these
opening remarks I would like to focus on three key issues.
First, this merger provides an accelerated transition to robust
5G. Second, more competitors is not always better. Or put
another way, there is nothing special about the number 4. And,
lastly, I would like to discuss the right way to define the
market when thinking about this transition.
First and perhaps most importantly, 5G. The key point here
is that a combined firm would have both the spectrum assets and
financial strength to deploy a robust 5G network with broader
coverage and significantly more capacity compared to what
either company could provide alone. Not all 5G is the same.
Around the world, carriers are in the process of exploring
business models, deploying pilots, and incrementally replacing
old equipment with new 5G gear.
These initial exploratory offerings are different in kind,
however, from the 5G network the parties envision. The
combination of T-Mobile's low band, wide coverage, 600
megahertz spectrum and Sprint's high capacity, 2.5 gigahertz
spectrum would make for a high performance, nationwide, next
generation network that would help propel U.S. leadership and
economic competitiveness not just in 5G itself, but in the
applications that an advanced network enables.
This is incredibly important because 5G is anticipated to
being more than just faster, more responsive phones. The
technology is designed to be adaptive to a wide variety of use
cases hopefully driving significant productivity gains
throughout the economy.
The capacity from a new 5G network would effectively
increase the supply of wireless services, again more than the
two companies could provide separately. We should expect this
increased supply to maintain downward pressure on prices
including in the wholesale and prepaid market segments.
Second, let's talk about competition. You will hear some of
my friends or you already heard some of my friends on the panel
argue that the Government must preserve four carriers for
competition. But competition is a means, not an end unto
itself. Of course any market can have too few competitors, but
it can also have too many, resulting in wasteful duplication of
resources.
I want to stress that again, more competitors is not always
better. This is especially true given the economics of
communications networks which feature tremendously high, fixed,
upfront costs to serve a given geographic area. These high,
fixed infrastructure costs allow for vigorous competition with
relatively few competitors compared to other industries. We
should want infrastructure companies to compete at sufficient
scale.
A combined company could do more with less, allowing the
new firm to drive greater value throughout the business,
ultimately passing a significant share on to consumers in the
form of lower prices, a higher quality network, or innovative
new offerings. A market of three healthy, relatively equal-size
companies that continue to invest and innovate is far, far
better than a lopsided market with two firms considerably
stronger than the others. There is no reason to preserve four
for four's sake.
Lastly, it is important to not define the market too
narrowly and acknowledge the dynamic forces changing
competition. 5G is accelerating what are already rapidly
differentiating business models in wireless services. Basic
connectivity is increasingly commodified and wireless companies
are instead looking to new revenue sources to recoup their
large, ongoing investments. These new revenue opportunities
include Internet of Things services, connected vehicles and
drones, over-the-top video services, advertising, and perhaps
most notably, fixed wireless broadband to the home, which is in
turn prompting cable providers to explore wireless entry.
These new business models with value-added services built
on top of basic connectivity are likely to keep downward
pressure on price for the traditional bundles of voice, text,
and data whether there are three or more facilities operators.
Because this merger will accelerate flourishing U.S. 5G future,
improves the market structure with three strong firms with
sufficient scale to vigorously compete, and comes at a time of
rapidly changing business models, we believe it is in the
public interest and hope it is quickly approved.
Thank you and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brake follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Doyle. Thank you.
Mr. Berenbroick, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF PHILLIP BERENBROICK
Mr. Berenbroick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Latta, and members of the subcommittee. And I want to associate
myself and Public Knowledge with the statements of the panel
and the members of the subcommittee honoring Chairman Dingell's
life and his service.
Thank you for inviting me to appear today and thank you for
shining a light on the harms of the proposed Sprint/T-Mobile
merger. Today's hearing will show that this proposed merger is
a bad deal for consumers, for competition, and for America's
wireless future. The evidence clearly shows that this
transaction does not serve the public service and is unlawful
under the antitrust laws.
As you consider this deal ask yourself, what will it mean
for each of your constituents who rely daily on their smart
phones? The answer is clear. They will ultimately pay higher
prices and have fewer choices for wireless service. Since
announcing their intention to merge in April 2018, the
companies have failed to show that the merger would not violate
competition laws. They have failed to show that the merger
would affirmatively serve the public interest as required for
FCC approval and they have failed to show that other public
interest benefits would offset the merger's substantial
reduction in competition.
The evidence Sprint and T-Mobile have presented to the FCC
and the Department of Justice shows that consolidating the
wireless market down to three national players would result in
substantially higher prices for consumers. And you don't have
to take my word for it, the economic analysis submitted by the
companies admits as much.
Recent promises that the merged company will not raise
prices in the near term underscore the obvious. Post-merger the
marketplace will not be competitive enough to discipline the
three remaining national carriers when they raise prices. The
proposed transaction will eliminate competition and choices for
consumers. It will inflict significant harm on the low-income,
prepaid, and rural consumers who can least afford to pay more.
Additionally, the deal will lead to tens of thousands of lost
jobs and lower wages for the workers that remain.
The merger will eliminate avenues for new competitors to
enter the wireless market, and, finally, the deal will harm
small and rural wireless providers and their subscribers who
rely on competitive choices for roaming and wholesale.
Remember, under the FCC's public interest analysis, the
companies' burden is not merely to show that there is a lack of
public interest harms, they must demonstrate specific public
interest benefits that would directly flow from the
transaction.
The FCC is charged with affirmatively promoting
competition, not merely maintaining or protecting the existing
level of competition. The companies have not shown that this
merger would increase competition or benefit the public
interest. The Commission's public interest standard is rooted
in the text of the Communications Act and the Commission is
charged with ensuring the availability of advanced
telecommunications to all Americans and that quality services
are provided at just, reasonable, affordable rates and the
merger would frustrate all of these fundamental roles.
For nearly a year, Sprint and T-Mobile have attempted to
overcome these overwhelming yet predictable harms to the public
interest, consumers, and competition. To distract from the
damage this merger would inflict on wireless competition, the
companies insist that this merger is about competing with cable
companies. Don't buy it. We have heard this before. This is
exactly the same song AT&T and T-Mobile sang when they tried to
merge in 2011.
Policymakers, the public, and enforcement agencies rejected
these arguments then, and these claims are similarly hollow and
misleading today. The merger benefits alleged by the companies
have collapsed under public scrutiny and the companies'
economic and engineering models have come under substantial
attack and they actually undermine the case the companies are
making here today.
The DOJ, the FCC, and this subcommittee must follow the
objective evidence they collect rather than relying on
unverifiable and unenforceable commitments made by the
companies. That evidence includes prior public statements by
the companies themselves, prior FCC and DOJ evaluations of four
to three wireless market mergers; international wireless market
comparisons. All of this evidence clearly shows that the merger
will gut competition in the wireless market, lead to
dramatically higher prices for every wireless consumer;
further, the evidence undermines the speculative and
unverifiable benefits the companies continue to allege and have
done so here today.
To be clear, this merger is not necessary to build 5G
networks. It will not increase investments in 5G. On their own
the companies are already competing to deploy robust 5G
networks. This will continue preserving the well-documented
benefits of vigorous four-firm competition and it will not lead
to new deployments in rural areas or help close the digital
divide.
Thank you for your invitation to appear here today and I
look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Berenbroick follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Doyle. Thank you.
With the conclusion of witness testimony we are now going
to move to Member questions. Each Member will have 5 minutes to
ask questions of our witnesses. And let me say to my colleagues
that I love you all dearly and it pains me greatly to bring the
gavel down when you have exceeded your 5 minutes. But the
kindness that I showed last week resulted in many people going
much, much over their 5-minute time.
So if you are near the very end, then you ask the question
and it takes more than 5 minutes for the answer, we will
certainly let that happen. But after 5 minutes, please no more
questions, or I am going to have to enforce it with the gavel.
So, and I will try to set an example by yielding myself 5
minutes and staying within the time.
So, Mr. Legere, I am going to ask you and Mr. Berenbroick
the same question but a different way, and I am going to hold
you each to 45 seconds because I have only got 5 minutes.
So tell me, Mr. Legere, why you think this merger is
different than other mergers in the past in highly concentrated
areas. Tell me why you think this isn't going to result in some
of the things we have seen in other mergers where it did raise
prices and it didn't bring competition. What is different about
this?
Mr. Legere. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. In general, the
issue with mergers is that industries consolidate, supply goes
down, prices go up, and jobs are eliminated. This is a unique
merger where the outcome of this merger will be a significant
increase in supply in the form of eight times the capacity that
our network will make available.
It will bring an 87 percent decline in the price per gig of
data and jobs will go up. So this is dramatically different. It
is unique. It is the advent of 5G. The complementary nature of
these networks increases supply significantly which will
decrease prices. That is quite different.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you. And that was within the 45 seconds. I
appreciate it.
So, Mr. Berenbroick, tell me in the same amount of time why
you think this merger is going to be the same as any other
merger.
Mr. Berenbroick. Thank you for the question. So this merger
is remarkably similar to AT&T/T-Mobile. That merger was
rejected by DOJ and the FCC in 2011. That deal would have led
to, DOJ and the FCC found, higher prices, less competition to
discipline the marketplace, less competition would also mean
less innovation and service plans, less robust networks, lower
customer service quality, less incentives to invest and deploy.
Those things are all true here, but in some instances this
merger is actually worse. We are actually eliminating both of
the smaller maverick competitors that challenge and discipline
the behavior of the two larger companies in the marketplace.
There are also increasing harms to the prepaid market, low-
income consumers, the Lifeline marketplace, and then lastly,
the roaming and MVNO marketplace. Those harms are exacerbated
here compared to AT&T/T-Mobile.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you.
Mr. Shelton, if a Sprint employee is working at a retail
store and they lose their job because they are working across
the street from a T-Mobile store, is the claim being made that
that employee will get another retail job in that area or do
you think, rather, it is potentially that these jobs will be
displaced and at best replaced by different types of jobs in
different communities?
Mr. Shelton. First of all, it may not be a Sprint employee
that loses their job, but that is kind of the problem with the
numbers here. Most of the stores are independent contractors
who don't have Sprint employees. But I don't see how even a
Sprint employee, say, in Pittsburgh would lose their job in
Pittsburgh because of consolidation of stores and end up in
Pittsburgh. They might end up in Nebraska if Mr. Legere keeps
his word and offers that employee a job. But I don't see how
they are going to because of the concentration of stores. After
this company merges, if it merged, they would have twice the
number of stores that either AT&T or Verizon has now. So stores
are going to be closed no matter what happens.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you.
Mr. Berenbroick, what precedent is set by allowing
competitors to merge to achieve an evolutionary step in
technology? I mean, what happens then for 6G or 7G, and how did
the Government view similar claims for 3G and 4G?
Mr. Berenbroick. Yes, Congressman, that is a good question.
So, as you will recall in AT&T/T-Mobile, one of the claims the
companies made was that they couldn't deploy 4G LTE coverage to
the entirety of their network footprints to the rest of the
country if they didn't merge. The Government evaluated the
evidence that was before it, they rejected that. They found
that that was not credible. They found that competition was
likely to lead to deployment not consolidation. The same is
true here.
So essentially, if you buy into the argument that we need
to allow these companies to merge for 5G--by the way that is
directly contrary to the statements they have made to Wall
Street and investors even, you know, very recently--you know,
it essentially sets the precedent that whenever there is a need
for these companies to invest in new infrastructure to employ
6G, 7G as you said, the gates are open to additional
consolidation. Consumers need more competition for lower prices
and better services, not fewer.
Mr. Doyle. And I see I have 7 seconds left, and I am going
to yield it back to set a good example for the rest of my
colleagues. And I will now yield to the ranking member.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
very much for yielding.
And, Mr. Brake, if I could start my questioning with you,
my district is a microcosm of the country, going from Toledo to
suburban neighborhoods all the way to small communities in
sparsely rural counties. The State of New York is also well-
known for being split between rural and urban communities.
What lessons can the committee draw from the New York
Public Service Commission's approval of this merger last week
in terms of benefits on both for the rural and urban
communities?
Mr. Brake. Sure, yes. I thank you for the question, Mr.
Latta. Yes, the New York Public Service Commission, I think the
main takeaway is that this Public Service Commission took a
hard look at this merger, determined that it was in the public
interest, and allowed it to go forward with minimal conditions,
modest conditions related to jobs. It saw it was benefitting
the State long term.
As far as your question regarding both urban and rural
areas, I think the most important point again is this
combination of complementary spectrum assets. You have the low
band 600 megahertz that provides great coverage to a wider area
but is relatively limited in the capacity it can offer compared
to the 2.5 gigahertz spectrum assets that Sprint has ready to
deploy for 5G which has a much greater capacity.
So with the two of those combined you get a much better
network in terms of both coverage that can help provide, you
know, maybe not the greatest capacity but a wider area in rural
areas to provide much of the service of 5G, but also in urban
areas you get a much greater capacity with a 2.5 gigahertz to
see a more robust 5G network again than either company could
provide on its own or even greater than the two individual
companies combined, if you want to put it that way.
I would note, however, the jurisdiction of States is
somewhat different than the review at the DOJ and the FCC. So
if I may if there is time, one of the main issues that is
unique to the State level jurisdiction is that of jobs. And so
with any merger there are going to be jobs created and jobs
destroyed, right. I mean that is inevitable. The companies say
that, you know, they will be a job creator from day one and
apparently the New York Public Service Commission was content
with that assertion in addition to some commitments and I
believe a call center being built in New York.
But, and this is a somewhat unpopular point particularly
with politicians, but wireless services, this is not a jobs
program, right. Again perhaps an unpopular point, but if the
companies combined--not even specifically this merger but any
companies--can provide a greater output, more capacity, greater
services with fewer inputs including labor that is the
definition of productivity. That is what drives economic growth
in this country and should be a good thing. I recognize that is
not a popular opinion and especially among politicians, but
productivity growth is an important component for this----
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Ms. Bennet, would you like to comment on New York, right,
would you like to comment?
Ms. Bennet. Well, I was just going to point out that the
review by the New York Public Service Commission is not looking
at--it is only looking at the jobs issue. It is not looking at
the overall merger. That is regulated to the DOJ and to the FCC
and they do not have jurisdiction over that.
I wanted to hop back to a point though that Mr. Legere made
about 87 percent decline in prices per gig. I would like to see
some of that pass through on the roaming rates because right
now roaming rates are about 10 times to 15 times higher than
the retail rates they offer their own customers.
So essentially that means they made that in a wholesale
environment, the carriers are charging more than the retail
environment. So the cost is definitely lower if they can pass
on retail rates that are lower than the wholesale rates. Sorry,
not your question, but I just wanted to go back to that for a
minute.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Mr. Berenbroick. Congressman, can I jump in for 1 second? I
apologize.
Mr. Latta. I am sorry. I am almost out of time here.
Mr. Legere, if I could, I have about 38 seconds left if you
would like to comment.
Mr. Legere. Yes, I would like to comment. And I appreciate
the comparison. Yes, the New York Public Service Commission is
one of 16 States that has approved the merger and their review
looked at all of the same issues, what it is going to mean for
the State from the standpoint of 5G, median speeds of 450
megabits, the promise of 5G while having prices decline, having
jobs go up, this was reviewed in total and all of the benefits
that we preach about this merger New York saw and we committed
with them to the things that are appropriate for them. And the
promise of it is similar to the reviews that are taking place
with the FCC and the DOJ.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Pallone, the full committee
chairman, for 5 minutes to ask questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Doyle. It is no secret
that unions are under attack. Corporations have sought to limit
the power of unions which are fighting to make sure workers are
fairly treated and get a livable wage, and what we are seeing
is a growing disparity between the people at the top and the
hardworking people like those in New Jersey, the folks who
haven't seen a dime to the huge corporate profits in the Trump
tax giveaways. And just this week, news reports highlighted
that the average tax refund will be 8.4 percent less this year,
so, so much for the GOP tax reform.
Now the CWA has argued that the merger of T-Mobile and
Sprint could wipe out as many as 30,000 jobs, about 25,000 in
retail and about 5,000 corporate. At the same time, T-Mobile
has announced it will be opening five new customer experience
centers if the merger is approved which will create up to 5,600
jobs by 2021. So I wanted to ask Mr. Legere about that.
In 2012, T-Mobile shut down seven call centers and
allegedly sent the jobs overseas. But now, you know, you are
saying that we are going to have these new customer centers. Is
there anything in the law or any legally enforceable
protections to ensure that these new center jobs are actually
created? And, if those jobs are created, is there anything in
the law or any legally enforceable protections to ensure that
they wouldn't be outsourced in a few years to somewhere else?
Mr. Legere. Thank you, Congressman. A couple things I would
like to insert is--and I am very proud of my tenure of being
the CEO since the end of 2012. I would point out that the
employees, badge-carrying T-Mobile employees since that time
have gone up 250 percent. The employees of MetroPCS----
Mr. Doyle. Mr. Legere, is your microphone on?
Mr. Legere. Yes.
Mr. Doyle. OK.
Mr. Legere. OK, sorry about that.
Mr. Doyle. Move that a little closer so we can hear you.
Mr. Legere. But I have had a 250 percent increase in
employees, badge-carrying employees at T-Mobile since the time
I have been CEO. I would also like to point out that I am very
proud of the over 50 workplace awards that the company has
worked to attain, including the 100 Best Companies Award for--
--
Mr. Pallone. But, Mr. Legere, could you address the call
centers? If not, I am just going to move on because I don't
have that much time.
Mr. Legere. Yes. The call centers, they have 5,600 jobs
including 2,000 additional, making it 7,500 to 7,600 jobs are a
critical integrated part of our business plan, our filing with
the DOJ, our support documentation to the FCC, and it is
something that I am completely committed to.
Mr. Pallone. All right.
I mean, Mr. Shelton, if I could ask you, does that comfort
you, his response, or what is your take on how this merger
would affect wages?
Mr. Shelton. Our belief is that it will have a downward
effect on wages. And we have a study from the Economic Policy
Institute and the Roosevelt Institute that just like prices go
up with less competition, wages go down with less competition
for labor. The one exception is where you have collective
bargaining, but T-Mobile and Sprint oppose collective
bargaining.
And if I may, when T-Mobile laid off those 3,300 people,
call center people in the past, they said that the work did not
go overseas. The Labor Department did an investigation and
found out that it went to the Philippines. So, you know, how do
we take their word now? And if you look, not only has the
workforce in the United States increased, but also the
workforce in the Philippines and lots of other countries has
increased by leaps and bounds.
Mr. Pallone. All right, let me ask Mr. Legere, if I can,
one more question about resiliency of the Nation's
communications systems and public safety. My district was hurt
probably more than any other district by Superstorm Sandy and
we have done a lot since then on a bipartisan basis to try to
address resiliency for the communications systems.
And I see that the FCC's 2017 Atlantic Hurricane Season
Impact on Communications Report outlines a portion of the
problem. It notes that in 2017 the U.S. experienced 16 natural
disasters with costs totaling 360 billion. I would like Mr.
Chairman to enter that into the record, if I could, that
report.
Mr. Doyle. Without objection, so ordered.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF16/20190213/
108895/HHRG-116-IF16-20190213-SD007.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Pallone. But my worry is that consolidation of network
infrastructure could prioritize cost savings over resiliency in
the face of disasters. And I notice network resiliency wasn't
addressed in your public interest statement at the FCC.
So, Mr. Legere, there is not much time. Can you explain why
you chose to leave this issue out of that public interest
statement, and whether you had discussions with the FCC
regarding how this deal will affect network resiliency and
public safety?
Mr. Legere. Thank you for that important question, sir. I
think the FCC's feedback on the increase in resiliency and the
response to natural disasters in the last year or two by T-
Mobile has been industry-leading and something that they are
extremely proud of. Resiliency of our networks has been a
critical priority and it is a critical priority of the New T-
Mobile's network. And, you know, this infrastructure plan will
significantly increase the resiliency of our network and it is
part of the plan.
Mr. Pallone. All right, thank you so much.
Mr. Doyle. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Walden, the full committee ranking member, for 5
minutes to ask questions.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And before I start I
want to thank you for your concern about these jobs. You know,
we had a hostile takeover here at this committee and we lost
about half our staff. And I am just wondering, in this new
spirit of protection of lost jobs could we get those back?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Doyle. Yes. Were they reassigned to a different
neighborhood?
Mr. Walden. Yes, you could say that.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here.
Mr. Berenbroick, I know Mr. Brake talked in his testimony
about the number 4 carriers. Is there a magic to number 4 in
terms of competition in this space? Is there some magic to four
versus five versus three versus eight?
Mr. Berenbroick. You know, it is a good question. The key
as the Department of Justice and the FCC look at this deal
isn't whether there is a magic number of firms in the
marketplace. It is do the players in the marketplace, does the
structure of the marketplace promote lower prices, more
investment, better choices for consumers, better--more
deployment of broadband services? And we believe, frankly, that
when you take these two companies and you merge them together
you eliminate the mavericks, the companies that have been the
driving competitive forces in the industry.
So to answer your question directly, I don't believe there
is a per se magic number, it is about market structure.
Mr. Walden. OK.
Mr. Berenbroick. But this transaction has significant
concerns.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Brake, do you want to comment on that
briefly?
Mr. Brake. Sure. I mean as I mentioned, right, there is no
real magic to the number 4, but it seems to be a lot of the
folks pushing to preserve four seem to think that more is
necessarily better, you know, why not five, why not six, why
not seven? And the answer is clear. It is because then you end
up with all of this duplication of infrastructure that leads to
a fragmentation of market, increases costs that ultimately have
to be borne by consumers of the network, right.
And so the question is, what is the optimal balance
between, you know, competition that drives down prices,
continues innovation but doesn't see these duplication of
resources? Considering the limited cash flow and the high debt
of Sprint, there is a good indication that that number, that
optimal number is closer to 3 rather than 4.
Mr. Walden. All right. Thank you both. I appreciate your
perspectives on that.
I want to turn to our other representatives here. Talk to
me, Mr. Claure and Mr. Legere, about roaming rates and what we
should anticipate, consumers. And about data, both data access
and costs going to go up, going to go down? As you both know,
my district is pretty enormous and gives new definition to
rural and remote, and we are concerned about how these two
would work.
And I don't know which among you wants to, between you
wants to go first on that, but please, and thank you again for
being here.
Mr. Claure. Thank you, Congressman. One of the most
important pillars of this merger is increasing capacity.
Basically when you put these two networks together you are
going to create eight times the capacity. So to put things in
perspective, imagine if you had a stadium in which two thirds
of it is empty. Pretty much you are going to be, you are going
to have an economic incentive to basically reduce prices and
find different people to fill this capacity.
This is why we have been very clear and we made a
commitment to lower prices. Traditionally, most mergers, you
don't find companies that go and make a voluntary filing to the
FCC like John at T-Mobile did basically making a commitment
that prices will remain the same or lower. It is a question of
capacity. We are going to have more capacity than ever before,
eight times capacity, so we have got to fill it and that is
going to be filled by the different partners in the industry.
Mr. Walden. All right.
Mr. Legere, do you want to address those two issues as
well?
Mr. Legere. Yes. Thank you, sir. I would first say, let's
be clear. The wireless industry is a duopoly controlled by AT&T
and Verizon who control over 80 percent of the profitability
and 95 percent of the cash flow and after the merger they will
still have almost 70 percent market share. What we have done
for 6 years at T-Mobile as the uncarrier, the whole thesis of
this transaction is to use this increase in supply, capacity,
and decreased price to supercharge the uncarrier, to bring
competition. You will see users have an 87 percent decline in
the price per gigabit of data. You will have an eightfold
increase. Users will go from ten gigs to eighty gigs and that
is just in wireless.
We expect to take that competition also to the cable
industry which is not only a duopoly, it is a monopoly. And
most of America, 79 percent, have no more than one choice for
high speed broadband access and we plan on entering that
market, having as many as 9.6 million customers serving 50
percent of the geography of the United States and saving just
in that part over $13 billion a year to people on their cable
and in-home broadband bills.
Mr. Walden. All right. I thank all of our witnesses for
your comments. My time has expired. I yield back.
Mr. McNerney [presiding]. Thank you.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes, but I first want to
reiterate my colleagues and the panel on recognizing the
leadership that John Dingell provided on a bipartisan way to
get legislation done that was sustainable in the long run, and
hopefully we can continue in that tradition.
Many households in my district live paycheck to paycheck.
More than a quarter have an annual income of less than $35,000
a year. If these households are faced with even a couple more
dollars each month it could mean they no longer have access to
wireless service.
So, Mr. Legere, can you cite any recent example where a
country went from four to three wireless carriers and prices
did not increase?
Mr. Legere. Thank you very much for the question, sir. And
the types of customers that you describe we are
disproportionately serving both at T-Mobile and at Sprint and
they disproportionately have benefitted from what we have done
because they are the highest----
Mr. McNerney. Which is why we are worried about the merger
reducing competition to those, to that sector of the
population.
Mr. Legere. Thank you, sir. Since we have acquired
MetroPCS, the average price of a prepaid service to our
customers has gone down four percent, but the data usage has
gone up twelvefold.
Mr. McNerney. But you really didn't answer my question. Any
recent examples of countries that went from four to three and
did not have prices increase?
Mr. Legere. I am not a study in the countries around the
world, sir.
Mr. McNerney. I understand.
Mr. Berenbroick, is it true that the three to four merger
of T-Mobile Netherlands and Orange led to price increases in
the Netherlands compared to other control countries?
Mr. Berenbroick. Yes, Congressman, between 10 to 17 percent
price increases.
Mr. McNerney. Wow. And is it true that when Austria went
from four to three wireless carriers the prices also increased?
Mr. Berenbroick. Yes, sir, between 14 and 20 percent. And
what is particularly important in that market is that one of
the three remaining players is one of T-Mobile's sister
companies, T-Mobile Austria.
Mr. McNerney. Wouldn't this merger have an even greater
impact on lower income people who depend on prepaid services
since we would be moving from three to four facility-based
prepaid providers?
Mr. Berenbroick. Yes, sir. I believe it would. You know, in
this marketplace in the prepaid market you tend to have only
three players currently--T-Mobile, Sprint, who would merge, and
AT&T. T-Mobile and Sprint would have a dominant position in
that marketplace and have the power and incentives to raise
prices on those prepaid customers who, you know, frankly, are
likely to be lower income, likely to be mobile-only, likely to
be consumers of color and, frankly, would have no other choices
in the marketplace. So prices would go up on them and they
would have nowhere else to turn.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Legere, I have a letter here from you to the Chairman
of the FCC dated February 4th of this year in which you stated,
``I want to reiterate unequivocally that New T-Mobile rates
will not go up, rather our merger will ensure that American
consumers will pay less and get more.''
And I am going to submit this to the committee, without
objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. McNerney. Is it also correct that on the same day you
submitted a letter, counsel for T-Mobile submitted an ex parte
filing to the FCC, that further articulated this commitment?
Mr. Legere. Yes, sir.
Mr. McNerney. And I am going to submit this to the
committee, without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. McNerney. Mr. Berenbroick, I am curious to take into
your opinion on this commitment.
Mr. Berenbroick. Well, thank you for the question and this
is an important issue. So the history of these merger
conditions, behavioral merger conditions in concentrated
markets, is not a positive one. We saw this with conditions on
Comcast where it violated its merger conditions with regards to
Bloomberg.
Mr. McNerney. Well, let me ask you specifically, if a small
amount of data is added to T-Mobile and Sprint legacy plans
consumers could see an increase in the amount they pay for
their plans; is that correct?
Mr. Berenbroick. Yes, sir. Under the letter that was filed
last week that appears to be the case.
Mr. McNerney. Is it your opinion that under the proposed
condition legacy Sprint and T-Mobile fees could be hiked and
there would be nothing to stop that?
Mr. Berenbroick. Yes, sir. And even if those fees were
hiked and even if those were covered by the commitment that T-
Mobile has said it has made, how are consumers supposed to
enforce that? Are they supposed to, you know, come to the FCC
which has forsworn rate regulation and ask it to step in and
enforce this on T-Mobile? It just seems impractical and
enforceable.
Mr. McNerney. And yes or no, is it your opinion that under
the proposed condition legacy Sprint and T-Mobile surcharges
could be hiked and there would be nothing to stop that? Yes or
no, please.
Mr. Berenbroick. Yes.
Mr. Legere. Sir, could I respond to some of----
Mr. McNerney. Yes, I am going to just wrap up here. I hope
that your promise that the people will get more for what they
are paying holds true. My concern is that many people won't
even be in a position to take advantage of that promise because
they might not be able to scramble the extra cash they need.
Simply put, I am worried about many of the constituents that I
have would be priced out.
And my time has expired and I yield to Mr. Shimkus.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Legere, you can respond to that.
Mr. Legere. Yes. Thank you very much. And I, you know, with
respect, my colleague continues to interpret what is taking
place at the FCC through his interpretation of what the outcome
is before their work is completed that I highly respect what is
taking place. Several things, I want to be clear. I have worked
very hard to rid the lines between postpaid and prepaid such
that----
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, let me ask because I was going to have
that question anyway. I am old enough to know the Uncola. We
are using the term ``the uncarrier,'' so describe
``uncarrier.''
Mr. Legere. Yes. ``Uncarrier'' is a term that I coined. It
was the thesis and the genesis of who we were going to be. And
what it was, was we set out to fix a stupid, broken wireless,
arrogant industry by listening to customers and solving all the
pain points and removing those barriers.
Mr. Shimkus. Like what? Give me some quick examples.
Mr. Legere. We eliminated contracts, eliminated
international data roaming, free, you know, free music
streaming, et cetera. So things----
Mr. Shimkus. So let me follow up on this question. So if
you enter as a more dominant competitor to AT&T and Verizon,
wouldn't that uncarrier characteristics carry into that
competitive marketplace, or are you going to jettison that?
Mr. Legere. Sir, my goal has been not just to differentiate
myself by the changes but to force AT&T and Verizon to change,
that the wireless industry would adapt. I have been successful
in changing the industry, but I am not breaking through because
I don't have the scale and the resource and capability. The
goal here is to supercharge that uncarrier and force AT&T and
Verizon to invest more in 5G, to lower prices, broaden
services, go deeper into in-home broadband, and I believe that
that is possible through this merger.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, and I appreciate that.
And, Mr. Claure, kind of what is going to happen if the
merger gets approved? You do bring something beneficial to this
debate especially for the rural folks. Greg Walden represents
rural America. I represent rural America, Billy Long. We have a
lot of folks here that that is a concern. Is there a way to
carry that roaming debate that Sprint trumpeted to this new
merged company? Hit your mike.
Mr. Claure. Thank you for your question. Today, Sprint has
contracts with most of the rural carriers and those are
contracts. And I have been very clear with John that the New T-
Mobile will plan to honor the contracts that Sprint has signed.
What is important for most of you who have people in the rural
part of the country, it is very simple. T-Mobile did not have
600 megahertz spectrum so T-Mobile couldn't basically build a
nationwide coverage. Today they do. They like the capacity they
can buy with our spectrum.
So we are going to bring 5G to every corner of America and
that is going to be a huge differentiator. You have seen the
lack of competition that exists today in rural America.
Mr. Shimkus. So, Mr. Legere, I would hope that that would
be part of the new corporate culture as far as if this is a
successful merged company. I think my folks in the rural
wireless would like to see that too.
Mr. Legere. Yes, sir, a hundred percent. I would just like
to point out that when you take the topic of rural there is two
important components, the rural customer right now who is not
being served, does not have choice, and the rural carrier. Both
of those carriers will be served greatly by this transaction.
I clearly have honored that I will, you know, commit to
honor all of the agreements that Sprint has and I believe that
we will be in a position to negotiate even better things for
the rural players. And I believe that in that partnership we
can be the rural players' partner to bring them to the 5G
evolution and the winner will be the rural customer.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Legere.
With my remaining time I want to try to get two things
done. One is to remind my colleagues that this evening at 6:00
in the Rayburn Foyer, the Next Generation 911 has their awards
ceremony. Especially if you are new on the committee and want
to know 911, telecommunications, location, that is a good event
to stop by and I want to encourage you to do that.
And, Mr. Berenbroick, I am sorry. In your comments in your
testimony you lauded the Department of Justice on their
decision on the T-Mobile--what was it--AT&T merger. Our point
is you have the FCC and the Department of Justice making this
ruling. Do you trust the DOJ to make the ruling without, as
Ranking Member Walden said, political influence?
Mr. Berenbroick. Thank you, Congressman. Yes, obviously
that issue of political influence has come up with regards to
merger reviews in the past. Yes, I do trust the staff at the
Department of Justice to fully review the evidence before them,
the staff at the FCC to fully review the evidence and to make
those recommendations.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Iowa, Mr.
Loebsack.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I do thank the
chair and the ranking member for having this hearing today and
I want to thank all of you for being here as well. It has been
pretty enlightening. I think it is an important hearing. I am
happy to hear that there has been a lot of focus on rural
areas. Both sides of the aisle, we represent, many of us on
this committee represent significant rural areas.
So I am going to get right to my first question.
Ms. Bennet, your testimony you state that T-Mobile has, and
I quote, ``determined that it is better for its business to do
without any coverage in rural areas,'' unquote. As a
representative of a rural district--not as big as some of them
but nonetheless pretty darn big, 12 to 13,000 square miles, 24
counties--where coverage can often be dismal or nonexistent, I
get around my district all the time. I experience this whenever
I am back. I find that particular assertion very worrying, as
you might imagine. Can you clarify a little bit more on that
point?
Ms. Bennet. Certainly and I appreciate the question. Our
members who have built out the rural networks in their rural
areas and it is not everywhere, to be clear it is only in the
areas that they serve.
Mr. Loebsack. And you did mention Iowa in your testimony?
Ms. Bennet. Yes, yes. And what has happened is in
negotiations with T-Mobile, T-Mobile elects not to--they lack-
restrict. It is a technology that you can put in place so that
their customers don't have access to those rural carriers'
networks. So they have roaming agreements because under the
FCC's rules they have to let the rural carriers' customers roam
on their network but not the reciprocal. So that they choose
not to do that and that is because they probably don't want to
pay the roaming charges to the rural carriers.
Mr. Loebsack. Well, if T-Mobile and Sprint are combining
services can T-Mobile make a structural commitment to use
Sprint's rural carrier service model?
Ms. Bennet. Those are very hard to enforce after the fact.
And to go back to the favorable agreements that we have with
Sprint, right now those are expiring and we haven't been able
to get any certainty from Sprint about whether those would
continue regardless of whether the merger goes through. They
just have been silent. They have gone silent on us and have
told us that we have to wait until the merger is done----
Mr. Loebsack. OK.
Ms. Bennet [continuing]. Or not done.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you.
My second question is for Mr. Shelton. CWA recently
released a report on the impact in Iowa from T-Mobile's
acquisition of iWireless which has been mentioned. One of the
things that stuck out to me from this report was a dramatic
decrease of T-Mobile's retail footprint in Iowa. Can you expand
a little further regarding T-Mobile's acquisition of iWireless
and how that reduced access in rural parts of my State and
district?
Mr. Shelton. Yes. When they bought the company in Iowa they
closed down 90 percent of the stores. And now for a consumer in
Iowa, in a rural place in Iowa, they have to drive 68 to a
hundred miles to get to the nearest T-Mobile store in Iowa. And
if you look at the company's plans, their own plans say that 46
million rural customers will not be served by their 5G network.
So that does not bode well for Iowa.
And, actually, I know it is kind of difficult in this
political environment to demonstrate fairness, but I am going
to do it in this case, Mr. Legere. I am going to give you an
opportunity to respond and make your case, because to be frank,
Ms. Bennet's and Mr. Shelton's remarks leave me very concerned
about the potential negative outcomes in Iowa. I know there are
at least two sides to every story, so I want to give you a
chance to respond to them. And in particular will T-Mobile make
structural commitments to rural constituents in my State who
may stand to lose jobs, coverage, or retail services?
Mr. Legere. Yes, sir. Thank you very much. And the facts
associated with what is happening with Iowa Wireless I would be
glad to submit after the hearing as well. But let's just be
clear. There are a hundred more employees than there were a
year ago in Iowa. There are 35 MetroPCS, Metro by T-Mobile
stores equaling the number of what the stores were there
before. And Iowa Wireless was a failing company stuck in 2G and
3G and we came in and provided the investment. We spent $70
million so far upgrading to the 4G and now moving to 5G
network.
Mr. Loebsack. I am kind of running out of time here. I want
you to address the structural agreement issue going forward.
Mr. Legere. I would be glad to look at ways to make that
commitment. And I would point out that part of our plan is to
cover 96 percent of the 62 million people in rural America with
LTE coverage and 84 percent of all of rural America with
greater than 25 megabits of in-home broadband.
Mr. Loebsack. And a group of politicians here, we make
promises quite a lot. I would like this to be in writing. That
is what I would like it to be. I would like to see you make
that commitment, that structural commitment.
Mr. Legere. Yes, sir. It will be in my business plan as
well.
Mr. Loebsack. To make sure we have that access here in
Iowa. Thank you very much, Mr. Legere.
And I have 10 seconds left. I am going to yield back my
time, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you.
I now recognize my good friend from Ohio, Mr. Johnson, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I
appreciate the panel being with us today.
Mr. Legere, historically, Sprint has been an effective
partner with rural wireless providers--say that fast--allowing
their customers to access Sprint's voice and data network when
roaming. I represent a very, very rural district in Appalachia.
Ms. Bennet has testified that T-Mobile has been unwilling to
partner with rural providers or otherwise serve rural America.
Can you share what services the New T-Mobile intends to
provide in rural America and if there are any plans to partner
with rural providers? I know we have alluded to some of this
already, but if you could do it for me I would appreciate it.
Mr. Legere. Yes, sir. Thank you very much for the question.
I have two things I would like to point out. One is,
historically, T-Mobile has not had the wherewithal to provide
full capabilities in rural America. We were a very densely
urban company with no low band spectrum that covered rural
America and we only recently have that. New T-Mobile will have
significantly more ability to do that.
Secondly, Sprint is not going away. This is a merger
between T-Mobile and Sprint and all of the good of Sprint will
be part of the integrated T-Mobile and we plan to carry those
forward. And I believe that in addition to providing broader
services to rural customers, better LTE coverage, in-home
broadband, I believe that we have a great ability to be a
partner with rural carriers. We need their help with last-mile
access with capabilities and I think we can provide them with a
pathway to 5G. So I think it is the best partnership for both
rural customers and rural carriers.
Mr. Johnson. All right. Well, thank you for that. So
specifically then, will the New T-Mobile continue to make
wholesale agreements available that are in line with those
currently made by Sprint or T-Mobile?
Mr. Legere. Yes, sir. And all wholesale agreements are
currently contractual. We will honor those. I believe with the
supply and capacity that the New T-Mobile will have that
wholesale rates are only going to get better. In fact, carriers
that have agreements with both Sprint and T-Mobile will be able
to choose the better of those and the alternative that suits
them as well.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Well, thank you.
Mr. Brake, Ms. Bennet's testimony indicates that the New T-
Mobile would have zero incentive, quote, zero incentive to
provide commercially reasonable roaming rates, terms, and
conditions to RWA members. Although, aren't there rules at the
FCC in place to ensure that carriers do just that and if they
do not there are enforcement mechanisms that the FCC can take?
Mr. Brake. That is right. Thank you for the question. So
the rural coverage is a multifaceted issue. This roaming issue
is a narrow component of it. And I just want to be very clear
about the sort of dynamic here, right. The members of the Rural
Wireless Association enjoyed favorable negotiations with Sprint
mainly because they had a very small network focused on cities
and did not have the rural coverage. And so, and I don't mean
to disparage the members, right. There is nothing more American
than trying to, you know, serve your community with wireless
services.
But this is a wildly inefficient system to have a bunch of
small rural operators trying to negotiate with a small limited
coverage nationwide carrier is not an efficient way to do
things. We should have companies operating at scale, building
out coverage into rural areas as best they can. It is better to
do that at scale than to hamstring providers to have individual
small companies in each pocket of rural America.
Mr. Johnson. All right. Well, thank you.
Ms. Bennet. I am sorry. I just have to interject here if I
could have permission.
Mr. Johnson. No. I have got to move on because I am limited
on my time.
Mr. Legere indicated in his testimony, in 2012 CWA claimed
that the T-Mobile MetroPCS merger would destroy 10,000 jobs
when that merger actually generated 12,000 new jobs following
the transaction. So, Mr. Shelton, why should we believe CWA's
claims that the current merger will result in 30,000 job
losses, which incidentally exceeds Sprint's entire employee
head count?
Mr. Shelton. Well, in the first instance, we were concerned
about call centers jobs because T-Mobile had just shut down
seven U.S. call centers in the U.S. laying off 3,300 people and
sending the work to the Philippines. MetroPCS outsourced its
entire call center operation. If T-Mobile adopted MetroPCS'
outsourcing model, then 10,000 T-Mobile call center workers'
jobs were at risk at the time.
Mr. Johnson. OK, my time has expired. So let me ask Mr.
Legere real quick if the chairman will indulge, do you want to
respond to that as well?
Mr. Legere. Yes, I think what my colleague was attempting
to explain is why his estimates were wrong and it didn't take
place. I would also just like to submit that the CWA predicted
that the AT&T/T-Mobile transaction that was disapproved would
add 96,000 jobs. So I know what my business plan is and I am
very clear jobs will be created.
Mr. Doyle. The gentleman's time is expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
McEachin.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
holding this hearing to help us better understand these very
complex issues. As for me, I am particularly interested in how
the T-Mobile/Sprint merger will affect market for low-income
consumers with poor credit. The services you provide are
absolutely essential in the vulnerable communities and that
with reduced access this merger will have profoundly harmful
effects. That is why I would like to talk about what this
merger would mean for the prepaid market.
Now Mr. Berenbroick--did I say that right?
Mr. Berenbroick. Close enough, sir.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you. In your testimony you discuss the
effects of this merger on these customers, that is again the
prepaid mobile market. Can you expand on probably what this
merger means for this customer base in terms of choice and
price?
Mr. Berenbroick. Yes, sir. And that is an important
question. The prepaid market is, you know, right now it has
about 97 million subscribers. I think that was the number at
the end of 2017. And, you know, those nearly a hundred million
people are more likely to be people who are low income, people
who mobile is their only connection. They might not have a
fixed broadband connection at home because it is too expensive.
They are more likely to be young people or persons of color who
maybe have bad credit or no credit.
This market drastically consolidates that marketplace. The
HHI numbers that we talked about with the antitrust review are
even higher for the prepaid marketplace, which means that the
combined Sprint and T-Mobile in a duopoly market where only
AT&T is there, is going to have the power and the incentives to
raise prices on those consumers, consumers who, frankly, are
reliant on that mobile connection and have nowhere else to go.
Mr. McEachin. Now, Mr. Legere, you have suggested that the
prepaid market would benefit from the merger and even made
commitments to the FCC not to raise rates for these plans for 3
years. And we have already heard arguments that the spirit of
those commitments may not really bind you in practice. I assume
you are making this commitment in good faith, but business
plans change. How can we be sure prices will not increase
especially for low-income Americans? For instance, could
consumers take you to court?
Mr. Legere. Thank you very much, sir. This whole topic is
one that is extremely important. And what I have attempted to
do and what T-Mobile has been successful in doing is blurring
the lines between what is called postpaid and prepaid, such
that it is almost a payment term. You pay on the first of the
month or the last of the month, so that prepaid customers are
not getting lesser capabilities or quality or data than
previously.
We are very proud that we are a large provider second
behind billionaire-backed TracFone in serving the prepaid
market and that is very important to us. And our track record
is that our prepaid customers over the last 5 years have had a
four percent decline in price, a 12 times increase in data, and
I have implemented plans, by the way, to allow prepaid
customers to create their own credit by their payment history
with T-Mobile as opposed to their other forces and use that as
a way if they choose to move to postpaid. And I have a
migration of about 150,000 customers a quarter going from
prepaid to postpaid very proudly and that will continue.
Mr. McEachin. Mr. Berenbroick, I would like to give you the
last word with my remaining time. Can you speak to Mr. Legere's
comments that he just made?
Mr. Berenbroick. Yes. I guess I just--I didn't know if
there was a commitment there or a promise. But, you know, I
think what the committee and I think what the Department of
Justice and FCC should be looking at with this marketplace is
are prices likely to go up? Does the combined firm and the
other players left in the prepaid market have the power and
have the incentives to raise prices?
And when you constrict this marketplace down to two
facilities-based providers, New T-Mobile and AT&T, that is
clear and evident. A duopoly market will result in higher
prices for the people in the prepaid market who can least
afford to pay those higher prices.
Mr. Legere. Sir, could I just emphasize the last word. I
want to be very clear in any which way you would like to ask
the question, prices will go down. Unit cost prices will go
down. Absolute prices will go down. And the pricing commitment
that I asserted on February 4th, I believe was the date, was
not in response to a negative review process. It was an attempt
to add another layer in addition to my business plan that says
if you are concerned whether there was any trickery let me be
clear, the rate plans will stay in place and customers that pay
X today will not pay more. And that was a very clear attempt
that I made.
Mr. McEachin. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Long.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Legere, in my district T-Mobile has a call center
that employs nearly 1,000 employees. Since it opened in 2006,
it has shown continuous improvement in employee retention and
performance. And in 2006 and 2007 it was ranked number one by
417 Magazine as the best place to work in Springfield,
Missouri, my hometown.
Can you talk about the New T-Mobile commitment of at least
600 new retail stores, five new customer experience centers,
and 11,000 new employees on the ground in rural areas, small
towns, communities that need them most? What affect will this
merger have on jobs in my district?
Mr. Legere. Thank you, sir. I am very proud of the fact
that a core component of the uncarrier and T-Mobile was even
changing the definition of what is a call center, away from
IVRs and robotic responses and taking and empowering those
people like in Springfield, Missouri to own, personally,
customers, called team of experts. And what I am doing with the
merger is I am creating five new, gigantic centers to deploy
call of centers, a team of experts across what is going to
happen with Sprint.
So there will be five major centers with 5,600 new
employees. The existing centers will expand by 2,000 employees,
meaning just in that area 7,600 jobs. Of the increase in jobs
at T-Mobile, rural America will disproportionately benefit.
There will be 600 new retail stores, 5,000 jobs. About 11,800
of the people that will do the integration and network
deployment will be heavily in rural America and so there will
be 5,000 retail jobs, over 7,600 customer care jobs, and
thousands of jobs on network integration heavily all in rural
America.
Mr. Long. Thank you.
And, Mr. Claure, should we be concerned that these two
companies once merged would hold a significant share of the
prepaid market?
Mr. Claure. Even after the companies are combined, market
share will only be 38 percent and the biggest beneficiaries
will be those prepaid customers that are going to have the same
access today to the great network that we are going to go
build. So we believe we have been very clear that everybody is
going to benefit from this merger whether you are a prepaid,
whether you are a postpaid. Sprint has a long history of
serving all prepaid customers all the way down to Lifeline to
our different brands that we have, Boost and Virgin. And we
have decided that we are basically going to keep all the
brands, so therefore want to continue to up the ante in the
prepaid ecosystem.
Mr. Long. OK, thank you.
Ms. Bennet, if you came down to Branson, Missouri and you
went to the corner of Commercial Street and Main and on each
corner there were different folks with carts selling Gala
apples, apple company 1, 2, 3, and 4, selling edible apples,
and one of those companies got to talking to the other one on a
smoke break and said, hey, you know, we could combine and we
could, you know, figure out how to grow more apples at less
money, save on trucking expenses, bring them to the market at a
smaller fee, do you think combining those two companies would
affect the price of apples on that corner?
Can you turn your mike on there, please, and turn it up a
little bit?
Ms. Bennet. Since we are talking apples I don't think that
that would have an effect on the market because they are all
the same.
Mr. Long. OK. And----
Ms. Bennet. But the difference here is we are talking
wireless and we are talking about wireless in rural America
where both of these companies have had over 20 years to build
out to rural America and Sprint tries a path of working with
carriers. Mr. Brake over here just said, oh, that is a bad path
to choose. Let's just eliminate all the rural carriers. There
is your nail on the head on the antitrust concerns about here.
These two companies have worked to--if they are combined
together we are going to have the New T-Mobile with Mr. Legere
sitting at the head who has not made one iota to build out to
rural America. I don't even know if Mr. Legere has been to
rural America. But it is a very hard row to hoe as you know
with your rural constituents. It is a lot of work. It is a lot
of money. It is a lot of fiber.
Mr. Long. The four companies that are competing together
regardless of the product that they are selling, if one of
those combined with the other do you think that prices for
their product would necessarily go up?
Ms. Bennet. If we are talking apples and they are all the
same----
Mr. Long. No, I didn't say we are talking apples.
Ms. Bennet. Your example was apples. Yes, I think the
prices----
Mr. Long. I moved on. I said we are talking about selling
the same product.
Ms. Bennet [continuing]. Are going to go up because I think
they are motivated to put other companies out of business,
other small companies. And that is just what I heard Mr. Brake
said.
Mr. Long. You think prices would go up then if the two of
them combined?
Ms. Bennet. I think prices will go up, yes.
Mr. Long. OK. Now what if one of those companies just said
this deal of selling whatever that service or product is, it is
of equal value, maybe not apples but whatever that is, what if
they said this is not as much fun as it used to be, you know,
the competition has knocked us out, we are not making the
profits, you know, for a shareholder, we are going to go out of
business?
Ms. Bennet. I think there is a lot of that----
Mr. Long. If they went away do you think that--let me
finish my question, if you would. Do you think that that would
also increase prices or would that lower prices if one of those
three merchants went away? Four merchants, I am sorry.
Ms. Bennet. I think that others will step in and sell the
apples.
Mr. Long. OK, my time has expired. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Soto.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think we all understand this is a complex decision which
is why I thank all of you for being here today. We are dealing
with various interests like workers and consumers, advancing
technology like 5G and broadband, rates and competition, and I
think, overall, my broadest concern is will this merger create
a synergy? Will the ultimate proposed company be greater than
the sum of its parts or will it not?
Mr. Legere, first, you know, your company has a reputation
of being a disrupter and that is a good thing, but it also
draws concerns about whether that would continue obviously. We
applaud your promise to have no rate increases for 3 years and
have each worker have an opportunity to work somewhere else in
the company. Would you also agree to have that as a condition
of approval of the merger by the Federal Government?
Mr. Legere. Could you repeat the commitment, sir?
Mr. Soto. There were commitments that there would be no job
losses and that rates wouldn't go up for 3 years. And I was
wondering if you all would be in agreement with that being a
condition of approval of the merger.
Mr. Legere. Thank you very much, sir. All of my submissions
of 24 million pages of documentation to the DOJ as well as all
the work with the FCC makes it very clear that I am committing
to prices declining and jobs increasing and I will make those
commitments in any fashion that is necessary.
If I could real quickly point out that I spend a
significant time in my life in rural America as all of my
employees around the country would point out.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Mr. Legere. I am sorry. My time is
limited. But I appreciate that.
Mr. Claure, would you also agree to these promises as a
condition of approval of a merger by the Federal Government?
Mr. Claure. Mr. Legere is going to be the CEO running the
company, but what I can tell you is before agreeing to merger
companies we have had lengthy discussion in terms of how
important it is going to be to increase the number of jobs and
to bring prices down. If we tried to keep this extremely
factually, we are going to increase our capacity by eight
times. There is no other way to do it, bringing your customers
down to lowering prices.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Mr. Claure. So I accept those as both
yeses then. Thank you for that.
And, Mr. Shelton, can you go into what the current wages
right now are at both Sprint and at T-Mobile versus other
carriers and what your opinion is as far as how the merger
would affect those wages?
Mr. Shelton. Since we don't represent either Sprint or T-
Mobile, I don't exactly know what the wages are in either of
those companies. But I do know that when you decrease
competition for labor, wage rates are going down no matter what
you do. And the other problem that this merger would create is
that by the companies' own admission there is $43 billion in
synergies here. And to me synergies is a word that has a
synonym called job cuts. And if there is $43 billion in job
cuts, you know, you are going to decrease competition for
labor, or increase competition for labor and therefore wages
are going down. And they are not only going down in T-Mobile
and Sprint, but they are going down in every wireless carrier
in the country.
Mr. Soto. Thank you.
Mr. Legere. Sir, could I provide some facts to this
discussion?
Mr. Soto. I assume that you disagree with that. I have some
other----
Mr. Legere. That was a significant absence of facts. I can
tell you that the average wages of a retail employee at T-
Mobile are approximately $50,000 a year. A customer care person
makes about $46,000 a year. Every single employee receives
stock grants every year as well.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Mr. Legere. Thank you for that. And
that is important to get----
Mr. Legere. And synergies are not in jobs.
Mr. Soto. Thank you for getting that on the record too.
I want to end with Mr. Berenbroick. There is a public
interest analysis that is done by the FCC. Obviously we are
here in oversight of the FCC. Do you have any opinions on how
this would score and any predictions on the FCC's review of
this potential merger?
Mr. Berenbroick. Sure. And thank you for the question. So
as you know the FCC's analysis is different from the Department
of Justice's. They both look at competition harms, harms to
consumers, antitrust type issues. The FCC also looks at issues
like, you know, will Americans continue to have access to----
Mr. Soto. Just if we could get to it, how do you think it
will score? What is your prediction?
Mr. Berenbroick. I think this merger has many of the same
harmful characteristics, if not more, as the rejected AT&T/T-
Mobile merger in 2011.
Mr. Soto. OK. Well, thank you all for your opinions.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Flores.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate the
panel for joining us for today's hearing.
Mr. Legere, would you repeat the comments you made about
the use of Huawei and ZTE technology in your opening
statements, for the record?
Mr. Legere. Yes, sir. There is no Huawei or ZTE equipment
in the network of T-Mobile. There will not be any. We will not
be using any. In fact, we have had a litigious relationship
with them and we are, frankly, very supportive of the United
State Government's increased action against them.
Mr. Flores. Glad to hear that. I spent 30 years of my life
in business before I did this and 20 years of that was as a C-
level person in companies and a big part of my portfolio had to
do with M&A. And I had to look at every transaction as if there
were only two outcomes because that is really the truth, either
you are going to merge or you are not. The acquisition is going
to happen or it is not.
So we have had a lot of comments from the panel today about
what happens if we do this, both some good, some bad. What
happens if it doesn't happen? So, Mr. Legere, if you would,
spend about a minute to talk about the impact on T-Mobile's
customers and employees and stakeholders if the merger doesn't
happen.
Mr. Claure, we are going to go to you next.
And, Mr. Brake, we are going to ask you about the wireless
ecosystem at large if the merger doesn't happen.
Mr. Legere. Yes, thank you. And I will try to be brief and
pass to Mr. Claure. I will not be able to and the United States
will not be able to enable its promise on building a world-
leading 5G network. What we will create and Sprint will create
along with AT&T and Verizon will be inferior to what is being
created in China and in South Korea. That will lead to loss of
jobs and economic impact in the country. I will not have the
supply or the capacity to continue to supercharge the
uncarrier. I will be able to move forward, but not in the same
fashion creating competition. I will have limited if no ability
to expand into the in-home broadband and provide Comcast and
Charter the competition that they need.
Mr. Flores. OK.
Mr. Claure, could you talk about Sprint's, if the merger
fails, the impact on Sprint's customers, employees, and
stakeholders.
Mr. Claure. Thank you. What I think that is important to
reiterate is today we live in a duopoly. And you were a
businessman and you know that if the duopoly, AT&T and Verizon,
control over 93 percent of the cash flow that is generated it
is impossible to compete. It is impossible to invest. So Sprint
ain't going away, but what Sprint is going to be is going to be
a very different type of company. It is going to be one that we
can only invest in the traditional urban and suburban and we
will bring a limited 5G.
Unfortunately, as you know Sprint doesn't generate any cash
flow. And if we have got to build this network on our own we
need to spend between 20 to 25 billion dollars. We are going to
have to go to the banks, we are going to have to go to the bond
markets, and we are going to have to borrow that money. In
order for us to pay back the investment in 5G, unfortunately,
Sprint is no longer going to be able to be the price leader.
Prices will go up.
And I am going to reiterate one thing that we don't talk
enough, 93 percent of the cash flow in this industry is being
generated by AT&T and Verizon. That is exactly what as close to
a monopoly or duopoly is in this country.
Mr. Flores. OK, thank you, Mr. Claure.
Mr. Brake, if the merger fails what is the impact on the
wireless ecosystem writ large?
Mr. Brake. Sure. Of course there will be a number of
different impacts. But to my mind one of the most important
impacts is you will see a much slower, more gradual transition
to a 5G network. One of the main reasons for this merger is the
synergistic spectrum that both T-Mobile and Sprint would
combine. The low band spectrum and the mid band spectrum bring
together coverage as well as capacity. Sprint with the limited
cash flow is unlikely to be able to deploy, you know, a 5G
network at the scale that would be needed to get the coverage
out of the mid band spectrum. There is limited propagation.
And the FCC is trying to bring mid band spectrum available
to market that T-Mobile may have the resources to acquire, but
that would be years down the road and would take a much longer
process. I could talk for a while about the benefits of 5G and
why that is so important. It is anticipated to be a very
flexible, adaptable network, right, that isn't just about
phones. It is about integrating with business and the broader
economy writ large.
So it is, I think, a strong national interest to make an
accelerated transition to 5G. This combination is the most
obvious, fastest way to get a good combination spectrum to see
a really robust 5G network.
Mr. Flores. Thank you for your responses.
Mr. Chairman, I am going to give you back 15 seconds.
Mr. Doyle. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes my good friend from California,
Ms. Eshoo, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I apologize to all
of the witnesses for not being able to hear all of your
testimony. But I did review it. We have another very important
subcommittee that is meeting upstairs, and I chair that and
that is the reason I wasn't here. But I am now. I want to use
my time not to ask questions but to make a statement. And again
thank you for appearing, all of you, and for the testimony that
you have submitted.
I have had the opportunity to meet with various
stakeholders of speaking to them and listening to them both pro
and con about this merger. I have given a lot of thought to it.
And as I said, I want to use this time to state my position.
Since I first joined this subcommittee in 1995, only 5 minutes
ago, my work has been guided by two overarching priorities: to
create and maintain healthy competition in our country and to
protect consumers.
Capitalism doesn't work without competition, and when
markets don't work consumers are the first to lose. Competition
is the lifeblood of our economy. It stimulates innovation,
something that my district produces a great deal of, and it
benefits consumers with more choices, lower prices, and better
service.
Today, the top two wireless carriers in America control
approximately two thirds of the market. They had roughly the
same market share 5 years ago, 10 years ago, and 15 years ago.
So this is hardly a competitive, dynamic market that we have.
For all intents and purposes we have a duopoly in the country.
Americans pay some of the highest prices for mobile wireless
service in the developed world. They have fewer choices when it
comes to providers, and the quality of service particularly in
rural America leaves a great deal to be desired.
Both Sprint and T-Mobile challenged AT&T and Verizon in
recent years and they have fought tooth and nail to gain market
share while adopting proconsumer policies that have forced real
change in the industry. I heard the chairman's opening
statement, and he detailed that I think very well. I admire and
respect what they have been able to do, but both companies are
missing a crucial ingredient to become heavyweight competitors
in the market.
T-Mobile has a strong track record as an aggressive
competitor. That I think we can all stipulate to. But the
company lacks critical midband spectrum to provide the network
capacity it needs to compete more aggressively with the top
two. And that is where Sprint come in. Spectrum is gold, and
Sprint has it. But Sprint has something else. They have a $40
billion debt that they are carrying and they can't make the
kind of investments that are necessary to build out a network
and compete with the top two carriers. Sprint's debt, I think,
is unsustainable and I think it is difficult to stay afloat
while carrying it. It really holds one back to say the least.
Now imagine if they go out of business, if they go
bankrupt. This outcome would clearly, I think, be worse for the
market for employees, for consumers, and I can just picture the
Chairman of the FCC allowing the spectrum to go to the duopoly,
so that is not a pretty picture either. I think it is something
that we all need to consider.
Some have argued that consolidating the current market from
four carriers to three will increase prices and harm consumers.
I think this argument assumes that the new company will not
compete to lure new customers away from its competitors. It
just doesn't make sense. In reality, I think the merger will
increase the new company's network capacity eightfold. New T-
Mobile will have the resources and the capacity to grow its
subscriber base and to do so it will need to aggressively
compete. They are not going to sit--why would someone buy and
then sit on their oars and not try to attract new customers?
So, some have raised concerns that the merger will harm
low-income consumers. The companies have sworn under oath and
made commitments to continue participating in the Lifeline
program that I have fought so hard for and will keep prices low
in the prepaid market.
So I have more in my statement, Mr. Chairman, but I think
each call center, all call centers are going to be coming back
to the United States and new call centers are being added. That
means more jobs. I know that one of the biggest rubs for my
side of the aisle is that T-Mobile is not union. My personal
preference is I wish they were, but they are not. But I think
that competition and the protection of consumers is front and
center in this and that is why I support the merger.
I thank the chairman for his patience with my overuse of my
time. Thank you.
Mr. Doyle. As usual. I thank my friend.
Ms. Eshoo. As much in as I can.
Mr. Doyle. The Chair now yields to Mrs. Brooks.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
holding this important hearing. I along with my colleague who
could not be here today for obvious reasons, Debbie Dingell--
and I just want to extend my sorrow to her and to her State and
district and to those who served with Chairman Dingell--we
formed a 5G Caucus last Congress. And Congresswoman Dingell and
I have certainly been educated and believe that there needs to
be significant education in the country about the importance of
5G.
And continuing to build on Congresswoman Eshoo's comments
about the importance of competition, I got the sense, Mr.
Brake, and would like because you were supporting this merger,
but before I ask you about 5G, because I think you wanted to
talk more about the importance of 5G, I would like to--I ask
unanimous consent to enter into the record a letter dated
September 17 of 2018 from the Indiana Chamber of Commerce. The
vice president of environment and energy policy, Greg Ellis,
Indiana Chamber of Commerce, submitted to the FCC a letter of
support for this merger.
I will say that Indiana, specifically Indianapolis and
Central Indiana, is the first site in the country to have the
build-out by AT&T and Verizon of 5G. So we are the only
community in the country where that is happening right now, and
I find it interesting and ask unanimous consent to submit this
letter to the record that our Chamber of Commerce is asking for
more competition and they are asking that the FCC adopt the
merger and approve of the merger for the New T-Mobile.
Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Doyle. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you.
Mr. Brake, on behalf of the Information Technology and
Innovation Foundation, can you please talk with us about the
importance of 5G? We need to do a better job educating
everybody about 5G and the importance of how 5G, when we have
rural communities still at 2G, 3G, 4G, we know there is a
growing digital divide and how important it is that we catch up
with Japan, with Korea, with other parts of the globe that are
right now beating us in 5G. Can you very briefly talk about the
importance of 5G?
Mr. Brake. Right. Thank you very much, Mrs. Brooks, for the
question. And thank you so much for your leadership with the 5G
Caucus. We at ITIF are in strong agreement it is an incredibly
important issue. So a lot to unpack with 5G, I will try to be
as brief as possible. 5G in its sort of most capacious sense,
right, the broadest sense of 5G is best understood simply by
the specification, the technology defined by a standard-setting
body, international standard-setting body called 3GPP.
This new radio standard unlocks a number of different
capabilities, but its sort of defining hallmark is its
flexibility, its adaptability, right. As I mentioned in my
opening statement, this isn't just about faster downloads and
more responsive interaction with your phone, though it is that
and that is important. It brings real consumer benefit.
But there are a number of ways in which the technology can
be, can adapt itself, for example, can radically simplify
communications for IoT devices. So if something only needs to
wake up, you know, once a day to send a little, you know, a few
packets of information about the humidity on a farm or, you
know, a water main leak or something like that, it can do so
while maintaining extremely long battery life on the, you know,
measured in the terms of years rather than days.
So all this is to say that 5G poses a unique opportunity to
see a much greater innovation of wireless services with the
broader economy and has the opportunity to greatly increase
productivity overall for businesses throughout America. That is
why we want to see a quick transition to 5G in a way that is
both broad and deep, right, and that is where the specific
spectrum combination at play here comes in.
Mrs. Brooks. This is going to be revolutionary, the
possibilities of what 5G will bring.
And so, Mr. Legere, I think the concern that you have heard
about is how will this new network, how will the New T-Mobile,
you know, help these untapped markets, these underserved areas,
the rural areas? I represent both urban, suburban, and rural
areas. How can we make it ensure that you are going to get
there and that it is going to be more cost effective?
Mr. Legere. Yes, thank you for this extremely important
topic. And very importantly, one of the reasons the Nation is
lagging in 5G deployment is that Verizon and AT&T have been
stuck in providing millimeter wave in very small geographic
areas. And for the promise of 5G to be true, we need all
spectrum bands across all of the Nation. Think about something
like autonomous driving, something where a 10 millisecond delay
is attained by the 5G networks and you are actually going to
have autonomous driving cars. How would that work if it was
only in one small geographic area?
T-Mobile and Sprint together are going to be the only full
broad and deep 5G capability that is nationwide and that will
spur AT&T and Verizon to broaden their views as well.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you.
My time is up. I yield back.
Mr. Doyle. The Chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from
California, Ms. Matsui.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I also apologize
for not being here to hear your testimony because I was also on
the Health Subcommittee hearing also.
But I am curious. This is a very important topic and it is
very important for the future of our country. Now I understand
that Sprint is in the process of deploying massive MIMO radios
to utilize its 2.5 gigahertz spectrum and complete the first 5G
data transmission on a MIMO radio earlier this year. I realize
it is technical, but I am leading to something here. As you
know, band 41 was included in 3GPP's 5G new radio specification
in late 2017. Of course, the benefits of these radios are that
they enable both LTE and 5G transmission simultaneously and are
software upgraded to the full 5G. This appears to offer a
particularly promising path in the effort to deploy 5G.
Mr. Claure, with Sprint already deploying this radio
technology, is it necessary for the company to combine to
deliver its next generation offering?
Mr. Claure. Yes, thank you for your question. The important
part when you build a 5G network is you want to be able to
combine capacity, which is what Sprint has through massive MIMO
and others, with coverage, which is what Sprint lacks. It will
be no good for Sprint to offer just 5G in some specific
neighborhood or some specific cities. What this is going to
allow us to do when we merge with T-Mobile is we are going to
be able to have the ultra-capacity that you have mentioned
combined with T-Mobile's 600 megahertz spectrum that will give
us the coverage.
So it is necessary in order for the U.S. to lead in 5G
which is quite necessary for our country, the combination of
our two companies, it is the only way that we are going to be
able to build a 5G network that basically has capacity all over
the U.S.
Ms. Matsui. So what I get from that is that you are
definitely going to, Mr. Legere, adopt this deployment strategy
and the New T-Mobile will leverage these assets in a way that
Sprint has not by the combination; is that correct?
Mr. Legere. Yes. Very importantly, and thank you for
introducing 4x4 MIMO and carrier aggregation and 256-QAM which
are the main characteristics of what AT&T is now falsely
calling 5GE. We will put that in. One of the big issues with
deploying a nationwide broad and deep network is the amount of
sites and between T-Mobile and Sprint we have an inadequate set
of network macro nodes.
The biggest improvement here is together we have 110,000
macro nodes. We will be able to pick 75,000 of them, build
10,000 more, and the decommissioning of 35,000 of those sites
is actually going to provide the significant amount of this
synergy. When you take that many sites and you get that extra
spectrum per site and the spectral efficiency of 5G that is the
magic that unloads, you know, the real promise of 5G.
Ms. Matsui. Now Sprint acquired Nextel Communications in
2005, bringing with it a considerable amount of band 41
spectrum leases and significant groundwork put into IP-based
mobile broadband technologies. And with Sprint's Clearwire
acquisition, the mobile broadband technology selected by both
companies to leverage the spectrum assets for 4G was WiMax.
However, Sprint began deploying LTE technology on its network
in 2011 and the leap from third to fourth generation of mobile
internet that WiMax was supposed to offer by utilizing Sprint's
2.5 gigahertz spectrum assets was not fully realized.
Mr. Claure and Mr. Legere, what lessons do you see as being
learned from this effort and how do those lessons inform your
companies' 5G strategies?
Mr. Claure. Thank you for the question. I think Sprint
chose the wrong technology. WiMax was not the right technology.
And what makes this merger unique is we are both choosing the
exact same technology for 5G. And basically your complementary
spectrum assets is what is going to allow us to go ahead and
build the fastest--and we made both statements. I believe that
we have a chance to build the world's best 5G network, as
simple as combining the two spectrums that we have.
Mr. Legere. Congresswoman, if I could just add, with all
the great work that T-Mobile has done I think it points out
that when these generational shifts take place in wireless,
whether it was 3G to 4G, 4G to 5G, with all the great work we
have done a big enabler of our ability to deploy 5G happened to
be the spectrum and the cash that came to T-Mobile from the
failed AT&T merger as well as the acquisition of MetroPCS and
the utilization of their capabilities. So it does take the kind
of things that we are able to do in this merger to provide that
complementary spectrum as well as the financing and the assets
that we don't individually have.
Ms. Matsui. OK, thank you.
And I ran out of time, I yield back.
Mr. Doyle. I thank the gentle lady.
OK, let's see. Who is left over there? Mr. Walberg, you are
up for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. I am looking around and I don't see anybody
else, so it is a pretty good pick here. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. And thanks to the witnesses for being here.
Representing plenty of rural area in my district, this is
an important hearing for me especially as a new Member to get
up to speed, maybe at 1G or 2G, let alone 5G. But it is
incredibly important to my rural district areas that we not be
left behind as carriers move to 5G, but also probably more
importantly that we get reliable wireless service to begin
with, in the process.
So, Mr. Legere, you have talked a lot about the jobs that
might result if your transaction were to be approved both in
your announcements of the new retail stores in rural parts of
the country where you hope to expand service, but also to the
new customer experience centers. But taking a step back, as you
would build out your new network, can you talk a bit more about
the cascade of high-skilled jobs that may result, whether it is
tower crews erecting new macro cell sites or other industries
like agriculture and manufacturing that might be fueled by a
better connectivity?
Mr. Legere. Yes. Thank you very much, sir, for the
question. I would point out that the rural America has been
left behind already. It is that divide that we need to cure. I
am very proud of the fact that in the recent broadcast spectrum
auction one of the first times that low-bid spectrum was made
available T-Mobile showed up and won the majority of the
spectrum and has been deploying 600 and 700 megahertz now to
301 million people in the United States. So we are bridging
that basic divide already.
Very importantly, CTIA has shown that the advent of 5G will
mean three million jobs in the United States, $275 billion
worth of investment and half a trillion of economic benefits.
So whether they are jobs associated with the impact of
utilization of new applications in 5G or the onslaught of the
utilization, for example, in rural farming applications, et
cetera, it is three million jobs that are at stake and with the
deployment of 5G rural America will benefit the most.
Mr. Walberg. That is important to understand because it is
rural America that is catching up and too often left behind in
the thought process that we don't need it. I am looking forward
to the first time I have broadband to my house. Or cable. Or
anything to my house. My agricultural industry is way beyond
now what the capabilities they have available to them in many
places.
Mr. Claure and Mr. Legere, there has been a lot of
discussion today about the spectrum bands that would help a New
T-Mobile be competitive and able to better serve rural America.
But Sprint also has a widespread network of wireless assets
that would be just as critical for connecting the new network
to the backbone and ensuring Michiganders can get wireless
broadband access.
Can you talk about--both of you--about these wireline
components, while maybe not as exciting as the flashy 5G, how
will those position your company to expand wireless
connectivity to enterprises, customers both small and large?
Mr. Claure. So thank you for the question and many times we
don't talk enough of wireline, and wireline has been the
backbone for wireless networks. The plan would be us to
continue to invest in our wireline network and to continue to
be able to compete against Verizon and AT&T who are even more
dominant players in that wireline. And we are going to be able
to do that through a different efficiency that we are going to
have in this merger.
Mr. Legere. Sir, I would just add, the enterprise business
is controlled 90 percent by AT&T and Verizon. T-Mobile and
Sprint have 5 and 4 percent market share. We are going to add
1,100 jobs into the enterprise space and we plan to double our
market share in the enterprise business.
Second part of building out this network, it is a bit of a
build-it-and-they-will-come, and the fiber deployment
associated with the backhaul required to build our network has
been advancing greatly and about 86 percent of our build-out
has been covered by that. So those are also good opportunities
as well.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you.
Ms. Bennet, can you describe for me how you plan to compete
with the New T-Mobile if the transaction were to be approved?
What would happen to your prices and what would your
subscribers' choices look like?
Ms. Bennet. Our members are again concerned. We have been
working with T-Mobile for the--or a form of T-Mobile before Mr.
Legere joined. Back when we were trying to do 3G we tried to
work--they had a big meeting. They brought all the carriers in.
They said they were going to work with us. They were going to
get us equipment discounts, all kinds of things to be a great
rural partner. That never came to be. It was another promise
they made to us that they broke. Again that was not on Mr.
Legere's watch. It was prior to him. Since he has been on board
we haven't seen them looking to work with us.
So the concern is if T-Mobile wants to come out and build
out and overbuild any of these rural carriers then we are there
to compete. But for every cell site we have seen T-Mobile put
up in a rural market we have at least 10 times the number of
cell sites. So we live and work in those areas.
And I am sorry that you don't have service in your area. I
wish one of my rural carriers was serving out there. I am
betting they don't, but if they did you would have a gigabit of
service. You would have fiber. You would have fiber in the
backhaul. You would have wireless. You would have 4G and you
would have the promise of 5G coming. So we would do it if we
were there. Unfortunately, we are not everywhere.
And I think what T-Mobile probably fails to recognize is it
takes a lot of work to build out a rural wireless network. We
build out to where maybe only eight people will work a cell
site. I don't think they are going to do that. So.
Mr. Walberg. Thanks for the extra time.
Mr. Doyle. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Schrader.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, a good hearing. I
appreciate the hearing.
Mr. Shelton, it doesn't seem like you are a big fan of this
potential merger going forward. And I guess I have a question.
My understanding was that CWA was a big fan of the AT&T/T-
Mobile merger which would have consolidated the marketplace
much more than what we are talking about here. So why was CWA
in favor of one and not this particular merger?
Mr. Shelton. During that merger we had a written, binding
commitment for jobs and a binding promise not to interfere with
our organizing at the new company. And that is why we were----
Mr. Schrader. Oh. Well, I understand that. That was to
protect the union workers. But, you know, one can argue the
consumers might have been terribly disadvantaged with that
degree of consolidation. I just put that out there. I
appreciate the work you are doing though very, very much on
behalf of working men and women.
I guess for Mr. Legere, you know, T-Mobile has been,
especially since your tenure, been very disruptive--I mean that
in a positive way--very innovative, you know, coming up with
new ideas for the marketplace. You know, once you and Sprint,
you know, merge together, you become one of the big three, you
know, obviously there is not a lot of incentive to do that
anymore. Can consumers expect to see less innovation from the
New T-Mobile?
Mr. Legere. Yes. Thank you very much for the question.
Several pieces, in spite of how innovative we have been and the
changes that we have been able to create, we have been unable
to crack the share of the top two. They are fighting. We drag
them kicking and screaming. But the capacity and the scale and
the power of the network that this will give us will really let
me take it to them and bring competition in a way it hasn't
been seen before. And I am salivating to take it to the cable
players as well.
Suffice it to say, if in fact there was ever a fear that
there would be a cozy side discussion of the apple vendors
getting together, I am pretty sure these folks wouldn't speak
to me if I was the last person in the room. So that is what
this is about is creating scale and capacity to supercharge
this uncarrier, bring the country to the forefront of 5G, and
really drag these duopolists kicking and screaming to what they
need to do for the consumer in wireless, I mean rural, as well
as let's get into the in-home broadband market as well and make
these cable guys start playing also.
Mr. Schrader. Pretty good.
Ms. Bennet, you have talked about the concern about low-
income folks, the minorities, people that ostensibly don't have
as easy access to, you know, internet services, broadband, and
that the merger could be very detrimental to a lot of those
folks that rely on some of the largesse from both Sprint and T-
Mobile at this point in time.
The question I have is why are you so concerned about that
but the U.S. Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, the Black Chamber of
Commerce, the National Hispanic Caucus of State Legislators,
National Rural Education Association, Puerto Rico Chamber of
Commerce all think this is a good thing? Why the disparity?
Ms. Bennet. Well, first of all, I have been focusing on the
rural carriers' perspective and we do have low-income folks in
rural America that those carriers also serve. It is just a
different position. I can't speak to why they are for it. It
seems odd to me and I will just leave it at that.
Mr. Schrader. Well, that is very fair, very fair.
Mr. Legere, back to you, you know, while the market share
may be small, a lot of the population in different areas seems
to be concentrated in the Sprint/T-Mobile arena. With the
merger, isn't this going to increase consolidation in the
marketplace from a pure population standpoint and how do you
respond to that as a problem, or?
Mr. Legere. Yes. Well, first of all, the wireless business
is a national market. Our pricing is national, the programs are
national, advertising is national and the share concentration
that we have will still, you know, be small compared to AT&T
and Verizon as well as the marketplace for what we are trying
to do is broadening. And, you know, you need to look at what
the cable players are doing and the in-home broadband market,
et cetera. So I think there is plenty of room.
Mr. Schrader. All right, very good.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Doyle. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Bilirakis.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it.
And I want to thank the witnesses of course for being here
today and testifying.
Mr. Brake, toward the end of your written testimony you
mentioned costs associated with switching providers and number
portability. Over the years we have all seen the commercials in
the cell phone market comparing rates, statistics, and data
services. Can you further detail the ease, if it is easy, and
costs of switching wireless providers, and do you have any
information related to frequency a customer switches providers
whether in the prepaid or postpaid market?
Mr. Brake. Sure. Thank you for the question. Right, so
switching costs have historically played a very important role
in competition in communications networks, I mean going far
back beyond even the advent of wireless, right, for wired
telephone service. Number portability played an important role.
If you can't bring your own phone number that all of your
friends know to a new network you have little incentive to
change costs.
So there are a number of different tools that have made
those switching costs lower and lower over time that makes it
very easy for consumers to change providers. I think an
important one going forward is this advent of the so-called
eSIM, the electronic SIM card that allows for consumers to very
easily change carriers and also plays an important role in
the--or important future role in the MVNO market. When virtual
providers can change the carrier that their consumers use it
has an important role in maintaining competition in those
markets.
Mr. Bilirakis. Well, thank you very much.
Mr. Legere, based on what you have heard, in a post-merger
world if one of your competitors offers a great deal to new
subscribers will a New T-Mobile be worried that it will lose
users and feel pressured to offer a substantially similar deal
to retain consumers in the marketplace?
Mr. Legere. Yes. Thank you very much for the question. I
want to point out that T-Mobile has been one of the main reason
that customers are able to switch. Amongst the first things
that I did was separate the device in the rate plan so that
customers would know which was which, eliminate all contracts,
and then I instituted the payment called ``contract freedom,''
where I would pay any costs that would be required if you
wanted to leave your carrier. We have also been a strong
proponent of eSIM as well which allows customers to move freely
between them.
I am not afraid of any kind of a competition from a
standpoint of creating the value that customers would need to
switch. And with the capacity that this network will bring and
the scale and scope that I will be able to have and the unit
cost, it is highly likely that I will be the one creating those
offers that are going to cause people to think twice.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. It sounds like there is decent
competition within the marketplace; is that correct? I mean you
just said that so I will assume that. Is that right?
Mr. Legere. Yes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes, all right.
Let's see. In closing, like Mr. Walden, I am wondering now
is the process already in place for these types of mergers. The
agency review process has been used successfully in the past to
approve, conditionally approve and deny mergers. Like the
sought-after mergers before this, I have full faith that the
FCC and DOJ thoroughly review all the facts to determine
whether it is in the public interest of course, the merger.
Like the witnesses, I await the decision and the reasoning for
that conclusion from all the information in the record.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding this
hearing.
Mr. Doyle. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Clarke.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I thank our
ranking member, and our panelists for their testimony here
today.
Speaking on behalf of my constituents in Brooklyn, New
York, they care about creating and keeping good paying jobs
particularly in New York City. However, they have grown quite
weary and cynical of big corporations that seem to rake in
money hand over fist while their hardworking neighbors have to
pinch pennies to make ends meet or to even afford the corporate
offerings that we hear about and that sound so great for the
consumer. If T-Mobile and Sprint merge there is going to be one
less employer in this particular labor market.
So my question, first, is to Mr. Shelton. And Mr. Shelton,
I would like to know if at all how will losing one additional
employer affect the wages of communication workers, even those
that don't work for the new T-Mobile?
Mr. Shelton. As I have said before, when you decrease
competition for labor, wages go down. And that is what will
happen and it will happen throughout the whole wireless
industry if this merger takes place not only at T-Mobile and
Sprint, but also at Verizon and AT&T and any other wireless
carrier.
Ms. Clarke. Now what makes you say that? I mean currently
you have a baseline of wages and what would less competition do
in terms of particularly those in unionized shops of impacting
on their wages? I think it is important for the public to
understand that.
Mr. Shelton. Well, we believe that there will be
substantially less employees working at T-Mobile/Sprint and
therefore you will be flooding the labor market with people who
know the wireless industry and know how to do the job at any
wireless company. The only one that we really have protections
because of collective bargaining is AT&T. So at Verizon and T-
Mobile and Sprint you will have wages going down.
Ms. Clarke. OK. Mr. Legere, would you care to respond to
those concerns of----
Mr. Legere. Yes. Thank you very much. And I would say that
I have already made my commitments very clear to the State of
New York associated with what employment would be and that jobs
will be going up after this transaction. Competition is clearly
going to go up and I would actually welcome greatly that you
walk around Brooklyn to the many stores and experiences----
Ms. Clarke. They are all in my neighborhood. I don't have
to walk because they are right there.
Mr. Legere. And I would say you are going to find a very
happy, very well paid, highly compensated group of employees
that are extremely excited about this merger and the future.
Ms. Clarke. Well, let me ask another question. Given that
Lifeline provides essential service including mobile broadband
service, does the New T-Mobile intend to continue Sprint's
existing commitments to Lifeline and other contractual
agreements that they have currently engaged in?
Mr. Legere. Yes. And thank you very much for that
opportunity to discuss this because it has been a question.
Very clearly we are supporting the Lifeline agreements that
Sprint has. And, frankly, you know, New T-Mobile will have a
capability to support Lifeline that old T-Mobile didn't. So I
think not only will we support all the agreements, but we will
be a better Lifeline provider than we were before.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. And then I would like to get a sense
from you post-merger. What would be--well, what is the current
and future racial and gender composition of your board of
directors and executive management team? Can we get that
information?
Mr. Legere. I would be glad to. Our employees are 62
percent diverse, but I would be glad to provide all that
information.
Ms. Clarke. Looking at particularly the board and
management as well as currently with Sprint so we can see what
this merger does in terms of inclusion and diversity at the
leadership level.
Mr. Legere. I would be glad to include that.
Ms. Clarke. Very well.
Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Berenbroick. Congresswoman?
Ms. Clarke. Oh, sure.
Mr. Berenbroick. Can I jump in on the Lifeline question
very quickly?
Ms. Clarke. Would you, please, absolutely.
Mr. Berenbroick. So, you know, as you know, and you have
been a champion of the Lifeline program, it is the service that
serves the most low-income segment of the population that
absolutely needs that subsidy for basic connectivity.
Ms. Clarke. Yes.
Mr. Berenbroick. Sprint has been a great partner in the
Lifeline program. And you just heard Mr. Legere fail to make
any commitments that New T-Mobile will actually participate in
the Lifeline program other than keeping Sprint's current
commitments in the Lifeline program. There was no future
commitment to Lifeline. And most importantly, Sprint is a
wholesale provider to many of the wireless resellers that
participate in the Lifeline program and serve 70 percent of
that marketplace. There was no commitment to continue those
relationships going forward as well.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. My time is up. But Mr. Legere, my
eyes are on you.
Mr. Legere. Yes, my microphone might have been off when I
said we will honor all of the Lifeline commitments. We will be
a good provider going forward and we honor all of the wholesale
agreements that are in existence and look forward to extending
those.
Ms. Clarke. I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Veasey.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Legere, I wanted to ask you particularly about your
economists. They told the FCC that this merger is in the public
interest because consumers should be willing to pay more for a
better product. And I want to know, will low-income consumers
be able to participate in this better product or will they be
forced to endure second-tier service because they cannot pay
for the more expensive product?
Mr. Legere. I appreciate the question, but I don't recall
any time I have ever made a statement that customers should pay
more for a better product. My whole philosophy has been to pay
less and get more and that is the philosophy of the New T-
Mobile as well.
Mr. Veasey. If Sprint becomes your partner on this merger
and it goes through, one of the areas that I would be
interested in learning more about is if Sprint is not willing
to make the commitment right now to build out their broadband
and all the capacity that they have in that and expand upon
that, why would they be willing to do it if there was a merger?
If the investors that play a big part in T-Mobile and Sprint
right now, many of them are the same investors, they have
invested money in other adventures outside of the cell phone
product.
Mr. Legere. Yes.
Mr. Veasey. So I guess I am trying to figure out what is it
about this merger that would actually make them want to invest
money moving forward.
Mr. Legere. Yes, thank you. Thank you very much. It is a
good opportunity to clarify. And I won't speak for the pace at
which Sprint has invested, but I think Mr. Claure has been
clear about the financial limitations that were put upon them.
This transaction itself provides the financing that both of us
need to do this build-out. And pinnacle to the whole thesis of
this merger is an integrated network plan, you know, tens of
millions of pages of documents and models that I have submitted
to the DOJ as well as the FCC that show how at the time of
merger moving forward we will fully integrate and build out
these networks and how the $43 billion worth of synergies, 26
billion of which are coming from the network integration, will
provide the financing for $40 billion worth of investment in
the first 3 years in the 5G network.
So the transaction itself is not only the financing but it
is the accelerant of the investment. And it won't be Sprint
building out, the New T-Mobile will be doing the integration
and the build-out of the network.
Mr. Veasey. The investors have the money right currently
now. Why are they not building out that capacity as we speak?
Mr. Legere. Again I think we have both been very clear that
neither of us have the capital and the financing to do this 5G
build-out. We have created a business plan and we have reviewed
it with rating agents and we do have the ability to finance
this through the New T-Mobile's company as well as the
synergies that the deal will provide.
And I just want to point out that at some point synergies
were referred to as job losses and they are not. They are
coming in the form of decommissioning of sites, of things that
are part of the network integration, so that is the funding
mechanism for this transaction.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Doyle. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair recognizes the distinguished Minority Whip, Mr.
Scalise.
Mr. Scalise. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Doyle. And second baseman.
Mr. Scalise. The second baseman in baseball, right? I thank
the gentleman from Pittsburgh for yielding. The Pirates are
represented very well with you.
And I appreciate the opportunity to talk about this merger,
some of the things that could potentially be done to increase
the ability for consumers to be able to experience 5G. You
know, you look at the growth in the industry and just, you
know, what we are seeing in terms of more wireless usage,
connectivity, the devices that are able to be connected, you
know, and of course you see trillions of megabytes of data
being used by Americans and that number is increasing.
As people find out more uses it creates more jobs. It
creates more opportunity. It creates more efficiencies and
improvements in people's quality of life. And I do think that
is an important point to talk about as, you know, as Americans
use so many more devices and rely on that increased amount of
data that they are able to access it does really improve their
lives on a daily basis. There is things that I know I am able
to do. You watch how it is able to allow people to do more
things and in a much more effective way.
I know you have talked about the jobs. I think, to me, some
of the things that the Department of Justice should be looking
at is, you know, if this merger goes through would it help
consumers? Will it help lower costs? Will it create more jobs?
And I know you have talked about some of that in your
testimony, Mr. Legere. So if you could first talk about the
ability for consumers to have more competition and have access
to lower costs for the increased amount of data that they are
using.
Mr. Legere. Thank you very much for the question. There is
so much in what you said that is extremely important including
starting 5G. The promise of 5G is a hundred times the speeds, a
hundred times the number of devices that can go on networks, 10
times the improvement in the response or the delay that is
created. Our New T-Mobile will provide 15 times the speed that
we have now, up to 450 megabits average speed across the U.S.
and users will go from an average of ten gigs of data usage to
80 while the unit price will go down 87 percent. And the track
record is there, especially with low-income users who have had
a price decline and a disproportionate increase.
So that is what this transaction with the DOJ heavily is
about, showing the network modeling that will take this
industry and significantly increase capacity and provide a
pricing decline, and because of that network integration how
that will impact consumers, the offers that they have and the
utilization. And that is what their whole transactions review
has been about thus far.
Mr. Scalise. Yes. I think the idea that not only can you
see in your case 15 times the speed as well as lower costs,
both of those are, I think, something that would be very
attractive to consumers who shop around really good for all
kind of products, but clearly data plans. You know, you watch
the commercials and the reason there are so many commercials is
because there is a competition for consumers because everybody
knows how important it is to be connected. And how you have
talked about an integrated network plan, what these two
companies can do to combine the resources that you have.
I think hopefully one day not too long from now that little
circle that you see when you are waiting for something to
download will become a relic that the Smithsonian Institute
might hold because people won't have that problem anymore. You
will have to Google that--well, what are you talking about? I
don't know what that circle is you are referring to.
Mr. Legere. Sir, that will happen as soon as you switch to
T-Mobile.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Scalise. I see you are already well-branded.
Mr. Legere. Yes.
Mr. Scalise. You know, it is a nice opportunity to give a
plug for, you know, for your products. And again competition is
what made this industry great. You know, when we look at what
5G can mean for consumers, because ultimately that is what, you
know, we are trying to help make sure the consumers can have an
even better experience, all this is coming from private
investment and, you know, this isn't government that is
spending billions of dollars to build out these networks. It is
companies like yours and other companies.
And, you know, we know all the other players in this space,
but, you know, here we are talking about this, you know, this
potential merger and how, I know what you talked about is how
you can make those synergies work to provide an even faster
experience and help you invest billions more to build that 5G
network.
Let's talk now about the jobs side of it. And I have heard
numbers like 10,000 new jobs referenced. What kind of jobs are
you talking about? I don't want to get into spectrum and some
other things, but I am not going to have enough time to get
into all of that. And maybe for the record later if you can let
me know about some of the combined spectrum assets of the
companies and how that would be good for more innovation and
opportunities, but on the job side if you can touch on that is
my last question.
Mr. Legere. Yes, I would be glad to. We have talked a bit
today about customer experience centers which are one of the
core jobs in our company now. There will be 5,600 new jobs,
2,000 expanded jobs in that, so about 7,600 in the customer
experience centers. And those are good paying, 45-$50,000 wage
jobs. It would be about 11,800 people involved in network
integration and deployment.
There will be 5,000 people in new retail stores especially
in rural America. And there will be about 11,000 jobs created
over the period for the new businesses we are going in-Internet
of Things, video, broadband, et cetera, businesses that we
aren't in now. So those are the key growth areas of new jobs.
Mr. Scalise. Thanks, Mr. Legere. I appreciate your
testimony.
Thanks for your discretion, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Doyle. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now yields to Mr. Lujan.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, I appreciate the conversation today about 5G and what
it will mean for our economy and our future. However,
unfortunately, too many people where I live in a very rural
State--my district is 47,000 square miles, it takes 8\1/2\
hours to drive across it--I have better connectivity over the
State of New Mexico in many cases when I am on an airplane than
when I am on the ground. I don't understand that.
There is a promise now that 5G is going to answer this
problem for people like me that live in rural America, and that
is where my questioning concentrates. As Mr. ``Berenborick''--
did I pronounce that correct, sir?
Mr. Berenbroick. Close enough, sir.
Mr. Lujan. Pronounce it correctly for me.
Mr. Berenbroick. Berenbroick.
Mr. Lujan. Berenbroick notes in his testimony, this gap
exists because low population density and high per-consumer
costs means that rural areas have historically lacked the
economies of scale needed to attract strong investment from
major carriers.
Mr. Legere, in your testimony you insist that a merger will
allow you to, quote, close the gaps in rural broadband access
and increase outdoor wireless coverage to reach 59.4 million
rural residents or 95.8 percent of the estimated 62 million
rural residents. Mr. Legere, first, yes or no, do you agree
with Phil's diagnosis of why rural communities have been left
behind?
Mr. Legere. I apologize. I am not sure what the diagnosis
was.
Mr. Lujan. The gap exists because low population density
and high per-consumer costs means that rural areas have
historically lacked the economies of scale needed to attract
strong investment.
Mr. Legere. I would submit that that is an analysis that
had to be have done by those that had the low band spectrum to
cover those communities, which was AT&T and Verizon at the
time. Right now that we have nationwide low band spectrum we
are deploying quickly across all of rural America and it is our
hope to cover every square inch.
Mr. Lujan. So do you agree with Phil's assessment?
Mr. Legere. I guess, sorry.
Mr. Lujan. I am going to say yes, unless I was told no.
Mr. Legere. I will make that a yes, sir.
Mr. Lujan. Second, yes or no, would you agree that the
merger's stated benefits to rural Americans are an important
aspect of whether it should be approved?
Mr. Legere. Yes.
Mr. Lujan. Then help me quickly understand how this merger
specifically incentivizes this proposed New T-Mobile to better
serve rural communities and when can my constituents expect to
enjoy the wonders of 5G connectivity?
Mr. Legere. Thank you very much, sir. And yes, the rural
divide is extremely important for us. One of the things that is
very clear in the output of the models associated with the New
T-Mobile is the deployment of the 5G capability will have a
penetration across the country where 90 percent of every person
in America will have greater than a hundred megabit speed and
capacity by 2024. And I can break that down by rural community
in any different part of the country.
Mr. Lujan. So what I will do is I will submit some
questions for the record. Here is the question that I have is
that T-Mobile's chief technology officer, Neville Ray, states
in an article CNET authored February 6, Mr. Chairman, that I
would ask unanimous consent to submit to the record.
Mr. Doyle. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Lujan. What Neville says is that we wouldn't go after
5G millimeter wave deployment in rural America. So help me
understand what this comment means. Will my constituents not
enjoy the same speeds as people living in urban and suburban
communities?
Mr. Legere. That is a very good point, sir. And I would
point out that that is probably more of a condemnation on the
Verizon and AT&T deployment of 5G only in millimeter wave
spectrum. Because the analysis would show that in order to use
only millimeter wave to make a nationwide coverage it would
need a site every thousand yards which would cost $1.5
trillion.
So in order to deploy 5G nationwide you need to use
millimeter wave, mid band, and low band across all frequencies
so you have full geographic coverage. Nobody could cover the
United States with millimeter wave spectrum. What is likely to
happen is millimeter wave will be used in some densely
populated urban areas and then enhanced with mid band and low
band 5G coverage to make a broadband capability nationwide.
Mr. Lujan. So the concern that I have is we also don't have
robust fiber in many parts of rural America, and that is where
I point my question back to Phil to give you a chance to
respond. I notice your testimony, you discuss how 5G networks
will need backhaul support from fixed broadband networks. Does
anything about this merger address that need?
Mr. Berenbroick. Congress, it is a perfect question. That
is absolutely right. For 5G, especially for 5G that you know,
we are talking about to get the full benefits of 5G that Mr.
Brake has walked us through, you essentially need fiber
backhaul everywhere to connect to those cell sites and towers.
The companies don't actually bring those assets to the table.
They need to lease those assets, which that is not a merger-
specific necessity. They can lease those assets today.
And T-Mobile, you know, has gone out on the marketplace and
acquired 600 megahertz spectrum. You know, kudos to them for
winning that spectrum at auction, and they have started to
deploy it. They are making the case that their 5G deployment in
rural America is based on that 600 megahertz spectrum. Those
are assets they already have. That is not a merger-specific
benefit of this deal.
Mr. Lujan. And, Mr. Chairman, I know my time has expired,
but as a former regulator details matter. And when I am told
the rural America is going to get these assets and things don't
exactly add up, I have a lot more questions. And so I
appreciate the importance of this hearing, Mr. Chairman. There
is some important aspects that we need some answers to
associated with the commitments with mapping and looking at
rural deployment. So, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Doyle. The Chair recognizes Mr. Cardenas.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, and thank you so much for bringing this important
hearing before the public.
Mr. Legere, I understand you have made commitments to
continuing the Lifeline program. You used the word, ``I will
honor,'' just a few minutes ago. T-Mobile began withdrawing
from the program in 2014 and no longer provides Lifeline
services today. This service is extremely important where
connectivity is basically required to survive both economically
and when it comes to safety and education, et cetera.
What is your commitment to Lifeline and how long do you
intend to continue offering Lifeline services should this
merger go through? And when you say you will honor, are you
talking about the person, current CEO Legere, or are you
talking about the New T-Mobile will commit to that in writing
and make it real beyond your tenure?
Mr. Legere. That would be the person and the New T-Mobile
will put in writing and commit to honoring the Lifeline
agreements that Sprint through assurance has. And I would point
out that T-Mobile didn't withdraw from the Lifeline market, we
moved to being a wholesale provider of it. But yes, the
commitment is from the New T-Mobile and very willing to put it
into any form.
Mr. Cardenas. Well, thank you for clarifying. I wouldn't
want to mischaracterize your business practices. But when you
look at Claure, his Sprint is more robustly involved in the
Lifeline program. What I would love to see is a future if this
merger goes through, a future organization, the New T-Mobile as
some people are calling it, to actually be more like Sprint.
So, Mr. Claure, what would the New T-Mobile have to do in
order to adopt and expand on what you have been able to do with
your company?
Mr. Claure. Thank you for the question. The New T-Mobile
has made a commitment and they are doing it in writing, and we
have taken one step above what was required from us and that is
make a voluntary filing to the FCC that includes Lifeline.
Nobody asked us to do that. We thought it was the right thing
to do to take----
Mr. Cardenas. On that point, is the New T-Mobile willing to
do exactly what Mr. Claure just described should this merger go
through?
Mr. Claure. Let me have one quick thing and that is we have
always got to look at, yes, Mr. Legere is the CEO and there
will be a New T-Mobile, but what is important to know is the
new network we are going to build is going to have eight times
the capacity that we have today. So therefore we have an
economic incentive to bring as many customers as we can whether
they are Lifeline, whether they are prepaid or they are
postpaid. So yes, we made commitment. but in addition we have
an incentive to do that just to fulfill our business plan.
Mr. Cardenas. Without--now my question to you, Mr. Legere,
about following suit with what Sprint has done to actually file
a commitment in writing, is the New T-Mobile ready to do that?
Mr. Legere. Yes. Just to clarification, sir, it was me that
made the filing----
Mr. Cardenas. OK.
Mr. Legere [continuing]. On behalf of the New T-Mobile. And
again I want to reiterate we are merging with Sprint. Sprint is
not going away. So all of the good characteristics and
behaviors of Sprint we are adopting into the New T-Mobile, and
this is one of them. And I will make the commitment in Lifeline
in whatever form is needed.
Mr. Cardenas. Mr. Berenbroick, are you familiar with that
submission in writing that they are referring to?
Mr. Berenbroick. Yes, sir. I am.
Mr. Cardenas. Is it what I seem to be describing or is it a
little bit less nuance than that and is it--what is it?
Mr. Berenbroick. It is heavily caveated.
Mr. Cardenas. There you go.
Mr. Berenbroick. Sir. And, you know, like many of the
commitments that we have seen here today, you know, I think
Congresswoman Clarke asked questions about Lifeline too and the
commitments were to honor existing commitments. There were no
commitments to honor participation in the Lifeline program as
the combined company going forward.
Ms. Bennet has spoken about, you know, the high costs
likely going up for roaming partners and in the MVNO market.
That is a huge problem for Lifeline subscribers who may see
costs go up and the commitments of these companies go down.
Those issues all do need to be explored.
Mr. Cardenas. And another thing, look, Mr. Legere, I have
heard a lot of wonderful things about you and how you have
really changed in a positive way T-Mobile. I commend you for
that American business.
Also, Mr. Claure, I followed your career as well.
One of you guys wears tennis shoes. The other guys wear
hard shoes to work. Apparently the tennis shoes guy is going to
stick around as a CEO, likely, and then the hard shoes guy is
going to probably remain on the board because of the shares
that Sprint has or what have you. But what I have found when it
comes to Lifeline specifically, I like the hard shoes guy and
what he has been doing as CEO rather than the tennis shoes guy.
So what are we going to expect to see from the New T-Mobile
when it comes to really adhering to this opportunity when you
very clearly pointed out the market share opportunity for the
New T-Mobile is going to be amazing especially when it comes to
your positioning to be able to provide 5G which is the future
of any provider?
Mr. Legere. Yes, sir. I can only reiterate the New T-
Mobile's commitment to Lifeline and I will follow up in any
form necessary after this hearing to make sure that that
commitment is clear.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Doyle. Right.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Welch.
Mr. Welch. Thank you for the hearing, Mr. Chairman. I am
going to make a few comments that express what I consider to be
major concerns about rural America. We do not have good
coverage in Vermont. And the assertion that both gentlemen are
making is that this will be tremendous for rural America. I
would like to believe that is true, but I have an apprehension
that it won't necessarily occur.
You know, last February Congress passed and the President
signed some bipartisan legislation that I worked on with David
Young improving rural call quality. And it turned out that
shortly after that bill became law, T-Mobile and Sprint--the
FCC announced that T-Mobile agreed to pay $40 million in a fine
for violating FCC rules with a practice of faking ringtones. I
mean this is a big deal for us in Vermont. Dakin Farms in the
Christmas season depends on those calls. Camel's Hump School
gets the word out that it has been canceled because of weather.
And in the settlement, T-Mobile acknowledged it had
injected false ringtones in hundreds of millions of calls. I
mean, that is really upsetting to us. And I am struggling to
see how this past gives me confidence about the future. So, Mr.
Legere, can you explain how T-Mobile did fail to abide by the
basic call quality standards in not connecting hundreds of
millions of calls in rural America? But very briefly because we
don't have much time.
Mr. Legere. Yes, sorry. You know, the details associated
with the settlement associated with that action are far more
complex, and I am not sure we could go into the process here.
Mr. Welch. Well, maybe offline we could do that.
Mr. Legere. I would be glad to.
Mr. Welch. Because that is--what you are admitting to, or
T-Mobile admitted to, was that it actually had the system false
ringtones.
Mr. Legere. Yes, there was no admission to a willingness of
participation in any kind of fraud.
Mr. Welch. Well, that is--I mean you, and I both know that
is sort of the deal, but it happened. And then this brings me
to my point about wireless coverage, and I am a little
skeptical about the deployment promises in rural areas.
Mr. Chairman, we have got a map of T-Mobile coverage in
Vermont, and it looks pretty good. It is pretty much the whole
State. But the Burlington Free Press had somebody get in a car
and travel the roads, the main roads, for 6,000 miles, and take
signal coverage over 6 weeks this fall. And as I mentioned, it
was only on the main roads and it was covering about 65 percent
of the buildings in Vermont.
And its results contradict many of what the assertions that
are made by T-Mobile and Sprint. The data on T-Mobile and
Sprint, T-Mobile covers 22 percent of the area tested in the
State with 5 megabits per second or greater speed. T-Mobile has
no service or spotty service in 62 percent of the areas. Sprint
has no service or spotty service in 50 percent of the areas.
And when I sit here and hear what I believe is your sincere
goal to serve rural America and bring 5G to rural America, in a
lot of Vermont we have no G and these maps don't correspond to
what the Burlington Free Press found.
So I am a skeptic, all right. And I guess I am going to ask
both of you, Mr. Legere and Mr. Claure, when you use your maps
you are saying it is 96 percent coverage? These maps are bogus.
I mean, they just don't work. So are you going to redo your
mapping so that what we are talking about is apples and apples
and not apples and oranges, briefly?
Mr. Claure. Thank you. I will take the answer. Today,
Sprint has a very limited coverage, and we rely mainly on AT&T
and Verizon to be our roaming partners outside of core zone. So
we are basically replicating what the maps of AT&T and
Verizon----
Mr. Welch. Well, they are no good.
Mr. Claure. What is that?
Mr. Welch. These are no good. These are phony maps.
Mr. Claure. But the problem that we have today is a very
serious problem. The two spectrum holders have been AT&T and
Verizon, and they have failed to serve rural America. The
commitment that we are making is to build a nationwide
coverage----
Mr. Welch. Right.
Mr. Claure [continuing]. Because we just got 600 megahertz
just a couple of years ago, and we are going to deploy it as
fast as we can.
Mr. Welch. Well, I mean, if you were sitting where I am and
getting the calls I am getting from Vermonters who have a map
that says they have fantastic service and they can't get a dial
tone, you would share my skepticism. This is a big deal.
Mr. Legere. Sir, your concerns are very real. And the
commitments and the filings that we have made are about the
network we will create, and we have a strong commitment to
cover rural America. Thank you.
Mr. Welch. OK. Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit for the
record these documents that I referred to.
Mr. Doyle. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Welch. I yield back.
Mr. Doyle. And now we come to our final witness, Mr.
O'Halleran. You have got 5 minutes.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am sorry I
didn't make it on time today. I had a commitment at the other
side of town. But, boy, I have sat here through this hearing
and listened intently on issues about rural America and I have
heard time and time again that they will be treated differently
from now on.
That doesn't seem to be the case. They are still going to
be at the low end of the pole. They are going to be down there
with the lack of ability to compete, lack of ability to make
sure the families of rural America have the health care
necessary through telemedicine, the need for our businesses to
be able to expand and economic development to expand and all of
a sudden we are back to the same old thing. We are back to the
cities and everybody else getting the higher amount of coverage
than rural America. That is unacceptable.
I have a map just like the gentleman from Vermont had and I
travel. My district is 58,000 square miles. Half the time that
map says I should be covered. Half the time I am not, by
anybody. And so there is a lot of work to do. And what I have
also heard today are semi-commitments, you know, we are looking
into it. I mean if--and I have also heard that it is about
productivity.
Mr. Brake, I understand productivity. I also understand the
needs of the citizens of rural America and the needs of the
citizens for everywhere to be competitive with the rest of the
world. We understand that. But I really am concerned with the
type of information I heard today.
Mr. Legere, and you have indicated very much that on the
Lifeline and Tribal Lifeline program that you are--are you
committed? Are you going to ensure, are you going to guarantee
that those programs will be completed, completed and stay, and
how are you going to do that? What is the plan, the real plan
of how, and be specific as you can.
Mr. Legere. Yes. Sir, on--thank you very much and I
appreciate your patience. On Lifeline it is very clear Sprint
is a big provider of Lifeline services and we will honor their
commitments and move forward providing Lifeline in the fashion
that they do. And the 5G capabilities that we have will make us
an even better Lifeline provider.
Second, sir, I would submit to you----
Mr. O'Halleran. Just a second. I want to make sure that--
their commitment, honor what they do, for how long?
Mr. Legere. For as long as the contracts are available.
Mr. O'Halleran. So how long are those contracts available
for?
Mr. Claure. Those are contracts that self-renew. And we
have, as part of the merger we have discussed that the New T-
Mobile will basically honor all the commitments and we will
continue to be a fierce competitor in the Lifeline the same way
as Sprint has been.
Mr. O'Halleran. So as long as the contracts go. It is not
into the extended future, it is just the contract life of that
particular contract.
Mr. Legere. Sir, could we be clear? The New T-Mobile is----
Mr. O'Halleran. And just a second, I am sorry. It is my
time.
Mr. Legere. OK. Sorry, sir.
Mr. O'Halleran. I just, as somebody that represents Tribal
nations, 12 of them, as somebody that represents vast amount of
towns in rural America, I am really concerned from what I have
heard. And, Mr.--I am going to try to get your name right, but
I know I am not going to do it--Berenbroick--no, never mind.
What do you anticipate this merger's impacts could be on the
tribal Lifeline program and do you anticipate the FCC and DOJ
will meaningfully enforce any conditional commitments made as
part of an approval, and anything that we talked about here if
you have comment on that?
Mr. Berenbroick. Sure. And thank you for the question. This
is an important line of questioning and I am glad the committee
has gotten into this. So, you know, as you know tribal lands
are some of the most underserved areas of the country. You
know, facilities-based providers often provide wholesale
service to resellers that serve the tribal Lifeline
marketplace. One big concern in this merger that we have talked
about here is we are consolidating that MVNO, or sorry, that
wholesale marketplace under only three providers who have fewer
incentives to provide a low-cost wholesale access. And Carrie,
Ms. Bennet has spoken to this a little bit.
So what we think that means is the incentives in the
marketplace will be to increase the costs that those resellers
have to--that those tribal resellers have to pay for Lifeline,
those resellers that serve tribal lands pay for Lifeline
driving up the costs in the Lifeline marketplace, potentially
driving some of those resellers that serve those communities
that you care about out of the market entirely, potentially
leaving those consumers without any Lifeline provider.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Legere. Mr. Chairman, could I make a final comment,
please, shortly, which is just that with all the concerns about
rural America, this transaction is the best path forwar4d for
this country to solve the issues of rural America. So I
vehemently believe that is the best path forward.
Mr. Doyle. OK. All time is expired. I request unanimous
consent to enter the following documents into the record: A map
from CWA of Sprint and T-Mobile's retail distribution for
Newark, New Jersey; an op-ed by former Reps Waxman and Tauzin;
a statement for the record from Consumer Reports; a blog post
from INCOMPAS; a report from the Vermont Department of Public
Service; a map of T-Mobile's U.S. wireless coverage; a report
from the Democracy Reform Task Force; a report by GSA Inspector
General; a letter from Representative Cardenas, et al, to John
Legere; a letter from the National Diversity Coalition; a
letter from CASE; a letter from J. Kenneth Blackwell; a letter
from Let Freedom Ring; a letter from Consumers' Research; a
letter from Americans for Limited Government; a letter from
Americans for Tax Reform; a letter to the FCC and DOJ from
Members of Congress; and last, but not least, a letter from
coalition members. Without objection, that is so ordered.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing. The
Democracy Reform Task Force and GSA Inspector General reports have been
retained in committee files and also are available at https://
docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/ByEvent.aspx?EventID=108895.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Doyle. Well, I want to thank the witnesses for their
participation in today's hearing. And I want to remind Members
that, pursuant to committee rules, they have 10 business days
to submit additional questions for the record to be answered by
the witnesses who have appeared. I ask each witness to respond
promptly to any such questions you may receive. At this time,
the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:08 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]