- DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
[Senate Hearing 116-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
----------
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 3, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 9:36 a.m. in room SD-192, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Richard Shelby (chairman)
presiding.
Present: Senators Shelby, Moran, Boozman, Durbin, and
Tester.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
Defense Health Program
STATEMENT OF VICE ADMIRAL RAQUEL BONO, DIRECTOR OF THE
DEFENSE HEALTH AGENCY
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR RICHARD C. SHELBY
Senator Shelby. Good morning. The subcommittee will come to
order.
Today we are pleased to welcome our distinguished panel to
review the 2020 budget request for the Military Health System
and the medical readiness of our servicemembers.
Today the committee will hear from the following: Vice
Admiral Raquel Bono, Director of the Defense Health Agency;
Lieutenant General Nadja West, Surgeon General of the Army;
Vice Admiral Forrest Faison, Surgeon General of the Navy;
Lieutenant General Dorothy Hogg, Surgeon General of the Air
Force; and Ms. Stacy Cummings, Program Executive Officer of the
Defense Healthcare Management Systems.
As this committee reviews the Department's fiscal year 2020
request for funding, we acknowledge here that our Country
expects our Military Health System to competently deliver
medical care to our servicemembers while in theater and also
provide health care to active-duty and retired U.S. military
personnel and their families.
More than 125,000 medical professionals are engaged in the
work to ensure those that are in uniform are medically ready to
deploy and provide healthcare to 9.6 million beneficiaries
around the world. This is no small undertaking.
At the same time, the committee here recently learned that
the Department of Defense plans to reduce its uniformed
military health personnel over the next few years. We expect to
hear more about that today.
electronic health record
In addition, the committee understands that the goal of the
new electronic health record system is to provide a single,
integrated electronic health record for servicemembers,
veterans, and their families.
The GENESIS system has been deployed for over a year now at
four sites in the Pacific Northwest, and the Department is
preparing to introduce the system to more sites this fall.
We expect that you will keep this committee informed of the
lessons learned and improvements to the technology and training
that will be implemented in the next round to avoid some of the
issues identified in the initial implementation.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Senator Richard C. Shelby
Good morning, the Subcommittee will come to order.
I am pleased to welcome our distinguished panel to review the
fiscal year 2020 budget request for the military health system and
medical readiness of our servicemembers. Today the committee will hear
from Vice Admiral Raquel Bono, Director of the Defense Health Agency;
Lieutenant General Nadja West, Surgeon General of the Army; Vice
Admiral Forrest Faison, Surgeon General of the Navy; Lieutenant General
Dorothy Hogg, Surgeon General of the Air Force; and Ms. Stacy Cummings,
Program Executive Officer of the Defense Healthcare Management Systems.
As this Committee reviews the Department's fiscal year 2020 request
for funding, we acknowledge that our country expects our Military
Health System to competently deliver medical care to service members
while in theater and also provide healthcare to active duty and retired
U.S. military personnel and their families.
More than 125,000 medical professionals are engaged in the work to
ensure those in uniform are medically ready to deploy and provide
healthcare to 9.6 million beneficiaries around the world. This is no
small undertaking.
At the same time, the Committee recently learned that the
Department of Defense plans to reduce its uniformed military health
personnel over the next few years. We expect to hear more about your
analysis behind these cuts in your testimony today.
In addition, the Committee understands that the goal of the new
electronic health record system (MHS Genesis) is to provide a single,
integrated electronic health record for service members, veterans, and
their families.
The Genesis system has been deployed for over a year now at four
sites in the Pacific Northwest and the Department is preparing to
introduce the system to more sites this fall.
We expect that you will keep this committee informed of the lessons
learned and improvements to the technology and training that will be
implemented in this next round to avoid some of the issues identified
in the initial implementation.
Now I turn to the Vice Chairman, Senator Durbin, for his opening
remarks. Thank you.
Senator Shelby. Senator Durbin, I will turn to you now.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR RICHARD J. DURBIN
Senator Durbin. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Let me apologize. I thought it was a ten o'clock start, as
usual.
Senator Shelby. It is.
Senator Durbin. But the Chairman understood we have a joint
session with the NATO leaders, and so I apologize for coming in
late.
DEFENSE HEALTH PROGRAM BUDGET INCREASE
I am going to ask that my opening statement be placed in
the record in its entirety and just say that we have made a
pretty significant commitment from this subcommittee, a 46
percent increase in this Defense Health Program over the last 5
years.
There have been critics who have said we should not have
done that much or perhaps not at all, and we are counting on
you to give us testimony that justifies our belief in what you
are doing.
I start with that premise, and I want to continue with this
hearing to fortify it. So thank you for being here.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Senator Richard J. Durbin
Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to join you in welcoming today's
witnesses, here to discuss the fiscal year 2020 Defense Health
Program's budget request.
Over the last few years, this Subcommittee has made significant
investments in our military's readiness. But there is no readiness
issue more important than continuing to ensure the physical and mental
health of the force.
Today, 71 percent of our Nation's young adults are not be eligible
to enlist in the Armed Forces for reasons that include overall health
and fitness.
We need to improve that number. One way is through proper Federal
investment in education and healthcare--which I'm sure the other
Appropriations Subcommittees are working hard to do.
In the meantime, this Subcommittee can do its part to ensure that
the force we have is as healthy as possible. This means meeting the
medical needs of service members and their families at home and abroad.
medical research
While we often hear about challenges in the Military Health System,
I believe we also need to celebrate its successes. Chief among these is
the fact that our combat survival rate has never been higher.
Breakthroughs in combat casualty care speak to the innovation are a
large part of that success. We must build on that by tackling other
challenges like infectious diseases, pain control, and prosthetic
devices.
In fact, work funded by Congressionally Directed Medical Research
Program (CDMRP) managed grants led to development and application of at
least 100 distinct medical devices, pharmaceuticals and clinical
practice products that are now incorporated into standard clinical care
in the DoD and civilian healthcare systems.
Breakthroughs in these fields are improving the quality of life of
our service members after the fight, and for the families of our
troops. The spouses and children of our troops face their own
healthcare issues, and taking care of them is every bit as important as
taking care of our troops.
With the support of as many of our Senate colleagues, we have
increased research funding over 46 percent over the last 5 years--a
trend that I continue to support.
tobacco, e-cigarettes and vaping
Even though the defense budget is on the rise, we know there is a
push to contain the rising costs of military healthcare. I know our
panel will field questions on policy changes and bureaucratic
reorganization, but let us also remember that overall individual health
is a key component of the rising cost of healthcare, inside and outside
the military.
Further curbing the use of tobacco is a common-sense way to
accomplish these goals.
This includes the risks of new tobacco alternatives such as e-
Cigarettes and Vaporizers--we need to get ahead of understanding the
health hazards that these products pose.
I would like to hear from the Surgeons General about ongoing
efforts to reduce tobacco use, and what you are doing to impede new
tobacco alternatives before they become an enduring health threat to
our servicemen and servicewoman.
restructuring the military health system
We are on the path to align the military treatment facilities under
the Defense Health Agency.
It makes sense that streamlining healthcare among the Army, Navy,
and Air Force medical department can create efficiency and improve
innovation--but we must do this smartly to ensure the individual
services maintain their necessary level of operational readiness.
I would like to hear from the Director of the Defense Health Agency
and the Surgeons General about your perspectives on how this
restructure is progressing, and what efforts are being made to ensure
that our medical professionals continue to receive the training they
need in order to deliver high-quality healthcare on the front lines as
well as here at home.
conclusion
Thank you for your service and for your work to better the lives of
the personnel entrusted to your care. It is an essential part of
maintaining a ready force.
Senator Shelby. We will start with you, Admiral Bono.
SUMMARY STATEMENT OF VICE ADMIRAL RAQUEL BONO
Admiral Bono. Good morning. Chairman Shelby, Ranking Member
Durbin, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for this
opportunity to share the work of the Defense Health Agency in
support of the combatant commands and the military departments.
MILITARY TREATMENT FACILITY RE-ALIGNMENT
I will briefly provide insight into the work of the DHA
(Defense Health Agency) to execute our responsibilities under
this proposed budget.
Both Congress and the Secretary of Defense's guidance was
clear: pursue efficiencies and create value for the Department
by consolidating and standardizing military health care
functions to support an integrated system of readiness and
health. DHA is honored and privileged to facilitate that
integration. We are a strategic enabler to the Department in
supporting the readiness needs of our combatant commands and
the military departments.
Through our management of enterprise activities, the DHA is
positioned to reduce unwarranted variation in costs in both
clinical and administrative functions.
On October 1st, 2019, all military treatment facilities in
the eastern region of the United States will transition to the
Defense Health Agency for administration and management,
placing over 50 percent of the facilities, admissions, and
enrollees under the Defense Health Agency.
Support for medical logistics, health facilities, and
acquisition will be fully managed for MTFs (Military Treatment
Facilities) in the Military Health System by the DHA. We will
also be preparing for the transition of the remaining
facilities in the continental United States and Alaska on
October 1st, 2020.
MILITARY MANPOWER REDUCTIONS
With regards to the proposed military medical manpower
reductions, the military departments and DHA are working
closely together to ensure that access to care and availability
of health services will be consistently maintained for all of
our beneficiaries. As needed, alternative staffing models,
contracts, military-civilian partnerships, and existing TRICARE
networks will be utilized to best meet the needs of our
patients.
We will continue to meet all standards for timely access
for beneficiaries, and while care delivery locations may
change, our commitment to provide our patients with the high-
quality healthcare that they deserve will remain steadfast.
I am particularly proud of how we have standardized our
performance management systems providing all levels of the
military with our performance measures in readiness, health,
access, quality, safety, and cost.
Our dashboards can be viewed at an enterprise level by
service, by market, and by individual hospital or clinic. These
dashboards help us assess performance and identify where we
need to invest resources, training, and management in order to
achieve further improvement.
I look forward to working with you over the coming months,
and I welcome any questions you may have about our plans,
performance, and vision for the future.
Thank you for inviting me to be here today.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Vice Admiral Raquel Bono
Chairman Shelby, Ranking Member Durbin and members of the
Subcommittee, we are pleased to represent the Office of the Secretary
of Defense and the Defense Health Agency (DHA) to present our medical
program funding request for fiscal year 2020. We are honored to
represent the dedicated military and civilian medical professionals in
the Military Health System (MHS) providing direct support to our
combatant commanders and delivering or arranging healthcare for our 9.6
million beneficiaries.
The Defense Health Program (DHP) request in the fiscal year 20
President's Budget is fully aligned with our enduring commitments
around the globe and with National Security and National Defense
Strategies--along with the Department's 3 lines of effort: to increase
the lethality of our fighting force; expand strategic partnerships; and
bring business reforms to DoD.
Consistent with the National Defense Authorization Acts (NDAA) for
fiscal year 2017 and 2019, this budget reflects and supports a number
of reforms to the Military Health System (MHS), including the multi-
year transition of the management of military medical treatment
facilities to the DHA to better integrate our system of readiness and
health.
For fiscal year 2020, DoD is requesting approximately $33 billion
for the DHP representing a 4 percent decrease from last year's enacted
base budget. Almost $25 billion, or 77 percent, of our request directly
supports patient care--delivered either in our military hospitals and
clinics ($9.6 billion) or in the private sector ($15 billion).
Over the last 8 years, the total Unified Medical Budget (UMB) has
grown at a slower rate than overall medical inflation in the country.
This successful management of cost growth can be attributed to a number
of factors to include reforms to TRICARE reimbursement, the management
of TRICARE contracts, healthcare delivery operations, pharmaceutical
pricing, the migration to mandatory home delivery for many prescription
drug refills, and the implementation of standardized business processes
across the enterprise.
Even with these successes, the Department remains vigilant about
variation in year-to- year expenditures, and we are appreciative that
Congress continues to grant the Department carryover authority each
year. Carryover authority allows DoD to maintain better funding flows
to minimize disruption of healthcare services to our beneficiaries. We
are committed to making our healthcare cost projections even more
transparent in the year of execution, providing regular updates to the
committee, and providing full visibility to Congress on potential plans
for reprogramming funds within the fiscal year should that possibility
unfold. Furthermore, we will ensure that available funding is directed
toward unfunded medical readiness and healthcare delivery requirements.
Carryover authority is an invaluable tool that provides the Department
with needed flexibility to manage issues that emerge during the year of
budget execution. We request that it be continued in fiscal year 2020.
There are several significant programmatic issues detailed in the
proposed fiscal year 2020 budget that we wish to highlight today,
following analyses and reforms, that Congress directed the Department
to undertake. Taken together, these reforms represent the most
significant change to the MHS in decades. They include: the realignment
of our management structure for overseeing military medical treatment
facilities (MTFs); the continued implementation and standardization of
enterprise-wide activities in support of global medical support
activities; and the restructuring of the Department's medical personnel
end strength.
The fiscal year 2017 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA)
enacted sweeping reforms to the organization and management of military
medicine. The over-arching direction from Congress was to consolidate
and standardize many military healthcare functions in a way that better
integrates readiness and health delivery throughout the Department.
Included among these reforms: the expanded authority and responsibility
of the DHA to manage MTFs worldwide; the authority to convert military
medical positions to civilian; and the authority to adjust medical end-
strengths and infrastructure in the MHS to maintain core competencies
of healthcare providers.
The DHA is a strategic enabler to the Department in supporting the
readiness needs of our Combatant Commands and the Military Departments.
By building a management structure with an enterprise focus, we are
ensuring a medically ready force and ready medical force for any
contingency for which our forces are called to serve.
The DHA will enter fiscal year 2020 prepared to manage these
expanded responsibilities for the delivery of care across the MHS. On
October 1, 2019, our current plan is to have all MTFs in the eastern
region of the United States transition to DHA administration and
management--placing over 50 percent of facilities, admissions, and
enrollees under the DHA. Enterprise activities for medical logistics,
health facilities, and acquisition will be fully managed by the DHA. We
will also be preparing for the transition of the remaining facilities
in the continental United States and Alaska, targeting an effective
date of October 1, 2020. The transition of overseas MTFs is planned for
October 1, 2021.
By consolidating management of MTFs under the DHA, the MHS is
positioned to reduce unwarranted variation in both clinical and
administrative functions. By standardizing approaches to quality
management, the MHS seeks to improve health outcomes, reduce errors and
allow service members and other patients to recover more quickly by
reducing the incidence of hospital-based infections and other patient
safety priorities. DHA's pharmacy operations established a standardized
formulary, an enterprise-approach to managing the transition to
mandatory refills of prescription drugs through its home delivery
program, and movement to standardized pharmacy automation support in
MTFs. Standardization in areas such as medical logistics and
contracting help ensure the military medical work force functions with
common equipment and supplies both in garrison and in the deployed
environment.
With the expansion of DHA responsibilities directed both by the
Secretary and by Congress, the Department is also streamlining military
medical headquarters and reducing personnel overhead across the
Military Departments. A 10 percent (10 percent) reduction in
headquarters medical personnel was applied across the Department in
conjunction with the implementation of Section 702 of the NDAA for
fiscal year 2017, which consolidated responsibilities for management of
military hospitals and clinics under the DHA.
The Department continues to manage other initiatives that reduce
the growth in healthcare costs while ensuring our health benefit
remains an exceptional tool for recruitment and retention of military
personnel and their families. These DHA cost-saving initiatives
strengthen the Department's financial posture without affecting access
to care. We will continue to produce significant savings from the
TRICARE contracts by restructuring terms and cost control initiatives
for TRICARE contractors, and will continue to restructure contracts
that incentivize greater risk-sharing. Payments to long-term care
hospitals and inpatient rehabilitation facilities are being adjusted in
a phased process to align with Medicare rates. We have increased IT
savings through consolidation and rationalization of IT services and
products. And, we have consolidated acquisition for education and
training technologies and developed a DoD-wide common course catalog in
our education and training programs.
The modest increase in retiree copayments beginning in 2018 also
continues to produce cost savings to the Department. The Department is
not proposing any further changes to patient cost-sharing in fiscal
year 2020.
The Department's budget proposes to increase investments in medical
programs and services that directly support our medical readiness
obligations. Notable areas include: increases for Air Force patient
movement equipment, combat casualty care training, medical material and
increased support for operations in the European Command, Central
Command, and Africa Command areas of operations; and expansion of
physical therapists in Marine Center Medical homes.
Another critical support component of our readiness mission is the
fielding of a modernized Electronic Health Record (EHR)--MHS GENESIS.
In August 2015, the Department awarded a multi-billion dollar contract
for its new EHR system. In 2017, we began the initial deployment of MHS
GENESIS in the Pacific Northwest. The purpose of the initial
operational capability (IOC) deployment to four medical facilities in
Washington State was to evaluate the system for full-scale deployment,
identify additional change management issues, and resolve
infrastructure and security concerns.
We are encouraged with the initial success of this deployment. Ms.
Cummings' testimony provides specific examples of how MHS GENESIS has
improved patient care and patient safety--to include the reduction of
thousands of duplicative lab tests, and improvements in medication
reconciliation at the time of patient discharge. We are proceeding with
full deployment of MHS GENESIS world-wide over the coming 5 years.
Later in fiscal year 2019 we will begin deployment to additional sites
in Northern California and Idaho. Together with the Department of
Veterans Affairs' decision to deploy the same commercial product in
their system.
The DHA has also established an MHS Prescription Drug Monitoring
Program (PDMP), similar to programs established by individual States
and territories to help combat the national opioid crisis. Through this
initiative, DHA will share prescription information with other State
entities to ensure patients do not receive overlapping opioid
prescriptions that can worsen an opioid use disorder or cause an
overdose.
We remain committed to sustaining the superb battlefield medical
care we have provided to our Warfighters and the world-class treatment
and rehabilitation for those who bear the wounds of past military
conflicts. Our proposed fiscal year 2020 budget sustains the medical
research and development portfolio, allowing us to continually improve
our capability to reduce mortality from wounds, injuries, and illness
sustained on the battlefield, and in the execution of our readiness
responsibilities.
Specific research programs support efforts in combat casualty care,
traumatic brain injury, psychological health, extremity injuries,
burns, vision, hearing and other medical challenges that are militarily
relevant and support the warfighter. This budget proposes increased
funding for battlefield injury research and establishes a permanent
baseline for mission-essential research. Additionally, we have
sustained funding for technology and advanced concept development. The
successful investment of research dollars has also allowed us to move
proven advances in areas such as clinical enterprise intelligence and
the Defense Occupational and Environmental Health Readiness System into
Operations and Maintenance funding lines, and out of medical research.
The process established, through the Congressionally-Directed
Medical Research Program (CDMRP), allows the Department to also ensure
innovative, external research opportunities identified by Congress are
well-managed. We intend to sustain our CDMRP management infrastructure
into the future.
As part of the reforms directed by the fiscal year 2017 and 2019
NDAAs, the Department has undertaken several initiatives regarding our
military medical personnel. First, the Military Departments, the Joint
Staff, and organizations within the Office of the Secretary of Defense
conducted the required assessment of the operational medical
requirements needed to support the National Defense Strategy. As a
result of this assessment, the Military Departments plan to reduce
overall uniformed medical positions. This proposed restructuring will
permit the Military Departments to repurpose active duty medical end
strength for other operational/modernization efforts needed to support
the National Defense Strategy.
The Military Departments and DHA are working closely together on
the process for implementing these reductions responsibly and
carefully. We are now identifying the alternative models--civilian
hires, contract staff, military-civilian partnerships, or use of
existing TRICARE networks--that will best meet the needs of
beneficiaries. We will continue to meet all standards for timely access
for our beneficiaries, and while care delivery locations may change,
our commitment to provide high quality healthcare will remain
steadfast.
As part of the MHS's effort to optimize our operations, we continue
to standardize and strengthen our financial management tools. We are
proud that the DHA was certified as audit compliant, as part of the
broader Federal government and DoD goals to achieve full audit
compliance. We are continuing our implementation of a common cost
accounting methodology within the MHS that will improve accountability
and transparency to the Department, the Services, Congress, and the
public with improved insight into how resources are allocated in
support of our mission. The DHA has adopted the Army's General Fund
Enterprise Business System (GFEBS) as its cost accounting system, and
the Uniformed Services University of Health Sciences has also migrated
to this system. Navy Medicine is in the process of migrating from the
Standard Accounting and Reporting System--Field Level in the coming
years and we intend to begin transitioning the Air Force shortly after
the Navy is complete.
Similar to our cost accounting standardization, we are proud of our
efforts to standardize and centralize our performance management
systems. We have created standard MHS-wide performance dashboards that
provide stakeholders--both medical and line leadership--at all levels
of the military with visibility into how we are preforming on key
metrics. These dashboards show longitudinal performance in measures of
readiness, health, access, quality, safety and cost. For readiness, we
monitor both the medical readiness of the force--particularly the
number of individuals with deployment-limiting conditions, as well as
the readiness of the medical forces. We are expanding our ability to
assess the number of military providers who are meeting our established
``Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities (KSAs)'' clinical competency and
proficiency levels. We monitor critical indicators of quality and
safety----that point us toward high reliability as a system of care.
Access to primary care and specialty care are measured along with
patient satisfaction to ensure we are meeting patient expectations. And
``costs per member per month'' provide us with a metric used throughout
the health industry to measure the efficiency with which we deliver
needed medical services.
Our dashboards can be viewed at an enterprise level, by Service, by
market, and by individual hospital or clinic. We have adapted the
dashboard to provide us with metrics on the 8 MTFs that now report
directly to the DHA, and will continue to adapt this management system
as the MTF transition progresses. Commanders can assess their
performance against expected benchmarks, against peer institutions,
and--where possible--against civilian sector performance as well. These
dashboards help us to both assess how we are doing in these areas, and
where we need to invest resources, training, or management attention in
order to achieve further improvement.
The fiscal year 2020 budget represents a balanced, comprehensive
strategy that aligns with the Secretary's priorities and begins to
fulfill our requirements associated with congressionally directed
system reforms. We look forward to working with you over the coming
months to further refine and articulate our objectives in a manner that
improves value for everyone--our warfighters, our combatant commanders,
our patients, our medical force, and the American taxpayer.
Thank you for inviting us here today to speak with you about the
essential integration between readiness and health, and about our plans
to further improve our health system in support of the National Defense
Strategy and for our beneficiary population.
Senator Shelby. Lieutenant General West.
I forgot to say, but I think it was implied, all of your
written testimony will be made part of the record in its
entirety.
You may proceed.
STATEMENT OF LIEUTENANT GENERAL NADJA Y. WEST, SURGEON
GENERAL OF THE ARMY
General West. Thank you.
Good morning, Chairman Shelby, Vice Chairman Durbin,
distinguished members of the subcommittee. It is my pleasure to
address this committee a final time as the 44th Army Surgeon
General and Commanding General of U.S. Army Medical Command. It
has been my honor to serve with and lead our talented and
dedicated soldiers, Army civilians, and all of our team members
for more than 30 years.
On behalf of my soldiers, their families, and Army
civilians, I would like to sincerely thank you for your
unwavering support.
I would also like to thank my colleagues here, my sister
services, my fellow Surgeons General here; Rocky, the Defense
Health Agency. It has really been my honor to serve with you as
part of the military health team.
ARMY MEDICAL MISSION
Today I am proud to tell you with the utmost confidence
that the Army's commitment to its medical mission and to our
people remains steadfast. We are poised to delivery timely
health services in the operational environment, comprehensive
care at home station, and to remain on the cutting edge of
medical research, development, and fielding, the components of
a continuum of care that provides forces that are medically
ready and enhances the readiness of our medical forces.
America's Army stands ready today to deploy, fight, and win
our Nation's wars, and as our Chief continually emphasizes,
readiness is number one and there is no other number one.
ARMY MEDICAL DEPLOYABILITY
A key component of the Joint Health Services Enterprise in
a deployable Army, Army Medicine is ready to provide capability
across unified land operations.
We in Army Medicine, along with our colleagues, support
combatant commanders across the globe in 10 named contingency
operations, various exercises, and security cooperation
activities.
And we understand that Army readiness begins with a fit and
healthy fighting force. Currently, medical issues account for
about 3.7 percent of soldier non-deployability, which is a
market improvement over the last 24 months. I am confident that
we will continue to trend in the right direction as our Brigade
Combat Teams have increased readiness over the last many
months.
The Army has made strides in improving mental resilience.
Sixty-one embedded behavioral health teams support our
operational units throughout the Army. In fiscal year 2019, we
dedicated approximately $455 million to support behavioral
health initiatives.
ARMY MEDICAL EVOLUTION
Army's implementation of the Holistic Health and Fitness
Program and our combat formations has increased readiness. The
addition of physical therapists, strength trainers, and a
dietitian to units is improving the Army's culture of fitness.
Army Medicine is extremely proud also of our high-quality
medical education and training. Annually, we train over 1,500
physicians in our facilities. Our first-time medical board
certification pass rate is approximately 92 percent, well
exceeding the national average of 86 percent.
The Army Medical Department Center and School in San
Antonio, Texas, trains more than 31,000 U.S. students and 330
international students annually in diverse programs to ensure
that we have ready medical professionals to support whatever
our Nation asks of us.
Army Medicine has continually evolved to meet the global
threats and to improve the battlefield survivability rates. Our
researchers have focused on traumatic brain injury, behavioral
health, combat casualty care, military operational medicine,
military infectious diseases, radiation health effects,
clinical and rehabilitative medicine, health services, global
health engagements, medical training systems, and health
informatics. It is a mouthful there.
We have made great advances in such activities as
peripheral nerve growth following amputation and a living anti-
infective human skin substitute, which is extremely important
given the injuries that some of our servicemembers may be
sustaining in the near-term environment if asked to serve in
those areas.
Most notably, in 2018, the Food and Drug Administration
approved the first-ever blood test for traumatic brain injury.
Continuous generous funding from Congress has made the steady
advancement of military medicine possible.
Finally, in keeping with congressional intent, Army
Medicine supports and has committed resources towards reforming
the Military Health System. We will divest responsibilities for
the administration and management of all military treatment
facilities to the DHA, as Admiral Bono just mentioned, in a
phased approach which began 1 October of 2018 with the transfer
of Womack Army Medical Center at Fort Bragg to the DHA, and we
are committed to ensuring the transition is transparent to our
soldiers, families, and retirees, and that we will contribute
to the resources to ensure that that mission continues on as we
look at our end-strength numbers.
In closing, our Army and our Nation has relied on Army
Medicine to conserve the fighting strengths since 1775. The
lethality of our Army is derived from our soldiers who are
strengthened by their families. That is why it is so important
that we take care of them.
We will continue to respond to our Nation's call with
premier medical professionals high-quality care, and I
appreciate the subcommittee's work and your continued support
to our soldiers, Army Medicine, and to our Army. It has been my
honor to serve with you.
Again, thank you, and I really look forward to answering
your questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lieutenant General Nadja Y. West
Chairman Shelby, Ranking Member Durbin, distinguished members of
the subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to speak on behalf of
United States Army Medical Department (AMEDD). It is my pleasure to
come before this committee to address you as The 44th Army Surgeon
General and Commanding General of U.S. Army Medical Command. I have
been honored to serve with and lead our talented and dedicated Soldiers
and Army Civilians for more than 30 years. They are our most valuable
asset. It has also been my honor to work with the distinguished members
of this committee and your staff. Your enduring support of Army
Medicine has enabled the readiness of our Army and Soldiers to respond
to the demands of the global security environment. On behalf of my
Soldiers, their Families, and Army Civilians I would like to sincerely
thank you for your steadfast support.
I would also like to thank my colleagues serving on the panel
today. Together with the Defense Health Agency and our sister services,
the Army has provided medical support to globally dispersed forces
while concurrently responding to natural disasters and other complex
contingency operations. It has been an honor to serve with each of you
and with the military medicine team.
America's Army stands ready today to deploy, fight, and win our
Nation's wars. As our Army Chief of Staff continually emphasizes,
readiness is number one and there is no other number one. In order to
sustain readiness, we must ensure our people are ready. We must provide
Soldiers who are medically ready to deploy, and we must generate and
maintain a rapidly responsive and broad spectrum of medical
capabilities that include properly trained and equipped individuals and
units. Army Medicine, as an integrated part of the Joint Health
Services Enterprise (JHSE) and an essential part of a lethal and
rapidly deployable Army, is ready for all operations. We support
Combatant Commanders in 140 locations across five continents. As of
February 2019, the Army has more than 180,000 Soldiers assigned or
allocated to our Combatant Commanders in support of ten named
contingency operations, various exercises, and theater security
cooperation activities.
We continue to focus efforts on the Army's priorities of readiness,
modernization, and people, in concert with reform, to ensure that
America's Army is always ready--today and into the future. This
requires our Soldiers to be manned, trained, and equipped through
timely, predictable, and sustained funding. At the same time, as part
of the Joint Health Services Enterprise, Army Medicine continues to
drive efforts to make significant improvements in healthcare as we
implement the National Defense Authorization Acts (NDAA) for fiscal
year 2017 and fiscal year 2019, which will influence how we sustain
readiness. We are working closely with the Defense Health Agency (DHA)
and the rest of the JHSE to implement these legislative changes, with
thorough analysis, deliberate planning, and ongoing coordination. I
want to thank this committee and Congress for its steadfast support,
which has improved our Army's warfighting and lifesaving capability.
Our enduring priorities, people and values, remind us that as we build
the requisite readiness to succeed in combat we must take care of our
Soldiers and their Families, and remain true to the principles of our
Army values and warrior ethos.
Soldier Readiness
Readiness begins with a fit and healthy fighting force and is the
foundation of a strong national defense. With that foremost in our
minds, the Army is improving personnel readiness and deployability by
strengthening Soldiers, improving resilience, implementing the new Army
Combat Fitness Test (ACFT), new deployability and fitness standards,
and providing tools to fully inform command decisions.
To further increase the quality of the Army force, the Secretary of
the Army set a non-deployable goal in September 2018 of under 5 percent
by the end of fiscal year 2019. The Army has reduced the number of non-
deployable Soldiers making thousands of additional Soldiers ready to
deploy in support of contingency operations around the world. Medical
issues account for 3.7 percent of Soldier non-deployability with
temporary profiles over 30 days (1.5 percent), pregnancies (0.6
percent) permanent profiles facing medical board processing (1.0
percent), and other permanent profiles (0.6 percent). Army Medicine has
begun a full revision of the standards of medical fitness and medical
readiness regulations and guidance to inform future policy direction.
Beyond reducing the number of non-deployable personnel, the published
policies are establishing a culture of readiness. While the Army
continues to monitor the impact of recent policy revisions and
established initiatives, we are confident we are trending in the right
direction, as evidenced by the increased readiness in our Brigade
Combat Teams.
Medical readiness is a shared Soldier and command team
responsibility. Army Medicine plays a decisive role; however, in
monitoring, assessing, and identifying key health-related indicators
and outcomes; enabling command teams to understand the health of their
formations; and providing recommendations to mitigate risks. While
policy revisions have aided in increasing deployability and lethality,
Army Medicine's support of additional Army initiatives continues to
provide positive results. The establishment of the Commander's Portal
for Medical Protection System integrated crucial medical readiness
information into one easy-to-use application, giving Commanders (or a
designee) the ability to review Soldiers' deployability status quickly.
In short, the Commander's Portal significantly increased visibility of
factors influencing Soldier medical readiness.
Army readiness is strengthened across the force through the Warrior
Care and Transition Program (WCTP). Army Warrior Care and Transition
embodies the Army's enduring commitment to care for our wounded, ill
and injured. Warrior Transition Units (WTU) provide an environment in
which our Soldiers recover from wounds, injuries and illnesses, with
the confidence that they, their families and caregivers will receive
support. The program greatly benefits Army readiness through its high
success rate in returning Soldiers to the force. Since the inception of
the WCTP, over 82,000 Soldiers have entered the program with 42 percent
returning to the force. As a result, nearly 33,000 Soldiers were able
to return to their units, including senior noncommissioned officers
(NCOs) and officers whose experience and knowledge would have taken
years to replace. This is roughly equivalent to six Brigade Combat
Teams. Our WTUs have assisted in increasing readiness and provided
retention cost savings for the Army. The Army will continue to maintain
a level of scalability and flexibility within the WCTP to meet the
future needs for our Soldiers.
Behavioral Health (BH)
Mental resilience is essential to Soldier health and readiness.
Suicide continues to be an issue for our Nation and Army. We will
continue to use all available assets to address the problem. The Army
anticipates continued growth in the demand for BH care, even as
overseas contingency operations decrease, due to the cumulative strain
of over 17 years of sustained combat operations on Soldiers and
Families, the unique stressors of military service, and the Army's
continued emphasis on seeking help.
An October 2017 Harvard Business Review article highlighted the
best practices captured in the transformation of the BH System of Care.
As of November 2018, sixty- one Embedded Behavioral Health (EBH) Teams
support all operational units, including thirty-one Brigade Combat
Teams (BCT) and an additional 156 battalion and brigade- sized units.
Today, embedded behavioral health consists of 691 Medical Command
(MEDCOM) dedicated staff members including Active Duty, Civilian, and
contract providers--psychiatrists, psychiatric nurse practitioners,
licensed clinical social workers, clinical psychologists, and other
fields.
The Army is continuing to work to decrease the stigma associated
with seeking behavioral healthcare. The Behavioral Health System of
Care (BHSOC) supports readiness by promoting health, identifying
behavioral health issues early in the course of the illness, and
delivering evidence-based treatment. Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Yale School of Management, RAND reports, and ongoing Army
Public Health Center evaluations have validated the Army's approach.
Soldiers have shown a willingness to use behavioral healthcare.
Encounters (or visits) have increased from 900,000 in fiscal year 2007
at the height of combat operations in Iraq and Afghanistan to over 2.25
million in fiscal year 2017. To improve access and reduce stigma, many
of our programs are available to Soldiers and Families in their
communities and workplace. There are eleven at the Training and
Doctrine Command (TRADOC) Centers of Excellence and fourteen
installations with Brigade Combat Teams (BCTs) which host embedded BH
specialists, to include twenty in Alaska, fifty-three in Europe, 119 at
Fort Bragg, and 106 at Fort Hood to list a few. We have also embedded
our Behavioral Health Specialists within operational Brigades and
Special Forces Groups.
In fiscal year 2019, the Army resourced approximately $455 million
to support BH and sustain implementation of behavioral healthcare
initiatives. These funds specifically support the eleven recognized
enterprise Behavioral Health Service Line clinical programs under each
Medical Treatment Facility's standardized Department of Behavioral
Health. The Army estimates a requirement of approximately $462 million
to support the same level of effort in fiscal year 2020.
What is the effect of our BH programs? Accessible and effective
behavioral healthcare has led to 65,975 fewer inpatient bed days for
all types of behavioral health and Substance Use Disorder (SUD)
conditions in 2017, a 41 percent decrease from 2012.
The Army continues to lead the expansion of substance treatment
that allows Soldiers meeting prescribed criteria to receive treatment
and aftercare voluntarily for alcohol-related SUDs. Additionally,
Soldiers can proactively re-enter Substance Use Disorder Clinical Care
(SUDCC) without mandatory enrollment in a treatment program. This
voluntary care process often fosters early intervention prior to an
alcohol-related incident. Of note, 10,779 (62 percent) active duty
Soldiers self-referred for voluntary care vs. mandatory enrollment in
formal SUD treatment in fiscal year 2017. This significant increase of
22 percent from the previous year indicates the recognized benefit of
early intervention through voluntary care in support of individual
readiness.
Soldier Performance
A fit Soldier is a lethal Soldier. To further increase
deployability, the Army established the Holistic Health and Fitness
Program (H2F), which is a paradigm shift to a proactive injury
prevention strategy. This program represents a comprehensive,
integrated, and immersive health and fitness system of governance,
personnel, equipment, facilities, and leader education that maximizes
readiness and deployability through the reduction of injuries,
attrition, and associated costs. The program fosters resilient Soldiers
who are better prepared to conduct their wartime mission.
Similar to professional athletes, Soldiers must train both mind and
body for optimal performance. Since 2017, 71 percent of all Soldier
injuries were cumulative micro- traumatic musculoskeletal (MSK)
``overuse'' injuries. The addition of physical and occupational
therapists, strength and conditioning trainers, and dietitians to our
units will improve our fitness culture and increase physical toughness
across the Army, which will render a more lethal, ready, and deployable
force.
I applaud the Army's implementation of H2F in our combat
formations. Army Medicine will continue to collaborate with TRADOC and
Forces Command (FORSCOM) in support of the Army's H2F Program. The
Surgeon General's Physical Performance Service Line (PPSL), a team of
experts who focus on the leading cause of Soldiers seeking medical
care--traumatic and overuse MSK injuries, studies soldier performance.
Roughly 30 percent of all medical evacuations from Iraq or Afghanistan
were for non-battle MSK conditions and injuries; most Soldiers did not
return to theater. Early intervention of an acute injury prevents
development of a chronic condition or disability. The work of our
Physical Performance experts allows Army clinicians to address
individual patient risk factors contributing to musculoskeletal
injuries.
The Ready and Responsive Medical Force
The requirements established by the Army and the Joint Force set
the bar for our ready and responsive medical force. The Army must
maintain a rapidly responsive and broad spectrum of medical
capabilities that can conduct rapid deployment in support of Combatant
Commanders' requirements. This drives how Army Medicine recruits,
trains, and operates from expeditionary and pre-hospital emergency
medicine to primary and tertiary care. Our medical capabilities must be
prepared to support the full range of military operations with mission
ready personnel able to rapidly transition from garrison to delivering
the appropriate health service support in an area of operation. We
maintain our skilled medical force through daily Medical Treatment
Facility (MTF) operations, medical training, and education programs. To
make medical providers more readily available for training and
contingency operations and to increase unit readiness, the Army has
assigned healthcare providers to their operational unit with duty at
the MTFs to maintain essential clinical competency. The assignment of
deployable medical personnel to line units supports the operational
commander's ability to evaluate and track the readiness of medical
forces and establishes clear mission command of Army personnel working
in MTFs.
To enable commanders' ability to better track the training and
readiness of the medical provider force, the Army adopted Individual
Critical Task Lists (ICTLs) in 2018. These are a combination of Army
specific and joint development of knowledge, skills and attributes (or
JKSA) task standards. Army Medicine developed ICTLs for ninety- eight
AMEDD Officer Areas of Concentration and twenty-four enlisted military
occupational specialties. All Army MTFs will use them to define
readiness requirements at each facility and to evaluate the gaps in
providing that readiness to the Army and DHA. Further, all Army medical
personnel assigned or attached to a DHA facility will be required to
use ICTLs as the Army's requirement for assessing readiness.
I am extremely proud of the world-class medical education and
training we provide. Today, Army Medicine runs the largest Graduate
Medical Education (GME) training program in the DoD. Annually, we train
over 1,500 physicians in our MTFs. Our reputation for superior clinical
training and leadership development boosts recruiting and retention
efforts and our first time medical board certification pass rate of
about 92 percent well exceeds the 86 percent national average in fiscal
year 2017. Our GME programs are vital force generation and retention
tools. The reach of Army GME extends across all the DoD. Those leaving
active duty service are a primary source of GME-trained physicians for
the Nation's civilian healthcare system, as well as the Army Reserves
and National Guard, helping to bring experience and innovation to our
Nation.
In addition to GME, the Army Medical Department Center and School
(AMEDDC&S) located in San Antonio, Texas is the largest civilian-
accredited service school and aligned under TRADOC. The Army trains
more than 31,000 U.S. students and 330 International students annually.
This includes enlisted Soldiers, officers, warrant officers, and Army
Civilians in diverse graduate, leadership, and technical programs. The
AMEDDC&S has thirteen Master's Degree Programs and Doctoral Programs,
which provide an advanced education in areas such as Public Health,
Health Administration, Social Work, Nursing, and other critical health
related fields. U.S. News and World Report ranked four of these
programs in the top ten nationally: the U.S. Army Graduate Program in
Anesthesia Nursing, the Army-Baylor University Doctor of Physical
Therapy, the Army-Baylor University Master of Health Administration,
and the Master of Physician Assistant Studies Program.
In 2018, Army Medicine created the AMEDD Medical Skills Sustainment
Program. This gave Army trauma team members and enlisted healthcare
providers the opportunity to serve and train for 2-3 years in
prestigious civilian level-one trauma centers such as Cooper University
Health Care in Camden, New Jersey; Oregon Health and Science University
in Portland, Oregon; and other programs in Cincinnati, Ohio, and
Hackensack, New Jersey. Finally, we will also rotate Army medics in
select civilian hospitals over two- week rotations for ``hands-on''
immersive training.
Enabling a Ready Force Today and Tomorrow: Research and Modernization
Army Medicine continually evolves in the face of global threats and
challenges to improve the battlefield survivability rate, Soldier
adaptability to the most austere and extreme environments, and overall
health of the force. Army Medicine researchers at the Army Futures
Command (AFC) employ the best crosscutting and cross-functional efforts
to modernize medical procedures and equipment in accordance with the
needs of our beneficiaries and Congressional priorities.
The Army's Medical Research and Materiel Command (MRMC), is
advancing the state of medical science to discover and explore
innovative approaches to protect, support, and advance the health and
welfare of Service members, Families, and communities. MRMC's research,
development and acquisition elements, currently a vital part of the
Army Futures Command, will become the Medical Research and Development
Command (MRDC) this year. They will accelerate the transition of
innovative medical technologies into deployable products and translates
advances in knowledge into new standards of care for preventing injury
and disease, treating casualties, overcoming infectious diseases,
minimizing adverse radiation health effects, promoting rehabilitation,
and developing medical training systems.
The Defense Health Program (DHP) core research programs have
focused on traumatic brain injury (TBI), behavioral health (including
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)), combat casualty care, military
operational medicine, military infectious diseases, radiation health
effects, clinical and rehabilitative medicine, health services, global
health engagement, medical training systems, and health informatics.
Research planning and research reviews are conducted jointly with the
other Services, Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), and the National
Institutes of Health (NIH).
Researchers have made great advances, which will improve the
lethality of the Army. Most notable in 2018, the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approved the first ever blood test for TBI, and,
after 15 years of research, Dsuvia (sufentanil), a tablet for severe
pain/battlefield pain management. The FDA also approved a variance for
DoD blood banks to extend the shelf life of platelets from 14 days to
21 days and authorized access to civilian blood banks to supply the DoD
with cold stored platelets in the event of a major conflict.
Researchers have also advanced regenerative medicine for revolutionary
changes such as peripheral nerve growth following traumatic amputation;
a living, anti-infective human skin substitute; and generation of
functional skin by either spraying the patient's harvested skin cells
on a burn wound to enhance healing or by applying skin substitutes
grown in tissue culture in place of a skin graft.
Congressional funding has enabled MRMC to make advancements in the
areas of combat casualty care, clinical rehabilitative medicine,
medical training, health information, infectious disease prevention,
and operational medicine. No nation on earth can approach the reach and
scale of our medical support to deployed forces.
People
The strength of our Army is our people. We have a ready medical
force capable of global deployment for the full range of military
operations as we ensure the Total Force is ready to fight and win our
Nation's wars. The recruitment, development, employment, and retention
of Soldiers who are adaptable, skilled medical professionals is
critical to the ability of Army Medicine to conduct its mission across
multiple domains. Talent management is vital to enhancing readiness by
aligning the unique knowledge, skills, and attributes of our people to
the needs of our Army in supporting the JHSE and any operational
requirements.
We must develop and equip our Soldiers and Army Civilians with
tools that enable effective, agile and adaptive leaders. We must also
develop our education and training in tandem with development of a
career progression model that identifies key assignments that impart
the experience and knowledge crucial to understand and solve the
complex and dynamic challenges associated with globally integrated
health services. These steps will produce medical leaders who
understand how to plan, coordinate, and build synergy in medical
capabilities provided by Services, interagency, multinational partners,
and nongovernmental organizations.
The ultimate outcome is Army Soldiers who are medical professionals
capable of operating within a joint framework and warfighting leaders
who are capable of employing the medical force. To this end, we are
committed to ensuring all Soldiers and Army Civilians have full career
opportunities to reach their highest potential and realize their vast
talent.
Military Healthy System (MHS) Reform
In keeping with Congressional intent, the goal of Military Health
System (MHS) reform is an integrated, efficient, and effective system
of readiness and health that best supports the lethality of the force.
Transition of Army MTFs to DHA is an iterative process. Army Medicine
will divest responsibilities for the administration and management of
all MTFs to the DHA in a phased approach, which began 1 October 2018
with the transfer of Womack Army Medical Center, at Fort Bragg, North
Carolina, to DHA. The MHS transition plan calls for the transfer of
MTFs in the eastern United States in 2019; MTFs in the western United
States will be transferred in 2020; and overseas MTFs by the end of
2021.
We are supporting and have committed resources to the transition
efforts and will continue to work diligently with our JHSE colleagues
to implement NDAA requirements while improving medical readiness,
meeting the operational requirements of our Combatant Commanders, and
providing quality healthcare to our patients.
To support the Army's objectives to increase lethality and combat
power, Army Medicine identified military medical and dental positions
that do not pose high risk to mission for conversion to civilian
positions. These carefully considered conversions will enable the Army
to repurpose the converted billets across the operational force to
increase lethality and strength of operational units and will lead to
enhancing medical skills for the remaining military medical billets by
concentrating patient treatment performed at installation hospitals and
clinics among fewer military providers. Our intent is to make the
transfer of Army MTFs to the DHA transparent to our Service Members,
Families, and retirees, who will all continue to receive high-quality
medical care throughout the enterprise.
Conclusion
The Strength of our Army is our Soldiers and their Families. Our
strength is not derived from a weapon or a weapon system alone; it
originates from our people. Army Medicine is the driving force behind
the medical innovations and technologies that allow us to adapt to
future challenges that may arise at home or abroad. I would like to
offer my praise and admiration to our Soldiers doing the Nation's work
and everyone, military and civilian, who support them. No other
Military Health System in the world can compare. We can transport an
entire hospital around the world at a moment's notice and establish it
where needed. Congressional support has always provided Army Medicine
with the resources necessary to support our Army.
Our Army has relied on Army Medicine since 1775 to serve our
fighting forces. We will continue to respond to the call with high
quality care. This is our solemn obligation to our Nation--our
readiness to support our Nation's Army will always be assured. I
appreciate the subcommittee's work and your continued support to our
Soldiers, Army Medicine, and our Army. It has been my honor to serve
with you.
Senator Shelby. Admiral.
STATEMENT OF VICE ADMIRAL FORREST C. FAISON, III,
SURGEON GENERAL OF THE NAVY
Admiral Faison. Chairman Shelby, Vice Chairman Durbin,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, it is my honor to be
with you here today.
NAVY MEDICAL MISSION
My message this morning is straightforward. The operational
tempo and global commitments of America's Navy and Marine Corps
remains high. Sailors and Marines are deployed and operating
forward around the world today. The Navy Medicine team is with
them, working tirelessly to protect their health and readiness.
On behalf of these dedicated men and women, thank you for your
continued confidence and support.
My written statement today provides you more details, but I
want to highlight three key areas: readiness, transformation,
and our people.
We have no greater responsibility than providing medical
forces that are ready, prepared, and present to save lives of
those who volunteer to save our Nation, those servicemembers of
our armed forces. Every sailor, every marine, and their
families are depending on us to do all in our power to provide
them the best care our Nation can offer and one day return them
home safely.
To honor this trust, we are continuing to develop new and
improved capabilities to support the full range of operations
today. These efforts are critical since we know that
disaggregated operations pose unique challenges for timely
access to lifesaving resuscitative surgery and care in the
future.
Integral to advancing our expeditionary combat casualty
care capabilities is ensuring that our medical personnel
sustain their clinical readiness skills. We are making solid
progress in implementing our Navy Medicine trauma strategy.
In July of 2018, our Naval Medical Center Camp Lejeune
earned American College of Surgeons accreditation as a Level
III trauma center, where the staff is now gaining valuable
trauma experience while providing a valuable service to the
community.
NAVY MEDICAL TRAINING COLLABORATION
We expanded our Hospital Corpsman Trauma Training programs
through partnerships with Stroger Trauma Hospital in Chicago as
well as the University of Florida Medical Center in
Jacksonville and anticipate adding other sites this year.
We continue to embed our providers at L.A. County to get
important trauma training experience in preparation for the
future. The bottom line, these efforts are preparing us well
for the next fight.
Reform efforts continue within the Military Health System.
The Department of the Navy is in full support of these,
including the transferred administration of medical treatment
facilities to the DHA, as required by recent NDAA (National
Defense Authorization Act) Acts.
This legislation has reshaped military medicine to best
support the warfighter while improving the health care delivery
system with greater standardization and consistency.
Our leadership recognizes that both the services and DHA
must be successful in this effort. For us, this transition
represents an opportunity to laser-focus exclusively on the
readiness of our sailors and our marines. This is especially
critical as we return to competition between great powers and
the reality that future conflicts will present challenges and
combat casualty care and survival not seen in the recent past.
These reforms are allowing us to establish our
organizational constructs to support readiness requirements,
while sustaining our critical responsibilities to man, train,
and equip our forces.
NAVY MEDICAL READINESS
A key component moving forward will be to ensure that Navy
Medicine is resourced to meet our services--Navy and Marine
Corps--responsibilities and authorities and readiness missions.
Nothing is more critical to our mission than the Navy
Medicine team, dedicated and talented men and women serving
worldwide. A key priority for us is our human capital strategy.
Both our military and our civilian colleagues comprise our team
to ensure we have the proper mix of professionals that are
trained, organized, and equipped to meet their
responsibilities. This focus requires an emphasis on talent
management at all levels as well as recruiting and retaining
the best and brightest.
Navy Medicine is grateful for your support in this area of
our resource requirements to ensure that we continue to have a
high-quality team to support our servicemembers, their
families, and all who depend on us.
In closing, our commitment to you is that we will never
waver from our obligation to be ready to save the lives of
those entrusted to your care. I am proud of our Navy Medicine
team and remain appreciative of your strong support. I look
forward to your questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Vice Admiral C. Forrest Faison, III
Chairman Shelby, Vice Chairman Durbin, distinguished Members of the
Subcommittee, it is my honor to be with you today to provide an update
on Navy Medicine including our strategic priorities, key transformation
efforts, accomplishments and challenges. We are guided by our
unwavering commitment to those entrusted to our care. I can assure you
that the Navy Medicine team is working tirelessly to protect the health
and improve the readiness of Sailors and Marines so they can expertly
perform the demanding responsibilities around the world our Navy,
Marine Corps and Nation need them to do. On behalf of these dedicated
women and men, I want to thank you for your confidence and support of
our resource requirements to keep them healthy and on the job.
Strategic Priorities--Alignment and Transformation
Navy Medicine continues to be guided by the Chief of Naval
Operations' Design for Maintaining Maritime Strategy, initially
released in 2016 and updated in December 2018. His direction is clear:
The current security environment demands that the Navy must be prepared
at all levels for decentralized operations. To be successful, we must
remain committed to our core attributes: integrity; accountability;
initiative; and toughness. We are aligned with these tenets along with
the Secretary of the Navy's priorities of People, Capabilities and
Processes as the foundation of readiness in the Department of the Navy
(DON).
Our mission is to keep the Navy and Marine Corps ready, healthy,
and on the job. We follow and adhere to important and enduring guiding
principles in meeting these responsibilities: Honor the trust to care
for America's sons and daughters; Honor the uniform we wear; and, Honor
the privilege of leadership. Our strategic goals continue to provide us
an important framework to build upon our success, adapt rapidly to
changing operational demands and fully support and realize benefit from
the transformation underway in the Military Health System (MHS). They
are also pivotal to aligning our strategy and execution, as well as
targeting level of effort to best support our readiness investments.
Our goals include:
Readiness: Navy Medicine provides a medically ready force and
operational medical capabilities, at and from the sea, to support ready
naval forces.
High Velocity Organization: Relentlessly pursue high reliabilities
and a high velocity learning culture, in all Navy Medicine environments
to accelerate Fleet and Marine Corps performance.
Human Capital: Strengthen our team through a readiness-focused
human capital strategy to ensure a highly skilled, integrated
workforce.
Partnerships: Enhance our operational capability and meet mission
through partnership with the Defense Health Agency (DHA), the other
Services, Federal/public agencies and the private sector.
We continue to make progress and recognize the work ahead to
realize our vision to provide the Navy and Marine Corps family with the
best readiness and health in the world.
Reform efforts continue within the Military Health System (MHS).
The Department of the Navy is in full support of the transfer of
administration and management of military treatment facilities (MTFs)
to the DHA as required by the fiscal year 2017 National Defense
Authorization Act (NDAA). This legislation catalyzed the reshaping of
military medicine to best support the warfighter while improving the
healthcare delivery system with greater standardization and
consistency. Our leadership recognizes that both the Services and the
DHA must be successful in executing their responsibilities so,
collectively, we can effectively optimize the MHS as an integrated
system of readiness and health. For us, this transition represents an
opportunity to focus exclusively on the readiness of Sailors and
Marines--a medically ready force as well as a ready medical force. This
is especially critical as we return to competition between Great Powers
and the reality that future conflicts will present challenges to combat
casualty care and survival not seen in recent past conflicts. These
reforms are allowing us to establish our organizational constructs to
support readiness requirements while sustaining the critical Services'
responsibilities to man, train and equip our forces.
The phased transition to DHA administration and management of MTFs
began on October 1, 2018. Our first MTF, Naval Hospital Jacksonville,
officially transitioned on this date to become a field activity of the
Defense Health Agency. To preserve critical command and control
responsibilities to meet Navy and Marine Corps mission, in parallel we
established a new organizational construct, the Navy Medicine Readiness
Training Command (NMRTC). The NMRTC is part of an integrated system of
health that supports the Fleet and Fleet Marine Force.
It has specific responsibilities to maintain the readiness of our
assigned medical forces, support installation and operational
commanders' requirements and provide a Navy command structure essential
for proper execution of Service-specific requirements. Given the
Services' will retain command and control of their uniformed medical
forces, we must have a structure in place to meet these
responsibilities and NMRTCs will provide this throughout our
enterprise. Moving forward, additional NMTRCs will be established in
association with the transition of our MTFs. There will be no
organizational growth associated with these commands as existing
functions and personnel have been aligned within the NMRTC to support
our readiness mission, allowing us to better consolidate or coordinate
readiness and fleet support functions already in existence.
We will also be restructuring our headquarters in alignment with
our readiness-centric responsibilities. The Navy and Marine Corps are
forward deployed, expeditionary forces and Navy Medicine must be
organized to support their missions. While we proceed with our own
transformation, the Navy continues to support the DHA with their
manpower requests. As of March 1, 2019, we have detailed the 143
military and civilian personnel requested to date to support them as
they assume their MTF administration and management responsibilities.
We continue to work with the DHA on the transfer of 325 personnel as
outlined in Section 702 due by October 1, 2019. We continue to work
together to best support their requirements while moving forward to
transform Navy Medicine to meet our readiness mission.
Major organizational changes in large healthcare enterprises like
the MHS are inherently complex. Deliberate planning, careful assessment
and agile decisionmaking (and, to course correct as needed) are crucial
to our success. A key component will be to ensure that Navy Medicine be
resourced to meet our Services'--Navy and Marine Corps--authorities and
readiness functions. Progress continues but there remains significant
work ahead as we fully implement the congressional requirements
contained in NDAAs fiscal year 2017 and fiscal year 2019.
Readiness Imperative--Now and Moving Forward
We have no greater responsibility than providing medical forces
that are ready, prepared and present to save lives of the Nation's
armed forces. Every Sailor and Marine, and their families, are
depending on us to do all in our power to provide the best care our
Nation can offer and return their loved ones home safely and alive. You
rightly hold us accountable to meet this mission and we must continue
to develop new and improved capabilities to support the full range of
operations in multiple domains and in varied operational environments.
Maritime and land- based disaggregated operations pose unique
challenges for damage control resuscitation/surgery (DCR/DCS) and
patient movement through the continuum of care. As part of the CNO-
directed Naval Expeditionary Health Service Support Requirements
Evaluation Team (RET), Navy Medicine, in partnership with Deputy Chief
of Naval Operations for Naval Warfare (N9) conducted an assessment of
how to optimize medical support to Fleet Design, Distributed Maritime
Operations (DMO) and Littoral Operations in a distributed contested
environment. A significant number of gaps were identified and the
results demonstrate how ensuring Naval Health Service Support afloat
and ashore can provide integrated solutions supporting the DMO concept.
Through the development of modernized medical capabilities that are
modular, scalable and distributable, we will improve patient outcomes
meeting the Fleet and Fleet Marine Force's current and future needs.
Key assessments in this area identify the need for small teams
equipped with DCR/DCS capabilities as well as small container-based
forward resuscitative care/primary surgery capabilities as a medical
payload on a number of combat logistics/support platforms. With the
additional congressional resources provided to us, we made system
upgrades and safety improvements to include transitioning dated legacy
systems to rapidly erectable hospital infrastructure that enhances unit
deployment capability in our expeditionary medical facilities (EMFs).
Knowledge Skills and Abilities (KSA) efforts are focused on
sustainment of clinical readiness skill sets for the entire
expeditionary combat casualty care team and supporting specialties. To
meet the challenge of future warfighter requirements, clinical and non-
clinical currency must be maintained through robust readiness-centric
work at MTFs, and augmented by partnerships with civilian health
systems, when applicable. A seminal component of our efforts is the
Navy Medicine Trauma Strategy. Our provider teams must be prepared to
provide trauma care across the full range of military operations and it
is incumbent on us to ensure they have access to this clinical
experience either in our facilities or with civilian partners. Key
initiatives include:
--Naval Medical Center Camp Lejeune (NMCCL) received Level III
American College of Surgeons (ACS) accreditation in July 2018.
The trauma center was developed in partnership with the State
of North Carolina and provides trauma care to our beneficiaries
and other patients in the area. Our personnel are getting
valuable experience in treating traumatic injuries from motor
vehicle accidents, gunshot wounds, burns and falls. Key
partnerships are in place with local civilian medical centers.
--Hospital Corpsman Trauma Training Course (HMTT) provides our junior
Corpsmen with first-hand trauma training at the James H.
Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, a level I trauma center in
Chicago, Illinois. This pilot project was successful and has
been expanded to a second site, the University of Florida
Health Jacksonville. Additional sites are currently under
evaluation.
--Navy Trauma Training Center (NTTC) at the Los Angeles County/
University of Southern California Medical Center continues to
support trauma training for our provider teams. Over 232
personnel participated in NTTC training in fiscal year 2018 and
over 3,500 since its inception in 2002. In addition, NTTC
implemented the Navy Surgical Team Trauma and Resuscitation
(NSTTAR) course utilizing validated curriculum such as
Emergency War Surgery, Fundamentals of Critical Care and
Advanced Surgical Skills for Exposure of Trauma.
--Integrated Trauma and Medical Readiness Exchange (ITMRE) with the
Vietnam People's Armed Forces provided Navy Medicine personnel
with the opportunity to work at the host nation's medical
treatment facility. Clinical work for the team focused on
emergency medicine, surgery and orthopedics. This initiative
aligns with U.S. Indo-Pacific Command theatre security
priorities.
--Hospital Corpsmen Personnel Qualification System: A successful
trauma response is built on core knowledge and experience in
complex patient care. We implemented a new Corpsman Personnel
Qualification Standards program last year to ensure all
Corpsmen gain and maintain important clinical proficiencies in
patient care as a foundation for successful trauma and combat
resuscitation response.
Supporting Combatant Commands' humanitarian assistance/disaster
response missions provide our personnel with unmatched readiness
training. These deployments are professionally challenging and
personally rewarding. From October to December 2018, USNS COMFORT (T-AH
20) deployed in support of U.S. Southern Command's Enduring Promise
(EP2018). EP2018 was successful in demonstrating U.S. commitment to the
people of Central and South America--and strengthening strategic
alliances and regional partnerships. Navy Medicine personnel, working
with personnel from the other Services, partner nations and non-
governmental organizations, provided medical care during a time of
unprecedented movements of migrants and stress on host nation health
services. Medical personnel treated over 26,000 patients and performed
about 600 surgeries aboard the ship and in land-based clinics in
Ecuador, Peru, Colombia and Honduras. The crew built trust and, in many
cases, changed lives. We used valuable information from the KSA Combat
Casualty Care Team (CCCT) analysis for required surgery and anesthesia
proficiencies to improve provider currency with the case load presented
during this mission. This approach adds significant value to future
missions by the MERCY Class hospital ships that will ensure clinical
skills are sustained. This marked COMFORT's sixth deployment to the
region since 2007. I know these missions, along with those of USNS
MERCY (T-AH 19) in support of Pacific Partnership, are instrumental in
making our providers better prepared, particularly in the maritime
environment. Drawing on the success of EP2018, the Commander, U.S.
Southern Command indicated that the medical force is returning more
ready, and capable of providing critical care to our warfighters.
Each year, we train approximately 3,700 new Hospital Corpsmen. We
work hard to prepare them for their demanding responsibilities and
never let them forget that they are part of a Corps rich in tradition
for bravery, skill and service. Their exemplary performance was
instrumental in the unprecedented combat survivability rates during our
most recent conflicts; however, we must continually adapt and reinforce
training at all levels to meet the demands of future contingencies. It
begins at Hospital Corps ``A'' School and continues with that rigorous
Hospital Corpsmen Personnel Qualifications Standards and operationally-
relevant skills experience at MTFs and civilian partners. I want our
Corpsmen clinically competent and professionally confident when they
arrive at their first ship or deploy with their Marines. This priority
is the same for all our uniform medical personnel which is why our
nationally-recognized graduate medical education programs remain so
important to preparing our officers to meet the needs of the Fleet and
Fleet Marine Force.
Optimizing Health--Medically Ready Sailors and Marines
Force health protection is foundational to Navy Medicine and we
target all aspects from operationally-focused preventive medicine to
life-saving combat casualty care at sea and on the battlefield. We ask
a lot of our Sailors and Marines, and in turn, they can rightly expect
to be cared for by Navy Medicine with the best care our Nation can
offer--anytime, anywhere.
Navy Medicine continues targeted efforts in the area of traumatic
brain injury (TBI), particularly in support of our Special Warfare
communities. We provide services through a network of TBI clinics,
including our two Intrepid Spirit Centers at Marine Corps Bases Camp
Lejeune and Camp Pendleton, as well as Naval Medical Centers San Diego
and Portsmouth. Programs are in place to support the demanding training
and deployment cycles of these personnel with an emphasis on
identification of potential injury followed by rapid intervention,
treatment and recovery. In addition, we are actively engaged with
public and private entities on our research priorities, identifying
knowledge gaps and working together to improve diagnosis and treatment
protocols.
Increasing access and decreasing stigma are vital to connecting our
Sailors and Marines to mental health and substance use services. Our
embedded mental health (EMH) program is focused directly on supporting
the Fleet and Marine Forces by placing mental health providers--
psychiatrists, psychologists, clinical social workers, mental health
nurse practitioners and behavioral health technicians--as close to our
Sailors and Marines as possible to increase utilization and decrease
stigma. Twenty-five percent of our active duty mental health providers
are currently assigned to EMH billets, and this will continue to
expand. EMH increases trust with commanders and connectedness with
service members, leading to increased willingness to seek help early
after the onset of combat or operational stress. In addition to
reducing medical evacuations and unplanned losses, EMH also helps
improve personnel readiness. Following USS Fitzgerald (DDG 62) and USS
John S. Mccain (DDG 56) collisions at sea in 2017, Navy Medicine
developed the Organizational Incident Operational Nexus (ORION) Trauma
Tracking system to provide long-term tracking of Sailors and Marines
involved in unit level traumas and to target outreach to service
members at elevated risk for psychological injury, as well as providing
priority access to care when needed and regardless of location or
future assignment.
These initiatives target providing care and support where and when
they are needed most. All of us recognize that resiliency, toughness
and mental health fitness are essential for operational effectiveness.
We continue to partner with the Navy and Marine Corps line leadership
in suicide prevention efforts. Every suicide is a tragedy and
devastates families, shipmates and commands. All service members are
screened annually for mental health concerns, including potential
suicide risk, during the required Periodic Health Assessment. In
addition, we have specific programs including Psychological Health
Outreach Program (PHOP) and Returning Warriors Workshops to address the
needs of our reserve component Sailors and Marines.
The Navy Comprehensive Pain Management Program continues to advance
an integrated, patient-centered approach to pain management and
restoration of function. We are leveraging best practices and
empowering clinicians through education and evidence-based preventive
strategies. To minimize opioid use and impact on deployability, Navy
Medicine's policy--Long-term Opioid Therapy Safety (LOTS)--established
LOT committees at every MTF, along with clinical guidelines, training
requirements and compliance reporting for patient management and
safety. We are seeing solid results: From 2013--2018, we saw a 44
percent reduction in the number of opioid prescriptions written for
Sailors and Marines along with 30 percent fewer personnel receiving
these prescriptions. Correspondingly, we continue to expand access to
alternative pain management methods including the use of Complementary
and Integrative Medicine (CIM) therapies.
When our Navy and Marine Corps personnel do have deployment
limiting medical conditions, we are continuing to improve clinical and
administrative interfaces that impact readiness, deployability, and the
tracking of each. Deployability of service members is considered at all
healthcare encounters and any changes are communicated to the member's
command and to Service headquarters through Limited Duty Sailor and
Marine Readiness Tracking (LIMDU SMART) or the Veterans Tracking
Application for permanent conditions requiring Disability Evaluation
System (DES) processing. We are expanding access to LIMDU SMART to
include all our operational providers so they can initiate appropriate
actions and fully participate in active management of Sailors and
Marines in a limited duty status to get those we can back to duty as
quickly as possible.
These efforts are important since we know that last year (2017-
2018), about 64 percent of the Navy and Marine Corps limited duty cases
were related to musculoskeletal conditions. Building on the success of
our Value-Based Care pilot project at Naval Hospital Jacksonville
(which is currently presented as a best practice case study at the
Harvard Business School) we created integrated practice units for lower
back pain and osteoarthritis and broadened the focus to include
musculoskeletal conditions, expanding this initiative to Naval Hospital
Camp Pendleton. We recognize that coordination of care is critical in
the prevention, treatment and recovery of these injuries so our efforts
target multidisciplinary, integrated musculoskeletal care so our
Sailors and Marines are ready to deploy. We are seeing solid gains from
this approach.
The evolving and expanding roles for women in the Navy and Marine
Corps has catalyzed the need for a new focus on comprehensive women's
health. Women's health services, though historically focused on
obstetric and reproductive care, have expanded to incorporate gender-
specific needs in areas including mental health, musculoskeletal
injuries, and female healthcare needs in a deployment setting to ensure
women have the care they need and are mission ready at all times. In
November 2018, Navy Medicine opened a Comprehensive Women's Health
Clinic in San Diego, California. This pilot program is aimed at serving
the unique health needs of active duty female Sailors and Marines. In
addition, family planning services are a critical component of women's
health with key implications for readiness and retention. Through our
Operation PINC (Process Improvement for Non-delayed Contraception), we
have expanded full- scope contraceptive walk-in clinics to 16 Navy MTFs
world-wide. These clinics allow for same day access to the full range
of DoD-approved contraceptive options, thus reducing barriers to
contraceptive care such as referral requirements and time delays. The
high utilization of long acting reversible contraceptives (LARCs)
provided in these clinics has significant implications for improved
readiness for female Sailors and Marines, particularly those forward-
deployed.
Navy Medicine continues to be a leader in providing trauma-informed
compassionate and gender-responsive sexual assault medical response
around the world. We have over 240 providers trained to conduct sexual
assault medical forensic examinations (SAMFE) at our MTFs, aboard our
large deck aircraft carriers, amphibious assault ships, and remote
operational environments. In addition, we have 33 memoranda of
understanding in place with civilian partners to ensure that our
service members have ready access to these critical services when they
are needed.
Research and development is inextricably linked to our readiness
mission. The Naval Medical Research Center (NMRC) enterprise is the
Navy and Marine Corps' premier institution for biomedical research,
infectious disease surveillance and response, and international public
health research. Work done in our eight overseas and domestic
laboratories by our scientists--in partnership with Army, Air Force and
other government, academic, and private collaborators--have a direct
impact on protecting the health of Sailors and Marines. Examples
include the detection and constant surveillance and reporting of
infectious pathogens including Ebola, influenza, dengue, malaria,
antibiotic-resistant bacteria, drug-resistant parasites, and other
militarily-relevant pathogens which regularly affect deployed service
members. We see innovations in a full range of operationally-focused
research such as the evaluation of blood substitutes, optimizing
resuscitation strategies, guidelines for standoff distance from
underwater blasts, and testing on a patient warming system for injured
warfighters in isolated environments. Given their international scope,
our research activities are integral components of our global health
engagement and Fleet support efforts while this work with host nations
helps build and sustain public health capacity. Our investments in
their work help ensure we have the capability to respond to current
challenges as well as those that present in the future.
One area on which we are keenly focused in our operational labs is
physiological episodes in tactical jet aircraft. Navy flight surgeons,
aerospace/operational physiologists, and researchers are involved in
all aspects of response, diagnosis, treatment, mitigation and research
of physiological episodes. Navy Medicine developed and, continually
updates, standardized clinical practice guidelines to ensure rapid and
consistent evaluation wherever and whenever a physiological episode
occurs. At Naval Medical Centers San Diego and Portsmouth, we
established referral centers to rapidly assess and treat complicated
physiological episode cases with a multi-disciplinary team approach
providing immediate access to subspecialists and fast- track innovative
treatment on both coasts. Earlier this year, Navy Medicine conducted a
full day, world-wide Navy--USMC aeromedical synchronization
teleconference to ensure that all our personnel are prepared with the
most comprehensive information, tools and lessons learned to keep our
aircrews healthy and safe. In addition, given their co-location onboard
Wright Patterson Air Force Base, our researchers at the Naval Medical
Research Unit--Dayton are working closely with their Air Force
counterparts at the United States Air Force 711th Human Performance
Wing on relevant hypoxia and physiological episode research. Diligent
efforts to address this problem are also ongoing at the Navy and Marine
Corps Public Health Center (NMCPHC), Navy Experimental Dive Unit (NEDU)
and the Navy Aeromedical Institute (NAMI), among many entities.
Active expansion of virtual health (VH) capabilities is important
to caring for Sailors and Marines in all environments and mitigating
the limitations of time, distance and access to specialists.
Initiatives such as Health Experts online Portal (HELP) at Naval
Medical Center Portsmouth continue to demonstrate high value in
supporting U.S. and overseas commands, including helping to avoid
medical evacuations. We have established Naval Medical Center San Diego
as our first virtual medical center, and their work will capitalize on
the availability of medical specialty expertise with an emphasis on
Tele-Critical Care (TCC) and Operational Virtual Health (OVH). We are
also using VH technology to keep our Corpsmen skills sharp. We expanded
our Corpsmen in the Community initiative to three sites allowing our
personnel to provide active duty Sailors and Marines care at convenient
times outside normal clinic hours so there is reduced impact on
training and work schedules. Corpsmen provide hands-on patient care
outside the MTF and closer to our service members while connected
virtually to providers at the local MTF. This allows for virtual
reviews of the assessment and treatment plans and helps sustain
Corpsmen skills sets.
Progress continues with the deployment of MHS GENESIS, with
emphasis on aggressively addressing configuration challenges in the
initial roll-out of implementation in the Pacific Northwest MTFs. Navy
Medicine is fully engaged and supportive of the joint implementation
and optimization of MHS GENESIS with the other Services, DHA, and the
Defense Healthcare Management System (DHMS) Program Executive Office
(PEO). All of us recognize the criticality of MHS GENESIS as it will
significantly help drive standardization throughout the MHS while
providing a single platform to access accurate healthcare data in our
MTFs and operational settings. MHS GENESIS is active at Naval Hospital
Bremerton and Naval Health Clinic Oak Harbor and is scheduled for
implementation at Naval Hospital Lemoore in Fiscal year 2019.
The Navy Medicine Team--A Ready Medical Force
Nothing is more critical to our mission readiness than the Navy
Medicine team--dedicated and talented men and women serving world-wide.
Individually and collectively, they form a ready medical force that
supports and cares for Sailors, Marines and their families.
A key priority for us is our human capital strategy--for both
military and civilian personnel--to ensure we have the proper mix of
professionals that are trained, organized and equipped to execute their
responsibilities. This focus requires an emphasis on talent management
at all levels, as well as recruiting and retaining the best and
brightest. We face formidable competition with the private healthcare
sector and this trend is likely to continue. Navy Medicine is grateful
for your support of our resources requirements needed for accession and
retention incentives, particularly for many of our high demand wartime
critical specialties. It is important to note that any significant
changes in force structure, to include impact to medical personnel,
requires us to assess risk and mitigate impact to our operational
capabilities. We do this on an ongoing basis.
Overall, current Navy Medicine Department manning (officer and
enlisted) is healthy. We recognize, however, that ensuring we have the
proper skill mix to meet our wartime mission requires continued
attention, particularly for surgical, critical care and mental health
specialties that face manning shortfalls. Special and incentive pays,
successful student recruiting initiatives and attractive graduate
medical/dental education opportunities have been key factors for
meeting these manning levels.
In fiscal year 2018, Navy Recruiting attained 96 percent of Navy
Medicine's overall direct accession active component officer goal and
71 percent for the reserve component. Recruiting reserve component
Medical Corps officers remains a challenge and we continue to work on
incentives to address these shortfalls. Our overall success in
retaining active component medical officers leads to a smaller pool of
officers available for affiliation with the reserves. This, in part, is
impacting reserve officer recruiting. We had success in recruiting 100
percent of our enlisted personnel for both active and reserve
components. Within the active component, we remain focused on the
manning levels of our independent duty Corpsmen (surface, submarine,
dive and reconnaissance) given their key roles in supporting operating
Fleet and Marine Force requirements. Importantly, Navy met 100 percent
of our student accession program recruitment goals for all our officer
Corps. These programs are critical to our overall accession pipeline.
Within Navy Medicine, we are fortunate to have a talented and
diverse civilian personnel workforce that bring unmatched knowledge,
skills and abilities to their important work around the world. They
work along-side their uniformed colleagues, and in many cases, provide
unmatched training and mentorship to our officers and Corpsmen. Navy
civilians are integral to our readiness mission and important to the
success of the MHS transition activities currently underway. Recruiting
and retaining our civilians, particularly in high demand occupations or
remote locations, can be challenging particularly given strong
competition from the private sector. We are grateful for the
flexibilities and authorities, including Expedited Hiring Authority and
Direct Hire Authority, that help us attract these personnel. In fiscal
year 2018, we accessed over 480 hard-to-fill healthcare providers using
these combined authorities.
Way Ahead
In closing, I want to reiterate that Navy Medicine is laser focused
on readiness--preparing our medical force to save lives at sea and on
the battlefield and doing everything we can to ensure our Sailors and
Marines are healthy and ready to perform their demanding missions. We
will never waiver from this obligation: Readiness and being where it
counts, when it counts, to save the lives of those entrusted to our
care. I am proud of the Navy Medicine team beyond words and remain
appreciative of your strong support. I look forward to your questions.
Senator Shelby. General Hogg.
STATEMENT OF LIEUTENANT GENERAL DOROTHY A. HOGG,
SURGEON GENERAL OF THE AIR FORCE
General Hogg. Chairman Shelby, Vice Chairman Durbin,
members of the committee, thank you for this opportunity to
testify today.
AIR FORCE MEDICAL MISSION
The Air Force Medical Service is in a period of great
change, driven by numerous factors. Throughout these
transformations, our commitment to our patients we care for and
our medical readiness mission has never been stronger.
Today's Air Force operates the most effective patient
movement system ever. We bring wounded servicemembers home in
record time, deliver critical care at 30,000 feet, and push
lifesaving care farther forward than ever before.
Multiple efforts are under way to further improve our
patient movement capabilities to better position us to execute
the National Defense Strategy.
We will increase our Critical Care Air Transport Teams
based on the Aeromedical Requirements Analysis Study. These
teams of doctors, nurses, and technicians turn aircraft into
flying intensive care units that provide life-sustaining care,
while moving patients hundreds, even thousands of miles away.
We continue developing our Ground Surgical Teams, our
primary battlefield surgical unit, for deployment to austere
locations.
We are also looking at our other deployment platforms to
prepare and modernize them for what may be our next conflict as
well as ways to make them lighter and leaner and more
tailorable to current and future combatant commander
requirements.
We continue to collaborate with the Defense Health Agency
in moving authority, direction, and control of the military
treatment facilities.
AIR FORCE MILITARY TREATMENT FACILITIES TRANSITION TO
DEFENSE HEALTH AGENCY
On October 1st, 2018, the Air Force transferred four
military treatment facilities to the Defense Health Agency, and
like any enterprise transformation, we have identified gaps in
our current planning process and are working collaboratively to
resolve these to improve the transition for subsequent military
treatment facilities.
In addition to the Military Health System transformation,
the Air Force Medical Service will also transform itself to
refocus on operational medical readiness. We will stand down
two field operating agencies and stand up a single agency
called the Air Force Medical Readiness Agency. This will
eliminate redundancies and right-size my headquarters'
capabilities to focus on medically-ready airmen and -ready
medics who are current and competent to do their missions.
We are also restructuring our medical squadrons. The Health
Care Operations Squadron will focus on providing beneficiary
care without the distractions of military medical requirements,
such as periodic health assessments and waiver requirements.
AIR FORCE MEDICAL READINESS
The Operational Medical Readiness Squadron will focus on
active-duty airmen's mission capability. This new structure
optimizes both functions and allows us to return airmen to
full-mission capability as quickly as possible without
decrementing care to our beneficiaries.
As Robin Sharma once said, ``Change is hardest in the
beginning, messiest in the middle, and easiest at the end.''
The Military Health System is in the middle of change. These
challenges create opportunities to shape the future and to
think without a box.
Air Force medics are, first and foremost, warrior medics.
As the Air Force Surgeon General, I am committed to achieving
full-spectrum medical readiness, developing joint medical
leaders, and driving Air Force Medical Service transformation
to increase our agility and lifesaving capabilities required to
execute the National Defense Strategy.
Thank you for your support of Air Force Medicine and the
opportunity to address you today, and I look forward to
answering your questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lieutenant General Dorothy A. Hogg
Chairman Shelby, Senator Durbin, and distinguished members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to testify before you
today.
The Air Force Medical Service celebrates its 70th anniversary this
year. Since separating from the Army Medical Department in 1949, Air
Force Medicine has been an innovative force in the medical community,
developing and implementing new ways to deliver ever higher levels of
care in challenging environments, from remote, austere battlefields to
the back of a plane at 30,000 feet.
Today, the Air Force Medical Service supports a beneficiary
population of more than 2.5 million from 63 clinics and 12 hospitals
across the country and around the world. More than 850 Air Force medics
are currently deployed in an operational theater worldwide, an increase
of nearly 20 percent in the past 2 years. These deployed medics are
backed by 29,000 active duty medics and a total medical force of 40,550
personnel, including civilians and contractors.
The Air Force Medical Service employs the greatest patient movement
system in history. This system developed gradually, driven by the
evolving requirements of delivering medical support in shifting
battlefield environments, and improves continuously. Our current
capabilities are tailored to our current and recent conflicts, and must
be adjusted to meet anticipated future requirements. Expanding our
aeromedical evacuation capacity and enhancing its versatility is vital
to preparing for future conflicts that may involve more casualties than
current operations.
The Air Force of tomorrow must be able to compete with peer
militaries; deter rogue states and opportunistic aggression; defeat
terrorist threats wherever they arise; and defend American interests in
air, space, cyberspace and other domains. As the Air Force looks to
increase the number of operational squadrons, the Air Force Medical
Service will remain a vital part of supporting and sustaining the
effectiveness of those units. To accomplish this goal, the Air Force
Medical Service must modernize and transform to stay aligned with a
changing Air Force and our Joint partners.
Our operational squadrons depend on the entire Air Force to ensure
they are lethal, resilient and ready to fight. Today's combat
environments require our forces to operate seamlessly across all
domains with our Joint and allied partners. Medical integration and
Joint training are critical, for while the human body is the same no
matter what uniform it wears, the platforms, techniques, terminology
and equipment vary. We do our medics a disservice when they have to
learn unfamiliar systems on the fly during a deployment. The Air Force
Medical Service is committed to relentlessly working with our Army,
Navy and Defense Health Agency partners to increase Joint training and
duty opportunities to minimize this challenge. Strengthening these
bonds furthers the vision of an integrated, innovative, flexible,
efficient and modern medical service that is responsive to the needs of
combatant commanders.
Last year, we told the Senate Subcommittee that the Air Force
Medical Service was at a crossroad. That crossroad is now in our
rearview mirror. The Air Force Medical Service is already moving
quickly down the path that will define the next decade or more of Air
Force medical support. We are undertaking multiple lines of readiness-
focused reform simultaneously, including:
--Transitioning healthcare delivery at our Military Treatment
Facilities to the Defense Health Agency;
--Restructuring our headquarters and field operating agencies;
--Reorganizing our Military Treatment Facilities to focus on Airmen
availability;
--Creating Operational Medical Readiness Squadrons;
--Revising and expanding the practice and training for flight
medicine to additional provider types; and
--Evolving our deployable medical platforms to meet the needs of our
combatant commanders.
The National Defense Strategy makes restoring readiness the top
priority for our Nation's armed forces. Each of the reform efforts
underway in Air Force Medicine seeks to improve readiness. As we make
our plans for the future and evaluate the courses of action available
to us, our readiness mission is at the forefront of every discussion,
matched by our commitment to providing our patients with high quality
care.
Using the National Defense Strategy and the Secretary of the Air
Force's priorities as guidelines, the Air Force Medical Service
unveiled a strategy map last summer outlining three goals to drive our
future efforts--Achieve Full Spectrum Medical Readiness, Strengthen
Joint Warrior Medical Teams and Drive Air Force Medical Service
Transformation. Each goal aligns to the broader vision of the
Department of Defense and the Secretary.
Air Force medics are not ``trigger-pullers'' or ``bomb-droppers''
or even intelligence analysts, weapon system designers or cargo-movers.
Our job is to make sure that the Airmen who execute those critical
functions can most effectively accomplish their mission, contributing
to the lethality of the force. We optimize their physical and mental
health, and work to heal and return them to duty if they become ill or
injured. We are the maintainers of the human weapon system.
Our single biggest driver of change remains the readiness needs of
combatant commanders. As the global security landscape evolves, the Air
Force Medical Service must also evolve to ensure we deliver the medical
support required to conduct global operations.
In the last 20 years, the Air Force Medical Service has tailored
our operational medical support to relatively small-scale and
asymmetric conflicts. We built a world-class patient movement system
that gets casualties from the frontline to higher levels of care in a
remarkably short time. Since September 11, 2001, we have conducted
nearly 340,000 global patient movements, saving many lives and
contributing to an unprecedented 98 percent survival rate for U.S.
service members injured in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Sustaining and improving this high-level of support for tomorrow's
conflicts will be difficult and requires adapting our force composition
and our deployment, training and readiness models. As the Air Force
Medical Service implements the reforms coming from Congress, the
Department and the Air Force, these evolving operational readiness
requirements are the prism we use to determine the best way forward.
There is no better example than our efforts to implement the
various medical reforms outlined by Congress in recent National Defense
Authorization Acts.
The Air Force is committed to the vision of a single, integrated
Military Health System laid out in the fiscal year 2017 NDAA, and we
have moved smartly to adopt these reforms. We are working hand-in-hand
with the Defense Health Agency and our sister services to design a
model that effectively transitions the authority, direction and control
of the healthcare benefit at Air Force Military Treatment Facilities to
the Defense Health Agency, as detailed in section 702 of that act. The
resulting standardization and efficiencies will allow the Air Force
Medical Service to focus our efforts on supporting the readiness of
operational Airmen, and organizing, training and equipping deployable
medical Airmen in support of combatant commander requirements.
In October 2018, the first four Air Force Military Treatment
Facilities--Keesler Air Force Base in Mississippi, Joint Base
Charleston in South Carolina, and Seymour Johnson Air Force Base and
Pope Field in North Carolina--transitioned to the Defense Health
Agency. We are also in the process of transitioning initial
headquarters functioning to the Defense Health Agency, including the
Quadruple Aim Performance Plan (a tool to quantify resources required
for Military Treatment Facility readiness activities), health plans and
pharmacy operations.
The run-up to and handover of the phase-one Military Treatment
Facilities has not been without challenges. This is to be expected in
any organization undergoing major structural and cultural change, and
we do have noteworthy success stories. Participating in the
collaborative transition Intermediate Management Organization with
Army, Navy and the Defense Health Agency led to invaluable information
sharing and gave the Air Force an opportunity to provide input as the
Defense Health Agency built its processes.
The Defense Health Agency and the Air Force Medical Service worked
together to overcome some unanticipated challenges at phase-one
Military Treatment Facilities. Keesler Medical Center experienced a
shortfall in funding soon after the Oct. 1 transition. The transition
Intermediate Management Organization worked with Keesler to revise its
estimated funding requirements to cover all civilian workforce and
nearly all contract requirements in one day, allowing Keeler to sustain
normal business operations without interruption.
In early March, a burst pipe flooded a building at Joint Base
Charleston, affecting the mental health clinic, resource management
office, and education and training facilities for the 628th Medical
Group. The Medical Group worked with the Air Force Medical Operations
Agency, the Defense Health Agency and the transition Intermediate
Management Organization to secure funding for disaster management,
flood restoration and the eventual facility repair and renovation, and
reopen mental health services in a temporary facility.
These examples demonstrate the potential the Military Treatment
Facility transition provides--a resilient, flexible organizational
structure with greater resources and a narrowed focus on
administration, management and patient care. The structure we developed
allowed us to overcome many of the initial hiccups presented by the
transition. Significant strategic and operational challenges remain as
we move toward transitioning more Military Treatment Facilities and
additional headquarters functions to the Defense Health Agency. These
future steps will be taken with the benefit of lessons learned from
this first phase, but we will have challenges to overcome--some already
identified, and some not foreseen.
As we transition more organizational roles and move new structures
from concept to operation, the key to ongoing success will be
maintaining strong lines of communication with the Defense Health
Agency and other partners and stakeholders. Only through close
coordination and collaboration will we achieve the goal of an
integrated Military Health System while maintaining the same commitment
to readiness, continuity of care, and high level of service to our
patients.
The next phase of transition begins October 2019 with additional
CONUS Military Treatment Facilities moving to the Defense Health
Agency. We are fully engaged with the Defense Health Agency, affected
Military Treatment Facilities, their wings and Major Commands to
prepare for this action. Additional headquarters functions, including
medical facility administration, and medical logistics will also
transition to the Defense Health Agency during this phase. We are
simultaneously communicating to Military Treatment Facilities in future
phases to help them adapt to the coming changes.
Concurrently, the Air Force Medical Service is preparing to
implement section 703 of the fiscal year 2017 NDAA. Our team is
evaluating ways to restructure Military Treatment Facilities in order
to maintain appropriate support for their host wing's mission and
ensure our providers have the opportunity to practice and maintain the
essential skills needed to provide care downrange. Our teams are
currently in the process of assessing each Air Force Military Treatment
Facility, analyzing their current mission requirements, clinical
performance, and ability to integrate care with network partners. We
will build comprehensive assessments of each facility based on these
criteria, which will inform our re-scoping recommendations, and be
included in reports due to Congress.
The Air Force Medical Service has also made significant progress
reorienting our internal organizational structure in support of our
full spectrum readiness mission. We are preparing to stand-down our two
current Field Operating Agencies, the Air Force Medical Operations
Agency and the Air Force Medical Support Agency, and replace them with
the Air Force Medical Readiness Agency.
The creation of the Air Force Medical Readiness Agency facilitates
our renewed focus on the operational readiness of our Airmen and our
medical forces, and will help us coordinate with the Defense Health
Agency to align readiness requirements and avoid duplication. We have
draft plans for the composition and location of the Air Force Medical
Readiness Agency and will reach initial operating capacity this summer,
with full operating capacity expected in autumn 2020.
This new headquarters structure highlights our renewed readiness
focus and commitment to efficiency. As the Defense Health Agency on-
boards additional functions, the Air Force Medical Service is taking a
careful look at which parts of our organization will no longer be
required, and which of these resources can be realigned to other parts
of the Air Force. A more streamlined Air Force Medical Service supports
the Secretary's plan to expand the Air Force's operational squadrons.
This reorientation towards readiness goes far beyond headquarters.
We are restructuring Air Force Military Treatment Facilities in support
of the readiness mission, and to clearly demarcate full spectrum
readiness activities from healthcare delivery to non-active duty
patients. We anticipate that these changes will help the Air Force meet
its 95 percent medical deployablity and 90 percent fully mission-
capable goals by reducing the number of Airmen deemed non- deployable
due to preventable illness or injury.
Per guidance issued by Secretary in February 2019, many Air Force
Military Treatment Facilities will soon reorganize based on a model
implemented in 2018 by the 366th Medical Group at Mountain Home Air
Force Base, Idaho. The Air Force Medical Service Reform Model divides
Military Treatment Facility staff into new squadron types, each with a
distinct focus. Medics assigned to Operational Medical Readiness
Squadrons will only treat active duty patients, while medics assigned
to Health Care Operations Squadrons will only treat non-active duty
patients. At larger Military Treatment Facilities, a third squadron
type, Medical Operations Support Squadrons, will provide ancillary
health services like laboratory, x-ray, and administrative functions.
The Medical Operations Support Squadrons squadron will support both
active duty and non-active duty patients.
This new model will enhance our organizational readiness culture by
allowing medics who treat active duty patients to focus on that patient
population and their readiness needs. Over an initial six-month period
in 2018, employing the Air Force Medical Service Reform Model at the
366th MDG contributed to a 20 percent reduction in the percentage of
Airmen deemed non- deployable at Mountain Home AFB at a time when the
rest of the Air Force maintained a constant rate. We anticipate this
will have similar effects at future sites.
We are on track to implement the Air Force Medical Service Reform
Model at 43 Military Treatment Facilities this summer. Some facilities
will be exempt, including larger hospital facilities, overseas Military
Treatment Facilities, some smaller Military Treatment Facilities, and
Graduate Medical Education platforms.
Airmen will be empaneled to Operational Medical Readiness Squadrons
by unit. This allows providers to build relationships with squadron
leaders and individual Airmen, and focus on squadron-specific needs to
return Airmen to duty. The Air Force Medical Service Reform Model will
allow our providers to get to know their active duty patients better,
understand the challenges they face, prevent more injuries and
illnesses, and return Airmen to full duty status more quickly.
This structure will also allow medical groups to be more responsive
to the shifting operational mission requirements of their wings. The
Air Force Medical Service is working closely with the Defense Health
Agency as we plan this reform, as it overlaps and complements the
transition of healthcare delivery to that organization. Our partnership
with the Defense Health Agency is vibrant and vital, and its strength
will contribute greatly to the future successes of these efforts.
The Air Force Medical Service is also modernizing its approach to
aerospace and operational medicine capabilities. The definition of an
operator has evolved over the years but flight medicine has not. We
will use the traditional flight medicine model to reach the rest of our
operational medics such as security forces, explosive ordinance
disposal and intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance operators.
The traditional flight medicine model will remain as part of our
operational medical readiness model and it will expand to include nurse
practitioners and physician assistants as flight surgeons. This expands
the pool of flight medicine-qualified practitioners, increasing our
deployable medical assets and capability to ensure Airmen are mission
ready.
Another critical readiness component the Air Force Medical Service
continues to develop is the concept of Integrated Operational Support.
Integrated Operational Support embeds medical assets directly into
operational units, enhancing access, building relationships and
improving performance, fitness and overall health. In particular,
embedded medics help in preventing and rapidly diagnosing
musculoskeletal injuries. Integrated Operational Support has long been
a staple of Air Force Medical Service support to operational squadrons,
but we are developing new platforms to push the envelope.
One such platform, the Operational Support Team, is designed to act
as a ``strike team'' to deploy into units at the request of the
commander to analyze and recommend solutions for medical and mental
health issues that may impact the mission. These teams are typically
composed of a physical therapist, a psychologist, two nutritionists, an
exercise physiologist, and a human performance integrator. Working in
partnership with squadron commanders, the Operational Support Team
evaluates the unit as a whole, determining what behaviors or conditions
may contribute to illness or injury, and recommending strategies for
the unit to avoid or address preventable health issues.
We rolled out the Operational Support Team model at two sites in
2018, Whiteman Air Force Base in Missouri and Joint Base Elmendorf-
Richardson in Alaska. It will deploy to 15 additional sites in the Air
Force in 2019, and we plan to continue rolling this model out Air
Force-wide in coming years. These efforts aligns closely with the
Secretary's goal of revitalizing the Air Force at the squadron level,
our core unit, making them more lethal, resilient and ready.
Even as we realign our medical support to the Air Force of the
future, the Air Force Medical Service must recommit to training,
nurturing and supporting our own medical personnel. One of the primary
objectives in the new Air Force Medical Service strategy map is
strengthening our Joint Warrior Medical Teams. The move towards an
integrated Military Health System mirrors the Joint nature of most line
deployments. It is increasingly more common for Airmen to serve side-
by-side with Soldiers, Sailors, Marines, Coast Guardsmen, National
Guard and Reserve members outside deployments. We need to do a better
job of preparing medical Airmen for these Joint environments. We also
need to create career and professional opportunities that reflect that
new normal and contribute to the recruiting and retention of qualified,
valuable military medical personnel.
Along these lines, the Air Force Medical Service is refining our
career pyramids to align with future Joint training and fully develop
an Air Force Medical Service continuum of learning to establish a clear
framework for career evolution for medical Airmen. Throughout that
process, it is vital for us to listen to our medical force to ensure we
are meeting their needs as members of the military and medical
professionals. This will also support our need to recruit, develop and
retain the highest quality practitioners. We are committed to building
a talent management structure for each of the seven officer, enlisted
and civilian Air Force medical corps to meet current and future
requirements.
We are designing the plan to help us achieve these goals, and we
know that making the proper investment of time, energy and resources
today will pay off as we develop service and Joint leaders equipped to
meet emerging challenges. Our goal to strengthen our Joint Warrior
Medics is flexible and adaptive. We will continue to collaborate with
our partners at Defense Health System and the other Services to find
innovative ways to improve training and allow members to plot their
professional and Joint development.
Another major change affecting the Air Force Medical Service is the
adoption of MHS GENESIS, the integrated, enterprise electronic health
record for the Military Health System. MHS GENESIS was first fielded by
the 92nd Medical Group at Fairchild Air Force Base, Washington, in
February 2017. MHS GENESIS will deploy in a series of waves over the
next several years, with Wave One sites coming in 2019. Air Force
locations in Wave One include Travis and Mountain Home Air Force Bases.
Electronic Health Record usage is a critical component of modern
medicine, and replacing legacy electronic health records with MHS
GENESIS is a significant additional mission for medical Airmen.
Adoption requires broad systems and network improvements, as well as
business process changes to achieve standardization and culture change.
Fairchild provided a critical template and testing ground for MHS
GENESIS adoption, and for the change management and systems processes
needed to successfully implement it across the Military Health System.
One key lesson from Fairchild's implementation of MHS GENESIS is
that the transition to a new network has to happen at the Military
Treatment Facility well in advance of actual MHS GENESIS training and
Go-Live events. We are now implementing network updates at least 6
months prior to these events at all future adoption sites. This
significantly alleviates many of the technical problems that affected
Fairchild's MHS GENESIS implementation. Another key lesson from
Fairchild is the need to overhaul our training approach. Immature
workflows limited training effectiveness for the entire staff, beyond
the designated MHS GENESIS ``super-users'' who were tasked to help
other members learn the system. We developed a new training approach in
coordination with the Defense Health Agency, informed by the challenges
and solutions from Fairchild and the other early sites.
Although the 92nd Medical Group did suffer a temporary but
significant decrease in productivity as their staff learned MHS
GENESIS, Fairchild did not lose readiness capability during this
period. 92nd Medical Group leadership prioritized that mission, another
critical lesson for future Military Treatment Facilities. Access levels
at Fairchild decreased during MHS GENESIS adoption, but rebounded by
December 2018. We expect the duration of this decrease to shrink as our
experience implementing MHS GENESIS grows. However, the readiness
mission cannot and will not be allowed to suffer during implementation.
We also learned that Fairchild's manning structure was insufficient
in some areas to support MHS GENESIS workflows. Adoption of MHS GENESIS
will require on-site program management and additional resources. As
the number of sites using MHS GENESIS increases, the normal military
cycle of permanent changes of station will find experienced MHS GENESIS
users already working at Military Treatment Facilities as they begin
implementation. This will provide a cadre of experienced users at new
sites, easing transition.
It has been more than 2 years since we started electronic health
record modernization in the Military Health System, and that time has
reaffirmed the knowledge that it requires significant collaboration
between the services and the Defense Health Agency to effectively
accomplish this modernization. We have learned a lot and the product
has been improved greatly in that time. We will continue to strive
towards standardizing and optimizing our use of MHS GENESIS and look
for ways to streamline our business processes.
Even while these transformation activities are underway, the day-
to-day mission of the Air Force Medical Service continues. Our medical
Airmen remain resolute in their commitment to our culture of Trusted
Care, wherever they serve. Above all else, we are focused on our
patients, whether they are an Airman getting ready for deployment, a
mother and newborn child at a hospital stateside, or an injured service
member en route home from a faraway battlefield. I am always humbled
and amazed by the incredible work medical Airmen do every day.
Alongside the structural and organizational changes to the Air
Force Medical Service outlined above, we continue to refine and grow
our expeditionary medical and aeromedical evacuation platforms. These
efforts are aligned with and in response to the requirements of our
combatant commanders, with a strategic eye towards the next generation
of conflicts. While this process is continuous, the past year saw
significant progress in evolving our capabilities to support a global
or regional peer-level conflict.
In fiscal year 2018, the Air Force Medical Service initiated the
Ground Surgical Team program to upgrade and enhance the capabilities of
the Mobile Field Surgical Teams. This was accomplished by modifying
training, equipment and personnel assigned and revising the tactics,
techniques and procedures for employment. These enhancements provide
ground force commanders with enhanced capabilities for damage control
resuscitation, combat damage control surgery, life, limb and eye-sight
saving care, and post-op critical care. When the transition is
complete, the Air Force Medical Service will field a total of 65 Ground
Surgical Teams.
This new platform offers several improvements over the previous
iteration. Ground Surgical Teams are designed to be flexible platforms
that undergo robust training and have a scalable, modernized equipment
augmentation package with enhanced capabilities to meet combatant
commander requirements. While staging out of an Expeditionary Medical
Support System near the front lines, these small, agile teams can drop
into remote, austere locations to save lives. This forward deployable
medical asset can prolong survivability for injured service members in
denied environments, where typical patient movement and en route care
is inaccessible.
At this time, 92 percent of active duty Ground Surgical Team
positions have been filled, with 63 percent of those individuals fully
trained. We are currently on schedule to have the remaining positions
manned and trained by the end of fiscal year 2019.
Ground Surgical Teams form the core capability of the Expeditionary
Medical System, which we are also making more flexible to support new
requirements. A key component of the revised Expeditionary Medical
System tactics, techniques and procedures is the addition of a second
Ground Surgical Team to each Expeditionary Medical System +25 package.
This will allow one team to forward deploy as a surgical element
without rendering the entire Expeditionary Medical System non-mission
capable.
We are also growing our Critical Care Air Transport Team
capability, which can turn an aircraft into a flying Intensive Care
Unit, expanding our global patient movement capability. We are taking
short- and long-term steps to build this capability by training
additional active duty, Guard and Reserve Critical Care Air Transport
Team crews, with plans to nearly double our current baseline of 124
crews to 221 crews by the end of fiscal year 2020. Increasing our
Critical Care Air Transport Team capability was identified as a
requirement in the 2017 Air Force Aeromedical Requirements Analysis
Study, and as a needed improved/enhanced medical mission in the
deliberate planning process for existing Air Force Operation Plans.
The Air Force Medical Service responded to this requirement by
taking immediate and long-term steps to increase our Critical Care Air
Transport Team capability. First, we increased the number of crews in
our training pipeline. Second, we identified the lengthy and repetitive
training process as a potential impediment to future growth. The 711th
Human Performance Wing and the U.S. Air Force School of Aerospace
Medicine at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio unveiled a
streamlined Critical Care Air Transport Team course in 2018, making it
more efficient at training new crews and maintaining skills for
existing crews. This allows the Air Force Medical Service to sustain
our increased Critical Care Air Transport Team capability, and grow it
further should this requirement arise.
In addition to training more Critical Care Air Transport Team
crews, the Air Force is expanding our standard aeromedical evacuation
fleet. We are working to certify the C-5M Super Galaxy for regular
aeromedical evacuation missions. The C-5M is currently used for
emergency aeromedical evacuation missions, but certifying it for
scheduled missions makes our aeromedical evacuation fleet larger and
more flexible. The C-5M can accommodate up to 300 patients, with a mix
of ambulatory and litter cases. Because this capacity is so large, we
are also in the early planning stages of increasing our ground staging
capability to take full advantage of the C-5M.
Our commitment to restoring readiness exceeds the areas outlined
above. I recently issued a new vision and guidance to the Air Force
Medical Service that positions Full Spectrum Medical Readiness as our
top priority and aligns with the Air Force's vision. We are
institutionalizing our Comprehensive Medical Readiness Program, which
establishes standards for a ready medical force at the individual
Airman level, enabling Commanders to manage to those standards. We are
clarifying and standardizing the readiness roles of our Major Command
Surgeons, Air Force Medical Service headquarters staff and Military
Treatment Facilities commanders.
We are also taking another look at our readiness training
exercises. This means reemphasizing the importance of medical
participation in wing-level readiness exercises. We are recommitting to
``training how we fight'' by conducting realistic and challenging
training and exercises to ensure our medical personnel are ready
perform to across a multi-domain environment. We are bringing back our
readiness training exercises, known as ``Medical Red Flag'' to give
medics additional training in battlefield casualty management. We want
to ensure our medics are ready to ``fight tonight'' when called on.
Working with our combatant commanders, we have also updated our
medical resourcing to revise some of our deployable medical platforms.
This includes configuration for Air Force Theater Hospitals, the
Expeditionary Medical System, and the aforementioned increase in
Critical Care Air Transport Team crews across our Total Force. These
efforts allow us to improve our capability mix through cost-effective
modernization, facilitate Joint operations, and build a more flexible
operational medical force.
Implementing these numerous, concurrent transformation efforts
commanded an enormous amount of time, energy and attention. As a
leader, it is my responsibility to help manage the natural concerns and
anxieties Air Force Medical Service members are experiencing during
this time. Author Robin Sharma says ``Change is hardest at the
beginning, and messiest in the middle, and easiest at the end.'' We are
in the middle of our change and it's messy and we are working are way
through it.
Many Air Force Medical Service members perceive the various ongoing
transformations with concern and trepidation about how it will impact
their careers, personal lives and, of course, patients. It is also a
testament to the incredible talent, resiliency and character of our
Airmen that we have made so much progress transforming the Air Force
Medical Service in such a quick time. Despite the challenges and
anxieties created by transformation, there is also a broad recognition
of the opportunity before us. By renewing and recommitting our focus on
operational medical readiness, we will build a stronger, more flexible,
and healthier Air Force than ever before.
As the Air Force Medical Service continues down the road of
multiple, simultaneous modernizations, efficiencies and reforms, we
will continue to innovate new ways to push medicine forward on the
battlefield, higher into the sky, and improve it in traditional
clinical settings. I regularly call on each and every medic,
irrespective of rank, to be disruptive innovators in their workspace.
This means finding new solutions that upend the established way of
doing things. To take risks, to try new ideas, to think without a box.
This spirit will see the Air Force Medical Service through this
tremendous change, and will lead to an even stronger organization.
Chairman Shelby, Senator Durbin, thank you again for the
opportunity to address you today. I hope that my testimony gives a
complete picture where Air Force Medicine is going, and the challenges
we are overcoming to get there. Building an integrated Military Healthy
System, focused on supporting the readiness and operational medical
needs of U.S. Armed Forces, will take time and significant efforts from
all involved, but I am confident we are on the right path to achieve
that vision. None of this would be possible without the remarkable
contributions, hard work and constant sacrifices made every day by the
men and women of the Air Force Medical Service.
I look forward to answering your questions.
Senator Shelby. Ms. Cummings.
STATEMENT OF MS. STACY A. CUMMINGS, PROGRAM EXECUTIVE
OFFICER OF THE DEFENSE HEALTHCARE
MANAGEMENT
SYSTEMS
Ms. Cummings. Chairman Shelby, Ranking Member Durbin, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you today.
ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORDS
I am honored to represent the Department of Defense as the
former Program Executive Officer, Defense Healthcare Management
Systems, PEO DHMS. The mission of PEO DHMS is to transform the
delivery of healthcare and advance data sharing through a
modernized electronic health record for servicemembers,
veterans, and their families.
In 2015, the DoD (Department of Defense) awarded a contract
to the Leidos Partnership for Defense Health to deliver a
modern interoperable EHR (electronic health record), MHS
GENESIS. MHS GENESIS provides an integrated inpatient and
outpatient state-of-the-market commercial solution consisting
of Cerner Millennium, an industry-leading EHR, and Henry
Schein's Dentrix Enterprise, a best-of-breed dental module.
In 2017, DoD deployed MHS GENESIS to four pilot sites in
Washington State. The deployment to these pilot sites allowed
DoD to better understand technical configuration and adoption
challenges that are typical in an EHR deployment. Today those
four pilot sites are using MHS GENESIS to safely deliver,
manage, and document health care, completing over 100,000
patient encounters each month.
In December of 2018, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Acquisition, in coordination with MHS leadership, approved the
further deployment of MHS GENESIS to the next six Waves
beginning later this year.
ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORD IMPLEMENTATION
MHS deployment will follow a regional Wave model, a total
of 23 Waves across three regions in the United States and two
overseas. This approach allows the DoD to take full advantage
of lessons learned and experience gained to maximize
efficiencies in subsequent Waves.
As we work towards fully deploying MHS GENESIS across the
DoD, we recognize the benefits of expanding our Federal
partnerships. In 2018, the United States Coast Guard joined the
DoD program, and the Department of Veterans Affairs awarded a
contract to acquire, deploy, and adopt the same EHR as DoD. The
result of these decisions will be a single integrated EHR for
all servicemembers, veterans, and their families, fundamentally
eliminating the need to exchange data between the Departments.
As the granddaughter, daughter, and spouse of veterans and
a beneficiary of the Military Health System, I can confidently
say that PEO DHMS is equally committed to the successful
deployment of a modern EHR, not just for the DoD, but also the
Coast Guard and the VA (Department of Veterans Affairs).
In closing, I would like to introduce and welcome PEO
DHMS's new Program Executive Officer, Mr. Bill Tinston, who is
with me today. Mr. Tinston joins us from the Defense Logistics
Agency, where he served as the Program Executive Officer. He
brings extensive executive-level experience in information
technology, program management, and cybersecurity.
Thank you again for the opportunity to share our progress.
I look forward to your questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ms. Stacy A. Cummings
introduction
Chairman Shelby, Ranking Member Durbin, and distinguished members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify before
you today. I am honored to represent the Department of Defense (DoD) as
the former program executive officer responsible for modernizing the
military's electronic health record (EHR) system and enhancing
interoperability and data sharing with the Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA) and private sector providers.
The mission of the Program Executive Office, Defense Healthcare
Management Systems (PEO DHMS) is to transform the delivery of
healthcare and advance data sharing through a modernized EHR for
service members, veterans, and their families. To this end, the DoD is
committed to three equally important objectives: deploy a single,
integrated inpatient and outpatient EHR, branded MHS GENESIS; improve
data sharing with the VA and our private sector healthcare partners;
and successfully transform the delivery of healthcare in the Military
Health System (MHS) through advanced tools that provide beneficiaries
more control over their healthcare experience. In June 2017, former VA
Secretary Shulkin announced his decision to adopt the same EHR as the
DoD. Since both departments will use the same commercial software
solution, interoperability is no longer an issue. The DoD and VA will
deploy one single instance. For the first time ever, medical data from
the DoD and VA will be stored in a single database, reducing the burden
for our service members and veterans, placing them in the center of
their healthcare.
Our mission aligns with the DoD's National Defense Strategy (NDS)
to modernize the DoD and provide combat-credible military forces. The
threats facing our nation constantly evolve and a medically ready
military force is critical to our national defense. MHS GENESIS
advances that mission. This cutting edge technology will supply MHS
providers with the necessary data to collaborate and make the best
possible healthcare decisions for our service members to remain mission
ready and mission focused, contributing to the NDS strategic approach
to restore warfighting readiness and field a lethal force.
history
Requirement from Congress
The DoD was an early pioneer in the development of a centralized,
global EHR when it introduced AHLTA in 2004. At the time, the private
sector viewed the DoD's in-house EHR solution as the future of
healthcare documentation. However, the DoD's health information
technology (IT) systems are dated, are not integrated, and are not
seamlessly interoperable with the VA. In the fiscal year 2008 National
Defense Authorization Act, Congress directed the Secretaries of the DoD
and VA to develop and implement EHR systems or capabilities that
provide full interoperability of personal healthcare information
between the DoD and VA. Additionally, it directed the establishment of
an interagency program office for the DoD and VA.
The DoD/VA Interagency Program Office (IPO) was established to lead
EHR efforts between the DoD and VA to improve the quality of
healthcare, improve clinical and patient experiences, and increase
interoperability among the Departments and the private sector. From
2010 to 2013, the DoD and VA executed a joint program called the
integrated Electronic Health Record (iEHR) with the goal to create a
single next-generation EHR system, led by the DoD/VA IPO.
The iEHR allowed the DoD and VA to improve interoperability through
a series of focused data sharing initiatives, including the deployment
of the Joint Legacy Viewer (JLV), which provides an integrated view of
VA and DoD clinical information. JLV allows the DoD to leverage our
expanding relationships with private-sector providers, providing
clinicians a real-time comprehensive, single view of a patient's health
history whether they receive care in a military or commercial facility.
JLV is available to DoD providers in AHLTA as well as MHS GENESIS, and
statistics indicate more than one million patient records each month
are viewed between the DoD and VA combined.
Although the iEHR didn't progress beyond the first joint venture
site, it was an important learning opportunity for the DoD and the VA.
The Departments fully recognized that medical data interoperability
requires a steadfast commitment and continuous improvement. Ultimately,
it was the lack of standardization between the Departments' policies
that inhibited the ability of the DoD and VA to implement the
technologies available at the time and define long-term success.
Capitalizing on the lessons learned, the DoD transitioned from
multiple EHR systems to a single, integrated commercial-off-the-shelf
(COTS) capability. The DoD determined the MHS requirements could be
better met by a state-of-the-market commercial application that would
allow the DoD to leverage private sector investments in technology and
establish data sharing networks with civilian partners to reduce costs
and improve the customer experience. Staying current with the latest
advancements in technology without being the only investment stream
enables the DoD to benefit from some of the best products in health IT
without solely carrying the financial burden.
Throughout this process, the DoD/VA IPO continues to be jointly
staffed and jointly funded with collaborative DoD and VA leadership and
management. As the Departments' EHR missions evolved, the IPO was re-
chartered in December 2013 to lead the Departments' efforts to
implement national health data standards and establish technical
standards to increase health data interoperability.
2015 Contract
In July 2015, the DoD competitively awarded a contract to the
Leidos Partnership for Defense Health (LPDH) to deliver a modern,
interoperable EHR. The LPDH team consists of four core partners: Leidos
Inc., as the prime developer, and three primary partners in Cerner
Corporation, Accenture, and Henry Schein Inc. This modern, secure,
connected EHR, MHS GENESIS, provides a state of the market COTS
solution consisting of Cerner Millennium, an industry-leading EHR, and
Henry Schein's Dentrix Enterprise, a best of breed dental module.
The deployment and implementation of MHS GENESIS across the MHS is
a team effort. Complex business transformation requires constant
coordination and communication with stakeholders and partners,
including the medical and technical community, to ensure functionality,
usability, and data security. The DoD engaged stakeholders across the
MHS to identify requirements and standard workflows. The result was a
collaborative effort across the Services and the Defense Health Agency
(DHA) to ensure the clinical workflows enabled by MHS GENESIS are
standard and consistent across the enterprise to minimize variation in
the delivery of healthcare.
Through a tailored acquisition approach, the DoD leveraged
commercial best practices and its own independent test community to
field a modern, secure, and connected system that provides the best
possible solution from day one. While there is still much work to do,
the integration of the commercial data hosting into DoD networks and
systems represents a new direction in Pentagon IT culture and practice.
This innovative approach set the bar for COTS systems and commercial
partnerships with the DoD and other Federal agencies in the future.
Pilot Sites
We employ industry standards to optimize the delivery of MHS
GENESIS. Rollout across the MHS follows a ``wave'' model. Pilot sites
in the Pacific Northwest were the first wave of military treatment
facilities (MTFs) to receive MHS GENESIS, which began February 2017 at
Fairchild Air Force Base (AFB) just 19 months after contract award, and
officially concluded in January 2018 at Madigan Army Medical Center
(MAMC). The DoD's deployment to four pilot sites spanned a cross
section of size and complexity. The lessons learned from the DoD pilot
sites will make worldwide deployment of MHS GENESIS to the DoD, the
United States Coast Guard (USCG) and the VA successful. As of today,
those four pilot sites continue to use MHS GENESIS to safely deliver,
manage, and document healthcare--completing over 100,000 patient
encounters each month.
Deployment of MHS GENESIS will occur by region--three in the
continental U.S. and two overseas--in a total of 23 waves. Each wave
will include an average of three hospitals and 15 physical locations
and will last approximately 1 year. Regionally grouped waves, such as
the Pacific Northwest, will run concurrently. This approach allows the
DoD to take full advantage of lessons learned and experience gained
from prior waves to maximize efficiencies in subsequent waves,
increasing the potential to reduce the deployment schedule in areas
where necessary. Full Operational Capability (FOC), to include garrison
medical and dental facilities worldwide, is scheduled for 2023.
expanding federal partnerships
Last year, the USCG joined the DoD's EHR implementation and the VA
entered into a contract to implement the same EHR as the DoD. The
result of these decisions will be a single, integrated EHR for all
service members, veterans, and their families. The deployment of a
single integrated EHR for the DoD, VA, and the USCG will enable more
efficient, highly reliable, safe, and quality care. This solution will
focus on clinical services, interfaces, and a shared infrastructure to
enable shared workflows, user roles, order sets, training, and
cybersecurity standards. The health and safety of our most important
asset--our people--is our highest priority. I recently spoke with the
Commanding Officer at one of our pilot sites and he said:
``Despite the challenges of rolling out a new electronic health
record, the new EHR is much more integrated and capable than
our legacy systems. Features such as bar code scanning of
inpatient and Labor & Delivery medications and blood
transfusions, as well as enhanced medication reconciliation and
Patient Portal features are a few of the features that are
bringing our EHR into the 21st century. We are only beginning
to scratch the surface of what MHS GENESIS can do for our
patients to enhance safety and continuity of care across the
enterprise. We are excited about future interoperability and to
ultimately have the DoD and VA on the same electronic health
record platform. The future is bright.''
Partnering with the VA and USCG fundamentally eliminates the need
to exchange data while ensuring interoperability with private
healthcare providers and continuity of care for all of our service
members. A single, integrated EHR for the DoD, USCG, and VA for the
first time provides the transitioning service member with the complete
longitudinal record in one place at the time of need to support
healthcare delivery and benefits adjudication seamlessly and without
the need to move data from one system to another. This patent-centered
approach allows us to drive national interoperability and data
standards to benefit service members, veterans, and all Americans.
lessons learned
Change Management
Leadership from the DoD is heavily engaged and invested in the
success of MHS GENESIS, and we continually take lessons learned from
training, adoption of workflows, and change management activities.
Following deployment to the pilot sites, PEO DHMS implemented an
eight week stabilization and adoption period in January of 2018. During
this time, we optimized MHS GENESIS to establish a baseline
configuration, focusing on training, adoption of workflows, and change
management activities. The DoD identified several lessons learned
regarding training. MHS GENESIS training focused on ``buttonology''
rather than a workflow approach. The DoD is resolving the training
approach through three fundamental changes to the MHS GENESIS training
strategy. First, workflow adoption in key areas is being trained in
advance of MHS GENESIS deployment and being led by the functional
community. Second, training is being reconfigured to focus on role-
based workflow training that teaches the user how to perform key tasks
using MHS GENESIS. Third, the MHS will utilize a peer expert program, a
proven commercial best practice that utilizes an updated training
environment to deliver team based training and just in time training
during and after Go-Live. Our pilot deployments also provided lessons
learned for future training by reducing redundant training content for
users with multiple roles, transitioning from the aforementioned
``buttonology'' based training to a scenario and workflow based
approach, and ensuring the training technical environment is in sync
with the production environment.
Operational Testing and User Feedback
The DoD values the feedback from end users, stakeholders, and the
test community. In December 2018, DoD leadership evaluated the cost,
performance, and schedule of the MHS GENESIS program and made the
decision to approve continued deployment. Among the many factors that
informed this decision is the Initial Operational Test & Evaluation
(IOT&E) report. Approximately 90 percent of the total Incident Reports
(IR) captured at our pilot sites fall into workflow and configuration,
end user knowledge of the system, policy issues, or recommendations for
future enhancements. The remaining 10 percent of the total IRs can be
traced to a defect in the software solution that makes up MHS GENESIS.
Since the IOT&E report, the DoD continues to progress with responding
to user feedback; 100 percent of the defect IRs that the functional
community categorized as high priority have been resolved and
recommended for closure. The DoD notes the report recommends we
``conduct Follow-on Operational Testing & Evaluation at the next
fielding to evaluate corrective actions and revised training, to inform
future fielding decisions.'' The DoD concurs with this recommendation
and believes follow-on testing will validate the improvements made to
enterprise work processes, the system solution, and training that
impacts end users at our next facilities.
Federal Electronic Health Record Modernization Working Group
On September 28, 2018, the Secretaries of Defense and Veterans
Affairs signed a Joint Commitment Statement pledging to align VA and
DoD strategies to implement an interoperable EHR system. In response to
this commitment, the DoD and VA evaluated program dependencies such as
infrastructure, incorporation of clinical and business processes, and
other requirements from the functional, technical, and programmatic
communities. DoD and VA leadership determined the optimal and lowest
risk alternative is to re-charter the DoD/VA IPO into the Federal
Electronic Health Record Modernization (FEHRM) Program Office. The
FEHRM, which will incorporate key members of the IPO as well as DoD and
VA program office staff, will provide a more comprehensive, agile, and
coordinated management authority to execute requirements necessary for
a single, seamless integrated EHR.
Leadership Commitment is Critical to Success
Change is always hard. This is especially true when deploying a
single, integrated inpatient and outpatient EHR, while standardizing
enterprise wide workflows across more than 400 military treatment
facilities. Research in 2017 from KLAS identifies leadership
engagement, education, and good governance as factors that contribute
to the success of an EHR implementation. A recent study shows the JPS
Health Network ranks in the 99th percentile for provider job
fulfillment. This team credits their success to executive leadership,
specifically highlighting that ``senior executives lead by example and
expect all clinicians and employees to demonstrate service to others.''
The DoD leadership agrees and is heavily engaged and invested in the
success of MHS GENESIS. We continually take lessons learned from
training, adoption of workflows, and change management activities.
progress
Patient Safety and Cyber Focus
We work closely with the MHS community to continuously refine and
enhance the system to meet the needs of the military health community
based on ongoing, real-time feedback from the testing sites. Patient
safety and protecting beneficiaries' personal health data are the two
highest priorities for the MHS and those priorities guide the
implementation of MHS GENESIS.
Since the inception of the MHS GENESIS program, PEO DHMS has worked
closely with the DoD Chief Information Officer (CIO), the DHA CIO, and
the MHS GENESIS vendor team to secure beneficiary data by leveraging
commercial and DoD best practices, including architecture, tools, and
processes. A commercial datacenter hosts MHS GENESIS. It is both
physically and virtually segregated within the datacenter and undergoes
continuous scanning to identify and mitigate risks. Further, DoD
experts monitor and defend it to meet DoD cybersecurity standards, and
as a result, DoD mitigated nearly 90 percent of all identified risk to
moderate, low, or very low.
The DoD strives to maintain the most advanced information assurance
(IA) capabilities in the world. To leverage these capabilities, DoD IA
tools and personnel are embedded within the datacenter boundary to
ensure the data MHS GENESIS exchanges is monitored, protected, and
defended from cyberattacks. The DoD also established continuous cyber
assessments as a service, leveraging DoD's formal Cooperative
Vulnerability and Penetration Assessment and Adversarial Assessment
processes to improve the overall cyber posture of MHS GENESIS. This
innovative approach to public/private partnering not only improves the
cyber posture for the DoD but also the vendor's commercial customers
and the healthcare industry in general.
MHS GENESIS incorporates several IA improvements over the legacy
systems it replaces, including mandatory use of the Common Access Card
and Public Key Infrastructure, a single instance of software
architected to replace hundreds of distributed legacy instances, and
secure implementation of medical devices. On November 29, 2018, the DoD
CIO, who serves as the Authorizing Official for MHS GENESIS, renewed
the program's Authority to Operate with Conditions for 12 months.
Metrics, Global Trigger Tool, & Patient Safety Enhancements
Cyber security and patient safety remain our top priorities, and we
are committed to getting the deployment of MHS GENESIS right to ensure
the delivery of safe, quality care to service members, veterans, and
their families.
Many improvements in the adoption of MHS GENESIS were seen in 2018
that led to more effective care. For example, there was a 45 percent
increase in referrals processed in one business day; a 38 percent
decrease in the time nurses spent in the EHR in outpatient care
settings; a 26 percent decrease in the total time providers spent in
the EHR for ambulatory clinics; a 16 percent increase in operating room
procedure volume; a 21 percent decrease in the provider order time per
patient at all pilot sites; and 2,300 duplicate lab orders avoided.
Patient care and medication safety improvements are being
implemented in MHS GENESIS. Since 2018, the pilot sites realized the
following achievements: a 32 percent increase with the number of
patients seen in outpatient care settings; an 8.1 percent improvement
in turnaround time for STAT chemistry lab tests; an 88.5 percent
average in discharge medication reconciliation compliance; an 84
percent average Bar Code Medication Administration compliance; and a 63
percent increase in new prescriptions and refills.
With any EHR deployment, there is potential for increased error.
This is expected and seen in commercial marketplace deployments. The
DoD carefully monitored patient safety throughout the deployment
through its Joint Patient Safety Reporting System (JPSRS), as well as
with the Global Trigger Tool (GTT). Both the JPSRS and the GTT are
recognized safety monitoring processes and tools used throughout the
healthcare industry. We continue to use the GTT, which was developed by
the Institute for Healthcare Improvement to leverage chart review by
trained clinical abstractors of ``triggers'' or indicators of adverse
events. Once a trigger is identified, the record is examined more
closely for evidence of harm. While it is measured as a rate, GTT data
can also be used as a baseline for ongoing safety monitoring during
deployment of MHS GENESIS. Comparing the data from our pilot sites to
other military treatment facilities using legacy systems, there was no
increase in patient safety harm events prior to and following the
deployment of MHS GENESIS at the pilot sites.
Service to Enterprise Transition
Lessons learned from the pilot site fielding indicate that
enterprise level management is a more effective way to field MHS
GENESIS. Standard workflows and processes continue to prove beneficial
to system implementation and end user adoption. As the DoD implements
Congressional direction to transition from service unique to
enterprise-managed healthcare, MHS GENESIS will enable further
standardization and drive increased efficiency across the enterprise.
Waves 1-6 Status & Defense Acquisition Board Update
MHS GENESIS completed deployment to our pilot sites, applied
lessons learned and feedback from users and the test community, and is
on track for full deployment by the end of calendar year 2023. Our
deployment to four pilot sites in 2017 enabled the DoD to gather
feedback in order to further configure MHS GENESIS for future wave
deployments. PEO DHMS received exciting news in December 2018 when
participating in the DoD EHR Defense Acquisition Board assessment of
the DoD Healthcare Management System Modernization Program Management
Office's readiness for a Limited Fielding Decision. The Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Acquisition affirmed MHS GENESIS met the
criteria for approved deployment to Waves 1-6 fielding sites, which is
in line with the full deployment schedule. The next deployment Wave
includes: Travis Air Force Base, Naval Health Clinic Lemoore, Presidio
of Monterey, Mountain Home Air Force Base, and surrounding clinics.
conclusion
Thank you again for the opportunity to come here today and share
the progress we've made to transform the delivery of healthcare for
service members, veterans, and their families. The successful
deployment of MHS GENESIS to our four pilot sites was an important
milestone in implementing what will be the largest integrated inpatient
and outpatient EHR in the United States. Because of its tremendous
impact not only on military healthcare, but on healthcare across the
United States, I personally traveled to the Pacific Northwest on 12
separate occasions ahead of and during the rollout to our pilot sites.
I engaged with the leadership as well as system users to gain a better
understanding of the overall impact on providers. While we experienced
some challenges, we continue to progress, and providers as well as the
DoD are seeing the benefit. I recently received a quote from a
provider:
``Modernization of the DoD Electronic Health Record was a
necessity. MHS GENESIS became our opportunity. It shined a
light onto the Military Health System, illuminating the best
practices throughout the MHS and identifying areas needing
improvement. It caused us to breakdown not only the barriers
between services and the barriers between the DoD and the VA,
but also the barriers between all specialists within a
hospital's or clinic's care continuum. Never before have I seen
nurses, physicians, surgeons, and transfusion technicians sit
side-by-side and collaborate as intensely as I witness daily
with MHS GENESIS. Every day, multi-disciplinary teams work
across the pilot sites and the country to bring timely,
relevant, evidenced-based practice to MHS GENESIS. This is more
than an Electronic Health Record; it is a collaborative health
record serving our nation's service members, veterans, and
their families. There is much work to be done to deploy and
optimize MHS GENESIS, but it is a great leap forward in support
of the healthcare of this deserving population''.
In closing, I welcome PEO DHMS' new program executive officer, Mr.
William J. Tinston. Mr. Tinston joins us from the Defense Logistics
Agency (DLA), where he served as Program Executive Officer. In this
role, he was responsible for the management and oversight of DLA's
Major Automated Information Systems programs and special interest
programs. His strong acquisition, business systems, and executive
experience will provide superior leadership as we continue to deploy
relevant health IT solutions to the DoD along with our Federal
partners. Mr. Tinston is fully engaged with the progress of the FEHRM
Working Group and will work with this team to re-charter the IPO,
integrate acquisition management, and coordinate the EHR deployment in
support of the DoD, USCG, and VA. We began official turnover March 11,
and I transitioned to my new position in the Office of the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Acquisition on March 25.
While we are well on our way, PEO DHMS continues to progress as an
organization striving for nothing less than outstanding results and
acquisition excellence. We are agile and iterative in our approach and
are committed to identifying the right capabilities and delivering them
to our customers. As a partner in our progress, we appreciate Congress'
interest and ask for your continued support to help us deliver on our
promise to provide world-class care and services to those who
faithfully serve our nation. Again, thank you for this opportunity, and
I look forward to your questions.
Senator Shelby. Thank you.
MILITARY MEDICAL MANPOWER REDUCTIONS
I will start again with Admiral Bono. Can you explain,
Admiral, why the Department is reducing its uniform military
health professionals and how reductions will be tailored to
create the appropriate force mix of health specialists that you
need?
Admiral Bono. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much.
So this is an area that we have been working very closely
with the services. While I cannot speak directly to those exact
billets that the services have identified, what I can speak to
is how we are working together to make sure that our patients
continue to have the access to the care that they need as well
as the specialty services. So, in that regard, we will be
looking at different models of either hiring, contracting, or
the use of our networks.
We are also moving to a market-based approach to the
delivery of our care, where we will be sharing resources across
all of the services within geographic areas.
Senator Shelby. Thank you.
Admiral Bono. Thank you, sir.
ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORD ROLLOUT
Senator Shelby. Ms. Cummings, could you provide a little
more detail on the lessons learned from the initial rollout and
the corrective actions that will be put in place to ensure a
smooth deployment of the record to the remaining medical
facilities? In other words, is MHS GENESIS still on track for
full deployment across the Military Health System by 2023, or
has it slipped?
Ms. Cummings. Yes, it is on track for full deployment by
the end of calendar year 2023.
Some of the lessons that we learned through our pilot
sites, and that we have made mitigations for, is first the
network infrastructure. We need to have a stable network
infrastructure in place several months prior to----
Senator Shelby. That was a valuable lesson, was it not?
Ms. Cummings. It was a very valuable lesson.
Senator Shelby. Putting it out like a pilot program.
Ms. Cummings. Yes. At our pilot sites, we were deploying
the modern network at the same time we were deploying the
modern EHR, and that ended up being too much change and too
much instability for the sites to be able to handle and react
to. So we have put in place a 6-month buffer. So we will deploy
the modern network.
Admiral Bono has responsibility for that. She is on track,
and we have laid out our future deployment schedule based on
that requirement of 6-month stability for the network.
Senator Shelby. What will this do for this uniform service?
Ms. Cummings. So the modern network is actually built in
with cybersecurity in mind. So what we are doing is we are
creating the bandwidth required to be able to have fast access
to the system, but at the same time, we are creating security
that is built in around the way the network is designed as well
as the medical devices that are on the network. Under MHS
GENESIS, we will be able to connect and transfer data with
medical devices at a much higher rate than we are able to do in
our legacy systems.
Senator Shelby. Thank you.
The recent National Defense Authorization Act contained a
number of provisions that substantially transformed the
Military Health System, including transferring responsibility
for managing more than 400 military treatment facilities
currently operated by the services to the Defense Health
Agency.
MILITARY TREATMENT FACILITIES TRANSITION FROM SERVICES TO DEFENSE
HEALTH AGENCY
We will start with you, Admiral Bono. Could each of the
Surgeons General comment on how this transition is going, and
are there concerns in the transition in the management and
administration? Admiral.
Admiral Bono. Yes, sir. Thank you very much.
First, I would like to be able to thank Congress for giving
us this opportunity. This allows us to modernize----
Senator Shelby. Talk into the mic a little bit.
Admiral Bono. Sorry.
I would like to thank Congress for giving us this
opportunity. This allows us to transform our Military Health
System to start marrying some of the best practices that we see
in industry, and that is, as we know, that by collectively and
concentrating some back-office functions, we are able to get to
better standardization and more reliable outcomes.
So, as we are looking at that and taking advantage of those
opportunities in the NDAA, we have been working very closely
with the services to make sure that we identify those best
practices that we can apply to our Military Health System.
Senator Shelby. General West, do you have a comment?
General West. Yes, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for that
question.
Again, the success of our MTFs is 100 percent for I think
all of us sitting here because we know that it is a no-fail
mission, because our family members, our servicemembers, our
retirees are seen in these facilities. So it is imperative that
the DHA is successful, and so we have been working with Admiral
Bono and her team, with our fellow services to ensure that
there is no gap in care when that occurs.
As Dot, my colleague, mentioned, the change in the middle,
the middle part is a little bit messy, so that is when you
identify those areas during the transition that need to be
worked on, alternate solutions, more attention placed on.
So the transition that we are seeing at Womack Army Medical
Center, we have the dual-hatted commander that is there now is
looking through the processes of making sure that the
operational requirements and the senior commander requirements
for the installation are met as well as the healthcare delivery
piece, so it is the mix of readiness and healthcare delivery
benefit, and I think that is progressing well. With the path
that we have forward, I know we will be successful in that as
long as we make sure we look at those gaps and then provide
resources and alternatives to make them successful.
Thank you.
Senator Shelby. Admiral.
Admiral Faison. Sir, I think the transformation is
incredibly complex, but it also offers incredible
opportunities.
Senator Shelby. What is the biggest challenge?
Admiral Faison. I think we are doing something very new. We
are taking----
Senator Shelby. Because it is new?
Admiral Faison. Sir?
Senator Shelby. Because it is new?
Admiral Faison. Well, it is basically taking three global
health systems and merging them into one, and there are
enormous benefits to be had. So we are working through the
complexities. As General West said and as Admiral Bono
mentioned, there is a lot of moving parts to this, but I think
it is going well, to be honest with you. We are learning some
valuable lessons through Phase I that we can apply to this.
The opportunity for us is to be able to refocus exclusively
on readiness of our medical servicemembers to get them ready
for combat casualty care in the next fight and to provide
better care and support for our servicemembers who did not get
a break in operational tempo. So I think there is enormous
opportunities as we work through this together.
At the same time, we all know that we have to be successful
together because that represents----
Senator Shelby. How much more efficient will it be?
Admiral Faison. That is a great question, sir.
I am hopeful we will see increased efficiencies as we
standardize provision of care, as we standardize how clinics
are run.
The good news is for our servicemembers, they ought not to
have to guess what clinic hours are or how clinics operate or
pharmacies operate as they PCS from station to station. There
is enormous opportunities and efficiencies to be had there.
As we hand that off to DHA to do for us that will allow us
to focus on getting ready for the next fight.
Senator Shelby. General. General Hogg.
General Hogg. Yes, sir.
So the transformation, I believe is going well with some
difficulties because you are working with three different----
Senator Shelby. Explain what you mean by difficulties. We
know they are going to be difficult.
General Hogg. Yes. Again, as----
Senator Shelby. The challenges.
General Hogg. As Admiral Faison said, you have three health
systems that you are trying to merge into one health system,
and that health system not only delivers benefit, but also
delivers medical readiness.
We also do that a little bit differently because our core
missions are different. So, in the Air Force, our core mission
in medical readiness is our medical evaluation. Navy is sea and
under sea. Army is ground medicine. So we are a little bit
different, and so trying to bring all those four cultures
together is challenging.
But the one thing is we are committed to making this
successful. It is the right thing to do, to allow the services
to really focus in on readiness and bring that to the next--
future, and to be supportive of the Defense Health Agency in
delivering the benefit.
These are mutually supportive. They are not exclusive. We
are not divesting of the benefit.
Senator Shelby. Senator Durbin.
Thank you.
Senator Durbin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General West, thank you for your service. You mentioned
this may be your last opportunity to testify. Thank you for the
relationship and information you provided our office. I wish
you the very best.
SERVICEMEMBER TOBACCO USE
Currently now, fewer than 14 percent of American adults use
tobacco. Does anyone know what the percentage is of members of
our military who use tobacco products?
General West. Sir, I can speak to that. In our recent
report, our Health of the Force, where we look installation by
installation, there is a wide range, a low of 10 percent at
some of our installations, up to a high of in the mid-20s. So
there is a higher use of tobacco, I know in the Army, within
our servicemembers.
Senator Durbin. A November 2017 report, as you mentioned,
an installation-specific review found that 26.4 percent of
soldiers use tobacco, almost twice the national average.
Since most of you are medical doctors, have a background in
medicine, is there anyone on this panel who believes that is a
good thing, that over a fourth of our military are using
tobacco?
General West. Sir, absolutely not, from my perspective, and
I have mentioned before, there is no minimum daily requirement
for nicotine. There is not a nutritional need or need for
anyone to have tobacco in their system, so that is--and I think
the Surgeon General of the United States back over 50 years ago
identified that tobacco is not good for you, and it is even
printed on the cigarette packages.
Senator Durbin. So it turns out that about a third of the
military smokers took up the habit after they joined the
military. It appears that there is a pro-tobacco culture in our
military, which has more and more of our men and women in
uniform who are using tobacco which all of us I hope concede is
not a good thing for them individually or for our military in
general in relation to their performance of duty and their
ability to live long and healthy lives.
What will it take? I mean, when they go through basic
training and every one of the branches of the service, they are
prohibited from using tobacco products, so it appears that
after they are finished with basic training, all bets are off.
It is tobacco in every direction. What am I missing here? If
the rest of the world is discovering the danger of tobacco, why
is not our military?
Admiral Bono.
Admiral Bono. Thank you, sir.
Actually, we do recognize the dangers of tobacco, and while
we recognize also that we have a higher rate than the normal
population, there are several efforts that are ongoing.
First, we had the Healthy Base Initiative, where we have
declared several bases as tobacco-free areas, tobacco-free
zones. We have taken out tobacco sales out of many of our
nearby shops that make it very easy to get access to that.
Then the other aspect that we provide our servicemembers is
tobacco cessation, not only training, but also products, and we
do see that when we put people through tobacco cessation
programs, that we are able to drop the usage of tobacco
products, not just smoking inhalation products, but all tobacco
products by 10 percent.
Now, being able to sustain that means we have to continue
to create the environment in which they continue to choose to
avoid tobacco. So we recognize the dangers. We do have some
places. We do have some mitigations in place, but you are
absolutely correct. Part of what we have to do is continue to
create that environment that encourages----
Senator Durbin. Admiral, are you aware that it is because
this committee has added specific language that we finally
eliminated the discount that was being offered----
Admiral Bono. Yes.
Senator Durbin [continuing]. On tobacco products on base
exchanges?
Admiral Bono. Yes, sir. That is why I threw that in there.
Senator Durbin. Thank you for doing that.
[Laughter.]
Senator Durbin. So let us move to the next level. Let us
get beyond tobacco into the real world of vaping and e-
cigarettes, an addiction to nicotine. It may not include
tobacco, but it is an addiction.
There have been some instances, I think more than 60 cases,
where members of our military were using these vape oils, and
it turned out to be serious. Does anyone have any knowledge of
that experience?
General Hogg. Sir, I do not have knowledge, specific
knowledge. I know our members are turning to vaping.
What we are doing in the Air Force Medical Service as well
as concentrating on cessation, I think we are missing part of
the puzzle, and that is more about preventing initiation of
smoking. So we have partnered with the University of Virginia
to look at developing programs that are focused on behaviors
that would decrease members' desire or thought process in even
starting to use tobacco products, whether it is smoke or
smokeless or vaping. So we are in the process of doing that and
using evidence-based practices to try to reduce that.
Senator Durbin. I know this will not make me popular with a
fourth of the military and others, but we have got to get much
more aggressive on this. In the rest of the world, the
nonmilitary world, we are seeing an inundation of vaping and e-
cigarettes in junior high schools and high schools across the
United States.
These kids are taking this up because JUUL, which is now
owned largely by a tobacco company, has decided they want to
transition people from cigarettes into an addiction to nicotine
with their vaping products, and although they proclaim
publicly, ``Oh, we are not appealing to children,'' give me a
break. Ask any teacher or principal in the school near your
home what is going on with vaping.
It is no wonder it is now in the military. Does it not
stand to reason that we would make dependence on tobacco or
vaping one of the conditions when we grade a soldier or sailor
or airman's performance and eligibility for promotion?
General West. Sir, that is something that I think our
senior leaders would have to weigh in on to consider, but I
know back to the question that you had, sir, about the
experience with the vaping, the vape oils and the concerns and
the adverse health events we had, the Sergeant Major of the
Army actually put out a bulletin to all the servicemembers
regarding that and the usage of that warning against the
hazards of it.
But it is going to be education, education, education, and
then changing the culture of the, I guess, glamorization of
tobacco use.
Senator Durbin. I do not want to come down too hard, but he
did not just put out a bulletin. He reissued the bulletin----
General West. Yes, absolutely.
Senator Durbin [continuing]. From an earlier time. So,
clearly, there is progress that needs to be made here.
I do not understand if we are concerned about public
health--and you are medical professionals--why this is not
front and center. We can just see the obvious problem that we
have in our military, and it appears that the culture of
tobacco in the military is so engrained that we cannot attack
this, we cannot deal with it head on, and it troubles me. The
rest of the world seems to be waking up, but why is our
military so far behind?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Shelby. Senator Moran.
Senator Moran. Chairman, thank you and Senator Durbin for
the hearing today, and thanks to our panelists for being with
us.
I want to start with General West. General West, you did me
a favor, although I hope you think I did you a favor, but thank
you for presenting the Meritorious Unit Commendation to the
women of the 688th here in Washington, D.C., last week.
General West. Thank you, sir. It was my honor to do it,
and, yes, sir, you did do me a favor. It was awesome.
Senator Moran. I really was not fishing, but I know it
was--I met with these women soldiers at Fort Leavenworth. It
was a great experience for me, and I hope--I just know it was
for you as well.
General West. Yes, sir.
Senator Moran. Thank you. And I know your presence there
would be very meaningful to them. This is a group of African
American women who in World War II delivered the mail in Europe
in a segregated way and honored their country and did their job
so well. It was a great moment to meet these women. I
appreciate your presence.
General West. Well, thank you. Thank you, sir.
TOXIC EXPOSURE
Senator Moran. In a couple of issues for all of you--I
guess one of them for all of you--I am working with a number of
my colleagues but have an interest in the issue of toxic
exposure.
I would like to know that each of you would support our
efforts to get the DoD and the VA on a similar page and working
together as we do a couple of things.
First of all, research. We have introduced legislation that
became law. One of the things we are paying attention to is
intergenerational consequences of exposure to toxic substances.
The scientific community has--in a study that was required--a
study outside of the VA has indicated that there is a need for
additional research into this topic, and that, of course--that
research will require information.
We have worked to get DoD to make records, location, and
exposure circumstances available certainly to veterans and to
retired military, but it would be useful to me to hear from
each of you that you are understanding of this issue and
willing to devote your staff's time with the Department of
Veterans Affairs toward response to toxic exposure from Vietnam
to Iraq and Afghanistan.
General West and Admiral.
General West. Yes, sir, absolutely. The U.S. Army Medical
Commands--the Public Health Center really devotes a large
amount of their time to that toxic exposure, burn pits, for
example, registries to determine whether or not our
servicemembers and even family members as well are exposed to
any toxic agents, not only where they work, where they are
deployed, but also where they live.
We have been asked to check air samples. We have an
industrial hygiene team, members under the Public Health Center
that goes out, and they do EPICONs, where they actually go to
see if there is any epidemiological--case-by-case, if
requested, to look to see if there are any issues in an
individual's environment.
Then on a strategic level, again, those registries that
identify locations and try to triangulate locations with
symptoms and in any type of research that might assist us in
determining any countermeasures or mitigating strategies, if
individuals are going to be in that environment.
Senator Moran. Thank you for those details.
I am interested in making certain that the Department of
Defense sees this as an issue, both for DoD and for the VA. Is
that true, Admiral and General?
Admiral Faison. Yes, sir, absolutely.
As I shared in my opening statement, we view care of our
servicemembers and their families as a sacred trust that is
placed in our hands, and part of that is making sure that we
understand the environments from which they go and serve and
that we understand the health consequences of that.
As General West said, we have public health commands, all
of us, that are very actively engaged in research, in
epidemiological surveys and studies to understand the potential
impacts of toxins and other environmental factors on the health
and wellness of our servicemembers, their families, not only
during service, but after service, as you know, since many of
these do not manifest for quite some time, so absolutely
engaged in those partnerships.
Thank you.
General Hogg. Yes, sir. The Air Force Medical Service is
also actively engaged and understands the need to not only
research exposure and what that does to our airmen and our
families and the community and having registries available so
that it can be tracked. As Admiral Faison said, many of these
do not manifest themselves until later down----
Senator Moran. Thank you very much.
The National Academy of Sciences did the most recent study,
and they are suggesting, encouraging that DoD start monitoring
exposure so that we can prevent the exposure obviously from
occurring in the future.
The second issue I want to raise, this one perhaps to you,
General West, is suicide prevention and mental health issues.
Senator Tester, who just joined us, he and I have
introduced legislation related to these two issues, to suicide
prevention and mental health issues. It is again a request that
the Department of Defense and the services commit to working
with the Department of Veterans Affairs so that we can
coordinate.
DOD/VA COLLABORATION AND WOUNDED WARRIOR CARE
Much of what we seem to know today is that there has to be
a continuum of care, treatment, attention, love, compassion for
those who are departing our military and becoming veterans, and
that the space in that time is one of the most important as we
find opportunities for our servicemen and -women to pursue
careers outside the military. And so, again, I would highlight
the importance of DoD and VA cooperating.
General West, you were of extreme help to me, and I am
extremely proud of what I see at Fort Riley today, Fort Riley,
Kansas, in regard to Irwin Army Hospital, and I thank you for
your help in that regard.
Just next door to that new hospital, though, is one of the
few remaining Warrior Transition Units, and I would expect you
to be familiar with the National Intrepid Center for
Excellence, NICoE.
I would like to see the opportunity for a NICoE to exist at
Fort Riley in part because of the warrior transition, the new
Army hospital and 25,000 veterans that surround Fort Riley, and
I would ask you to help me understand the process by which the
Army works with the foundation to make determinations. There
are eight sites across the country. We would like to see, to
learn why we cannot be on a short list of a place for a next
facility, and I would appreciate your willingness to work with
me to understand how you, the Army, and I can be of help in
making that case to the foundation.
General West. Yes, sir. I appreciate the opportunity to
answer that.
As our wounded warrior population has thankfully decreased
from a high of over 20,000 when we had 45 Warrior Transition
Units across the Army down to the current 14 that we have Army-
wide for about a population of about 2,000, where we have our
assets located throughout our installations is determined again
by the population density for those areas.
I know working with the foundation, not only with the Army,
but they work with the other services because they also try to
pick if there is a location, if there is joint, if there are
other services that can benefit from that. But I will, sir, get
with you on the Intrepid Foundation.
Senator Moran. Thank you. That is a good point. Not every
veteran of those 25,000 are Army veterans around Fort Riley.
General West. Yes.
Senator Moran. Admiral Bono, just to conclude, I would ask
your help in our veterans committee. It seems to be a theme in
my conversations today, but we are having a hearing next week
in regard to access standards for the new John McCain MISSION
Act.
Admiral Bono. Yes, sir.
Senator Moran. Part of the efforts that went into that
legislation were to study, to inform ourselves about DoD and
how they allow military retirees to access healthcare, and so
the access standards in that legislation are based upon what I
think is pretty sound science. And I would welcome your input
to the Department of Veterans Affairs. I hope that you would be
asked to testify, and if I can get you to assist me in
informing my colleagues about this topic, I would welcome that.
Admiral Bono. Sir, I would be very happy and delighted to
do so, and I am very much in support of what you are trying to
do.
Senator Moran. Thank you.
I will submit for the record a request for information from
you, Admiral, about physical therapist regulations and the
timeframe we are on in getting those completed.
Admiral Bono. Yes, sir.
Senator Moran. Thank you, ma'am.
Admiral Bono. Thank you.
Senator Moran. Thank you, Chairman.
Senator Shelby. Senator Tester.
Senator Tester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here. It appears that you are going
to get hit by VA committee people back to back to back with
Moran, myself, and then probably Senator Boozman, but I
appreciate you all being here.
DOD/VA ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORD IMPLEMENTATION
I am going to start with you, Ms. Cummings. The Department
of Defense continues to move forward the deployment of your new
electronic health record. There is no top governance in place
between the DoD and the VA. I think every decision you make is
going to impact not only the Department of Defense but the VA.
So the question becomes about interoperability between the
two, and we have been here for 10 years or longer talking about
this and, quite frankly, probably have more money invested in
this, this year, than is in Montana's entire budget. So it is a
fair amount of dough.
Who are you working with, with the VA, when it comes to
EHR?
Ms. Cummings. So we actually have a very close relationship
with the VA. I have been working with the EHR Executive
Director, who is John Windom; the Under Secretary of Health,
Dr. Stone; the VA CIO, Mr. Gfrerer; as well as other senior
leaders across the VA.
Senator Tester. So you feel--and this is just your opinion,
but you feel pretty confident that what has been going on right
now, VA has--the communication has been there so that you and
the VA know what direction you are headed and so that it works
for both the Department of Defense and for the VA?
Ms. Cummings. So I think up until now, we have been focused
on governance, which allows us to make decisions through a
structured process.
Senator Tester. Yes.
Ms. Cummings. My personal opinion is that we should
actually be working much closely together, and we have been
talking to the----
Senator Tester. How can I help?
Ms. Cummings. So we have been working, looking at the
language associated with the Interagency Program Office, the
DoD-VA Interagency Program Office, and how we can use that
office to be more of a management structure than a governance
structure. I think we have made a lot of progress with the VA,
and I think we are very, very close to a decision that we will
be able to communicate that will create more of an integrated,
programmatic, and technical, organizational construct so that
we can make decisions together.
Senator Tester. Okay. I am always concerned about
technology because the 20 years I have been involved in State
and Federal Government, I cannot tell you how many tens of
billions, if not hundreds of billions of dollars have gone out
the window, and we have not ended up with a damn thing.
I really hope that you hold contractors accountable to the
dime and make sure that if communication is not happening
between the VA and you and you and the VA that you get a hold
of the folks on this committee and the VA committee to make
sure it happens. This is too important to screw up.
Ms. Cummings. I agree.
Senator Tester. Okay.
Ms. Cummings. And we have a system that is currently
operating, and so, clearly, there have been some decisions we
already made in order to support those pilot sites.
Senator Tester. That is fine.
Ms. Cummings. But we are making decisions together with the
VA as we speak, and I think we can continue to do that in a
very equal way where both the DoD and the VA get the best
possible----
Senator Tester. And I look forward to the day when this
program is implemented and there is seamless conversation
between the DoD and the VA for these veterans when they move
into this private sector because I think it is going to offer
better healthcare, and it is going to cost less money. And that
is a beautiful thing.
Ms. Cummings. I agree. And I think the beauty of having the
DoD, the VA, and the Coast Guard all in a single-instance
electronic health record, it allows us to be a very strong
customer towards that national interoperability with commercial
providers.
Senator Tester. Yes.
Ms. Cummings. And we can focus on that interoperability
instead of trying to focus on interagency interoperability, to
your point.
MILITARY AND VETERAN SUICIDE
Senator Tester. Okay. Thank you very, very much.
I want to talk about suicides. I want to talk to you about
it, Admiral Bono, the mental health conditions, servicemembers
that are separating from the military without a plan for care
at the VA.
It is my understanding that there is a spike in suicides
the first 12 months following separation. I think that is an
important statistic to pay attention to. So what is in this
budget that helps DoD do a warm handoff to the VA so that
recent veterans do not fall through the crack?
Admiral Bono. Yes, sir. Well, thank you very much for that
question.
I think it is also important to recognize that part of that
warm handoff is how we are coordinating care across the
services as well as with the VA.
Certainly, you have spent a few minutes talking about the
interoperability of our electronic health record, and that goes
a long way to being able to help us keep, front and center, the
data that apply to both of our transitioning servicemembers and
our veterans to make sure that we are identifying those people
that are most at risk.
Senator Tester. So let me get specific so you can get a
little more specific, as briefly as you can. Is there anything
that we are doing different to pay particular attention to
those folks who are being discharged immediately, that first
year?
Admiral Bono. Yes, sir. So--well, in terms of being able to
make sure that the warm handoff is happening.
Senator Tester. Yes. That is correct. And to make sure that
the VA understands that if there has been any traumatic brain
injury or PTSD issues that it is brought to their attention.
Admiral Bono. Yes. And so that case management between our
handoff between the services and the VA is extremely important
for that.
Senator Tester. Okay. Time flies when you are having fun.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Shelby. Thank you.
Senator Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all
for being here. We really do appreciate all of your hard work
and your expertise.
DOD/VA ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORD IMPLEMENTATION
Ms. Cummings, in your statement, you talked about the Joint
Program Office. Can you tell us a little bit more about the
role that the Joint Program Office is playing and the
responsibilities between DoD and VA?
These are always issues, and hopefully, you all are coming
together and have figured out your various responsibilities.
Can you reassure us in that regard?
Ms. Cummings. So the Interagency Program Office was
established by Congress back in 2008 and has changed its role
several times over the last several years.
Over the last year, since the VA made the decision to buy
and adopt the same electronic health record, the Interagency
Program Office has really been focused on how to bring the DoD
and VA together in a governance construct so that we can make
decisions together.
I can give you several examples of decisions where the DoD
had one strategy, technical strategy. The VA came in with a
different strategy, and we actually adopted the VA strategy
because it was going to work better for the joint DoD, VA, and
Coast Guard, of course, implementation.
So what we are looking at now is how can we make that joint
management structure even stronger so that we are not making
decisions in the DoD and VA and then bringing them together to
adjudicate them, but we are actually making decisions together,
where the engineers are sitting with the engineers, the cost
people are sitting with the cost people, basically so that we
can do what you and what Senator Tester asked of us, which is
hold our vendor team accountable to a solution that is going to
work for all of our customers.
And I personally think that we have a lot to learn from the
VA, just as the VA has a lot to learn from us, and so I feel
very confident that senior leadership in the DoD and senior
leadership in the VA are committed to getting this right.
Senator Boozman. So we have had this situation for a long,
long time. We have spent a lot of money, again, talking and
trying to move forward and interoperability. Is the Joint
Force--there is systems in the VA, what they need, such as
scheduling pharmacy and things like that. It is different than
the DoD. We have got a little bit different systems within the
common system, different features.
Ms. Cummings. So I think----
Senator Boozman. VA is structured a little different. I
think theirs is going to cost a little bit more, if you can say
a couple billion dollars is a little bit more.
But tell us how that is getting worked out.
Ms. Cummings. Sure. So I actually think we have a lot more
in common that we have different. We have 9.5 million
beneficiaries. The VA has a similar amount. We are both very
large, complex medical systems.
The things that the VA has bought on their contract that
might be unique to the VA, there are things that we and the DoD
may choose to take advantage of in the future, but there are
some things that the DoD is going to take advantage of or
deploy, especially around operational medicine, that does not
have that equivalency on the VA side.
But I would say that probably 85 to 95 percent of our
requirements are actually much more similar than they are
different, and so what we have done is we have put together a
governance structure where the two--on the functional side,
where the clinical and business folks are actually getting
together and looking at joint requirements, and where we can,
we do things the same. Where we cannot, we do them differently,
but we do that with purpose.
So when a servicemember is transitioning to veteran, they
have that consistent experience. Whether they are dealing with
a military doctor or a VA doctor, they have that same common
experience, and we think that that is a benefit to the
servicemember and the veteran.
Senator Boozman. Very good. Thank you.
MILITARY MEDICAL READINESS
I agree with you, General West, in the sense that you
talked about the foundation of a strong national defense is a
strong healthy force, and everything now has combat readiness.
Can you talk about how you are working with DHA to determine
force structure to support readiness to make sure that we have
combat capability?
General West. Absolutely.
Senator Boozman. Does that make sense?
General West. Absolutely. Again, as I mentioned, it is a
team effort. We are all part of an integrated team. That we
rely on each other to make sure that we have got a formidable
medical capability in whatever construct that our Nation asks
us to be able to perform in.
As far as getting the readiness piece as the land component
of the Joint Force, the types of injuries and the types of
illnesses that we may see require a lot of trauma specialists,
but also those that can take care of disease, non-battle
injury.
So, as part of that, we have partnerships that we have
established. I know that we are working with the DHA to take
advantage of those global partnerships that we can have our
members train. That if we do not have the workload within our
direct care system in the MTFs, that we can have those
partnerships with our external partners.
We are also working with the Joint Staff as well to
establish those skills that are required, those minimum skills
in each occupational specialty, along with our services, so
they are joint, and they are similar amongst the services to
ensure that we train our individuals on those to have them
ready for the next fight, so for the training part, for the
requirements that our Nation and our combatant commands have
for those to make sure that we have got the right mix of those
in the facilities and also within our operational units as
well. So we are working with DHA and our fellow services.
Senator Boozman. That is great.
We can be very proud of the effort in the past, and again,
anything we can do to help you, such that as we do, reconfigure
forces that that is going to be there in the future.
General West. Absolutely. Thank you.
Senator Boozman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
Senator Shelby. Thank you.
If there are no further questions, I want to thank the
panel for your appearance here today. We have got some other
Senators who might want to submit questions to you, and I would
hope you would respond to them within a reasonable time.
[The following questions were not asked at the hearing, but
were submitted to the Department for response subsequent to the
hearing:]
Questions Submitted by Senator Jerry Moran
Question. The fiscal year 2018 National Defense Authorization Act
allows Physical Therapy Assistants and Occupational Therapy Assistants
to be TRICARE-authorized providers to help increase access to physical
and occupational therapy for TRICARE-beneficiaries. The Department
released a proposed rule in December of last year, and the comment
period closed just this past February. I want to make certain that the
final rule is published in a timely manner so that TRICARE
beneficiaries can start utilizing these providers to get the care that
they need.
When can we expect publication of a final rule and if it is not
within this year, what is preventing you from being able to publish a
final rule within this timeframe?
Answer. The Department is confident that the final rule will be
published by the end of 2020, the standard timeframe expected for a
regulatory action of this nature. Due to the regulatory requirements of
the rulemaking process, it is unlikely that the final rule will be
published within this year. The draft document must be appropriately
reviewed within the Department of Defense and the Office of Management
and Budget prior to publication.
Question. I recently had the opportunity to learn about Sparta
Science which is a company that uses diagnostic software to accurately
assess a person's musculoskeletal health. With a clientele primarily
consisting of athletes, Sparta Science discloses this data to the
athlete and their coaches and trainers in order to build training plans
specific to the athlete's needs which in turns helps to prevent
injuries and optimize training and performance. As the services
continue to look for ways to increase personnel readiness by improving
physical fitness and reducing injury rates through prevention and
rehabilitation, what technologies are you leveraging or looking to
leverage in the future to accomplish this goal?
Answer. The DHP RDT&E supports training and Operational Commands by
investing in Science and Technology capabilities that will deliver
screening and injury prevention tools for musculoskeletal injury. It is
expected that this research will lead to validated ways of providing
training tools and predict injury risk including identification of
gene, protein, and other potential biomarkers. These tools can
integrate into larger health optimization programs such as the Army's
Holistic Health and Fitness and the DoD's efforts to embed personal
trainers.
Examples of the technologies for future leverage include the
research by Sparta Science and others such as the Dynamic Athletic
Research Institute (DARI) motion capture system which the Air Force is
using as a tool to screen for musculoskeletal injury and Conflict
Kinetics which multiple labs are working with as a potential tool to
measure and optimize performance.
Question. How much money is spent each year on healthcare for
injuries or conditions that are preventable via physical fitness?
Answer.
All beneficiaries:
--Direct care ambulatory cost: $28.8M
--Purchased care ambulatory paid: $3.5M
--Direct care inpatient cost: $3.2M
--Purchased care inpatient paid: $47k
--Total: $35.5M
Active Duty and Guard:
--Direct care ambulatory cost: $17.5M
--Purchased care ambulatory paid: $1.4M
--Direct care inpatient cost: $2.4M
--Purchased care inpatient paid: $0
--Total: $21.3M
Question. As we collectively work together to improve mental
healthcare and suicide prevention efforts in both the VA and the DoD, I
would like to know what authorities you or local commanders might need
in order to coordinate with law enforcement to gain visibility on
incidents that serve as an indicator or precursor for suicidal
ideations.
Answer. We agree that certain behaviors or incidents can serve as
precipitants and predispose an individual to suicide. It is vitally
important that commands, police forces and medical entities work
together to communicate about persons at risk to better intervene.
Local commanders have broad and sufficient authority to coordinate
with law enforcement and medical entities. Current policy in DoD
Instructions (6490 series) buttresses these authorities. For instance,
commanders and supervisors have a wide berth in ordering command-
directed mental health evaluations, and need not fear automatic
investigation of their actions.
______
Questions Submitted to Vice Admiral Raquel Bono
Questions Submitted by Senator Patrick J. Leahy
Question. In the fiscal year 2019 defense appropriations bill, the
Committee created a line item in Congressionally Directed Medical
Research Programs for Chronic Pain Mitigation, in order to seek
alternatives to treating pain in service members with opioids.
What projects have you funded or are you planning to fund with that
amount?
Answer. No projects have currently been funded and no funding
decisions have been made to date. The Chronic Pain Management Research
Program (CPMRP) as a new addition to the Congressionally Directed
Medical Research Programs is in the process of drafting program
announcements regarding fiscal year 2019 funding opportunities. It is
anticipated that the program announcements will be released soon with
applications receipt occurring in the fall of 2019 and recommendations
for funding following in spring of 2020.
Question. What gaps can you identify in non-opioid pain mitigation
research?
Answer. Gaps include the lack of known effective treatments for
chronic pain and in the understanding of the ``chronification'' of pain
process.
Question. How will you leverage research with these funds with
other government pain mitigation programs, such as at NIH?
Answer. The Chronic Pain Management Research Program (CPMRP)
programmatic panel currently has representation from the Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA) and National Institutes of Health (NIH)--National
Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. Inclusion of
representation from other agencies allows the program to understand the
priorities and initiatives of other government programs, preventing
duplication of areas of emphasis, and also improves in the
identification of novel knowledge gaps that are either currently not
being addressed or are specifically well suited for funding by the
Department of Defense (DoD). At this time no joint funding
opportunities or cost sharing initiatives have been planned for the
CPMRP fiscal year 2019 appropriations; however, the VA and NIH
representation on the panel are also involved in the existing
interagency NIH/DoD/VA Pain Management Collaboratory. The program would
be open to participating in similar endeavors in the future providing
an appropriate opportunity arose.
Question. To fully understand the challenges we face, we must
assess the prevalence and use of opioids.
How many service members are prescribed opioids in the Department?
Answer. For fiscal year 2018, during the average month, 1,306,308
members were classified as Active Duty and of this cohort 33,725
received an opiate prescription. This means that 2.58 percent of Active
Duty Service Members (ADSM) received an Opiate Prescription in fiscal
year 2018.
Question. What are the rates of opioid abuse or addiction among
service members?
Answer. The prevalence of Opioid Use Disorders (Abuse and
Dependence) remains very low among Active Duty Service Members (ASDM).
There were approximately 1,000 ADSM per year who are diagnosed with an
Opioid Use Disorder (OUD), a prevalence rate of less than 0.1 percent.
The rate is significantly lower than the U.S. adult population where 8-
12 percent develop an Opioid Use Disorder (OUD).
Question. What guidance or direction are practitioners within
Department given with regards to prescribing opioids?
Answer. To combat opioid overuse, misuse, and diversion, DoD is
addressing the problem at all touch points through implementation of
improved pain management strategies and procedural instructions,
efforts to improve DoD prescriber and beneficiary education,
prescription monitoring and safeguards, treatment and emergency
response systems.
Provider opiate prescription guidance is contained in DHA-PI
6025.04 Pain Management and Opioid Safety in the MHS. DHA-PI 6025.04
provides specific guidance for limited supply amounts based on patient
presentation as well as non-opioid alternatives. For example, an
uncomplicated, opioid-naive patient should be limited to no more than 5
day supply of short-acting opioids for acute pain episodes.
The Military Health Service Opioid Registry supports providers,
staff, and decision-makers in improving safety and quality of care of
patients on opioid prescriptions. The registry offers MHS leaders and
providers' access to near-real time demographic, clinical, and
pharmaceutical data related to opioids such as morphine equivalent
daily dosages. High-risk opioids and other medications such as
antidepressants, benzodiazepines, and sleep medications concurrently
prescribed with opioids are flagged, alerting staff of potential fatal
drug interactions.
The Military Health System uses a Stepped Care Model for Pain.
``Stepped care'' starts in the Patient-Centered Medical Home (PCMH) or
primary care, moving patients forward on the continuum of care only as
clinically required. The Stepped Care Model for Pain uses a three
tiered approach consisting of early identification, leveraging primary
care champions and embedded specialties (pharmacy and behavioral
health) for primary and secondary levels of care, and interdisciplinary
Pain Management Centers in the tertiary level of care to ensure
holistic care.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Patty Murray
Question. Recent reports indicate that a significant number of
uniformed medical positions will be cut across all four services.
How many positions are currently slated for elimination?
Answer. Authorizations will be repurposed by the Services for
higher priority readiness requirements. The table below provides the
number and timing of when the authorizations will be transferred to the
line:
Table 1. PB20 Active Force Authorization Reductions
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY20
FY21
Total FYDP
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Army DHP........................................................
6,935
-
6,935
Air Force DHP...................................................
4,684
-
4,684
Navy DHP & non-DHP*.............................................
3,230
2,156
5,386
DoD Total.......................................................
14,849
2,156
17,005
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Non-DHP includes 592 transient/patients/prisoners/and holdees (TPPH) and students.
Question. What is the timeline for these cuts to occur?
Answer. The transfer of the authorizations will occur in fiscal
year 2020 and fiscal year 2021. The personnel will transition as they
retire, leave the military or transfer to another posting over the
following 3-5 years.
Question. What are the specific positions that will be affected by
these cuts?
Answer. The Department intends that the transition of personnel
will not impact access or quality of care. The DHA and the Services are
in the process of identifying and mitigating any impacts to healthcare
delivery and will include replacing lost capabilities through
replacement civilian, contract staff, or by transition to purchased
care where available.
Question. Are there plans to convert any of those services to
civilian positions?
Answer. The Department intends that the transition of personnel
will not impact access or quality of care. Converting to civilian staff
is one option along with converting to contract staff or transition of
care to our purchased care network. The DHA and Services are
collaboratively currently evaluating the impacts and developing our
mitigation approaches. Table 2 provides the estimated timing of the end
strength reductions.
Table 2. Preliminary Medical End Strength Reduction Plans
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY20
FY21
FY22
FY23
FY24
Total
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Army..........................................
694
2,082
2,082
2,077
-
6,935
Army..........................................
694
2,082
2,082
2,077
-
6,935
Navy..........................................
1,991
2,476
501
253
165
5,386
Air Force.....................................
866
2,363
1,455
-
-
4,684
Total.........................................
3,551
6,921
4,038
2,330
165
17,005
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
There are 4,176 unencumbered authorizations that will be repurposed in the first 2 years.
Question. Vision requirements are among some of the most unique to
servicemembers. Each year, the Air Force alone issues 300,000 optical
devices, including over 67,000 prescription inserts for protective
masks and 37,000 flight frames for aircrew members, These devices can
only be issued through a military clinic. Additionally, across the DoD,
a high percentage of TBI patients experience visual disorders leaving a
need for, in some cases, a lifetime of follow up care.
How many of the expected medical personnel cuts are coming from
these critical ophthalmic services?
Answer. The reductions in uniformed ophthalmic providers and
ophthalmology/optometry technicians represent 2 percent of the total
uniformed manpower reductions. The DHA and Service are jointly
evaluating the impacts of these reductions on mission readiness with
the intent of developing mitigations where required that may include
hiring civilian and contract staff.
Question. How do you plan on maintaining a ready force if
servicemembers cannot get the protective equipment or the aftercare
services they need to save or restore vision?
Answer. The DHA and Services are working together to identify and
mitigate readiness impacts resulting from the transition of personnel.
This would include ensuring access to the medical devices and care
needed to support a medically ready force. To minimize any gaps we are
including replacement with civilian or contract staff as well as
utilization of the purchased care network where appropriate and
available.
Question. If the uniformed ophthalmic personnel are converted to
civilian positions, how will you ensure the level of care is not
disrupted for the servicemember and that these positions are filled in
a timely manner?
Answer. The DHA has developed contracts that will allow the
procurement of professional services to cover any gaps that may occur
during the transition of personnel. In addition, we are not planning on
repurposing encumbered authorizations until fiscal year 2021 allowing
time to hire civilian staff if deemed necessary.
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
Senator Shelby. Subject to that, the Defense Subcommittee
will reconvene on Wednesday, April the 10th, at 10:00 a.m., to
receive testimony from the Chiefs of the National Guard and
Reserve components.
The committee stands in recess. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 10:37 a.m., Wednesday, April 3, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene at 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday, April 10.]