- BERNHARDT NOMINATION
[Senate Hearing 116-143]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-143
BERNHARDT NOMINATION
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
to
CONSIDER THE NOMINATION OF
THE HONORABLE DAVID BERNHARDT
TO BE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR
----------
MARCH 28, 2019
----------
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
BERNHARDT NOMINATION
S. Hrg. 116-143
BERNHARDT NOMINATION
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
to
CONSIDER THE NOMINATION OF
THE HONORABLE DAVID BERNHARDT
TO BE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR
__________
MARCH 28, 2019
__________
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-261
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska, Chairman
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
JOE MANCHIN III, West Virginia
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
RON WYDEN, Oregon
MIKE LEE, Utah
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
STEVE DAINES, Montana
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
CINDY HYDE-SMITH, Mississippi
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
MARTHA MCSALLY, Arizona
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
Brian Hughes, Staff Director
Kellie Donnelly, Chief Counsel
Lucy Murfitt, Deputy Chief Counsel
Sarah Venuto, Democratic Staff Director
Sam E. Fowler, Democratic Chief Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa, Chairman and a U.S. Senator from Alaska....
1
Manchin III, Hon. Joe, Ranking Member and a U.S. Senator from
West Virginia..................................................
3
Gardner, Hon. Cory, a U.S. Senator from Colorado.................
5
WITNESS
Bernhardt, Hon. David, nominated to be Secretary of the Interior.
8
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
American Exploration & Mining Association:
Letter for the Record........................................
348
American Farm Bureau Federation:
Letter for the Record........................................
349
American Woodcock Society, et al:
Letter for the Record........................................
350
Americans for Responsible Recreational Access, et al:
Letter for the Record........................................
353
Archery Trade Association:
Letter for the Record........................................
355
Associated Governments of Northwest Colorado:
Letter for the Record........................................
51
Association of Fish & Wildlife Agencies:
Letter for the Record........................................
356
Association of O&C Counties:
Letter for the Record........................................
358
Baker County Commission (Oregon):
Letter for the Record........................................
359
Beaver County Commission (Utah):
Letter for the Record........................................
360
Bernhardt, Hon. David:
Opening Statement............................................
8
Written Testimony............................................
10
Letter to Senator Murkowski dated 12/31/2019 regarding the
DOI's OIG Investigative Report.............................
36
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
164
Board of County Commissioners, Mesa County (Colorado):
Letter for the Record........................................
361
Board of County Commissioners, Rio Blanco County (Colorado):
Letter for the Record........................................
363
Cassidy, Hon. Bill:
Article titled, ``Offshore Wind Bonanza Draws Bidding War in
Record-Setting Sale'' by Jennifer A. Dlouhy dated December
13, 2018...................................................
66
Chaves County Board of Commissioners (New Mexico):
Letter for the Record........................................
365
Colorado Farm Bureau:
Letter for the Record........................................
53
Colorado Water Congress:
Letter for the Record........................................
54
Conservation Lands Foundation:
Statement for the Record.....................................
366
(The) CorpsNetwork:
Letter for the Record........................................
367
Council to Advance Hunting and the Shooting Sports:
Letter for the Record........................................
368
Family Farm Alliance:
Letter for the Record........................................
369
Gardner, Hon. Cory:
Opening Statement............................................
5
Garfield County Board of Commissioners (Utah):
Letter for the Record........................................
371
Gila River Indian Community:
Letter for the Record........................................
372
Gordon, Hon. Mark:
Letter for the Record........................................
374
Harney County Court (Oregon):
Letter for the Record........................................
375
Hirono, Hon. Mazie K.:
Congressional Letter for the Record to Secretary Zinke and
Secretary Ross dated 9/12/2018.............................
59
Lee, Hon. Mike:
Letter for the Record from Scott A. de la Vega, Director of
the U.S. Department of the Interior Departmental Ethics
Office dated 3/25/2019.....................................
87
Manchin III, Hon. Joe:
Opening Statement............................................
3
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa:
Opening Statement............................................
1
National Endangered Species Act Reform Coalition:
Letter for the Record........................................
376
National Park Hospitality Association:
Letter for the Record........................................
377
National Shooting Sports Foundation, Inc.:
Letter for the Record........................................
379
Piute County Commission (Utah):
Letter for the Record........................................
380
Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility:
Letter for the Record........................................
381
Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation:
Statement for the Record.....................................
390
Letter for the Record dated 3/26/2019........................
391
RV Industry Association:
Letter for the Record........................................
393
Society for Range Management:
Letter for the Record........................................
394
Southern Ute Indian Tribe:
Letter for the Record........................................
55
United States Cattlemen's Association:
Letter for the Record........................................
395
Western Caucus Foundation:
Letter for the Record........................................
397
Wyden, Hon. Ron:
Letter to Secretary Zinke from David B. Weinberg dated 4/13/
2017.......................................................
20
Email from David Bernhardt to Gary Frazer, Todd Willens, Greg
Sheehan and Gareth Rees dated 10/5/2017....................
24
Bernhardt DOI calendar excerpts from 10/11-30/2017...........
25
Email from Gary Frazer dated 11/9/2017.......................
33
Wyoming Stock Growers Association:
Letter for the Record........................................
398
BERNHARDT NOMINATION
----------
THURSDAY, MARCH 28, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m. in
Room SD-366, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lisa
Murkowski, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LISA MURKOWSKI,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA
The Chairman. Good morning, everyone. The Committee will
come to order. We are considering this morning the nomination
of Mr. David Bernhardt to be the Secretary of the Interior.
Mr. Bernhardt, I welcome you back to the Committee again.
You have been here numerous times. Thank you for the visit that
we had last week. I know that you have had a chance to visit
with many of the members, and I know they appreciate that time
with you, as I certainly did. I also want to thank you for all
you have done at the Department, for your willingness to serve
in a new and a higher capacity, and for enduring what has
become, I guess, an increasing slog through the nomination
process--so thank you for that.
Senator Gardner will introduce Mr. Bernhardt here shortly,
and then Mr. Bernhardt will give his opening statement. I will
swear you in.
But I want to start off by explaining why I believe David
Bernhardt is an excellent choice for this important position.
Part of it is background. As a Colorado native and an avid
sportsman, Mr. Bernhardt understands how federal land
management decisions affect local communities. He has seen how
federal policies impact people's access to and use of public
land, and he recognizes the need to balance conservation with
opportunities for economic development.
Another part of it is experience. We need experience around
here. Mr. Bernhardt has served as Solicitor, as Deputy
Secretary, and now as Acting Secretary of the Interior. He has
proven his ability to lead the Department. He has built strong
working relationships with those who are affected by its
decisions. I believe there is no question that he is ready for
the job and can handle everything that it entails.
These are crucial considerations, especially for those of
us from western states. We all know the story around here, I
talk about it a lot. Alaska has more federal land than any
other, and the Department of the Interior controls most of
those acres. Back home, we often refer to the Department as our
``landlord,'' not necessarily something that we enjoy, not in
glowing terms. It has been part of our reality there. People in
Alaska clearly recognize that the decisions that are made back
here have a direct impact on them, their families, and their
livelihoods.
But we have seen a change in that relationship with this
Administration. I think we have gone from that landlord-tenant,
`can I hang a picture over here' type of a relationship to one
that is based more on a working partnership, and I appreciate
that a great deal. We have seen good progress in the State of
Alaska with this Administration in several different areas--
whether it is the NPR-A, whether it is the 1002, whether it is
gaining access for a small community in remote Alaska--we have
had a good partner there.
When I meet with Alaskans, the prevailing sentiment is that
Interior is doing a good job, and that is a sea change from
where we were just a few years ago. I think it helps to have
some Alaskans on your team, which I greatly appreciate. You
have Joe Balash, and you have Tara Sweeney as the Assistant
Secretary. I think we also see the reflection of the work led
by Secretary Zinke at the time when you were working with him
as Deputy and basically the ``Chief Operating Officer'' there.
So Alaska is not alone in seeing the benefits. A lot of
people in a lot of states are benefiting from better leadership
at the Department, and that is why Mr. Bernhardt's nomination
is supported by a wide range of stakeholder groups--ranging
from the Alaska Federation of Natives to Ducks Unlimited and
the Safari Club.
But for all the progress that we have made, we know that
there is a lot of work ahead. We need to fully tap into our
resource potential, we need to strengthen our mineral security,
something I talk about a lot here on the Committee. We need to
address the multi-billion-dollar maintenance backlog at our
land management agencies, particularly the National Park
Service. That is a concern that many, many of us have. We need
forest management reforms to address the growing threat of
wildfire, we need to lift decades-old Public Land Orders, we
need to do more to address climate change and we have to
account for our territories, which clearly have a variety of
different needs. And that is only a partial list here.
So we will have an opportunity this morning to engage you
in further questions. For members who have questions here this
morning, I am here for as long as anybody else wants to be.
Committee members will have their standard opportunity to
submit questions for the record. I would ask that these
questions be returned today by the close of business.
Mr. Bernhardt, I want to wrap up by thanking you for your
willingness to continue to serve and to take on even more
responsibility at the Department.
I also appreciate the work that you did, with our Committee
and internally in the Administration to help so many members
advance their priorities into law with the recently passed
lands package. That was significant legislation for many of us
on a host of different levels, and you really helped to
facilitate that. So thank you so much for that.
This is your third nomination so you know the drill here.
You know also that the nomination process has unfortunately
become more difficult, perhaps more contentious, even for good
and well-qualified individuals. But know that my intention is
to move quickly to confirm you to this new role as soon as we
possibly can.
With that, Senator Manchin, I will turn to you for your
opening remarks.
STATEMENT OF HON. JOE MANCHIN III,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WEST VIRGINIA
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Madam Chairman, for holding the
hearing today, and thank you, Mr. Bernhardt, for your
willingness to serve and your courtesy in meeting with me in my
office a few times and appearing before the Committee this
morning. I want to welcome your children with you today. It is
nice to have them in the audience, and I hope they will enjoy
this experience.
As a former Governor, I have always believed that an
executive is entitled to deference when selecting his or her
team as long as the candidates are ethical and qualified.
Mr. Bernhardt, it is clear that you have the knowledge and
experience to serve as Secretary. You know the Interior
Department inside and out and are well versed in all the issues
that come before it. I have reviewed your experience and
qualifications. We have met on two occasions regarding your
nominations for the Secretary role and discussed a variety of
issues, including my concerns regarding offshore drilling,
mitigation policies, and taxpayer fairness. I would also note
that we had lengthy discussions about the importance of
ensuring a culture at the Department of the Interior that
reflects the highest level of ethical compliance and integrity.
Your record has been scrutinized. And in light of the greater
amount of responsibility and authority that comes with this
job, I think that is only fair. It is not just about compliance
with the law and the ethics regulations, it is about a culture
of impartiality, fairness, and scientific integrity, and that
starts with you, the example you set for the 70,000 employees
that you will oversee at the Department of the Interior.
These principles are key to ensuring that a balance is
struck between the environment and the safe and responsible use
of our public lands. I would ask you to address these issues
today before the Committee and commit to the highest standards
of ethics, not just in the letter of the law, but truly, the
spirit of the law.
If confirmed you will be the guardian of our nation's
greatest natural treasures, a vast network of public lands,
including our national parks, our monuments, and our historical
sites. It is imperative that all of our citizen stakeholders
that have interest in the conservation and use of our federal
lands are able to engage with the Department, be recognized
with impartiality, and access information regarding the
Department's activities in a timely and transparent manner. I
think that is particularly important in light of the expansive
jurisdiction of the Interior Department.
Whether it be payments to miners for their healthcare
benefits, processing permits for the privilege of energy
production on federal lands, or ensuring the U.S. Geological
Survey can conduct its critical work of collecting and
analyzing data on our changing climate, the Department of the
Interior has a huge amount of responsibility and diverse
jurisdiction.
In particular, I believe the Secretary of the Interior must
prioritize and balance our resource needs with environmental
protection and fairness for all public landowners, the American
taxpayer. A perfect example of this is ensuring the Department
is working with industry to accelerate reductions in venting
and flaring of methane on public lands. We must also examine
ways to update our outdated mining laws to ensure a fair return
for our taxpayers. So I look forward to more conversations with
the agencies on that and many other matters.
I firmly believe that producers and other users of our
federal lands that have been granted the privilege of doing
business on federally managed lands must be responsible for
leaving those lands and, I repeat, leaving those lands in
better condition than they found them. I believe that is a
realistic expectation shared by most Americans that should be
met.
I also urge you to prioritize the preservation of public
lands and protect them for the benefit and enjoyment of our
generation and future generations as your agency makes
decisions regarding future energy production on federal land
and on the Outer Continental Shelf.
I believe the taxpayers must be protected from permanent
damage to the lands because these lands truly belong to the
American people and support hunting, fishing, hiking, and many
other outdoor recreation activities in communities across the
country. That will require vigilance on your part, sir.
Therefore, if you are confirmed I hope to work with you
collaboratively to ensure that protections for our public lands
are robust and enforced.
I would also like to address the importance of public lands
and outdoor recreation in my home state. Beautiful West
Virginia truly is wild and wonderful. We are home to the New
River National Recreation Area, the Appalachian Forest, Coal,
and Wheeling National Heritage Areas, not to mention Harper's
Ferry and so many others. Programs like those administered by
the Department of the Interior are key to ensuring our West
Virginia way of life is preserved for generations to come. That
is why I am a supporter of permanent funding for the Land and
Water Conservation Fund (LWCF). Over $240 million in LWCF funds
have been used to increase access in the Monongahela National
Forest, Harper's Ferry, the New River Gorge National River,
among others.
In fact, LWCF funds paid for every single public access
point along the Lower and Middle Gauley River in West Virginia,
an area used and over 50,000 people per year that enjoy the
beautiful rapids that we have. And just this year, LWCF funds
helped protect Summit Point Battlefield, the site of a
significant Civil War battle. LWCF is a bipartisan program with
national support. I must admit that I am concerned by the
Administration's lack of support for this program, sir.
Furthermore, the deferred maintenance backlog is another
major challenge that I think we both talked about. It is going
to be facing you and the Department, and I look forward to
hearing more on how you plan to address the growing backlog
problems we are facing in restoring our parks.
In conclusion, I look forward to discussing these and other
matters today during your confirmation hearing, sir. I believe
you are qualified and have a great deal of experience. I am
interested in learning more from you today, for your plans for
the Department were you to be confirmed. I look forward to
hearing how you would execute your responsibilities in a manner
that assures the American people our public lands are not just
being maintained but being improved for the benefit of
generations to come.
So I want to thank you again. Thank you for being here,
sir.
Madam Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Manchin.
I will now turn to Senator Gardner and would ask that, as
the home state Senator, you be allowed the opportunity to
introduce Mr. Bernhardt before the Committee. After that, I
will swear you in and we will proceed.
STATEMENT OF HON. CORY GARDNER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM COLORADO
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you,
Ranking Member, for your remarks today.
It is my honor to introduce a fellow Coloradan, a Colorado
native and my friend, David Bernhardt, as the nominee to be
Secretary of the Interior to the Energy and Natural Resources
Committee--this very important position for Colorado and
indeed, this country.
Thank you for being here. Thanks for bringing your
beautiful family who I have known for their entire lives. Thank
you very much for the opportunity to have them all here today.
I appreciate the fact that you keep moving up in the
agency. It means I do not have to really write a new speech, I
just get to add a little bit more detail, including the fact
that I believe, if our count is right, you will become the
seventh Secretary of the Interior from the great State of
Colorado. And seven is a very special number for the State of
Colorado. So thank you very much, David, for your willingness
to serve.
I have known you personally and professionally for over two
decades. Your roots are deep both on the plains of Colorado and
the Western slope.
We share a lot of common interests in rural development and
saving small towns. My experience stems from growing up in the
agricultural community of Yuma on the high plains. Mr.
Bernhardt's formative years were spent on the Western slope of
Colorado, an area that is a microcosm of all the things we
cherish about our public lands.
We both began our public service, only one year apart from
each other, working for Colorado State Representative Russell
George, later becoming the Speaker of the House in the Colorado
General Assembly.
Mr. Bernhardt worked with my wife, Jaime, at the Department
of the Interior during the George W. Bush Administration.
Mr. Bernhardt's personal background and public and private
sector professional experiences prove he is a strong voice for
the West and extremely well qualified for the nomination to be
Secretary. Extensive, extensive insight on Western water
policy, natural resources policy, and Indian affairs, just to
name a few.
Those that have worked with Mr. Bernhardt commend him for
his integrity and his wealth of knowledge on the issues under
the Department of the Interior's jurisdiction.
In 2008 after the Department reached the largest Indian
water rights settlement in the nation's history, Secretary
Kempthorne personally acknowledged Mr. Bernhardt's work as then
Solicitor and stated, and I quote, ``His effective coordination
both within Interior as well as with the local, tribal and
state Congressional leaders was essential to the success we
celebrate today.''
More recently, he worked to accommodate many Western
states' requests for more flexibility under the Greater Sage
Grouse RMP amendment. John Swartout, who as a Senior Policy
Advisor ran point on the issue for Colorado's Governor John
Hickenlooper, had this to say in December 2018 once the process
was completed, ``David Bernhardt is an honest man who puts all
his cards on the table and keeps his word. I have worked with
DOI for 25 years and David is one of the finest people I have
ever worked with.''
Dale Hall, the CEO of Ducks Unlimited, an organization that
does more real conservation work on the ground than most of the
groups that have the word conservation in their name, had this
to say when Mr. Bernhardt's nomination for Secretary was
announced, ``I have known and worked with David Bernhardt for
more than a decade and we are excited to continue to work with
him as the new Secretary of the Interior. His integrity in
following the law is beyond reproach. David Bernhardt is a
champion of conservation and the right person for the job. We
urge the Senate to swiftly confirm him.''
Colleagues of his working for Representative Scott McInnis
from Colorado, who represented your hometown, the hometown of
Rifle, at the time in the House swore he worked 40 hours a day,
8 days a week. I think that was the right math he said.
Notably during Mr. Bernhardt's tenure in office,
Congressman McInnis was the House author of the bill that led
to the designation of the Great Sand Dunes National Monument to
become a national park.
Having now worked at very senior levels in the Department
of the Interior over the course of many years, there is zero
question that Mr. Bernhardt is qualified to do this job. None.
No question.
Along with Mr. Bernhardt's professional career, I believe
it is important to fully understand his background or the
foundation of his interest in public lands that further
qualifies him for this role.
You grew up in a small town, on the outskirts of the Town
of Rifle, Colorado, located in the Colorado's Western slope.
Few places embody the spirit of our public lands more than the
Town of Rifle, Colorado, this incredible area of our great
state to lead this country as Secretary of the Interior.
Growing up in rural Colorado instilled in David the Western
values and interests to this day that he brings to the job
enjoying hunting, recreation, the outdoors, fishing, cherishing
our great outdoors.
Rifle is located in Garfield County, an area where about 60
percent of the lands are protected federal public lands. Rifle
was founded as a ranching community along the Colorado River.
It retains that heritage today along with tremendous support
for outdoor recreation including fishing, hiking, skiing,
rafting, rock climbing, sits at the edge of the Piceance Basin,
an area in Colorado that has vast amounts of natural gas energy
resources.
You grew up in the oil shale boom and the bust that has
made you more sensitive to the potential benefits and potential
impacts both environmental and social. In the 1980's Rifle was
hit by the state's oil shale crash, and you personally
experienced some of the hard times the nation's rural
communities often face.
Much like the Department of the Interior, itself, Rifle is
a community that is a product of its public lands and Western
heritage. Literally located within a few miles of the iconic
Grand Mesa which is the world's largest flat top mountain, the
flat top's wilderness, the Roan Plateau, that represents a home
base among these public lands with virtually unmatched access
to world class outdoor experiences which is why you have a
passion for these issues.
Your previous experience at Department of the Interior
allowed you to fix a problem in Colorado that for eight years
during the Obama Administration was said could not be done,
that it was unfixable. As a result, revenue owed to three
counties in Colorado that had been sitting in an account for
over a decade was distributed in early 2018.
David believes you do not just push problems off of your
front porch to someone else, you find a solution to it and you
fix it.
That previous experience includes prior to his current
position being tapped to be Solicitor for the Department, to be
confirmed by Solicitor by a voice vote by the U.S. Senate in
2006, earned bipartisan support during his confirmation process
in the last Congress as Deputy Secretary.
Your integrity and ability are assets that should bolster
this case for nomination and not distract from it. I hope my
colleagues can keep this in mind as we conduct this hearing
today.
I look forward to your testimony, Mr. Bernhardt, and I am a
proud Coloradan that you are here today.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Senator Gardner, and
also for the little geography lesson there on Colorado. It was
good for all of us.
Mr. Bernhardt, I would ask you to rise.
The rules of the Committee which apply to all nominees
require that they be sworn in connection with their testimony.
So raise your right hand, please.
Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you are about to
give to the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth?
Mr. Bernhardt. I do.
The Chairman. Thank you. You may be seated.
Before you begin your statement, I will ask three questions
addressed to each nominee that comes before the Committee.
First is will you be available to appear before this
Committee and other Congressional committees to represent
departmental positions and respond to issues of concern to the
Congress?
Mr. Bernhardt. Yes.
The Chairman. Are you aware of any personal holdings,
investments or interests that could constitute a conflict or
create an appearance of such a conflict should you be confirmed
and assume the office to which you have been nominated by the
President?
Mr. Bernhardt. No.
The Chairman. Are you involved or do you have any assets
held in blind trusts?
Mr. Bernhardt. No.
The Chairman. At this point you may proceed with your
opening statement. I believe you have family here with you. We
welcome them to the Committee and are pleased that you are with
us, even on a school day. We appreciate that and we appreciate
your support of your father.
With that, Mr. Bernhardt, please proceed.
STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID BERNHARDT, NOMINATED TO BE SECRETARY OF
THE INTERIOR
Mr. Bernhardt. So, I have Katherine, who is in eighth grade
and was willing to come today, and William, who is in tenth
grade and was excited to come today.
[Laughter.]
And my wife is ill, so she wasn't able to be here today,
but they're here and it's great.
The Chairman. Wonderful, welcome.
Mr. Bernhardt. Chairman Murkowski, Senator Manchin, members
of the Committee, good morning. I am humbled to appear here
today as the President's nominee for the position of Secretary
of the Interior.
It was an honor to be introduced by Senator Gardner. I
deeply appreciate his support.
Today's hearing is the third time that I've appeared before
this Committee as a nominee for a position within the
Department of the Interior. During my service at the
Department, both as the Deputy and as the Solicitor, I have
worked with many of you and your staff. I have met with many of
you in person and by phone on various issues that were actually
of concern to you, and I will always make myself available to
your request.
For me, there are few duties as important to the country as
the varied missions of the Department of the Interior.
No one dedicates nearly a decade of their life to any
organization unless they fundamentally believe in it. Even
after holding nearly every single job within the immediate
office of the Secretary, I catch my breath every time I walk
into the Secretary's office. Perhaps you do that when you step
on to the Senate Floor.
The reality is that I have spent over 15 years of a 25-year
career in public service, most of that time at the Department
of the Interior. In fact, I was recently told that of the 52
previous Interior Secretaries, only Oscar Chapman, who happens
to be another lawyer from Colorado, who was promoted from Under
Secretary to Secretary in 1949, had more experience at the
Department than I do now sitting before you to be considered
for the very same promotion.
I have a personal attachment to many of the places
entrusted to the Department. I know and love the various
bureaus' rich histories and their varied cultures. I appreciate
that the people who work at Interior choose to do so because
they believe in serving the American people first. I treasure
working with them. I've known many of them for over 20 years.
Interior's decisions impact livelihoods. They impact
communities' futures and they impact people's very way of life.
That reality will not be forgotten on my watch, if confirmed.
I have had the remarkable good fortune over the course of
my career to work on many of the most complex issues affecting
each of the Department's bureaus. I have a very clear
understanding of the often conflicting, legal and policy issues
that I will face, if confirmed, in balancing Interior's varied
missions.
As Deputy Secretary my focus has been on organizational
improvement and execution within the Department. Improvement
efforts have included aggressively addressing workplace
misconduct throughout the Department, beginning to
fundamentally transform the ethics program across the bureaus
and improving our business processes. I have also worked to
thoughtfully execute the President's agenda in the Department.
By issuing a series of Executive Orders and Presidential
Memorandums, the President has transparently provided us at
Interior a very clear direction on his priorities. We have
moved with dispatch to implement his vision.
One of the President's priorities is to strive to ensure a
conservation legacy, second only to Theodore Roosevelt. Over
the last two years we have opened or expanded hunting and
fishing opportunities on over 380,000 acres of wildlife refuge
at more than 30 refuges. At the same time, the Bureau of Land
Management restored over 689,000 acres of prime sage bush
habitat that is vital to many game species.
We are also working to reduce unnecessary regulatory
burdens without sacrificing environmental outcomes. In doing
so, we're taking actions to appropriately respect the
regulatory role of the states. Through our effort and,
honestly, also because of Congress' utilization of the
Congressional Review Act, Interior's combined deregulatory cost
savings for Fiscal Year 2017 and 2018 had a net present value
of $3.69 billion. That's quite significant. In the last two
years we've been in the top two and three in deregulatory
efforts across the government.
If I receive your consent to this nomination, I will
approach issues with an open mind. I will actively seek input
and listen to varied views and perspectives to help ensure that
the conclusions I draw are well informed.
When making decisions I strive to maintain a long-term
view, and I often think of the guidance provided by Gifford
Pinchot, President Roosevelt's Conservationist in Chief. As he
laid out his mission for the newly created Forest Service he
said, ``When conflicting interests must be reconciled, the
question shall always be answered from the standpoint of the
greatest good of the greatest number and in the long run.''
This direction rings as true today as it did then.
I ask for your consent to the nomination, and I thank you
for giving me the time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bernhardt follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Bernhardt. We appreciate your
comments this morning.
Let's go ahead and begin with a round of questions.
I have noted in my opening statement, and this was
reaffirmed by Senator Manchin as well as Senator Gardner, that
in terms of qualifications, experience within the Interior
Department, you really come to us with a set of qualifications
and again, experience that we seldom see. I think it is
unparalleled in terms of the time and the extent of your
background in these areas.
I will begin my questions then with something that is not
related to the experience, but maybe experience outside of the
time that you worked within the Department.
You are not the first nominee who has worked somewhere else
in the past and has had recusals as a result, but for whatever
reason you seem to have outside groups working harder against
your nomination than most anybody else we have had in front of
us. I am sure we will hear some discussion about that today.
So at the outset, I will ask you how will you handle ethics
and potential conflicts both for yourself and for the
Department?
Mr. Bernhardt. Thank you for that question.
I believe that public trust is a public responsibility and
that maintaining an ethical culture is critical.
On a personal level I have fully complied with my ethics
agreement, the ethics laws, and my ethics pledge and I will do
so in the future.
I've actively sought and consulted with the Department's
designated ethics officials for advice on particular matters
involving clients, and I have implemented an incredibly robust
screening process to ensure that I don't meet with former firm
or former clients to participate in particular matters
involving specific parties that I've committed to recuse myself
from.
I believe that it's also important to recognize the
Department's ethics responsibilities and role. The Department's
ethics program for years has been subject to a great deal of
criticism, a great deal of oversight and a lack of funding. If
you look back at old reports, you'll see that the Inspector
General and the Ethics Office both asked for additional
resources and didn't get them over the last several years.
Here's the steps that we have taken. We have elevated the
designated agency ethics official back up to directly reporting
to the Solicitor, the third ranking person in the Department.
That was something that Earl Devaney recommended in the mid-
2000s that I implemented that somehow got de-elevated in the
prior Administration.
We have hired extremely good leaders to come in and help
lead a new ethics department and, as of today, we have hired 42
counselors within the Department.
And if you want to know what our problems really look like
at Interior and the challenges we face in ethics, I would
suggest that you read the recent Inspector General's report on
philanthropy by the Park Service that was just out or the
strategic plan that IG put out. She acknowledges in there that
we are making tremendous efforts and strides in creating a
better and more robust program. I know, I know how important
and how devastating it is when folks at the top act in an
unethical manner. It affects the Department across the board.
And we have implemented a number of things to begin to change
that pathway. And I'm going to need your help to actually
consolidate the ethics programs across the bureaus.
The Chairman. Thank you for that, Mr. Bernhardt. I think
you will find that on this Committee we have had more
occasions, unfortunately, than we would like to raise the issue
of what is happening within the workplace in terms of
misconduct and ethics issues. And as you point out, the impact
then to the agency in terms of the morale, just the working
environment, it must be addressed.
The National Park Service is, unfortunately, the agency
that, time and time again, comes forward as an area that has to
be addressed. And so, whether it is sexual misconduct, major
ethical violations, knowing that you are shining a very serious
spotlight on this is critically, critically important.
I am going to turn to Senator Manchin, but I understand you
are going to defer.
Senator Manchin. I am going to defer to Senator Wyden
because there are a lot of our members here who have other
committees to go to. I am going to be here to the end.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Wyden. I thank my colleagues, both the Chair and
Senator Manchin.
Mr. Bernhardt, you asked to come to my office to say that
you were the guy who stood up for strong ethics at Interior
during the George W. Bush years. And less than 48 hours ago,
you told me in the Bush years you advised Julie McDonald, a
notoriously corrupt Interior official, to clean up her act.
Ultimately, the Inspector General found McDonald
politically meddled with the scientific conclusions of Fish and
Wildlife endangered species reports and McDonald had to resign.
A few hours after you and I met, I read Interior Department
documents obtained through a Freedom of Information Act request
that show within the last two years you blocked the release of
a Fish and Wildlife report with a new analysis of the dangerous
effects of toxic chemicals. So you asked to come to my office
to tell me your ethics are unimpeachable, but these brand-new
documents I just saw make you sound like just another corrupt
official.
Why would you come to my office to lie to me about your
ethics?
Mr. Bernhardt. Well Senator, with all due respect, the news
article you're referring to is not even close to that actual
story.
Senator Wyden. I read the documents. Forget the news
article, I read the documents.
Mr. Bernhardt. And if you read those documents, you'll see
that, I mean not the documents, but even in that article the
Fish and Wildlife Service employee that's quoted there says
everything was perfectly appropriate.
And let me tell you what the challenge is when I get a
document. I make decisions based on exactly the same standards
on every single thing that comes to my desk and here are my
standards. Have we appropriately dealt with the facts and the
information as we see it? That's a factual question. Have we
dealt with the parameters of the law that we have? That's a
legal question.
And then there's also at times a policy question. In this
particular issue, there's no policy, but there is a very
significant and important thing, you're dealing with some of
the most difficult consultations on the planet. And when I read
the document my reaction to it was this is really an
interesting draft but it clearly didn't have any legal review.
And in our world you can't ignore the law and come up with a
scheme. You have to have it fit the law and the facts.
And so, I basically said, let's go kick it over to career
lawyers, have them look at it and their assessment was exactly
like mine. So what we decided is that the approach needed to be
readdressed.
Senator Wyden. My time is short.
Just like Julie McDonald, you meddled with the science. You
inserted yourself in the scientific process and I would just
ask, Madam Chair, for documents that show what I am saying is
accurate and what Mr. Bernhardt is saying is not true, attest
to that point.
I would ask unanimous consent the documents be put into the
record.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
[Documents from Senator Wyden follow.]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Wyden. Now, I want to go into this conflict issue a
bit more with the remainder of my time.
Mr. Bernhardt, I am not claiming that you are big oil's
guy. The big oil lobbyists are making that claim. Your former
clients in the oil and gas industry have been caught on tape
crowing about how you are their guy at Interior.
I am thinking back to how Ryan Zinke sat in your seat and
said nine times he would be like Teddy Roosevelt, but he left
with an enormous ethical set of clouds.
I have not seen any evidence that you ever publicly
objected to any of Zinke's activities, A. And B, there is an
Inspector General report indicating that you have given the
green light to some of them.
[The DOI OIG Report referred to follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
So I am going to close because my time is out. I think you
are so conflicted that if you get confirmed you are going to
have one of two choices. One, you are going to have to
disqualify yourself from so many matters I don't know how you
are going to spend your day. Or two, you are going to be making
decisions that either directly or indirectly benefit former
clients, regularly violating your ethics pledge.
And for colleagues for whom this is a new matter, I would
urge you to take a look at the documents that have just come
out from the Freedom of Information Act lawsuit because I think
they make my point.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Senator Gardner.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Already, with the first questions, we have seen attacks
impugning the character of our nominee today.
I understand that people are going to have differences of
opinions. I understand that people are going to vote no. But to
attack the witnesses? This is why good people do not want to
serve this country, because people on this Committee and others
around this Capitol decide they can attack the witnesses and
impugn their character.
Let me read you a quote from the Fish and Wildlife official
that you are talking about, Senator Wyden. The top endangered
species official at Fish and Wildlife Service said, ``It was an
entirely appropriate role. There was no arm twisting of any
kind.'' He did not believe the change of direction was
politically driven.
Now you are accusing our witness of being unethical,
immoral, lying. If you want to get a friend in Washington, get
a dog. I think that is what a Democratic president said, and I
guess they are making true to it today.
Mr. Bernhardt, thank you again for being here.
I started talking about moving the BLM headquarters to the
West at the end of the Obama Administration. Since I first
mentioned it, a ground swell of bipartisan support in our home
State of Colorado has formed, supporting moving the
headquarters to Colorado, more specifically, Grand Junction,
Colorado, in the Western slope. If you want a street address, I
can provide that.
Grand Junction is situated in Mesa County, a county where
74 percent of the acres are federally managed. Ninety-nine
percent of the land BLM manages is west of the Mississippi
River. You would think that locating the headquarters of the
agency somewhere in that footprint would simply be common
sense.
In your testimony you alluded to the Trappers Lake Memo
authored by Art Carhart. It stated that there are a number of
places with scenic values of such great work that they are
rightfully the property of all people. They should be preserved
for all time for the people of the nation and the world.
Trappers Lake is unquestionably a candidate for that
classification.
There are many places deserving of such protection in the
West. However, there are also many places, many of which are
managed by the Bureau of Land Management, that are literally
made for and opportunities for resource opportunities, for
grazing, others for wheeling, for energy, much of it for all-
of-the-above.
The problem is if you have never lived or visited in these
areas in the Western U.S., you would not know that. You may be
tempted to treat every public acre as if it should be a
wilderness area or some other kind of designation.
That is why I believe it is important for the BLM to move
out West so its employees live among the land they manage and
can more readily see the practical impacts of the management
decisions they make.
Can you provide an update for us on the status of the
Department's reorganization and relocation plans?
Mr. Bernhardt. So, we're--thank you very much for that
question.
We're developing a business case for moving BLM west. We've
just submitted our budget for 2020 which will, which
contemplates a move west. And we'll be visiting with you and
other Members of Congress to, hopefully, move west.
It's very interesting. When I was confirmed as Deputy
Secretary, a Senate Democratic staffer gave me what was a job
description of the Deputy Under Secretary that came through a
committee hearing. And in that very committee hearing in 1936,
the members said if you're going to add a Deputy, we want you
to spend at least half your time in the west.
And I think with modern technology that's pretty easy for a
bureau director to do. And as a matter of fact, most of them
spend a lot of time in the west, and so I think their folks can
too. It also adds an element of allowing us to get to places
easier, more quickly, shorter flights which, and frankly, the
quality of life of our employees will be fantastic too. So
there's a lot of reasons to think about it, and we're trying
it.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Bernhardt.
It is unfortunate, but not unexpected, that the very
qualities that make you a supremely qualified candidate to
serve as Secretary are being portrayed by detractors as strikes
against you. Instead of being portrayed as a competent lawyer
who represents clients zealously and ably, you are painted as
compromised and in pockets of industry.
If the same standards had been applied to Sally Jewell, she
would not have made it out of Committee. She was a former oil
company employee who had most previously served as the CEO of
one of the nation's premier outdoor recreational gear
companies. That runs the gamut of issues the Secretary is
required to balance when running the Interior Department.
However, at the time they were portrayed in the press as assets
that would help her responsibly guide the Department instead of
a liability. Sally Jewell received 87 votes, 87 votes,
Republicans and Democrats, when her nomination went to the
Floor.
Janet Schneider was Assistant Secretary of Land and
Minerals and served under Secretary Jewell during the Obama
Administration. She came from a law firm, she was a lawyer,
where she handled environment, land, and natural resource
issues. Her conflict list submitted to ethics was very similar
to the substances in yours. At the same time of Ms. Schneider's
nomination, Secretary of the Interior Sally Jewell said, and I
quote, ``Janet's expertise in natural resource energy
development and environmental law and policy will enable us to
continue to safely and responsibly expand America's
conventional and renewable energy exploration and development
under President Obama's all-of-the-above energy strategy. With
experience in both the public and private sectors she will be
an advocate for a balanced approach and a science-based
decision-making process that both advances the President's key
energy initiatives and promotes the conservation of our federal
lands and natural resources.''
Apparently your experience is not to be given the same
consideration.
I am out of time, but I think there is an absolute double
standard that is being applied here that private and public
experience on one side of the aisle seems to be a benefit but
private and public experience on the other side of the aisle
seems to be a detriment. I get sick, and the American people
get sick, of the double standards applied. You are more than
well-qualified. You have dealt honestly and ably with every
member of this Committee. If they look past the partisan
politics, they will see your confirmation is absolutely in
order.
Thank you, Mr. Bernhardt.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Gardner.
Senator Heinrich.
Senator Heinrich. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Acting Secretary, as you are aware, New Mexico is one of
the most productive oil and gas states in the nation; however,
we also fiercely defend our history and our culture.
The Greater Chaco Canyon landscape is one of the most
sensitive and important cultural landscapes in the nation, and
it is eminently threatened by recent expanded oil and gas
development. The BLM and the BIA have been working on a new
land use plan for the area, but after five years we have yet to
even see a draft produced. So local residents, tribal leaders,
other community members, elected officials are all stuck
reacting to announcement after announcement of proposed leases
in the area.
Senator Udall and I have proposed legislation to
permanently withdraw the federal minerals in the immediate
vicinity of the park, and I certainly hope this Committee will
work with us to move that legislation.
But as Secretary, you would also have the authority to
withdraw this area from oil and gas development. Is that
something you would be willing to consider through the NEPA
process, withdrawing federal minerals around Chaco Cultural
National Historic Park and would you be willing to come out to
New Mexico and meet with the tribal leaders and other elected
officials who have a strong interest and ties to this area?
Mr. Bernhardt. First off, thank you very much for that
question and, more importantly, thank you for giving me some
time with you to visit yesterday.
First off, I would love to go to New Mexico and visit the
site with you, that would be great, and meet with your
constituents, more than happy to do that.
I do think that the planning process probably provides an
opportunity to include some alternatives that would be
conservation oriented, and I'd be happy to work with you and
work with those details with you. But I'd like to get out
there. Let's see the site, and then talk about it.
Senator Heinrich. I appreciate your willingness to come out
and see things with your own eyes. I think that is always
helpful. It is certainly something that Secretary Zinke and I
sometimes had some fairly exciting exchanges here.
[Laughter.]
But once we were able to go out and travel into a
landscape, usually with a horse involved, things got more
reasonable for some reason.
[Laughter.]
The Administration's budget request for next year, I was
disappointed to see, included almost no funding for LWCF. And
that was really despite this enormous ground swell of support,
everyone being so excited about finally, permanently,
reauthorizing that program.
I really worry that, you know, LWCF is one of the most
critical tools that we have for expanded access to public lands
for hunting and fishing, for all sorts of other uses as well.
We have a lot of public lands that you can't legally access
right now. You literally cannot get there by any means. And we
have certainly been very successful at using that in New Mexico
to open up areas to public access.
So talk to me about why there is no significant funding for
this program if sportsmen's access on public lands are a
priority for this Department?
Mr. Bernhardt. Well, let me say first that we applaud
Congress for permanently authorizing the Act. That was a
consistent position the Department held, and we really
appreciate that.
The budget, you know, my view of the budget is that it's a
beginning of a discussion point to work through.
The other thing I think that hampered us a little in our
own negotiation through the budget process internally, it would
have been nice if that legislation had been authorized.
So I'm going to fight going into the next year, and we'll
see where we come out. I'd like to work with the entire
Committee this year to make things land in the right place.
The other thing we have done, and this is in our budget, is
we've really invested in the mandatory spending side for the
Restore Our Parks Act. And so, that was a positive.
The other thing is overall we had a net of plus $900
million. So compared to some other agencies, we fought pretty
well internally, but we didn't get everything we wanted. And
we'll fight hard for that. I think we have a little leverage.
The other thing I should let you know, all of you who
worked so hard on the lands package, is I have taken a process
that I used when I was a counselor to the Secretary to
implement the Energy Policy Act which was quorum at the task
force, specifically to implement the Act quickly and
thoroughly. And we're applying that task force model. I signed
a Secretarial Order yesterday to apply that very task force
model to the implementation of the lands package so that we can
expeditiously get ahead of all the 120 provisions that you have
included in that.
Senator Heinrich. One of the provisions that we would urge
you to just take a look at as you are doing that would be the
access provisions, because there is good language in the
legislation to provide that.
Mr. Bernhardt. There absolutely is.
Senator Heinrich. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Heinrich.
We appreciate that update on the Secretarial Order, because
that is something that we would all like to see advancing.
Senator Lee.
Senator Lee. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Bernhardt, for your willingness to be considered for this
important position.
I want to note at the outset you are someone who I first
met, I think, 14 years ago or so. In my every interaction with
you I have been impressed at the care that you have
demonstrated to following the law, making sure that at every
step in your in government you are following the standards that
are expected of the Department and that are compelled by law. I
have deep respect for that.
It is not always a fun or an easy task to be in that role.
And in my every interaction with you and every action that you
have undertaken that I have been able to observe, even from
afar, you have impressed me as an administrator, as a legal
mind and as a citizen who has an unusually compelling
commitment to the rule of law and to sound public policy. I
appreciate that about you.
You are someone who enjoys the support of groups of
sportsmen, of outdoor recreationists, of wildlife groups and
many others who advocate aggressively to make sure that they
maintain access to public lands for the things that they want
to use it for. Multiple use is, of course, an important part of
our public lands management policy.
A lot of these people want to make sure that their
interests are not overlooked and that they are taken into
account. What would you do as far as adopting specific policies
that could help ensure that the voices of those stakeholders
who have great interest in and care a lot about our federal
public lands, make sure that their voices are heard?
Mr. Bernhardt. Well, we've taken one step last week, as a
matter of fact, Senator. I really appreciate the question.
At the end of the day public access for folks to get out
and use and utilize and enjoy our lands, whether it's for
hunting and fishing, for backpacking, it's so critical. And one
of the things I did is I issued an order to BLM that basically
says simply, if you're thinking about disposing of a piece of
land or you're thinking about exchanging a piece of land,
before you can do that at all, you need to consider the public
access benefit of that land so that that's treated just like
other high priorities of FLPMA in analyzing that piece of
property.
We have opened and we continue to open acreage for hunting
and fishing, for additional lands. We are on a mission where
we've taken and have 12 full-time folks in the Fish and
Wildlife Service that are trying to coordinate to ensure that
we have better hunting and fishing opportunities that our state
law and our laws, our regulations are carefully constructed to
not impede each other. And we're doing some great things with
that. The reality is people love our lands and they enjoy them
and the more folks out there, the better.
Senator Lee. Yes.
You have been nominated to a position that is involved in a
lot of decisions that are sometimes controversial, and yet it
is also a position in which there is a lot that makes people
happy.
There is not a lot that makes the people happy about the
Federal Government these days. We live in a day and age when
Congress enjoys an institutional approval rating that hovers
between 9 and 11 percent, making us slightly less popular than
Fidel Castro in America.
[Laughter.]
Slightly more popular than the influenza virus which is
inexplicably gaining on us.
[Laughter.]
One of the things about the Federal Government people still
like, that still makes them happy with the Federal Government,
in particular, is the National Park System. They like that.
They enjoy it. They want to make sure that they continue to
have access to their national parks and that the maintenance
backlog doesn't interfere with their ability to access them.
What kinds of things do you have in mind to make sure that
people will continue to be happy with at least that part of our
government?
Mr. Bernhardt. Well, what--the confirmation process is such
an interesting opportunity to visit with all of you. And almost
every member said the same thing to me and I think it gives us
a lot of hope.
I think you have a real opportunity to build on the
bipartisan success that you've had with this lands package by
working with us and together on the Restore Our Parks package.
That's something that we've proposed, and we manage about
76,000 constructed assets across the park system. I was in
Acadia. You could actually look through a cinder block building
and see the outside. Over 54 percent of our asset portfolio was
constructed before 1966, and there is such a need to make a
real investment there. So I'm really hopeful. Almost every
member I met with brought it up. Love to work with you on it.
Senator Lee. Thank you, Mr. Bernhardt.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Gardner [presiding]. Thank you, Senator Lee.
Before I turn to Senator Hirono, I have here letters of
support from several Colorado stakeholders including the
Colorado Water Congress, Associated Governments of Northwest
Colorado, the Colorado Farm Bureau and the Southern Ute Tribe,
in support of the nomination of Mr. Bernhardt. I would just
like to submit them for the record.
Senator Manchin. Without objection.
Senator Gardner. Thank you.
[Letters of support of Mr. Bernhardt's nomination follow.]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Gardner. Senator Hirono.
Senator Hirono. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bernhardt, I ask every nominee before any of the
committees I sit on the following two questions to begin with.
The first is since you became a legal adult have you ever
made unwanted requests for sexual favors or committed any
verbal or physical harassment or assault of a sexual nature?
Mr. Bernhardt. No, and as a father of a 13-year-old
daughter I won't tolerate it.
Senator Hirono. Thank you.
Have you ever faced discipline or entered into a settlement
relating to this kind of conduct?
Mr. Bernhardt. No.
Senator Hirono. Mr. Bernhardt, in reviewing your testimony,
obviously, we share a commitment to make public the lands
accessible to the American people, to the sovereignty of Native
American tribes, to combat workplace misconduct and a lot of
your testimony went into that which I think is very much needed
to develop a clear anti-harassment policy and also to address,
as you just mentioned, the tremendous maintenance backlog. So
we obviously agree on a number of aspects.
I wanted to point out two very specific things that relate
to Hawaii that I would want to ask for your assistance and help
in.
One is the USGS Hawaii Volcano Observatory which was
completely destroyed, as you know, during the eruption, and we
obviously need to rebuild that facility. There are discussions
about building it outside of the island on which there are
active volcanoes. So that does not seem to make a lot of sense.
I would want to have your commitment that you will listen to
the Congressional delegation as well as local stakeholders to
put this observatory where the eruptions will likely occur.
Mr. Bernhardt. So, I will----
Senator Hirono. Good.
Mr. Bernhardt. ----have to say that I will absolutely look
into that.
Senator Hirono. Let's do things that actually make common
sense.
The second thing is that the USS Arizona Memorial, I hope
you have had a chance to visit it, but there is ongoing dock
repair at the memorial and there is no foot access to this
repair. You can imagine the millions of people who are very
disappointed, including the 2,000 or so World War II veterans
who plan their visits to Hawaii based on going to this
memorial. And so, the Park Service has moved the date for
reopening of this dock a number of times. I would like to get
your support for working with our delegation to give us monthly
updates on what is going on. Why do we keep having to defer
when the dock is going to be reopened?
Mr. Bernhardt. So let me tell you a personal fact. My great
uncle went down on the USS Arizona so I can assure you----
Senator Hirono. Thank you.
Mr. Bernhardt. ----there is no one in the Department of the
Interior that's more interested in having that problem
addressed than I am. And we will absolutely give you a monthly
update.
Senator Hirono. That is great. Thank you very much.
Mr. Bernhardt, you have frequently been paid to challenge
the Endangered Species Act, right? So you are very familiar
with the Endangered Species Act. You are just staring at me,
yes?
Mr. Bernhardt. I am certainly familiar with the Act, yes.
Senator Hirono. Okay.
Do you think the Endangered Species Act goes too far in
protecting species that do not appear to have any economic
utility or benefit?
Mr. Bernhardt. I certainly have never said that.
Senator Hirono. So you do not believe that?
Mr. Bernhardt. My view is that there--I've worked with the
Endangered Species Act for nearly 30 years and I actually think
there's--I think the Act has wonderful goals, wonderful
objectives. I think there's some ambiguity in the Act that has
caused us----
Senator Hirono. Yes, I agree. Most Congressional acts do
have ambiguities.
Mr. Bernhardt. Yes, they do.
Senator Hirono. And so, how you are oriented in reviewing
those ambiguities.
So, you know, I would like to know why your agency is
considering changing the species listing decisions to take out
language that such decisions should be made, ``without
reference to possible economic or other impacts of such
determination.''
That means that in these listing decisions you want to be
able to consider the economic impact of providing protections
to endangered species. Isn't that the import of the change that
you are contemplating?
Mr. Bernhardt. Actually, no, because under the law, under
the Endangered Species Act, when you are making a listing
decision you can only consider five factors. Those factors are
factors that do not include economics. So you cannot consider
it for the listing decision itself. The question is, could
there be other documentation within----
Senator Hirono. Yes, I know, Mr. Bernhardt. You are not
supposed to consider economic decisions, but you are now taking
out that provision so that you will be able to consider
economic decisions.
Mr. Bernhardt. Although it may come out of the rule, and
that's still under debate, but it may come out of the rule.
It's in the statute. So, it can't. No one can do that. That
would be illegal. So it has to be the five factors and that's
it.
Senator Hirono. Well, I certainly review your proposed rule
much more clearly.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter into the record a
September 12, 2018, letter that a number of us signed that
expresses concerns regarding a number of rules changes being
proposed by your Department, including well, there is a change
that, as I mentioned about the economic considerations, a
change that would limit the ability of the services to consider
impact of climate change, rules to be changed that would
rescind existing blanket protections for threatened species,
two definitional changes, redefinitions in the proposal that
would also make it a lot harder to protect endangered species.
So, I would like to have this letter entered into the
record, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Gardner. Without objection.
Senator Hirono. Thank you.
[Letter regarding changes to the wording of the Endangered
Species Act follows.]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Gardner. Senator Cassidy.
Senator Cassidy. Mr. Bernhardt, thank you for being here.
Thanks for putting your name up. I know that you are the most
experienced nominee since the '40s and your exchange with my
colleague, Senator Hirono, in which you so were clearly versed
in the statute versus the rule on economic issues kind of
reflects that training. So thank you for offering yourself.
Let me just make a plug for my--have my shoes in front of
Gardner.
[Laughter.]
Let me just put a context here. As you and I both know with
your experience, according to the Energy Information
Administration, the Gulf of Mexico federal offshore oil
production accounts for 17 percent of total U.S. crude oil
production and the federal offshore natural gas production in
the Gulf is about 5 percent of the total U.S. dry production,
more than 45 percent of the total U.S. petroleum refining
capacities along the Gulf Coast and 51 percent of the total
U.S. natural gas processing employing thousands of hard-working
Americans from many different states, the energy revenues not
only fund the rebuilding of the Louisiana coastline but the
LWCF which has broad support. So I just want to note that.
And as regards to revenue sharing, this is my first
question. I have a headline here--Angus King is going to perk
up--``Offshore Wind Bonanza Draws Bidding War in Record-Setting
Sale'' off the coast of New York.
[The information referred to follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
We have been trying to get revenue sharing for all forms of
energy, not just oil and gas, but also wind. I would like to
expand that. Now frankly, there will be Louisiana companies
that are putting down the platforms for those wind turbines and
Republicans are about all-of-the-above. So, you know, I have an
interest in this.
But what are your thoughts on expanding offshore revenue
sharing for wind energy to states? I would specifically like
this wind energy to go to fund coastal resiliency as rising sea
levels are imperiling Maine, Louisiana, and eventually Nevada
may be a coastal state. So just to throw that out there.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bernhardt. Well, there's certain--thank you for that
question.
There are certainly a lot of discussions and thinking going
into innovative ideas for coastal resiliency and the role that
even public lands can play in those. And I think that's an area
really worth people examining and thinking about over time.
Revenue sharing has been an issue that I've dealt with in
various contexts, and my view is that there certainly is a
burden to areas where we ask energy to come from and that we
need to work to deal with that.
Senator Cassidy. Now I will also point out that LWCF really
benefits Western states, the big block states. LWCF revenues
are derived off my coast and benefit people with no coastline.
So I do think that if we could have something that would
somehow benefit coastal states as most of our nation's
population lives along the coast--if we can build a coastal
resiliency fund, similar to LWCF--that will hopefully limit the
damages of these storms that are impacting, for example, most
recently Florida, but my State of Louisiana prominently.
Let me also ask. Now as I go through my state, which is
trying to rebuild our coastline and that coastline has been
lost because long ago Congress made the decision to channel the
Mississippi River and we have lost the sediment that we need
flowing through our bayous. We channeled that river for the
benefit of inland ports, not Louisiana but inland ports. But
the permitting process is so cumbersome, it may take 10 years
to fund a project. And in the interim the geography is changed
so much that the permit is now obsolete because the landscape
has changed so much.
What do you think about permitting efficiency? Can we get
that so as we create coastal efficiency, we are not paying
consultants, we are paying for resiliency?
Mr. Bernhardt. So I really appreciate that question.
In my opening statement I mentioned working on business
processes. And irrespective of what one's policy views are,
there's a lot that we can do better at the Department of the
Interior.
And let me just give you one example. With our NEPA process
we've done a number of things. I have career staff ask us, hey,
can we have some timeline goals? Which seems reasonable, right?
You want a timeline for a goal. If you have a deadline you work
to the deadline. They also were interested in, we have some
goals for page limits. So we've worked on those.
But more importantly what we did is I sat down with the
state directors in BLM and I said hey, I have a process where a
state director sends a document to Washington. It's in
Washington and it goes to like 50 or 40 people and then it
comes to me to go to the Federal Register. And that process
takes a really long time, like 199 days on average. And if
you're doing that, I'm sorry to cut your time, if you're doing
that three times for an EIS that's like 300 days to an EIS. We
have consolidated our briefing schedule for Washington down to
an average of 29 days for BLM. So if you're in the field and
you've worked on a project and you got it done and it's a good
job, it comes up to us and in 29 days it's in the Federal
Register. That is a huge thing.
And what I'm going to get to spend the next two years
doing, if I'm confirmed, is working on from the state director
on down because there's just a lot of stuff in our system that
just doesn't need to be there. Without modifying a single,
environmental standard we can permit things much, much more
expediently just by simply changing a few of our processes.
Senator Cassidy. As I yield back, I will note I will finish
where I started.
Your experience is the most experienced nominee since the
'40s. It has been demonstrated that you understand that process
and how to make it more efficient for the benefit of those who
are trying to conserve and preserve.
I thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman [presiding]. Thank you, Senator Cassidy.
Senator Cortez Masto.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
Mr. Bernhardt, congratulations on the nomination. I know we
met before in your previous hearing.
One of the areas that I want to focus on is the Interior
Department's policy or initiative on the energy dominance
policy. It appears that that policy extends to oil and gas but
it does not extend to other forms of energy development on
public lands such as solar, wind and geothermal.
I noted on just while you have been at the Department of
the Interior a couple of things have already happened that
make, imply, your support more so of the fossil fuel industry.
You repealed the regulations on oil and gas hydraulic
fracturing on public lands and rescinded the regulations
preventing emissions of methane from oil and gas production on
public lands. You rushed to prepare for an oil and gas lease
sale in the Arctic National Wild Refuge, you proposed to open
essentially the entire coast of our country to Outer
Continental Shelf oil and gas development, you repealed the
offshore oil and gas safety regulations put in place by the
Obama Administration after the devastating BP Horizon disaster,
and you opened vast areas of what had formerly been protected
as part of the Grand Staircase Escalante and Bears Ears
National Monuments to oil, gas and coal leasing. So I guess my
question to you is why isn't the Department giving the same
level of intensity to cleaner forms of energy development that
it is giving to fossil fuel development? Can you address that
please?
Mr. Bernhardt. So, first off, I really appreciate the
question.
I don't think I can name a policy where we've not treated
like, for example, solar and wind equally fairly.
Senator Cortez Masto. So what have you done? Can you just
explain to me what you have done----
Mr. Bernhardt. Sure.
Senator Cortez Masto. ----to support a cleaner energy the
same as you have done to support oil and gas?
Mr. Bernhardt. So we have a number of renewable projects
that are in our FAST-41 process which is an expedited NEPA
review. We also have aggressively leased offshore wind areas on
the East Coast.
I think we are moving at about the same flip. And so, I
would really, and the process improvements I just talked about
apply to everybody.
I'm just honestly not--I'm happy to look at that and see if
the statistics line up and if they do, I'd love to talk to you
about it because our position is not that one project should
move faster than another. My position is we should move them
all better and more effectively irrespective of, you know,
type. We need to give people an answer and then move on.
Senator Cortez Masto. So, and no, I appreciate that and I
look forward to working with you.
But here is my other concern. Yesterday it was reported on
CNN that during the 35-day government shutdown earlier this
year, BLM, under your supervision, approved 267 drilling
permits and 16 leases applied for by oil and gas companies. Two
of your former lobbying clients are among the companies that
received approval for this application. This was during a time
that you recalled some, but not all furloughed workers, who
regularly review these applications. It is also my
understanding that such supporting staff that contribute to
these application reviews such as those that review details
concerned environmental and cultural resources remained
furloughed during this period.
And on February 15th you were quoted in the Carlsbad
Current Argus that work on oil and gas development continued
and I quote, ``Because the fees were still coming in. There's
also safety. We need to keep things safe. We need to keep
things going. I'm very comfortable with what we did during the
lapse. We could do more next time.''
I guess my question is what exactly was the safety
component applied to your decision to continue with the oil and
gas permitting during the furloughs and during the government
shutdown?
Mr. Bernhardt. You know, I really appreciate that question
because that specific reference during the shutdown our BSEE,
the Bureau of Safety and Environment, was continuing critical
inspections and permitting on offshore vessels. And we did
that, those activities throughout the continental shelf. And
so, that was the safety issue I was specifically speaking
about.
The reality is that the Department of the Interior has a
very complex budgetary framework. And what that means, and this
becomes important after people miss a couple paychecks, what
that means is there was money to do certain things and not
necessarily everything.
For example, the Park Service only receives one-year money.
Other states, other bureaus receive multi-year money. So we've
had money that we had not obligated that we could spend and
then fee revenue can be spent right away.
So I'd be happy to walk you through each of those accounts
to show you what we did. But I made a decision during the
shutdown that we were going to put people back to work because
I could guarantee that they'd get paid. And I didn't know how
long this was going to take.
I can tell you I had employees that were calling our ethics
office to see if they could sell their plasma. And so, I made a
decision to put folks to work that I could and that we had
resources for.
Senator Cortez Masto. I notice my time is out, and I will
submit the rest of my questions for the record.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Daines.
Senator Daines. Thank you, Chair Murkowski.
Mr. Bernhardt, when you were before this Committee last
time, pertaining to your nomination to be Deputy Secretary, we
talked about the important role you had in balancing the
multiple missions of the agency within the Department. I very
much appreciate the balance that you bring to this very
important job. In Montana, we say that is the balance between
Merle Haggard and John Denver.
You have taken good leadership at the Department toward
that end. In fact, just last week signing a Secretarial Order
facilitating more public access to public lands for hunting and
for fishing. By the way, we heard from Dr. Cassidy earlier. His
complaints, Senator Gardner and myself, we have better elk
hunting in Colorado and Montana. Let the record show that. You
also took the allegations of sexual misconduct at the National
Park Service very seriously. You took it head on protecting our
National Park Service employees from workplace harassment. And
even more specific to my state, you helped protect an area
right outside of Yellowstone National Park, Paradise Valley. It
is named that for a reason. You protected that from large scale
mining.
In fact, we recently enacted the Yellowstone Gateway
Protection Act that came through this Committee with my support
with bipartisan support to permanently withdraw these lands
from mineral development. But in October 2018 then-Secretary
Zinke issued an Administrative Withdrawal that would protect
this area for 20 years. So you all acted first in the 20-year
protection followed by the legislation that allowed permanent
protections, the longest time possible for any administrative
action. I want to thank you for your leadership in that regard.
Could you share with this Committee about your work to help
and prepare the implementation of that withdrawal and why you
saw that as an important act to take?
Mr. Bernhardt. Well, I really appreciate that.
That was actually, I went to Paradise Valley. That was my
very first trip as Deputy Secretary at the Department, and I
went out there. First, it's spectacular, it's location. I met
with the community. And at the end of the day, as somebody from
rural Colorado, I know that input from local communities is
absolutely critical. We need to look at these on a case-by-case
basis. We need to consider the impacts that these decisions
have on the livelihood of the folks who work there.
And you know, really at Interior we have opened hundreds of
thousands of acres of refuges, of BLM lands to hunting and
fishing. We have partnered with Fish and Game and state
agencies to protect wildlife corridors for big game animals. I
think that is something that's really important and I think as
you work with the transportation bills and infrastructure
bills, that's something we ought to really spend some time
thinking about.
And I was really excited to sign that Secretarial Order you
mentioned last week because the requirement that we think about
access before we make a decision to transfer or exchange a
piece of property is so important that very few people where I
grew up own a nice ranch to go hunting on. They depend on an
opportunity to go shoot an elk or a deer on public land. And if
you take that away from them, that has a tremendous impact on
their social, you know, their love for the outdoors and we just
cannot allow that to happen.
Senator Daines. You know, we pride ourselves, Mr.
Bernhardt, in Montana. It is a state where you still can go
down to Walmart and buy an elk tag over the counter and be at a
trail head, public lands, within 30 minutes with the next
generation of hunters here, kids, grandkids and so forth.
I want to shift gears and follow up with what Senator
Heinrich talked about, LWCF, and he was just a great partner in
moving that forward and getting permanent reauthorization with
a 92 to 8 vote in the United States Senate.
You understand the value of public access to public lands.
You understand the importance of locally-driven conservation
that balances the needs of landowners. However, the President's
proposed 2020 budget for the LWCF fund seems to signal
otherwise.
LWCF is one of the greatest tools we have to give access to
locked up public lands in the West. Seventy percent of our
fishing accesses in Montana have been funded through the Land
and Water Conservation Fund. We have over one and a half
million acres in Montana of public lands that are inaccessible.
LWCF also helps build playgrounds in cities and towns. They
help multigenerational ranchers stay working their land, helps
our local sawmills get a steady supply of timber. So it is a
big deal in Montana.
We were disappointed. Frankly, I have to tell you this.
When I saw the President's budget come out, it looked
embarrassingly low on funding for LWCF. Can I get your view of
that program?
Mr. Bernhardt. Well first off, let me thank you personally
because you're the one guy I could call and say, hey can you
help push this along too. And I really appreciated that and
appreciated everybody's support, but I really enjoyed visiting
with you to get that permanent reauthorization done. I had the
good fortune of joining many of you at the signing ceremony.
And you know, here you guys have worked on this bipartisan
effort, maybe the single largest and wide-ranging bill passed
since the 1970s on these issues.
And you know, the signing is sort of pass the baton to us,
if you will, to implement. And I will work very hard on our
budget next year, and I want to work with you on our budget
this year. I'm a believer in the program, and I want to move it
forward.
Senator Daines. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Bernhardt.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Daines.
Senator Cantwell.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Bernhardt, following on that same theme, I am
disappointed in the firefighting budget as it relates to the
Department of the Interior's part of that program. I am going
to definitely be sending you a letter on that today, but we
worked very hard in a bipartisan fashion to end fire borrowing.
And so, we want to make sure that the President's FY2020 budget
proposal, which basically reverses course on that or at least
doesn't move us forward as it relates to the budget, that you
are going to be an advocate on moving forward on the principles
that we passed here in Congress to end fire borrowing and make
huge investments in the types of fuel reduction and investment
we need to see.
Mr. Bernhardt. Well, I really appreciate that question.
Unfortunately, we haven't had a chance to meet yet and
visit. I know we have one meeting scheduled. And I'd love to
talk to you about that issue because from my perspective we're
in a little different place, at least with Interior's budget
and fire, that we actually feel like we got the additional $300
million. So I'd love to have the discussion with you,
understand it and am happy to work with you on the issue. We
all have a commitment to make sure that we're actively
addressing those issues in the proper way, so I'd be happy to
visit with you about it.
Senator Cantwell. Okay.
Do you support what we did in ending fire borrowing and
putting resources toward fuel reduction?
Mr. Bernhardt. I absolutely support putting resources
toward fuel reduction.
Senator Cantwell. And?
Mr. Bernhardt. And the borrowing.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you.
Alright, Mr. Bernhardt, I wanted to talk to you about the
Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) and obviously you have
an important role here to play. I want to ask about,
specifically, the coastal plain of the refuge is typically one
of the greatest concentrations of polar bear dens across the
Alaskan Arctic coastline and the Southern Beaufort Polar Bear
population would be one of the most impacted by drilling. I am
concerned that they are, you are, rushing to move forward on
this, you know, to drill in the Arctic Wildlife Refuge.
So my questions are do you believe the Endangered Species
Act and ANILCA, the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation
Act, and the National Wildlife Refuge System Act apply to the
National Arctic Wildlife Refuge? Do those laws apply to the
Arctic National Wildlife Refuge?
Mr. Bernhardt. I wasn't--certainly the Endangered Species
Act does and the Marine Mammal Protection Act does and both of
those are acts that really protect polar bears and those are
the primary acts that we look to in addressing polar bear
issues. And they both would apply to any activities that happen
in the 1002 area.
Senator Cantwell. And the ESA?
Mr. Bernhardt. What's that?
Senator Cantwell. And the ESA?
Mr. Bernhardt. Absolutely, the ESA.
Senator Cantwell. Okay.
A memo was written by Dr. Patrick Lemons, Chief of Marine
Mammal Management, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service office in
Alaska detailing numerous areas where the Interior Department
does not have enough information about polar bears to determine
whether or not the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge drilling
would harm or kill polar bears or destroy designated critical
habitat. Are you aware of this memo?
Mr. Bernhardt. I'm generally aware of the memo.
Senator Cantwell. Okay.
Can you--do you believe in the analysis? The Interior
Department scientists apparently shared this memo because they
believe the science in some of that information might be being
suppressed. Do you believe in the analysis conducted by the
Department scientist and incorporated into that EIS? If you
don't know the answer, you can give me an answer later, but I
want to know whether you believe in the science that was part
of that.
Mr. Bernhardt. So when we look at ANWR, and we spent a lot
of time on this, you know, first off you start, there's a ton
of studies that were done in the '80s, but more recently the
Fish and Wildlife Service completed a comprehensive
conservation plan for ANWR in 2015 which really, I think, had
over 2,500 pages of documents, 57 pages of literature
citations. And then in 2018 I asked the U.S. Geological Survey
to create a summary of anything that was an update to that. So
I feel very confident that our entire record includes
everything possible for ANWR in terms of things that are
already available.
I think the memo that you are speaking to goes to studies,
to studies----
Senator Cantwell. Can you share that information you were
just--can you share with us that information, correspondence or
documents so that we can see that too?
Mr. Bernhardt. I'll bring it to our meeting and we can talk
through it, yeah, of course.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you.
I think, you know, my concerns here are that I think we are
rushing. Now we had a debate. Obviously, my viewpoint failed,
but I did not think the drilling was consistent with the other
goals of a wildlife refuge. I definitely disagreed on that
point.
As a steward of our lands, I hope that you are going to use
these oversight responsibilities as it relates to managing the
wildlife refuge and not ignoring those responsibilities as you
look to moving forward.
I am sure much of this is going to end up in a big legal
dispute, but I think for you to help us by being transparent on
how you are meeting the goals of those other relevant acts as
it relates to managing a wildlife refuge will be very important
for people in the United States.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cantwell.
Senator McSally.
Senator McSally. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Bernhardt, good to see you again. Thanks for being
here, and I really appreciate all your leadership on so many
issues that matter to Arizona.
I want to talk a little bit about sexual harassment issues
in the National Park Service. Unfortunately, Grand Canyon
National Park has been ground zero for the issues across the
board in the National Park Service. In a recent survey nearly
39 percent of Park Service employees said they experienced
sexual harassment.
But when I see what is, you know, what is going on in Grand
Canyon National Park over the years, it is atrocious. It sounds
like a bunch of frat boys that think they can just get away
with an environment of toxicity and harassment and bullying and
you are very familiar with this.
The Grand Canyon Park Superintendent, Christine Lehnertz,
was brought in to clean house, the first-ever female
superintendent and unfortunately I know a little bit about
going into a good ole boy network and trying to change the
environment. Unfortunately, she then came under some
allegations last year that she has been completely exonerated
from but now she has resigned.
I am really concerned about the message that that sends to
the harassers and the bully-ers that somehow you can try to
derail progress, you can derail a female leader and maybe they
can get back to business as usual. I am concerned about the
Grand Canyon National Park, the culture, and the leadership
there. Across the Park Service, for sure, but specifically the
future of this leader, what has happened to her and what is
going to happen at Grand Canyon National Park to make sure that
people are treated with honor and respect and dignity and they
are serving that regard and that harassment and bullying and
the types of behavior that was happening there is not going to
be tolerated and leaders who come into change it are not going
to be pushed away.
Mr. Bernhardt. I really appreciate the question.
First, on a personal side I was very disappointed that she
just resigned, and I know that the Deputy Director of the Park
Service was disappointed in that and that's a personal choice.
Let me tell you what we have done. We have dramatically
revised our anti-harassment policy. We have hired anti-
harassment coordinators. We've reprioritized funding. I have
basically required every single bureau to bring me an anti-
harassment plan, handed that plan to experts, had the experts
go through it, come back to me and tell me what needed to be
tweaked and then say, implement it and we're watching you.
The IG, in about a month, will have an evaluation of that,
and I imagine there will be some, you know, people doing
better, some people doing worse.
That park that you mentioned, in particular, we're going to
have a good person there.
Senator McSally. Okay.
Mr. Bernhardt. And I, look, what I've told the management
side is if they don't deal with these issues themselves, I'm
dealing with the management. And because what really happens is
these things just get shoved under the, you know, they're
shoved away because they're hard to work with.
We've dramatically changed the way we handle personnel in
the Solicitor's Office, and we're going after that. I cannot
have an environment where I have to think that if Katie wanted
to work, my daughter wanted to work, at Park Service, that's
threatening. That's--it's unacceptable.
Senator McSally. Exactly.
Mr. Bernhardt. We're dealing with it.
Senator McSally. Well, I appreciate it.
The policies matter, and I appreciate you bringing all that
into order, but ultimately this is about leadership and it is
about your managers up and down the chain and, I think, the
culture as well and holding people accountable and then making
sure that you are training and promoting those who are the
right leaders and that you are holding the leadership
accountable, like you have talked about.
So I definitely want to follow up and maybe we need to go
visit and see what is going on up there. Let's do that. I will
invite you. Let's do that together.
Mr. Bernhardt. That would be great.
Senator McSally. I want to follow up also on water. Water
is life in Southwestern Arizona. I know you have a long and
distinguished background in Western water issues, and we are
dealing with a number of them to include the DCP and other
things.
I really appreciate this Administration's strong commitment
to Western water through the Drought Contingency Plan, the
California Central Valley Water Memo and just commonsense
regulations.
Can you discuss plans for the upcoming year and how you
will keep focused on Western water issues?
Mr. Bernhardt. Well, you know, I'll be very candid with
you, I think we have the best commissioner for the Bureau of
Reclamation in history.
Senator McSally. I agree.
Mr. Bernhardt. And so, I don't have to worry when I go to
bed at night at Interior, I don't worry a lot about water
because Brenda has it under control. I have her back. I think
she's doing, Brenda Burman is the Commissioner, and I think
she's doing a tremendous job. Our Assistant Secretary, Tim
Petty, for Water and Science, is doing a tremendous job. I
think we have a great team. We've just added Pat Weaver.
We're firing on all cylinders there and, you know, my job
right now with Brenda is just to stay out of her way.
Senator McSally. Great.
An Arizonan, I will note.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, I appreciate it.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator King.
Senator King. Thank you, Madam Chair.
First, Mr. Secretary Designate, I want to thank you for
coming to Maine last week for visiting Acadia National Park
which is a beautiful place anytime of year, for discussing with
me the future of the Katahdin Woods monument, for the
commitment that you made to work with us on solidifying that,
the future of that monument and the budgetary, the funds that
are in the budget. So I appreciate that.
Mr. Bernhardt. Well, thank you very much.
You know, I really want to make sure that we move promptly,
get that plan in place. And if I was, you know, what I really--
Acadia is fantastic and I really enjoyed the opportunity there.
Maybe we'll come up this summer and go to Katahdin, because I
think everybody should and we ought to be getting there as
quickly as we can.
Senator King. I hope you will. And as I understand it, if
we get that management plan done, we have----
Mr. Bernhardt. You're rock solid. You're rock solid today.
The Park Service is there. You're part of the Park Service.
Senator King. Thank you.
My next question is, and I think you said this but I want
to just nail it down on the record, you and the Administration
are going to help us, support us and push on the Restore Our
Parks Act, is that correct?
Mr. Bernhardt. Absolutely.
Senator King. I do have a suggestion that we made before in
this Committee that we fund the Restore Our Parks Act
alphabetically.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bernhardt. By state or by park?
Senator King. Oh no, by park.
[Laughter.]
Acadia. Sorry about Zion, Madam Chair, but anyway.
More serious question about offshore drilling. As you know
the former secretary created quite a stir a little over a year
ago talking about all the coasts are going to be open to
offshore drilling. There was some dispute about Florida.
Here is my concern. NOAA is moving some regulatory changes
that appear, they are talking about streamlining. We do not
really know what they are going to say, but it appears it could
limit states' abilities to affect these decisions through the
Coastal Zone Management Act. BOEM is part of that process.
Can you comment on your view of the state's role through
the Coastal Zone Management Act or just generally in this
process?
Mr. Bernhardt. Well, I can't. I'd be happy to look at it
and get back to you on the NOAA issue because I'm just not
familiar with that. I'm sorry.
Mr. Bernhardt. I can comment on our planning process, and
our planning process involves extensive input from the states.
As a matter of fact, it has special notification provisions for
when we talk to states. And I can assure you that, you know, we
listen to states. And so, we'll have a lot of dialogue with
them.
Senator King. The case of our State of Maine, I can tell
you we have a Governor, a legislature, and a bipartisan
Congressional delegation that is, to use your term, rock solid,
against offshore drilling or testing.
So here is the dilemma I have. We are talking about your
confirmation, your vote may come up in the next several weeks.
If a member of the New England delegation votes for your
confirmation and then you move for offshore drilling, I don't
know if I can go home again.
Mr. Bernhardt. I completely appreciate that.
You know, the dynamic I have here is the President issued a
very clear Executive Order, and that order says do a review and
then it says give full consideration to including lease sales
on an annual basis in each planning area.
So, you know, we're at the very beginning of our process.
We went out with the draft. We need to go out with a new
proposal and so----
Senator King. I am worried about the timing. This all
started a year ago and we were told there would be a draft last
fall, and we still have not seen it.
Mr. Bernhardt. Well, I'd be very clear with you and say
that I don't know what the timing is because it's not done to a
point where they've wanted to bring it to me yet. So I don't
have it yet. But I don't think it's going to happen
immediately, and I'm happy to work with people to figure that
out.
Senator King. Do you think the position of the states, as
expressed through their elected leadership, will be of
significant consideration?
Mr. Bernhardt. It--well, there's three factors that we have
to look at under the law, and that's exact--that is one big
one.
The entire planning process is supposed to do this. Start
out big and winnow down to an area that we have for a five-year
plan. And so, we're at like step one, not step seven. And so,
we just have to work through that process.
Senator King. Can I get your personal assurance here today
that the position of the state, its Congressional delegation,
will be a major consideration in making this decision?
Mr. Bernhardt. Absolutely. Absolutely. It's required.
Senator King. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator King.
Senator Alexander.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Bernhardt, welcome. You seem to be surviving your
confirmation hearing pretty well.
I noticed a question about even ended treatment of
different forms of energy. I am wondering this. I noticed that
the Department fined the Exxon Corporation $7,000 a bird for
migratory birds that were killed by exposure to hydrocarbons in
the Midwest.
I wonder if you are fining wind developers $7,000 a bird
for birds, migratory birds, killed by wind turbines which could
be also described as Cuisinarts in the sky.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bernhardt. Yeah, so, we've----
Senator Alexander. I mean, are you applying an equal
treatment for wind for, you know, bird killing by windmills?
Mr. Bernhardt. They are certainly being applied equally
today.
Senator Alexander. Let me ask you a few questions about
continuity.
Secretary Zinke was a good friend to the Great Smoky
Mountain National Park which is your most visited park. It is
up to 11.5 million visitors a year, partly because of the
opening of the new Foothills Parkway.
I am going to mention three quick items that I do not even
have much discussion with you on and then I want to also
mention the Restore Our Parks Act.
One is the Foothills Parkway which you and I have
discussed. It has produced, I think, one of the most, if not
the most, beautiful drive anywhere in the Eastern United States
along the edge of the Smokies. It is a 33.5 mile right-of-way
which the state gave to the Federal Government, the Park
Service, years ago.
And we are exploring with local communities and the state
and the conservation fund and the Smoky Mountain Park Service
ways to use that right-of-way for mountain bike trails or
hiking trails while we are seeing whether the road will be
built.
So, I have enthusiasm for that and I just want to make sure
that--Secretary Zinke knows about it. He has visited it. I want
to make sure that you will continue to be aware of it and
interested in it as we work with the Park Service and the
conservation fund.
Mr. Bernhardt. I can promise you we won't lose a step.
Senator Alexander. Good, thank you.
Number two, when Secretary Zinke visited the park, and this
gets to the maintenance issue that Senator King talked about,
he visited the Look Rock Campground up on Chilhowee Mountain
and said that he would provide $2 million to open it. It has
been closed five years for thousands of families who camp and
visit there. I hope you will check on the progress toward
fixing the roads to the bathrooms so that park can be opened.
Mr. Bernhardt. I'll look into it today.
Senator Alexander. I would appreciate that.
Now, third on the Restore Our Parks Act, that has an
extraordinary amount of support, 35 Senate co-sponsors on the
new bill this year. We are all in agreement about it. The
Chairman and Ranking Member moved it along through the
Committee last year. Strong support in the House. The President
is supporting it. The Office of Management and Budget, you and
Secretary Zinke did.
It has the opportunity to be the most important piece of
legislation to help our National Park System at least since the
1960s, because it has the capacity to cut in half the
maintenance backlog at the Smokies and the other 416 or 17
parks.
So my question for you is are you going to continue to push
the Restore Our Parks Act and what can we do and what can you
do to make sure that this becomes a law?
There are not many issues before the Congress today that
had such broad bipartisan and popular support.
Mr. Bernhardt. Well, you know, that's a wonderful point.
Every and in each of my individual meetings that bill came
up which I think is a good sign that there is really, you're
right, there's a lot of support for it. So I think we need to
figure out how to build on that and maybe talk to the House.
And I'm happy to row as hard as I can.
Senator Alexander. Well, I hope you will and I hope you
will continue to work with the sponsors of the bill, Senators
Portman, King, Warner, I, others and Senators Murkowski and
Cantwell as we try to schedule its passage in the Senate.
It may have something to do with the Land and Water
Conservation Fund at the same time. But in any event, I would
like to keep it at the top of the list.
Mr. Bernhardt. Yes, sir.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Alexander. Obviously a
priority around here, and we appreciate you raising it.
Senator Manchin.
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I wanted to
wait until the end here to make sure all my colleagues were
able to get their questions in.
Mr. Bernhardt, climate change is a priority to this
Committee. We are working very hard, and my focus working with
the Chairman and her staff is on seeking pragmatic solutions
for energy innovation as well as adaptation and mitigation on
our public lands.
At your confirmation hearing two years ago, you testified
that you take the science as we find it, whatever it is. But
then you added, you believe that you should take the science
and put it in a paradigm in the Administration's policy
perspective. And I know you are put in a tough position on
this.
Is that still your view, that while you are willing to look
at the science, are you able to push back if the Administration
is going against the science that has been produced? Do you
feel like you have input with our help?
Mr. Bernhardt. So, first off, I really appreciate that
question.
Here's the one thing I can assure you. I'm not a
wallflower. If I've got a view, they're going to hear it.
Here's where I am. I recognize that climate is changing and
man is contributing to that. But even if you look at the fourth
assessment, what you'll see and this is what our scientists
tell us, what you'll see is the largest uncertainty about
projecting future climate is projecting future climate
conditions that the largest uncertainty is what the level of
GHG is actually going to be going forward because it's based on
a number of things--economics, technology, political
structures, demographics--and those are all really difficult
for folks to predict.
And so what our scientists have told us is when we're
making a decision and we have to be really spot-on on this
because if I look at the prior Administration, every day, even
today, we lost a climate case, a case regarding how we analyze
climate.
We need to recognize that there's what our scientists say
is recognize that there's no one single model or one single
scenario that's right.
Senator Manchin. Well, they can----
Mr. Bernhardt. It's best to use these multiple models,
think it through, multiple scenarios and then look at that
range of possibilities and then make your decision in
accordance with that.
Senator Manchin. Yes, sorry, I want to move on to a few
other things.
Mr. Bernhardt. I'm sorry.
Senator Manchin. No problem at all, but I understand. I
come from West Virginia. I have a lot of deniers in my state. I
have a lot of people understand that it is climate change, and
we can do something. We don't have to do something drastic. We
can do something basically. I am not for eliminating. I am for
innovating.
Mr. Bernhardt. Roger that.
Senator Manchin. I am in innovation.
Mr. Bernhardt. And that drives that----
Senator Manchin. But basically, it is a global climate, not
just North American or U.S. climate. We have to address this
and we have to do it in a pragmatic way.
Alaska and West Virginia being heavy lifters, we know we
have to step up to the plate.
Mr. Bernhardt. That's right.
Senator Manchin. Now, with that being said, quickly, they
talked about offshore. Here is what befuddles me. We have 6
percent of the Outer Continental Shelf currently available for
leasing. The proposal I think you all are recommending is the
one with the 90 percent under the direction of the
Administration.
The only thing I can see is they want to basically be able
to export because our demand and our consumption does not pair
up with this at all. I think that Senator King is sharing a
little bit. There is nobody on the Atlantic Coast that wants
you to start drilling. Not one governor that I know of, not one
Congressperson or Senator, Democrat or Republican.
And we don't have a need for it because basically the
growth we have had, the EIA states the Lower 48 onshore
production continues to be the main source of growth.
Now we are up to producing 11.9 million barrels a day as of
February 2019. And they are saying that EIA is now predicting
U.S. crude oil production continues to set annual records
through 2027 and remains greater than 14 million barrels a day
through 2040. But yet, the companies want to continue to go out
there and start punching holes in the most drastic weather
conditions we have, which is the Atlantic Coast.
So we are asking, sir, please work with the governors. And
being a former Governor, we have to answer to every one of our
constituents every day, to all of our Senators and
Congresspeople. This is really, really serious for all of us.
Mr. Bernhardt. I appreciate that, sir, and I commit to
working with the governors on it.
We're at the beginning of the process. And I don't think
Secretary Zinke ever thought that the entire 90, you know,
everywhere would be ultimately leased, it would eventually be
winnowed down. So, I don't think he was thinking that. And so,
I think we'll work with you.
Senator Manchin. I am going to take liberty on a couple
questions, Madam Chairman, if you will allow me?
Two things real quick.
AML, abandoned mine land, has done so many good things in
restoring land. As I have said, we must leave the land better
than we started. AML, we don't have anything in the West. They
do hard rock mining. They just leave it helter skelter. That
has to stop. We have got to be good stewards and make them
responsible.
But AML is supposed to run out in 2021. I want to make sure
that you feel strongly enough about that to support
continuation of AML funds.
Mr. Bernhardt. We'll work with you on that.
Senator Manchin. Okay.
Last, sir, I think you deserve a right to explain. I have a
lot of my colleagues asking about recusal, your recusal. You
have, I think you have been under recusal now for nearly two
years, it runs out this August.
You might want to explain your thought process on recusal,
how it affects your job and things of this sort and what you
think needs to be done there? And they have been asking me to
ask you would you continue your recusal since so many of your
clients are going to be working directly with this agency?
Mr. Bernhardt. Well, I really appreciate that question.
And you know, I've had time to think about that question
since we visited a little bit earlier in the week.
And you know, my perspective is that in the 1990s the
Office of Government Ethics came up with the idea of a one-year
period from the day you entered government, when you entered
public service, to ensure that there was no bias for your
dealings on particular matters involving specific parties for
that year just to take away the appearance of impropriety or
appearance of bias. And bias can go either way.
Obviously, the prior Administration extended that for
certain things to two years. Some things were one year, but
some things were two. And the President kept it at two as well.
And so, I'm now at the point where in a few months these
recusals will run out for some things. Some things they've
already run off. And you know, when I think about this one of
the things I really think about is that I have a very
particular skill set, strength, creativity, judgment that I'm
basically handcuffed and not in the game for the American
people if I'm not, if I am recusing myself. And I don't think
that is really the best strategy.
So my view is follow that responsibility through the period
of time and then get in and be on the American team and win for
the American team. I'm actually pretty good at going up against
these guys, and I don't have any problem with doing that. And
so, you know, I would say you want your A quarterback playing
for your team.
Senator Manchin. Thank you.
Madam Chairman, thank you for the indulgence there.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Manchin.
Let's turn to Senator Barrasso.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Mr. Bernhardt, congratulations on your nomination. I really
appreciated the opportunity to meet with you earlier this week
to discuss your vision for the Department under your
leadership.
You know, over the past two years you have been
instrumental in developing many important policies at Interior.
You have been a champion of American energy dominance,
simplifying complex reviews that have caused analysis paralysis
prior to that. You developed policy that recognizes the need
for responsible multiple use of our nation's public lands. I
really look forward to more of this good work on your part and
the Interior Department's in the future.
In terms of communicating with Congress and the states
during your nomination hearing for the current job you have, in
2017 you emphasized your desire to work with stakeholders in
developing policies, specifically identifying states and local
communities as partners.
You know, over the last couple of weeks Interior has taken
a number of actions that directly impact the way that states
and state land managers will work with Interior and other
agencies. So, should you be confirmed, how are you going to
make sure that you are communicating consistently with your
state partners who are going to help you develop policies to
address the real, on-the-ground needs?
Mr. Bernhardt. Well, I'm reaching out to all of the
governors. I've visited with all of them. And the one thing I
will tell you, there's not a thing going out under my name
going forward that folks don't know about before it goes out.
Senator Barrasso. You know the Department has issued
several critical pieces of guidance and rules that improve the
management of federal land. I realize there is some discretion
afforded to on-the-ground managers who implement the policies
to ensure the policies are effective at the state and the local
level.
As Secretary, how will you communicate with BLM state
directors and field office staff because there is no one
nominated and confirmed as BLM director right now, to ensure
that they clearly understand the intent of the Washington
office?
Mr. Bernhardt. Well, one of the things I've done is I've
gone to the state director's offices themselves. I've been to
Wyoming's and told them what I thought our policy should be.
And if we have a field office that's out of kilter, I'll have a
discussion with them. I have no problem with engaging directly
to explain clearly where we need to go.
Senator Barrasso. Great.
Mr. Bernhardt. And we're working good with the Governor on
some really innovative ideas, I think, that would allow the
state to play a bigger role and facilitate a more streamlined
process.
Senator Barrasso. Former Secretary Zinke made commitments
to me, to a number of other members of the House and the Senate
to take administrative action to lower the royalty rate on soda
ash. The proposed rule has not moved forward yet. So our
natural soda ash producers continue to be undercut by cheap
Chinese synthetics and continue to hope that the commitment
from the previous Secretary will be realized. Will you commit
to take the necessary actions to lower the soda ash royalty
rate?
Mr. Bernhardt. I'm working on that proposed rule as we
speak.
Senator Barrasso. I want to talk about some court decisions
that are out there. Decisions made by Interior are no stranger
to the courtroom.
Last October a court reinstated the threatened status of
the grizzly bear in the Greater Yellowstone ecosystem under the
Endangered Species Act. Last week the D.C. District Court ruled
that the Bureau of Land Management did not adequately consider
greenhouse gas emissions under NEPA. The District Court of
Colorado issued a similar decision just yesterday.
Also yesterday a case was filed in the District Court in
Idaho challenging the contents of the sage grouse records of
decision and plan amendments, alleging violations of NEPA and
other land management views.
While these cases consider different questions, they do
represent areas where courts have historically been divided. As
Secretary, how do you plan to develop durable policy in a time
where litigation seems to be the first response?
Mr. Bernhardt. Well, you know, ideally you would say that
greater collaboration leads to less litigation. And that's
really what you'd think, but our numbers don't necessarily show
that. And if you go back and look at the number of protests and
you go back to like the '90s and then move through, we're now
at about 88 percent protest for lease sales. So, we really need
to think about those types of things.
I've spent--I had the attorneys do an analysis a couple
days ago to explain to me how much money we've lost in lawyer
fees for climate cases that we lost in the prior
Administration, and we're approaching a million bucks in fees.
And so we have to do a really good job of articulating what
exactly we're doing and how we're doing it and recognize where
the courts are so that we can beat it.
The reality, the sage grouse case you mentioned today,
actually it's a challenge that was filed to the 2015 plan in
2016. They've gone in and amended their complaint. So they
didn't like the prior Administration's plan. They don't like
our plan which I think probably tells you where you're going to
end up with those types of things.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Barrasso.
We are going to turn to Senator Hoeven, but I understand
that you, Senator Lee, would like just a moment here?
Senator Lee. Yes, I would like to offer for the record a
letter signed by Scott de la Vega, who is the Department of the
Interior's Director of its Office of Ethics Compliance.
Mr. de la Vega prepared an exhaustive report, quite
lengthy, led by a four-page letter in which he explains and
concludes that the Acting Secretary's conduct has complied with
all applicable laws, regulations, ethical rules and other legal
material that might be binding here. This is in response to a
letter received from Senators Warren and Blumenthal. I have
reviewed this and conclude that it confirms what I know about
this top-quality nominee, who I know to be a man of upstanding
character. I offer that for the record.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Lee, that entire report
will be included as part of the Committee record. We thank you
for your review and its introduction.
[Letter from the Office of Ethics Compliance follows.]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Let's turn to Senator Hoeven.
Senator Hoeven. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thanks for
holding the hearing, and Secretary Bernhardt, thanks for being
here, thanks for coming by and visiting with me, both now and
previously and for your service. We appreciate it very much.
We have BLM lands. We have national parks. We have a large
native population. We would like you to come to North Dakota.
My first question is would you come out to our great and
beautiful state for a visit?
Mr. Bernhardt. Absolutely.
Senator Hoeven. Thank you. I look forward to that.
Mr. Bernhardt. Preferably during pheasant season.
Senator Hoeven. Yes, exactly, that is phenomenal, just
phenomenal.
I am working on some legislation regarding minerals. As you
know we have incredible energy development out there and we
need to work on BLM lands on the permitting process. And there
are a number of ways to do it, adequate resources for your
field offices and you have some tremendous people out there
that we have worked with. They have come up with some
innovative ideas too. They are tremendous.
But we need to make sure they have adequate resources in
the field offices, and then we also need legislation in cases
where you don't have any surface ownership, just mineral
ownership, and we have legislation to do that that would
expedite the permitting process in a sound environmentally
responsible way.
I would ask if you would be willing to work with me on
that?
Mr. Bernhardt. I sure would. It lines up with exactly what
we're trying to do, Senator.
Senator Hoeven. Good.
Deferred maintenance backlog in the park. In Theodore
Roosevelt National Park we have, as you know, we are working on
a presidential library out there. We want your help with that.
You and I have talked about that. I would ask, one, are you
willing to help us with that? Obviously Teddy Roosevelt spent a
lot of time out there--incredible, beautiful Badlands, that is
just amazing.
So not only that project, but the other is the deferred
maintenance backlog. We are working with Lamar Alexander and
others to address the deferred maintenance backlog in our
national parks, really critical, obviously. I know you support
it but would like you on the record on both those issues.
Mr. Bernhardt. We are absolutely behind that. It's part of
our budget, and we'll work with you on it.
Senator Hoeven. I believe we have a real chance to get it,
and it is so important for our national parks.
Also, I chair the Indian Affairs Committee and would ask
that you come to our Committee and testify. Are you willing to
do that?
Mr. Bernhardt. Of course, sir.
Senator Hoeven. Okay.
One of the pieces of legislation we passed recently is the
Tribal Energy Resource Act. It gives tribes more control on
their reservations over energy development, how they do it,
traditional, renewable, whatever it is they want to do with
self-determination. Please talk about how you can interact with
them on that issue, please?
Mr. Bernhardt. Well, we--I'm familiar with that legislation
and I think that it really is the logical next step to self-
determination. And we want to work with the tribes that are
interested in utilizing that authority. We would really like to
work to have some successes with them.
I think it lines up policy wise, spot on with where the
Administration is and we'd like to work with tribes that are
interested in that to see if we can have some successes.
Senator Hoeven. Yes, I mean, it really does. It is about
jobs. It is about opportunity. It is about self-determination,
all things that, I think, are very good in terms of working
with our Native population.
Mr. Bernhardt. Absolutely.
Senator Hoeven. Last area. I just recently had a field
hearing in Bismarck and we have five reservations in our state,
some we share with South Dakota. We have more tribes than that
and we had tremendous representation from the tribal chairman,
the tribal councils and others as well as our state leaders,
the governor, our delegation and so forth.
One of the things we really focused on was more law
enforcement, particularly BIA law enforcement agents on the
reservation to help with safety and protecting women and
children and across the board, greater safety on the
reservation. And it really came to the floor the need for more
law enforcement officers, particularly BIA law enforcement
officers.
And as we listened to, like I say, tribal leaders testify,
as well as the BIA, they said if you can recruit somebody from
your geographic region not only are you more likely to convince
them to go into law enforcement, but they are more likely to
come and stay and continue because they are from the area.
And so, one of the things we need is more training centers
or more opportunity to have training centers around the
country. For example, in our case, our state would put
resources into it and that would reduce the federal cost to
train the law enforcement officers. Not only would we be able
to recruit more, we would retain them and it would cost less in
terms of the federal cost share. This is something we need to
do, and I would ask for your help in that. I know the
Administration has initiatives in this area, particularly
addressing violence against women and children on the
reservation.
Mr. Bernhardt. That's right.
Senator Hoeven. It plays right into that as well as
legislation we are trying to pass my Survive Act to provide
more resources to help in this area. It is a big subject but it
can have an impact in Indian Country and please touch on that.
Mr. Bernhardt. So, number one, our Assistant Secretary for
Indian Affairs is completely focused on the missing and
exploited category, and we're working like crazy on this.
What you're bringing up with this training, I think, is a
great idea. And I think we actually went back to the office
after we visited a little bit and thought we can also get some
justice money involved I bet too.
So we could bring together an interaction of folks because
if we can keep law enforcement in an area, if we can recruit
them, train them and then keep them in that area, we'd be much
better off than where we recruit folks, they come in for a
training for a few years and then they go to some other area
because they're just not familiar with the area. So I'd like to
work with you on that.
Senator Hoeven. Well, I was very encouraged when you came
in the other day and talked about wanting to take a leadership
role in this area.
I know for our Chairman this is a priority, something she
has worked on and is working on right now. And it is not only
the legislation that she is working on, it is bringing more
resources through the Survive Act, it is the law enforcement
piece. And for the Administration's initiative and for you to
be willing to take a lead role in this, I think you can really
have an impact.
Mr. Bernhardt. And I think, you know, we're really pushing
it and I think Tara's done a great job. I think we have a real
opportunity to do something in this space that's unique and it
fits. So I want to work with you on that.
Senator Hoeven. Thank you, I appreciate it.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Hoeven.
I appreciate you bringing that up because that is a
significant issue, and I have had a level of engagement with
the Assistant Secretary as well. I am very encouraged by the
focus coming out of the Administration in working with us on
these matters. It is long past time to address them.
I have just a couple more quick matters, and then we will
wrap up. I appreciate your time this morning, Mr. Bernhardt,
and the level and the detail to which you have responded to
colleagues' questions here. It is greatly appreciated.
Just very, very quickly here. I noted in my opening
statement that you have received the endorsement of the Alaska
Federation of Natives. I think that is significant, certainly
considering, again, the very unique relationship between
Alaska's tribes and the Federal Government and through the
Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act of 1971. We are coming up
on our 50th anniversary here.
But we recognize that many of the commitments that were
made under ANCSA remain unfulfilled. That is something that we
try to chip away at, but it has been frustrating at times as we
felt that the pace has just been very, very slow.
Just very briefly, your commitment to ensuring that the
Federal Government's commitments to Alaska Natives under ANCSA
will be met and what you can do to ensure that we see more
meaningful consultation with Native Americans, not only in
Alaska but around the country. This is an area of concern that
I continue to hear. There is a level of inconsistency with what
consultation is and does and means. Some agencies are better
than others. But again, it is making sure that this is more
than just a check the box exercise. So, just very briefly, if
you would.
Mr. Bernhardt. Well, first off, and you're largely
responsible for this, we have the best Indian Affairs hallway
that we've had in a very long time. Tara, John, Mark--it's an
incredible group. They're talented. They're doing great things
in the way they've separated BIA and BIE.
So one of the things we're doing is making sure that the
other agencies understand consultation a little better. But we
are completely committed. I have an A team, and I'll do
whatever they ask in terms of helping them.
The Chairman. Well, I appreciate you giving them that
latitude, that flexibility to really build this up because I do
believe you have extraordinary experts in place. Of course, in
Alaska, we are very proud of Tara Sweeney and all that she is
doing there.
Within the lands package there was a provision that we were
able to include that we were very pleased that the President
actually singled it out when we were there at the signing for
the ceremony in the Oval Office. It related to the Alaska
Native Veterans Lands Allotment.
One of the provisions, again, that we looked to, we have
been working on for decades and finally we will see an
opportunity for those who served us in Vietnam to be able to
receive their native allotments that they were unable to take
opportunity while they were serving.
And I think it is fair to say we have been kind of
tempering the expectations because we know there is now a
process that needs to unfold in order to implement that
program. I would ask you and your team there to be working
aggressively to try to advance implementation with regard to
the native allotments. It has been a long time in coming and I
think it is a fair statement to say that many who have been
waiting are anxious and eager to understand what their next
steps will be. So I would like your commitment to be working on
that.
Mr. Bernhardt. Absolutely. It did not go unnoticed to me
that the President specifically mentioned that.
The Chairman. Yes.
Mr. Bernhardt. And you know, we just formed yesterday this
task force for implementation. I'll sit down with Joe or,
sorry, the Assistant Secretary from Land and Minerals. We'll
figure out what we need to do and we'll move toot sweet. One of
the task force's jobs is to come back to me in 30 days with a
schedule, so I'll work on that and the Assistant Secretary will
and we'll get back to you.
The Chairman. Great. I appreciate that as well.
That was one of those initiatives that Secretary Zinke
singled out and said we have to make some headway on and
working with him, working with Senator Sullivan and you on this
and the others, it is greatly appreciated.
Finally, I just want to make sure that we have clarified
for the record here some of the issues that were raised earlier
by a couple colleagues.
I appreciate that there were some hard questions for you
here, but it must be exceptionally hard to sit in a committee,
to sit where you are and to have it, not only be suggested, but
to be stated that you have lied. That is very difficult. I
think it is unnecessary.
We can take hard questions around here, but I want to make
sure that you have an opportunity, a final opportunity, to just
respond very clearly, because it is my understanding that the
Office of Government Ethics has completed the review process
for your nomination and found you to be in good standing. Is
that a correct statement?
Mr. Bernhardt. That is correct.
The Chairman. It is also my understanding that Interior's
designated agency ethics official has determined that you will
and this is in quotes, ``be in compliance with the conflicts of
interest laws and regulations that will apply if you're
confirmed as Secretary.'' Is that also correct?
Mr. Bernhardt. That is correct.
The Chairman. So I am very satisfied with these answers but
is there anything else that you would like to add for the
record this morning to any concerns that were raised or
statements made by members that you believe deserve a response?
Mr. Bernhardt. Well, I certainly didn't lie to the Senator.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Bernhardt. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Bernhardt, thank you for being here this
morning. Thank you for your willingness to serve. Thank you to
your family who are there to back you.
Again, I appreciate all that you have done prior to this
time in giving guidance, giving counsel and truly helping us
move in a direction that is positive for this country.
I look forward to a rapid confirmation through the process
and to see you put in full capacity as Secretary of the
Interior.
With that, the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:12 p.m. the hearing was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
----------
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]