- FEDERAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVING FREDERICK'S DIVERSE SMALL BUSINESSES
[Senate Hearing 116-140]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-140
FEDERAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVING FREDERICK'S DIVERSE SMALL
BUSINESSES
=======================================================================
FIELD HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
AUGUST 8, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Small Business and
Entrepreneurship
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
38-872 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
----------
MARCO RUBIO, Florida, Chairman
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland, Ranking Member
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
JEANNE SHAHEEN, New Hampshire
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JONI ERNST, Iowa
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
CHRISTOPHER A. COONS, Delaware
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JOHN KENNEDY, Louisiana
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri
Michael A. Needham, Republican Staff Director
Sean Moore, Democratic Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Opening Statements
Page
Cardin, Hon. Benjamin L., Ranking Member, a U.S. Senator from
Maryland.......................................................
1
Gardner, Jan, County Executive, Frederick, MD....................
1
Witnesses
Panel 1
Umberger, Stephen, District Director, U.S. Small Business
Administration, Baltimore, MD..................................
5
Griffin, Richard, Director of Economic Development, City of
Frederick Department of Economic Development, Frederick, MD....
11
Callahan Brady, Kathie, President and CEO, Frederick Innovative
Technology Center, Inc., Frederick, MD.........................
20
Panel 2
Collins, Terry, Co-founder and CEO, Blue Sources, LLC, Frederick,
MD.............................................................
34
Troutman, Masai, CEO, MASAI Technologies Corporation, Frederick,
MD.............................................................
44
Dorr, Emily, Owner and Creative Director, Postern LLC, Frederick,
MD.............................................................
59
Alphabetical Listing
Callahan Brady, Kathie
Testimony....................................................
20
Prepared statement...........................................
22
Cardin, Hon. Benjamin L.
Opening statement............................................
1
Collins, Terry
Testimony....................................................
34
Prepared statement...........................................
38
Dorr, Emily
Testimony....................................................
59
Prepared statement...........................................
61
Gardner, Jan
Prepared statement...........................................
1
Griffin, Richard
Testimony....................................................
11
Prepared statement...........................................
14
Troutman, Masai
Testimony....................................................
44
Prepared statement...........................................
47
Umberger, Stephen
Testimony....................................................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
7
FEDERAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
SERVING FREDERICK'S DIVERSE SMALL
BUSINESSES
----------
THURSDAY, AUGUST 8, 2019
United States Senate,
Committee on Small Business
and Entrepreneurship,
Frederick, MD.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:05 p.m., in the
First Floor Hearing Room, Winchester Hall, Hon. Ben Cardin,
presiding.
Present: Senator Cardin.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, RANKING MEMBER, A
U.S. SENATOR FROM MARYLAND
Senator Cardin. Hello. Good afternoon. Welcome. First, I
want to thank the people of Frederick for allowing us to use
this facility for a Small Business and Entrepreneurship
hearing. It is always good to be here in Frederick. I want to
thank the staff of the Small Business and Entrepreneurship
Committee for making all these arrangements, and I want to
particularly thank Senator Rubio, our Chairman. I serve as the
Democrat on the Small Business Committee, and during
Congressional recesses, it is more convenient for us to do
field hearings. And I thank the Chairman and the members of the
staff for arranging this field hearing in Frederick County. But
first I am going to recognize Jan Gardner because it looks like
she is standing there. Jan does an incredible job as County
Executive here in Frederick County. I will say a few more
things about Frederick, but let me first turn it over to the
County Exec.
STATEMENT OF JAN GARDNER, COUNTRY EXECUTIVE, FREDERICK, MD
Ms. Gardner. Well, good afternoon. I really wanted to be
here today to welcome you Senator Cardin. We are always happy
to have you come and visit us in Frederick County. We
appreciate the good work that you do for our county, and our
State, and our nation. I want to thank you for holding this
hearing here today. We are really happy to have you. For
those--I assume everybody here knows Ben Cardin. He has
represented us and been dedicated to public service for many
years. We knew him first in the Maryland general assembly and
now as our U.S. Senator, and I know that you work hard for us
every day on lots of Federal policies.
I know you are an advocate and a national leader on
healthcare, and retirement security, and the environment, and
that today we are here to talk about the economy, and job
opportunities, and small businesses, and supporting our middle
class and our most vulnerable citizens. So for those of you who
don't know, he is the Ranking Democrat on the Senate Committee
on Small Business and Entrepreneurship. And we are really
pleased to welcome you here and to have you here, and to
support you in any way that we can in the future.
We do have a great business community here. Between 2015
and 2018, the small business partners that work out of our
business development center at ROOT, which is right around the
corner, helped more than 100 small businesses to launch, and
they created about 350 new jobs so that more of our residents
can work where they live. So thank you for all your efforts to
help small business. We know you have introduced some bills
lately to help our businesses, particularly underserved
communities, afford loans through the Small Business
Administration.
And so, we are proud to have you here and appreciate all
the work that you do. So with that, I will sit down.
Senator Cardin. Well Jan, first of all again, thank you. I
can assure you, I am familiar with the businesses this year.
Myrna and I visit Frederick often. We love what you have done
in Carroll Creek. We have visited, I think, just about every
shop on Market Street. So we have spent some money in this
town, and it is Main Street America.
So we thank you very much for being that the type of
environment which small businesses can flourish. Let me
acknowledge that we do have the staff from the Small Business
Committee that is here, both from Senator Rubio's staff and my
staff, and we thank them again for all the work they did in
making this possible. All I do is show up and everything is
arranged. So we thank you all for being willing to do this.
I do want to acknowledge we have representatives from
Congressman Raskin and Congressman Trone's office. We thank
both of those representatives for being here. Earlier today, I
was in Washington County with Senator Van Hollen, and with
representatives from Congressman Trone as we were able to see
the grand opening of the aqueduct in Williamsport, and the
groundbreaking for the C&O Canal National Headquarters in
Williamsport, which is pretty exciting. We then went to the
Museum in Hagerstown. So this has been a day in this part of
the State. But the highlight is this hearing, so we thank you
all for participating in this. Frederick is an incredibly
diverse community for small businesses.
The individuals in Frederick City identify 40 percent as
minority. When you take a look at the demographics of the
business community here in Frederick County, you find that 97
percent are small businesses, but the diversity of the small
businesses is extremely impressive. Over 7,200 women-owned
businesses, over 3,000 minority businesses, over 2,000 veteran-
owned businesses that we have. This is a really diverse State,
county, and city. So we recognize that, and we want to make
sure that these tools are working. So today's hearing is how
the Federal and local Governments are serving Frederick's
diverse small business community. And we have incredible panels
here that will help us in dealing with this. Frederick itself
is a magnet for technology.
There are a lot of great institutions here, not the least
of which is Fort Detrick, which has some of the most highly
sophisticated lab work in the world. It spins off technology
that is critically important, that can be developed by
companies. The commercialization of new technologies has been a
highlight of this region. So I am interested to know how the
tools of the Small Business Administration, how the tools
available to small businesses, have helped develop this climate
here in this region, and what we can do more effectively in
looking at the tools that are available. Can they be fine-
tuned?
Senator Rubio and I are going through a process of
reauthorization of all the tools under Small Business
Administration, and we have had a number of hearings throughout
this year that have been very helpful for us in dealing with
it. We have, of course, the procurement availability,
particularly from the Federal Government. The PTAC office here
is, I believe, the closest to Maryland's office at College
Park, but there are eight other offices that are available,
which was developed by the Department of Defense to help
specifically with technology growth with small companies in DOD
procurement. How is that working? Are there things that we can
do better? What more can we do to help?
It is interesting that you have a strong veterans
community, but there is no VBOC that is located here. It is
something I want to talk to Mr. Umberger about, as to why
Maryland, a State that has one of the largest concentrations of
veterans, why we do not have a Veterans Business Outreach
Center located in our State that could assist veterans in
getting more opportunities under the Small Business
Administration. If you are here, you have to travel 60 miles to
go to Springfield, Virginia, in order to get assistance.
We do have HUBZones in Frederick County. There are five
HUBZones in Frederick County, three located within the City of
Frederick. Interested as to how that is operating. That gives
you an advantage on procurement. Is it working the way it is
intended? We have heard that some of the restrictions in
HUBZones as far as where your employees must live may be an
impediment and we want to hear from our witnesses today whether
there are ways that we can try to improve that. Women-owned
businesses. You have a branch of the Women's Business Center,
which is headquartered in Rockville, Maryland, located here in
Frederick.
I also find this amazing that the State of Maryland does
not have a Women's Business Center in Baltimore. Now, I know I
am here in Frederick, but it seems to me we could have more
than one Women's Business Center and is that impacting the
opportunities of women businesses here in this community? The
Small Business Development Center, I believe headquartered at
Frostburg. You have a presence here and you have a presence in
College Park. Interested to know how that is working and
whether we can do things a little bit differently. You have a
SCORE Mentoring program here. That is good.
We have had some controversies nationwide on the SCORE
programs. It is a valuable program. Interested in how that is
working, and we are always wanting to hear from our witnesses
on the SBA's financing tools that are available. We know the
two major tools, the 7(a) and 504 that it has been challenging
for underserved communities to get those loans. Interested in
what we can do to help.
I recently filed legislation that would make the 7(a)
Community Advantage program, which is a pilot program now
making it into a permanent program under the SBA because it has
a much better success rate in reaching the underserved
communities. And I have also filed legislation on the Office of
Emerging Markets to help underserved communities in how they
can access the tools of the Small Business Administration.
So there is a lot we can talk about, and we got two
excellent panels. In the first panel we are going to hear from
Government officials who are working at the national level, our
District Director, and here in the county to help small
businesses, to get your perspective. And then from the second
panel we will have the opportunity to hear what people who are
in the field, business owners, as to how we can do a better job
in promoting small businesses. Why do we want to do this? I
think you all understand that small businesses are the engine
of growth in our country. It is not only where most jobs are
created, and most jobs are created in small businesses. But it
is also where innovation takes place. Where people figure out a
better way to do things. Where they take technology and turn it
into an innovative approach to dealing with our Nation's
problems.
So we want to have the most healthy climate possible. This
area is blessed. You are rural to a certain degree, but yet you
are very much connected to both Baltimore and Washington, you
have incredible institutions that are located here and close
by. This is a place where people want to work, live, and do
business. So there are a lot of good things going on here. How
can we help to make it better?
And with that, I am going to introduce our first panel.
Starting first with Steve Umberger. Steve has been at the SBA,
I have been told, for 25 years. An incredible record. He has
been a great friend. We share an office building together. That
is not exactly accurate. We are in the same office building in
downtown Baltimore. But Steve is the Director for most of the
State of Maryland, including areas here in Frederick, and we
would be interested in his perspective as to how the SBA tools
are being used, and how perhaps we can even be more effective
in reaching out to the small business community here in this
part of our State.
Richard Griffin is the Director of Economic Development,
City of Frederick Department of Economic Development. I
understand you also have 25 years of experience in this field,
17 years as the Director. So we can hear how things have
changed over your career here in Frederick County.
And Kathie Callahan Brady, who is President and CEO of
Frederick's Innovative Technology Center, FITCI, and we welcome
how Frederick has been able to use this tool in order to help
small businesses. So we will start with Mr. Umberger first, and
we will go right on down the line. And for all of you, your
full statements will be made part of the record. You can
summarize as you see fit, but I want to get into a
conversation.
STATEMENT OF STEPHEN UMBERGER, DISTRICT DIRECTOR, U.S. SMALL
BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION, BALTIMORE, MD
Mr. Umberger. Good afternoon, Senator. Thank you for all
your advocacy for small businesses across this great State and
thank you for your support of our programs both at the national
level end in our Baltimore district. I am Steve Umberger. I am
the District Director of the Baltimore District Office. And
like the Senator said, I have a territory that covers the State
of Maryland with the exception of Prince George's and
Montgomery Counties.
Now, much of what I wanted to say, was going to say, you
have mentioned but I will just kind of reiterate that of the
SBA resources other than myself and my staff traveling around
the State, we do spend a decent amount of time in the Frederick
County area, City of Frederick. And we also have SCORE
America's counselors to small business represented here. We
have a Small Business Development Center, both of which are
Federally funded through my agency, Representative in
Frederick.
The Women's Business Center which you mentioned is located
outside of our district headquarter, and Rockville also has a
counselor here. So our federally funded resource partners, part
of SBA, are all located right here in Frederick. Some of the
other things that we have that we provide, and I can provide
some numbers as to our business development and contracting
programs, the flagship program our 8(a) business development
program. As we all know, the Federal Government is the Nation's
number one purchaser of a wide variety of goods and services.
Our main program, or the 8(a) program is a socio- and economic
development program, and the businesses, in order to qualify,
need to be in business for two years.
Currently, there are 10 firms in Frederick County that are
active in the 8(a) program. We also over offer historically
underutilized business zones, HUBZone certification, Service-
Disabled Veteran certifications, and Women-Owned Small Business
certifications. All these certifications let these companies,
once they have obtained them, gain a leg up on Federal
contracting. Twenty-three percent of all Federal contracting
needs to go to small business, and there are subsets for each
of these that require the agencies to focus their efforts on
HUBZone, on 8(a), on Service-Disabled Vet, and Women-Owned
firms. We have nine HUBZone firms in Frederick County. We have
57 Service-Disabled Veteran-owned firms certified in Frederick
County, and we have 138 certified Women-Owned small business
firms in Frederick County.
So there are a fair number of firms out there that have
acquired certifications through SBA, mainly through assistance
from my office, and we think that is a good representation on
average based on what we have in the entire State. The number
one challenge for small businesses, as we all know, is access
to capital, and SBA, although we do not make loans directly, we
act as a guarantor, and with the tools provided by Congress and
by our agency, we reach out to many national and community
lenders who are all within our portfolio of roughly 90 lenders
in the State. We reach out to them to keep them up to speed
with the requirements to make sure that they are using our
programs, and we also entertain and look for, search out
lenders that may have at one time used our programs, but for
some reason they may have a myth that is causing a barrier to
the get them to what today's processes actually look like.
So we reach out to them and recruit, re-recruit and recruit
new lenders. The 7(a) program is the flagship program and it
can be used for a number of reasons. Certainly any business
need, furniture, fix your machinery, equipment, inventory,
receivables, and that covers pretty much the gamut on what our
7(a) loan is for; 708 entrepreneurs throughout our district
received SBA guaranteed loans in Fiscal Year 2018, which was
October 1st, 2017, through September of 2018; 708 deals for
over $236 million. In Frederick, there were 81 deals to small
businesses, 81 loans to small businesses, for over $35 million,
just over $35 million.
Senator Cardin. This is a very--we should get this in
Washington.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Umberger. Did I put that on hold?
Senator Cardin. No, you are fine.
Mr. Umberger. So those totals I gave you, that includes
7(a) and 504. The 504 loan is focused on real estate
acquisition or improvement, major capital equipment purchases,
and both the 7(a), 504 program have a ceiling of $5 million,
which was recently increased, I would say over the last 5
years, from $1 million and $2 million, depending on certain
circumstances, $5 million, which is being used a lot more by
lenders.
And we see from time to time in our top 10 lenders they may
do one loan, but it may be for $5 million, and that creates a
lot of jobs and a lot of opportunities in different
neighborhoods throughout our State. That is what I have brought
with me.
And again, I want to thank you for everything you do for us
and the small businesses across this great State of Maryland
and thank you to the committee for this opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Umberger follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Cardin. Well, thank you very much.
Mr. Griffin.
STATEMENT OF RICHARD GRIFFIN, DIRECTOR OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT,
CITY OF FREDERICK DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT,
FREDERICK, MD
Mr. Griffin. Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to be here. I
would like to just take a moment to introduce that I have two
of my staff. Mary Ford-Naill is a Manager of Economic
Development for the City of Frederick, and Emma Damazo is an
intern in my office, headed down to UVA in the fall. And I know
that I saw Alderman Roger Wilson in the back, one of my elected
officials. I do not think the Mayor was able to join us yet in
the room, but he may yet. So you did your homework on
Frederick. You had a lot of the great statistics that I had in
some of my testimony, so I will not repeat those, but what I
will say is that 44 percent of the 73,000 people that make up
the City of Frederick represent themselves as individuals of
some color or ethnicity, but when you look at the percentage of
minorities and women that own businesses in Frederick, there is
a gap. We are about 26.2 percent.
So we have a gap between the representational population
and the business ownership of somewhere around 18 percent, and
it is that gap that we are working on every day between our
partners at Frederick County Economic Development and the city
to try and increase minority ownership, women ownership, and
veteran and service-disabled ownership. And we are making some
progress. I would like to just highlight a few of the things
that together with Frederick County Economic Development that
we have been working on jointly.
First, let me say that City of Frederick and Frederick
County get recognized nationally now for high quality of life,
for our high-quality workforce. In fact, recently WalletHub
recognized Frederick as one of the most diverse cities in
America. We came in number eight, and we have been the fastest
growing community in Maryland for Asian and Hispanic
population. So we are a quickly diversifying community. One of
the challenges that we have had at the city and the county is
identifying and reaching out to that gap, to those individuals
who might be interested in starting a business or operating a
business, whether that is creating a new business, or
franchising a business, or whatever.
And so we have had to be resourceful. And a couple of the
things that we have done have been, you know, I think it worked
out kind of interesting. For instance, trying to reach out to
all households in the city is complicated but we figured out
that water bills go into every single household. So we took
flyers and put flyers in every water bill going out to the city
saying, if you are interested in starting a business, if you
are an entrepreneur, if you are minority and women business and
you need assistance, reach out to us. And from that we have
gotten a dozen or more companies that have emerged, individuals
that want to start companies, and now are working their way
through the process of building business plans and doing the
things necessary to grow their business. But we understand that
growing that number or shaving down that gap is a process that
starts back in school and it does not end until, you know,
people are in business for themselves and to succeed.
So the Frederick County Public Schools, for instance, has
put in place programs like the LYNX program, which is linking
students, and businesses, and high schools so that students
from a very early point in their education get a chance to see
what it is like in different career settings and grow some
understanding of how businesses are formed and how businesses
are started.
We have worked with the State of Maryland, the Governor's
Office of Small Minority and Women-Owned Business Affairs to
put on programs like the Ready, Set, Grow! program. We had 80
people participate in that program when they came out to hear
about the various resources that are available to, you know,
minority and women-owned companies to move their business ideas
forward and get the various financing.
We work with SBDC and obviously SCORE and others to try to
provide many of those services, and I will highlight that in a
moment. Frederick County took a leadership role in creating the
Frederick County Minority Vision program, and I think perhaps
you are going to hear more about that, but that program is
specifically intended for small businesses and opening doors to
Government, public-private resources for minorities and women
to start businesses and assist them with the division that they
need to have in order to be able to pull that off. That is a
year-long program. That has been very successful with a number
of graduating classes now.
And then finally, you know, we work with the city and the
county on procurement so that our own procurement offices are
trying to award more of our--in the city's case $20 to $30
million in controllable spending each year, awarding that to,
you know, capable and successful MBEs that, you know, would be
part of the pool of applicants for that type of work. And we
are just starting. The Mayor did a pointed panel to try and
provide advice to the city on policies that it might undertake
to encourage and improve in procurement activities.
While we do not do business plan assistance in our office,
we refer to a number of partners, and you have heard some of
them, SCORE, we recently did a franchise event with them, the
Small Business Development Center where they provide no-cost,
obviously, counseling to a lot of different business types, the
Maryland Women's Business Center who I think you will hear
from, our technology incubator and acceleration. We knew that
taking and providing resources to technology companies, many of
whom you are going to hear all about, are women and minority
owned. It was critical and we have had now many graduates from
that program. Tech transfer, you are going to hear from tech
transfer. We have really worked hard to try and promote
programs to get the technology off of Fort Detrick and the
National Cancer Institute as well as other Federal facilities
in Maryland to companies so that they can commercialize that,
sell it on the private market, sell it back to the Government
when necessary, and we have had a lot of success. You are going
to hear from one of those companies.
And finally, I would just like to recognize the fact that
the nonprofits in this community provide an immense amount of
support in the area of minority- and women-owned business
support. Centro Hispano, working with the Hispanic community,
the Spanish-speaking community of Maryland, the Asian American
Center of Frederick, the Maryland Hispanic Chamber, the
Maryland Black Chamber, the Maryland Washington Minority
Companies Association, and then finally even the State of
Maryland created the video lottery terminal fund out of the
lottery proceeds to assist small minority- and women-owned
businesses across Maryland through capital financing, and that
data resides with the Maryland Department of Commerce, but has
been successful. And I would like to end on just saying that
the Federal HUBZone program has been successful here in
Frederick.
We have been successful getting companies to relocate to
Frederick or to open up businesses in Frederick specifically
because of that HUBZone program. Now, we only have in the City
of Frederick six of the, I think, the nine HUBZone certified
companies that are in Frederick County, six of them are in the
City of Frederick, which is a small percentage of the total in
the State. I think there are almost 400 in the State, total
381, with the largest number of gain, amazingly enough I did
not realize, in Baltimore City. But those companies do depend
on that program initially to get started.
The challenge that they have and the reason we have heard
that there aren't more of them is the difficulty in being able
to hire employees that live in a HUBZone because of the, you
might not have enough housing to support that. And then
finally, the making sure that they have a plan for
transitioning off of that HUBZone program as that certification
ends so that they have an exit strategy into more normal
contracting processes.
And so we have lost a few companies that have gotten to the
end of the HUBZone certification and went away. We have had a
few that have made the transition. We have a few that, you
know, have relocated to other parts of the State. But one
thought that I have seen the State of Maryland do is that
cities within the State are priority funding areas, and that is
because traditionally or over many years you saw a lot of jobs,
and a lot of companies, leave our urban communities go to the
suburbs. It might be interesting to think about a model instead
of the smaller HUBZone, a HUBZone that matches the urban
boundaries of the city, which would allow for more housing to
be in that zone and more potential to hire from that zone as
well.
I think in closing, clearly small businesses are the heart
of the community. You said before, 97 percent of our businesses
are small, and we are working every day with the county to try
and deliver the services that they need in order to shave that
gap down and get our minority and women businesses closer to
the representational percentage they are in our community.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Griffin follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Cardin. Thank you for your testimony.
Ms. Callahan Brady.
STATEMENT OF KATHIE CALLAHAN BRADY, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
FREDERICK INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGY CENTER, INC., FREDERICK, MD
Ms. Callahan Brady. Good afternoon, Senator Cardin, County
Executive Gardner, other elected officials. My name is Kathie
Callahan Brady. I am the CEO of Frederick Innovative Technology
Center, also known as FITCI. We are actually a 501(c)(3). We
were created 15 years ago as a public-private partnership, and
we work with many clients whose businesses hinge on SBA
support.
And so firstly I want to say thank you and thank you for
being here and giving us your attention. Right now we have 49
clients. That is up from 15 clients three years ago. And, thank
you. They are still talking about you coming out to meet them.
There are also the 49 clients that we talked about. Each one of
them has looked to apply for SBA programs. So I asked each one
of them, along with our number one small business loan
officers, which is M&T Bank, they told me that 20 SBA loans
were, this particular year, in Frederick of the 340 across
Maryland.
And I also asked some of our other banks who don't lend as
much to SBA, and so my testimony is really their input on this.
So one of the things that they said was local access is one
reason that was mentioned by a woman-owned disadvantaged client
company. She noticed that the process was lengthy but during
that time she had to drive out of Frederick County to
Montgomery or Howard County to connect with appropriate
offices. The good news is she said that the benefit was
invaluable, and it increased her business as well. Another----
Senator Cardin. Did you meet with bankers or did you meet
with people to help her with that?
Ms. Callahan Brady. I meet with people to help her. Her
belief was that those offices were not here. Another client
spoke of the Federal contracting, saying that it has gotten
very difficult since 9/11 for small businesses to really go
about finding out the requirements. And so their suggestion was
to really potentially increase sole-source opportunities among
the 8(a) HUBZones and WOSB firms.
Another client talked about making it easier for the
average small business owner to compare the SBA loan programs,
including the qualifications on what makes a good candidate for
each program. And another client suggested that SBA could
highlight or reinforce the importance of the applicant's
relationship with his or her banking, and the banker's role for
the SBA loan process. Another client suggested offering
predetermined terms on defaults would be helpful since they
believe that the SBA loans are often given to people who are
shortfall on collateral or a higher risk. Input from the banks
that I had spoken to, they said banks are not lending as much
on the smaller loans as they believe that they are becoming
significantly less profitable.
And they also noted that a few years ago, they said it was
either two to three years, there used to be a program where
they waived the fees on loans that were under $150,000. And of
course, that program has closed, and they believe that that is
a result of fewer small loans being approved, which is what
most businesses need. And for all of the loans, they talked
about the process being cumbersome, and long, and therefore,
costly, and was hoping that there could be a program put in
place for these loans that are smaller than $50,000 to
potentially cut some of the process or even the bank's SBA
relying on the bank's process.
And with that, I hope the suggestions are helpful.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Callahan Brady follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Cardin. Well, thank you. Thank you, all three of
you, very much. They were very helpful, and I want to get to
some of these points but let me first start with the point that
you raised about having to travel to get help because as I look
at the SBA tools, they have been developed over a period of
years. A particular Congress might feel like they should do
something to help veterans, and later Congress might well do
something to help minority businesses, and other Congress might
want to do something in regards to women-owned businesses, and
they sort of layer these programs on top of each other and they
are not consistent on all of the procedures that are used or
all the opportunities that are available.
So in Maryland, we do have a very diverse small business
community. As I said in my opening comments, I am surprised
that for entrepreneurship help, we do not have what I would
think is a representative number. We have none for veterans,
one for women with a satellite office in Frederick, but nothing
in the Baltimore area. That does not seem to be adequate for
the needs that we have in Frederick or through the State of
Maryland. Your observations, am I right? Obviously that was one
of the points you raised, but what can we do to change that?
Mr. Griffin. One thing that we hear from the providers is
that there is not enough bandwidth. In other words, there are
more businesses that need assistance than there is bandwidth
sometimes to assist or it takes longer, and clearly, the
further they have to go for that assistance. Now, today some of
it can be done digitally or over the phone, but clearly we have
a much better and higher take-up rate with people that can meet
in person here in Frederick than we do on the longer distance
connections. But I would just like to say that bandwidth, in
addition to distance, bandwidth is an issue.
Senator Cardin. And Mr. Umberger, I know that there has to
be a private sector interest. There are also funding
challenges, etc., but if the State of Maryland wanted to set up
a second Women's Business Center, and they had the interest to
do it, how would they go about doing it under the current
setup?
Mr. Umberger. What we need to do is obviously have the
funding made available, and it was about, I want to say two
years ago, a year and a half ago, so January of 2017, that we
had a Women's Business Center located in Salisbury,
headquartered in Salisbury. They had, a couple of years prior,
worked on developing a position in Baltimore City. They opened
a branch in Baltimore City. Then a year and a half ago, they
contacted me to tell me that they were closing, out of the
blue, no discussion. We had been in constant contact. We are
always in contact with our resource partners and this was just
out of the blue, they are closing the Women's Business Center.
So that put us out of Baltimore City. That put us out of
Salisbury in the Eastern Shore.
Rockville, WBC had come along outside of our territory,
worked with Kiesha Haughton Smoots and had some discussion back
and forth, and then the office in Frederick was born. But in
the meantime, there was an appropriation, a request for
proposal put out by SBA across the country limited to five
locations, of which Baltimore was not one, that I was able to
go to them and say we need one. I want Baltimore added to that
list. They did a supplemental to it, added Baltimore to the
list.
So Baltimore, even though that was what was listed, it is
Baltimore District that would therefore cover our State. There
was some interest and the RFP closed. The proposals were
analyzed, and we were not one of the successful proposals. So
that leaves us in this syndrome of waiting till resources
become available again. We know of one in particular that would
be very interested in expanding across the State, in particular
into Baltimore. We would be more than happy to have them submit
a proposal.
There are a couple other folks that I have heard from, but
obviously with historical record and the track record, there
may be a leg up with what already exists in expansion scenario,
but the money and the folks----
Senator Cardin. Let me follow up on this for one second
because there has been some interest in the Rockville Centre to
expand to Baltimore, and I know Rockville comes under the
Washington office not under your office, but they cannot do it
unless the grant level is increased above its current limits of
the grant level. One of the areas under consideration in our
committee is to increase the limits on the Women's Business
Center to a higher number. I am not sure that is the right
answer for services in Maryland, but that is an avenue that may
be available to expand services. And of course the Frederick
office is under the D.C. District, not under the Baltimore
District.
Mr. Umberger. Well, Frederick is in our office, but the
headquarter of the WBO----
Senator Cardin. Yes, I get that.
Mr. Umberger. Yes. I am sorry.
Senator Cardin. So that does create a little bit of
confusion and that certainly is one of the things that we are
always interested is accountability, and there are so many
different lines that are inconsistent on drawing accountability
here. So let me get to veterans. Why don't we--I mean Maryland
is--explain to me, I know you have the local interest. We have
a great deal of veteran interest. Why don't we have a VBOC
here?
Mr. Umberger. I cannot answer that question. Again, we
have--a proposal came out, I supported an entity from Maryland.
The folks from Virginia made an application, the folks from
Maryland made an application. I am not the decision maker. The
decision was made to put this VBOC or expand the VBOC that
existed in Virginia to cover Maryland, Pennsylvania, Delaware,
Virginia, D.C.
We do in fact have a representative from that VBOC that
focuses his efforts in Maryland. And we do the Boots to
Business program, which we had one in Frederick here back in
March, that is run by them. But we really are the ones that
support the curriculum and provide the instructor, one of the
instructors. SBDC typically participates. SCORE many times has
a part of that. But to answer the question as to why we don't
have a VBOC is a tough one for me to answer because I don't
know why. We should have one. I fully agree.
Senator Cardin. Ms. Callahan Brady, you raised several
issues I have heard over and over again, the difficulty of
applying for a 7(a) loan, the trying to find a banker who is
interested because their interests today are not what they were
10 years ago or 5 years ago. We do not have many community
banks available anymore, so you have to go through a much
larger banking bureaucracy, which is not always sensitive to
small businesses, particularly, you know, outside of a major
urban center.
So we hear about that. We hear about the costs. We have
tried to do a couple things to counter that, and I am
interested in your views. We have the micro-loan program, which
can be pretty quick in getting money out. It is a small loan,
but it has a much better record with underserved communities.
And we could try to expand that program. We have the 7(a)
Community Advantage pilot program, which are smaller loans, and
has a much faster track time, and has a much better record on
reaching, particularly minority businesses. And then we have a
fee waiver program that is modest at this stage.
But Congress is looking at expanding the fee waiver
programs to try to make SBA loans less costly. It may require a
change in statute. It certainly requires an appropriation. So
there are two hurdles to get to that point, and I am interested
as to whether you think that would help or is it just a lack of
interest from commercial bankers to deal with businesses
particularly in underserved communities?
Ms. Callahan Brady. That is a lot to jump into. It is
definitely not a lack of interest in the banks and stuff here.
They definitely want to. I have got great relationships with
all of the banks here. They spend quite a bit of time with our
small businesses. They are always looking to see what they can
do to help. So I think all of the things that you mentioned,
yes, absolutely it could help. I would love to be able to, and
you know we are happy to host it, either at our Metropolitan
Court location or our ROOT building here, but why couldn't we
do something as simple as--so we work really closely with SBDC
out of Frostburg, and they spend a lot of time in our
facilities doing teaching and training.
The Rockville Centre that I hear about all the time has so
many amazing resources. What if they just came up once a month
to start with? Your VBOC, why don't they come up once a month,
and we have on a consistent basis. We all work together as a
community so well to be able to get those resources and to
allow people to know about those types of resources that are
available, and they are here on the third Wednesday or whatever
it is you decide. So maybe it doesn't have to be this big huge
funding effort and we could do something tomorrow.
Senator Cardin. Mr. Griffin, you mentioned the HUBZones,
and there is a challenge here. The requirements for people, for
the employees, to live in the HUBZone is intentional because we
are trying to help that community. It is an underserved
community and we want to make it clear that we want it to
benefit the community, which is within the zone, but you raised
some legitimate concerns. The city like Frederick is not that
big of a city. From the point of view of its workforce being
able to get to a job pretty much anywhere within Frederick,
that is not the issue. So are you suggesting that we change the
geographical area where the business can be located, or the
geographical area where the employee could live from to
qualify, or both?
Mr. Griffin. That is good. What I was suggesting was that
some of the programs that the State has for assistance, for
either underserved or rehabilitating neighborhoods and retail
corridors and things like that, is done on a municipalwide
basis, so the boundaries of the programs are the same as the
boundary of the municipality. And I know that greatly expands
the area, and maybe that takes the program to a much different
place financially, but the likelihood that you would have more
companies participating and being able to hire if the geography
was slightly larger, I think, is more likely. You would have a
lot better participation.
Additionally, I believe, if I am not mistaken, it is not
required that all the employees be in the HUBZone that the
business is located in, so that is helpful. And we do have some
companies that have had relationships. For instance, we had a
tech company in Frederick that had an office up in Frostburg as
well. And I want to say they had some employees in a HUBZone up
there working, they were programmers, and they also had an
office here, and working back and forth. But it seems as though
that is the biggest challenge for these companies, and
sometimes they have to incent their employees to consider
living in the HUBZone in order to be able to meet that
requirement.
Senator Cardin. Yes, well, you are correct. There is a
percentage that must live in the zone, which raises an issue.
On any given year, if you ask small businesses what is their
number one concern, Mr. Umberger, you are right, access to
capital will always be in their top tier of issues. In previous
years it has been access to healthcare for their employees.
That has changed dramatically for two reasons, one the
Affordable Care Act, there is no requirement of companies under
50, but secondly, there is now an exchange of available so they
can at least have access to health insurance products.
We can argue the affordability, etcetera. That is a
separate issue, although we do have some credits available for
smaller companies, but what is now making the top three
regularly, which didn't before, is access to workers, trained
workers. So if you are a large company, you have a lot more
opportunities for how to attract workers than if you are a
small business. So I think it is past time that we consider
programs to help small businesses in trained workforce. I am
curious as to what is being done here in Frederick, and whether
the SBA has any partnerships with workforce development offices
to help small businesses obtain qualified workers. Whoever
wants to start on that.
Mr. Umberger. We do not have any specific programs, but I
do know, and to confirm your statement, absolutely as I have
traveled through the State and I have managed to get myself
into a couple meetings on workforce development, it has become
the number one issue. Eastern Shore, there were five county
economic development entities represented, and there were three
jobs for everyone one employee available. There were two jobs.
There was half an employee for each job. You know, it is just a
negative number everywhere you go.
Some of the things--in a stretch scenario to address
workforce development, we do go into the inner city in
Baltimore, to the libraries, and we encourage younger
individuals, high school kids, middle school children, to
attend or their parents and learn about small business, about
starting a business, but it is not the trade education or the
trade training that we need. So other than being aware and
attempting to reach different audiences that we typically
would, we don't have any special initiative that would focus on
workforce.
Mr. Griffin. Frederick County, I believe, probably is
leading the State. We are certainly one of the leaders in the
State in terms of what it is doing with workforce development.
The Frederick County Workforce Services Organization provides
and retrains an enormous number of workers into our local
businesses, including some of our startups. We have had some
companies who have relied solely on employees that have come
out of Frederick County Workforce Services to populate, you
know, their staff, and the one really crucial thing is that the
Frederick County Workforce Services will do all of the upfront
vetting of employees to take that load off the business
initially, so that the only employees that they kind of passed
through to them are qualified, capable, you know, trained
individuals. But they will do skills training and things like
that.
Clearly, across every industry right now, the number one
thing that we hear soon as we walk into the business is being
able to find and retain the workforce that they need. And part
of that is inherent in our current economy with low
unemployment, but also we are trying very hard to grow certain
industries here in Frederick. Biotechnology is one of them and
gaining critical mass where employees from around the country
see Frederick, Maryland, as a great place to be in the biotech
industry and come here. And that helps our small start-up
companies because now you have got someone with years of skills
working in the biotech industry, coming up here into this
market, maybe even starting a business. I hope that answered
your question.
Senator Cardin. It does, and I would invite you, if you
have suggestions on how we could incentivize more help for
small businesses and workforce development, let us know. We are
scheduled to take up the Work Innovation and Opportunity Act
reauthorization, and our committee will try to get some input
into that for special help for small businesses. It is not
within our jurisdiction, the bill, but we will try to influence
the final reauthorization to include help for small businesses.
So if you have suggestions on how we could help you tailor that
more for the smaller companies, that would be helpful.
Ms. Callahan Brady. One suggestion. I completely agree with
you. We talk about capital all the time and then it is
workforce. Actually Terry and I were just talking right before
this started. He needs 25 new people. You know, what a great
problem to have. But some of the things I know my clients look
at and really depend on is the schools. We utilize interns
quite a bit so if there is anything we can do on that.
There are also the apprentice programs have been phenomenal
here, as well as if there is anything else that we can do for
that would be tremendous as well.
Senator Cardin. And we are looking at the apprenticeship
programs in regards to small businesses because we do put a lot
of confidence into that for trained workers. So, absolutely. I
want to ask you one more question, if I might, about the SCORE
program here. I am curious whether any of your businesses are
using the mentoring available through the SCORE program here in
Frederick County, and how effective that is.
Ms. Callahan Brady. Actually, several of them. We work
really closely with them, so a lot of our clients are the same,
many of them. We work together in terms of putting together
what their business model is, and then they spent quite a bit
of time going over our business plan and then shoot them back
to us. That is their key to fame is really spending time on
that comprehensive business plan.
Senator Cardin. Good. And Mr. Griffin, you are shaking your
head. So it has been working well here in the county. There has
been some recent controversies in regards to the SCORE program
but unrelated to the program here at Frederick County, I assure
you of that. So there have been some challenging audits that we
have had.
Mr. Griffin. The SCORE program here has been very helpful.
We have referred many clients over the years to SCORE who come
back and say that they have gotten great services out of that
program. We have a good relationship with the local leadership
of SCORE. In fact, as I mentioned earlier, we did an event
recently with them on franchise development because for some
people, you know, starting a business might not look the same
as it does for someone else. Maybe the idea of opening a
franchise is an option for them, and so we had a whole program
on that using SCORE and it worked out very well. We had a
number of people participating.
Senator Cardin. So you talked about bandwidth, how the
bandwidth--in regards to the various services that are
available, which ones are the most taxed right now?
Mr. Griffin. I would say they all--out of the response we
get back out of the SBDC counselors, out of the Women's
Business Center, out of SCORE is that they will continue to
accept new clients, but that they all have very low bandwidth
to be able to get very deep. They can only scratch the surface.
They aren't able to go quite as deep as they would like with
each company because there are so many companies in need of
their services.
Senator Cardin. Well, that is certainly a challenge, but it
is a good challenge to have. I mean, it just shows that the
interest is there, so the entrepreneur spirit and the desire is
needed. You should not have to travel 60 miles. It should be
available to them.
Ms. Callahan Brady. Absolutely, and that makes it even more
complicated. I agree, bandwidth is tough. We are having at
FITCI quite a bit as well. I mean we are going to have to close
our program off as well. If you were looking at the ones that
have probably the largest bandwidth, and this is my opinion, I
am seeing it with SCORE because we work with them quite a bit
and I am looking for a specific skill set, and they are tapped
out. I would also say the Women's Business Center. I think they
are pretty much tapped out as well. SBDC has probably got the
best resources, and then of course the veterans and procurement
is just kind of non-existent up here.
Senator Cardin. I have one final question. I think I will
start with Steve on this, and that is, it has been frustrating
on contracting, to get small businesses prime contracts because
of the size of the contracts, the failure to fund procurement
offices within different agencies so that they do not have the
capacity to look beyond traditional suppliers, the new category
management programs where they are trying to save money by
making things big which makes it impossible for a small company
to be able to get a prime contract. And the list goes on and on
and on.
We try to deal with this in a couple of ways by dealing
with abuses in bundling. We have also dealt with it by certain
requirements between prime contractors and subcontractors. I am
just interested as to whether you see this as a problem in our
region or in Frederick, and whether this is something we really
need to put more attention on how we can get more prime
contracts to small businesses.
Mr. Umberger. Well, what I see is a challenge there is,
obviously you are going to have a firm regardless of what
certification they may be able to obtain from the SBA, that has
to first, they should already have had their foot in the door.
They should have been doing some sub work for primes that are
Federal contractors to gain the experience, so that when they
go to the agency, they can position themselves and represent
themselves as being fully capable of obtaining and performing
on a prime contract.
The main challenge I see is with those procurement
officials at the agencies themselves. As a small business, I
need to have the experience, the capability, and the expertise.
Then, I have to prove myself to those contracting officers and
specialists that have been doing certain things a certain way
for a number of years. How do I break through that barrier to
get the prime is up to me, and I have to continuously, until I
find an opening or can provide the proper--really that is a
heck of a challenge. It is a tough question to try to answer.
That would be the scenario if it were me to get there, but
then breaking through that last final step to obtain the prime
contract for many is insurmountable. So we probably could use
some guidance to the agencies themselves as to what they need
to do to assist and increase the number of prime offers that
they put out.
Senator Cardin. Of course, I really do think this is a
major responsibility for the SBA in Washington. We are going to
have a confirmation hearing on a new Director, and I expect
this will be one of the areas that we will want to know how
well of an advocate we will have on behalf of small businesses
with other agencies, because if you do get into turf issues and
how much--we have done a very good job on the 23 percent. That
has been a sea change in the last decade. So that has been
done. Subgroups, not quite as well, but the 23 percent we have
done fairly well. Is this a problem in Frederick?
Mr. Griffin. We do hear, from time to time, with some of
the companies that are contracting with Federal agencies that
smaller companies are having a hard time getting in the door
for prime contracts. I am not that familiar with the specifics
of it so I cannot go into a lot of detail, but I can say that
one of the things that I have heard, and we hear this at the
city level as well, is that for the smaller companies to get
the bigger contracts, the amount of, you know, financial
capacity that they have to have in place in order to be able to
show that they can fulfill the contract, or in our case
sometimes it is a bonding issue of the city or whatever.
Those are significant hurdles for small companies to
overcome, but beyond that I can't comment any further. I just
don't have that much detail on it.
Senator Cardin. That is helpful, and I would invite all
three of you, if you have ideas on this, just let us know. In
regards to tech transfer, which I know is a big issue.
Particularly in this community, tech transfers are very, very
important for the types of businesses that are starting out
here. We passed laws and statutes and we have--we try to
encourage this, but if there is a way that we can make it
easier for innovative people to be able to use technology for
commercialization, please let us know as we go through this.
Thank you all very much. Very helpful.
Mr. Umberger. Thank you.
Mr. Griffin. Thank you very much.
Senator Cardin. We will transition to the second panel. And
I will introduce our panel first. Mr. Terry Collins, who is Co-
founder and CEO of Blue Sources in Frederick, Maryland. In
preparation for the hearing, I was trying to understand your
business. It seems fascinating how little fish can help us
determine----
Mr. Collins. Sir, I am happy to tell you whatever you can
stand to listen to.
[Laughter.]
Senator Cardin. It sounds fascinating.
Mr. Collins. It is pretty wild stuff.
Senator Cardin. It impressed me. Masai Troutman who is the
CEO of MASAI Technologies Corporation in Frederick, an SBA
HUBZone certified minority business enterprise MBE. And we have
Ms. Emily Dorr, the Owner and Creative Director of Postern LLC
of Frederick, Maryland, a woman-owned business. It is a
pleasure to have all three of you here. We will start off with
Mr. Collins.
STATEMENT OF TERRY COLLINS, CO-FOUNDER AND CEO, BLUE SOURCES,
LLC, FREDERICK, MD
Mr. Collins. Senator, I want to thank you for the
opportunity to appear today, and give testimony, and discuss
Blue Sources' experiences using small business resources
provided by Federal, State, and local Governments available in
Frederick County, and the City of Frederick, and the State of
Maryland. I am Terry Collins, the CEO and Co-founder. There are
two other partners who are not here with me today and that is
our Executive Chair and Co-founder P.J. Bellomo, and our other
Co-founder David E. Barr. And David is in charge of our Federal
business development area of which we think that will do a lot
of business in that area. But I would also like to thank Kathie
Callahan Brady of FITCI for cooperation and working together in
preparing the testimony for today.
Blue Sources is a FITCI client, so Kathie has had a lot to
do with where we have gotten today and getting us along in this
process. What we do, as you have already read, is provide a
product and a service that detects acutely toxic chemicals in
drinking water sources and wastewater effluent. Our customers
are public water utilities, industrial wastewater treatment
facilities, and the U.S. military. It is in use in the U.S.
military today, actually. Our aquatic biomonitor product relies
on a group of bluegill fish to constantly test water for acute
levels of toxins used by using computer algorithms to measure a
fish's biological responses, such as respiratory rate.
The aquatic biomonitor is essentially an early warning
system. It does not tell you what is in the water, but it tells
you that something there is a problem, and it is up to you to
figure out what it is. The fish tell us when something is wrong
with the water right before we might normally know. Blue
Sources was formed in the second quarter of 2015 after
discovering the aquatic biomonitor technology at a Technology
Transfer conference at the BWI Airport Marriott in Q4 of 2014.
We stumbled across this. The aquatic biomonitor technology
was invented and developed by the U.S. Army Center for
Environmental Health Research, which I am going to call
USACEHR, their acronym, at Fort Detrick, Maryland. A USACEHR
research scientist at the conference explained the operation of
the aquatic biomonitor and how the bluegill fish managed to
tell us when toxic chemicals are present in our drinking water
sources and wastewater effluent. This is essentially a canary
in the coal mine, is what it boils down to.
A short time after that initial meeting, Blue Sources
signed a patent license agreement with the U.S. Army and a
Cooperative Research and Development Agreement with USACEHR.
And that process was started through the Office of Research and
Technical Applications with the U.S. Army's Medical Research
and Development Command at Fort Detrick, where their ORTA
office is. Federal technology transfer is a massive opportunity
to license technology invented in defense labs and use it to
build, innovate, and expand businesses. Discoveries made by
Federal scientists and engineers are patented and then offered
for businesses to license, which enables businesses to
commercialize the technology and then sell to the private
sector or back to the military.
The U.S. Army's Office of Research and Technical
Applications, the ORTA, facilitated the tech transfer process
and agreements required to transfer the technology and
knowledge of this device, the two mechanisms most often used by
Federal laboratories for technology transfer or patent
licensing agreements, and the CRADA, the Cooperative Research
and Development Agreements. Legislation creating technology
transfer in the CRADA established the requirement that a
company or entrepreneur applying to license a Federal
Government invention must submit a plan for development and
marketing of the intervention and make a commitment to bring
the invention to practical application within a reasonable
amount of time. You have to tell them how you are going to do
it, and how you are going to sell it, or they are not going to
give you the patent license. It is that simple. You have got to
have a plan.
TechLink is the DOD's partnership intermediary organization
that facilitates technology transfer between Federal labs and
the private sector. The process of licensing technology from a
Federal laboratory from start to finish usually takes about six
months. Ours was about four months in total. Went by pretty
quickly, I thought, but it can be as short as one month.
TechLink was an intermediary between Blue Sources and the U.S.
Army patent attorneys. TechLink's assistance and guidance was
instrumental in paving the way for easily acquiring our
exclusive patent license with the U.S. Army.
A CRADA is a written agreement between a Government
laboratory and a private party to work together on research and
development of new technologies. Our CRADA with USACEHR
afforded Blue Sources with a way to collaborate and build
valuable relationships within the USACEHR organization. Our
CRADA with USACEHR was the primary tool by which technology and
technical expertise is transferred from USACEHR to Blue Sources
personnel.
Our CRADA allows USACEHR to provide staff access to
facilities, equipment, data, and other resources, not funding,
with payment by us or without payment or by providing in-kind
services, which is what we are doing with Fort Detrick today.
Having this level of access to USACEHR was critical to our
success for commercialization of the fish biomonitor system,
which is what we are calling the technology that we developed.
Frederick Innovative Technology Center, Inc., as I said
earlier, we are a client and it is the local business incubator
and accelerator, and without it, I doubt that we would have
been as far along as we are today. We joined FITCI in July of
2016, when we realized that we needed help getting this company
off the ground.
At this point, we had already bought patent licenses. We
had our CRADA in place. We needed to figure out how to get
funding and things of that nature to get where we were going.
We had experience in running existing businesses, but I had
never started one from nothing. So I know how to run a
business, but I had never taken one from the ground up. Kathie
Callahan Brady found Blue Sources that summer and convinced us
that we would benefit from the programs and connections that
she could offer. She was right.
As CEO of Blue Sources, I participated in FITCI's Strategic
Growth and Advisory Board, and other advisory coaching
programs. Kathie Callahan Brady introduced us to the Maryland
Technology Development Corporation, TEDCO. TEDCO provides
resources and connections that early stage technology companies
need to thrive in Maryland, including funding. Blue Sources
maintains an office at FITCI in an environment that is
conducive to success. Everything we need as a business can be
obtained in some way through FITCI.
As we progressed through programs at FITCI, it became
apparent that Blue Sources needed an experienced resource to
guide us through the process of starting funding and growing
our business, as Mr. Barr and I had never been through that
process. Kathie Callahan Brady introduced us to Mr. P.J.
Bellomo, who had taken several early stage businesses from
nothing to success. P.J. joined Blue Sources as a full-share
partner. We didn't just let him in. He had to write a check, as
we both did since we were self-funded initially, in January
2017 and was key to helping us obtain our SEED funding from
TEDCO and other sources. TEDCO provided Blue Sources with
mentoring, resources, expertise, and connections to find SEED
funding. Essentially, they provided it.
Our first contact with TEDCO was Mr. Chuck Ernst, the Rural
Business Innovator Mentor for the Western region, which
includes Frederick County. Chuck Ernst introduced us to TEDCO
programs and helped us navigate the process of applying for
SEED funding. As we prepared our pitch to TEDCO for funding,
Chuck mentored our progress throughout the funding process.
SEED funding was received from TEDCO in Q2 of 2017. Blue
Sources had the funding to commercialize the fish biomonitor
technology developed by USACEHR.
A commercially viable fish biomonitor product was completed
and available for sale in Q1 of this year. So we have something
to sell now. Additional funding. With the SEED funding provided
by TEDCO, Blue Sources completed several production-ready fish
biomonitor system devices. This will give Blue Sources the
jumpstart needed to close additional sales and to raise
investor funds for expansion, but we will use our sales money.
All of it will get poured right back into the business. So we
are going to bootstrap ourselves initially. We need to get
traction before we can go looking for funding in many other
places. So in Q4 of this year, Blue Sources will sell multiple
units to several Washington, D.C., area water utilities.
Some of these utilities have committed verbally to
purchases once they have received funds from grant applications
submitted by the Metro Washington Council of Governments to the
Department of Homeland Security Urban Area Security Initiative
grant program. These grants were awarded in May of 2019 and the
utilities will see their portion of the grant in October of
this year. So our purchases are imminent. Funds from the sale
of these FBS units to the D.C. area water utilities will be
plowed back into the business for marketing, additional
manufacturing of more FBS units, and hiring Blue Sources' first
employees. Essentially, we will bootstrap the next phase of
growth. Once we have gotten some traction, we will start
looking around for larger investors.
We are actually doing that right now to start talking to
people and get that process going because we know we are going
to close these additional sales. But we are looking, we are
being pretty particular about who we want to fund our business.
We want funding and investments from people that are already
involved in the environmental science space. So we are looking
for those investors through channels that Mr. Bellomo knows of
and looking to get the first round of funding so that we can
greatly expand our offering as quickly as we can.
I will say one thing about all this. I have been in Federal
contracting as a vendor and a contractor for more than 40
years, and this is probably one of the best experiences I have
ever had in going through this process with the Department of
the Army, the county, and the city, FITCI, the State of
Maryland, all the programs that we have used. Everybody has
been exceptionally cooperative. The information has just
flowed. Anything we have needed and asked for, we have pretty
much received it.
It has been a great experience for us.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Collins follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Cardin. We rarely hear from happy campers, so it is
good.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Troutman.
STATEMENT OF MASAI TROUTMAN, CEO, MASAI TECHNOLOGIES
CORPORATION, FREDERICK, MD
Mr. Troutman. Good afternoon. Thank you, Senator Cardin for
inviting me to testify today. My name is Masai Troutman and I
am the CEO of Masai Technologies Corp. MTC is a small
advantaged business in HUBZone company with over 20 years of
private and public sector information technology services
contracting experience. MTC is a prime contract holder with the
GSA, Schedule 70 for IT services and healthcare IT.
The National Institute of Health, CIO SP3, a HUBZone
category, contract, in the State of Maryland Consulting and
Technical Services plus contract. MTC began doing business in
Frederick, Maryland, as a prime 8(a) HUBZone certified business
in 2004 on a $2.6 million contract providing enterprise
logistics, and financial application software support and data
analytics for the Army Medical Material Agency.
At MTC, we also partner with local Frederick small
businesses and we provide internships and mentorship for the
high school students. In my experience, effective business
operation within the public sector requires continuous
marketing by the small business and by directional goodwill
actions from Government, contract officers, and program
management throughout the five-phase procurement process. That
process entails vendor outreach, where the vendor markets and
the Government agency then cultivates that pool of vendors to
make sure they are ready to bid when opportunities come out. To
capture, process number two, where the vendor is going to drill
down and try to find the specifications of the requirements,
and really understand if we should be investing our time or
not.
Then there is the proposal phase, the award, and then
program execution, and closeout. I am going to highlight how
the improvements that I see in that procurement process, and
what I have been able to experience here in the Frederick
County, are doing business. From the vendor outreach phase, I
work a lot with Frederick County's Minority and Business Vision
program. They do events every month. They invite minority and
small women-owned businesses, and they train us on--they talk
to us about how to finance, how to do financing with your
business, networking, marketing, and different business
development skill sets that you will need in order to function
as a business here in the county.
The State does a great job as well as running the Ready,
Set, Grow!, different events they have all around the county,
and all around the State. We attend those and we meet with
program managers, and they give us forecast and insights on
what is coming so we can put together teams and we can get
financing and get ready to bid and compete. In 2018, we bid as
a subcontractor, as a minority business enterprise
subcontractor on a State of Maryland contract that required,
going to say 7 or 8 percent minority business enterprise, like
African American, set aside for subcontracting.
We bid as a sub with a prime and we won an award. We bid in
July 2018. By January, we got the award, and we have key
resources on the contract. So some recommendations I have on
the outreach. Our outreach phase is to make sure we do partner
the Government partners with those nonprofits, the local and
national nonprofit, that can service the Frederick County area,
African American, Latinos, those underrepresented demographics,
with training on how to bid, on how to obtain financing and
market, technical skills. I am in IT and a high demand of
technical skills such as cloud computing on AWS, Microsoft
Azure, Cloud, artificial intelligence, machine learning,
programming, Python, getting Python certifications. Those type
of skill sets is what my business would need as a HUBZone.
To take people who could be in lower income, we got to
educate them so that we can make the 35 percent and maintain a
HUBZone status, and keep winning work, and keep hiring people,
but they got to have skills, and those skills can be learned.
As far as outreach, we work with Fort Detrick sometimes. They
run a SMART PROC annual conference here in Frederick where they
bring their program managers out and they market to small
businesses. Fort Detrick has lowered its HUBZone. Its HUBZone
is set aside to 1 percent. The DOD standard is 3 percent, and
my recommendation to them would be to start locally and let's
work together to identify the contract vehicles of HUBZone like
the CIO SP3 has a HUBZone category. We have teams with
different skill sets under us, team members. We can deliver
services that can help Fort Detrick to get its numbers back up
to 3 percent from the 1 percent they dropped it to.
And in the capture process, that is where we as vendors, we
go and we try to get more detailed to see if we should be
investing our money, our time, to going after these contracts.
And on a Federal level, locally, Fort Detrick puts out a
forecast and we look at those forecasts to see if we can get an
order to go for those bids if it is worth it to us. At the
State level, they do a lot of industry days where they invite
us in, and we meet with the program managers. And they share
their pain points and problems, and we can really shape our
solution and partnering to say, hey, we can bid on this or not.
So I think definitely on the State, city, county level,
they definitely need more industry days, more forecast provided
to us small businesses, and a person of color small businesses
and HUBZones, more key performance indicators and goals set for
subcontracting. So definitely have set asides, I think on the
city level and county level, I don't think that set-asides
exist. I think we need them because on the subcontract level
and on the prime contract level, they need to be enforced. I
don't think that they are being enforced.
And in many cases if they are on the city level, or the
county level. I use the State as an example because those set-
asides they have on the prime and sub, they enforce it. When we
thought we were not going to get utilized by the prime that won
the contract, I called the contracting officer and they did a
group meeting between myself as a sub, the prime, and they said
is there a problem here, and the prime said no, there is no
problem. We are using MTC. They will be great, and we have one
of the top key personnel on the contract.
One of the last things I want to say, the proposal process,
when we are responding to a solicitation, the solicitations, I
say, definitely we want to look at the Government providing,
again, more set-aside similar to the State where they have set-
asides for minority business enterprise, women. They break
minority business enterprise down to, they say African
Americans like 7 percent, they say Latinos, because in IT these
are the groups that are underrepresented.
So they make sure you say hey, you want to have goals to
try to make sure they get a fair chance. Track the contracting
of HUBZone utilization to make sure not only dollars but the
number of small businesses being awarded contracts are growing,
because basically they are just bundling funding a couple
contracts with vendors they like and they are just giving them
all the work, and that is not really growing the economy the
way we need it to. IDIQ contracts are big contract vehicles
that we are on.
We have to make sure that they are opened up so that new
players can participate, especially with category management
coming, those contract vehicles will be used more to make
purchases. So I mean, those are the type of things that we are
seeing. More monitoring and enforcement of the subcontracts and
the percentage goals for the prime contracts, and definitely
set-aside work.
And more so, sole sources for the, at least SDB HUBZones.
HUBZones that SDB, like MTC, we do not see many HUB sole
sources. We get a lot of opportunities to subcontract but the
prime contracts usually are through some type of vehicle, and
we have three vehicles. If they don't come out under those
vehicles, we really don't get access to them, but we get a lot
of opportunities to sub.
So we are big on enforcing subcontracting enforcement of
percentage goals.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Troutman follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Cardin. Thank you for those comments and
recommendations. Ms. Dorr.
STATEMENT OF EMILY DORR, OWNER AND CREATIVE DIRECTOR, POSTERN
LLC, FREDERICK, MD
Ms. Dorr. Thank you for having me here today, Senator
Cardin, and for everybody else in the room that is here to
participate, thank you for being here. I am a much smaller
business than I think some of the businesses you have heard
from already today, and maybe a little bit less sophisticated
but still have a lot of needs to help grow my business.
I purchased my business two years ago after having worked
for the previous owner for 19 years. It was Jean Peterson
Design. We were a small graphic design studio at the time, and
I saw the opportunity to grow the business to a full-service
marketing agency, boutique size, but still full service,
offering services such as copywriting, public relations,
management, digital marketing. So services far outside of just
the graphic design area. Mostly because I think there were many
businesses doing solely graphic design and there is a
tremendous amount of freelancers in that industry.
So having been in business for 20 years as Jean Peterson
Design and developing the base that she had, I saw it as a
great opportunity for myself and even for the businesses in
Frederick to have another full service agency to turn to. So
since, I think, during the transition time was probably where I
needed the most help, but it happens all the way up until
today. Talking to bankers today about expanding my access to
capital. So I would say during the first year, we were able to
maintain all of our existing clients and even grow.
In the last two years, we have grown our employees too. I
am about to hire the fourth new employee. We started off as a
five-person business when I bought it. So we have not lost any
employees, have not lost any clients, anything. We are
foreseeing our vision of growing into that full service agency,
including eight new clients in the last two years to use in
that capacity from planning their strategies, to budgeting, to
all the way down to the graphic design services we are very
well known for. We work with clients in various industries from
nonprofits, profit, for profit, Government departments, a
couple of them are here today. We work with the hospitality
industry working with businesses such as Visit Frederick,
recently winning The Visitor Guide for Howard County that we
will do in 2020.
And so, as we grow, the things that a business like I need,
I find sometimes hard to locate when I am doing research
myself. I know there are several people in the room that I turn
to on a regular basis and ask for assistance, including Richard
Griffin in the city Office of Economic Development and the
folks at the county Office of Economic Development. As a
business, we have used the Frederick County Workforce Services
program that you have heard about already today. They have
helped us with sorting through and sifting through resumes when
we are hiring for certain positions and picking out some of the
people that are the best qualified for the job.
We have hired people through that program and some which
are still employed in the office today. I think the majority of
my assistance though comes from the people that I hire, such as
my bookkeeper, and accountant, and lawyer, and business coach.
I haven't necessarily used the services outside of work for
service and a handful of other things. I am not a women-owned
certified business. There are only very few times where that
would come in handy to me that I know of, and so I think that
is probably where I may offer resources or information to you
is that the information that I think I need, I find kind of
hard to find sometimes, and so the information that I would be
looking for things in the area of corporate planning, growth of
the business, leadership training, human resources management.
Right now, we are in the process of possibly expanding our
services again, deciding whether to set it up as a sub-company,
a sister company, acquiring the additional capital to do so,
and a lot of times it happens. And as you acquire new contracts
and things like that, so I think that would be the other thing
that would be helpful to me is being able to find those
resources more quickly than I have been able to find them. And
I think that is all I have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Dorr follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Cardin. Well, I thank all three of you for giving
us some real life examples. So between Mr. Troutman and Ms.
Dorr, you have two different views on the importance of being
certified to have single source contracts. You are relatively a
young company from the point of view of your ownership. You
have, it looks like, a comfortable list of customers. Are you
doing Federal Government procurement?
Ms. Dorr. No. We do answer some RFPs that are put out by
local Government like the Howard County Office of Tourism and
different departments within the Frederick City and Frederick
County, but not large scale of Federal contracts.
Senator Cardin. And of course the State has its own
certification programs also, but you had, from the business you
bought, at least a list of clients to work with, so you didn't
find it necessary to go down that route?
Ms. Dorr. No, not necessarily. Neither did the person
before me.
Senator Cardin. Right. Mr. Troutman, you seem to think that
the certifications are critically important, both your 8(a)
originally as well as now your HUBZone for single source
contracts that otherwise would not be available to you. It
seems like that is what you are saying. So the certifications
here were critically important for your business to grow?
Mr. Troutman. Yes. Yes, the HUBZone has primarily been
beneficial on the subcontract level. When it comes to prime, I
have not been getting direct prime. We now have a HUBZone prime
contract IDIQ vehicle with the CIO SP3 by NIH. Now we see more
opportunities with bidding as a prime, but just having a
HUBZone certification to bid as a just a company off the
street, from what I do, there were not many opportunities.
Senator Cardin. Why not? Did you win prime contracts? Are
they too big?
Mr. Troutman. Yes, I mean we have done prime contracts, and
it is just a lot of work. When I had 8(a) it was a lot easier.
It was a lot easier because they could sole source. Now with
HUBZone, not many sole sources are awarded to HUBZones, but a
lot of the enforcement is on the subcontract level, so we get
to--partnering with a lot of the big companies, they will bring
us in to be their sub. That is my only thing. Let's get more
HUBZone sole sources, more HUBZone direct contracts, but it is
actually going the opposite. It is going to the big vehicles,
contract vehicles. That is what we have right now.
Senator Cardin. And Mr. Collins, as I said, if you finish
your remarks, we don't normally get people as satisfied as you
were as witnesses, but you have helped at both ends here, which
is not typical of a tech transfer startup company. You had
helped here in the county in two respects, one from the county
on its FITCI opportunities. You were in an incubator so you had
the shelter of an incubator that was interested in your
business growth and started you off in a way that you could
take advantage of opportunities.
And then you had TEDCO, which is a State operation that
takes a look at tech transfer and provides extra attention. So
you were protected and helped by both the county as well as by
the two local Government agencies. We facilitate tech transfer
through a Federal statute, the Tech Transfer Act, but you
explained that the tools that are available for technology to
be commercialized. It is very interesting that a lot of
taxpayer dollars go into basic research.
We all know NIH, but DOD, a lot of money goes into
research, and then they come up with technology that could be
used to keep our water supply safe, not necessarily from DOD's
interest, they have some interest in that, but we allow that to
be commercialized and you took advantage of it. So, my question
to you, and you may not be able to answer it, what can the
Federal Government do more to encourage more happy campers like
you?
Mr. Collins. I don't have an answer, but I have an opinion.
Senator Cardin. Okay.
Mr. Collins. Alright. So after going through this process,
and as I told you, I mean we literally fell across this
technology. I was at that conference to look for something
completely different. I have another business that is in the
same space as Mr. Troutman, and we were looking for a different
type of product that had been developed by a Federal agency
because there were a lot of them there. A couple of the three-
letter agencies there. A couple of the military, Fort Detrick
obviously, but we found this because I said, oh there is Fort
Detrick, let's see what they are doing.
I have found in going through that process that the
military and Government in general are not very good marketers.
So a lot of people probably don't know about technology
transfer or the products that are available, even though that
information is freely available. There is websites TechLink has
a website where you go out there and search through their
database of products. The local ORTA office out at Fort
Detrick. They have a database that you could sort through for
the research and development that they do in the medical
industry. They have already approached me about, is there
anything else that you would like to develop as a product, and
I said, let me get this one done first, then we will see about
that.
But I think that somehow find a way to advertise this more.
I just happen to drive down to go to that one because it was,
you know, easy to get to, it was at the Marriott, and I think
our local Congressman was actually speaking as a keynote
speaker, which was another reason why I went. So that was the
draw for me, and we just happened to find this technology.
Wouldn't it be nice if they had an event like that here locally
in Frederick?
Senator Cardin. More outreach.
Mr. Collins. Yes, and maybe in other locales like that. I
mean this is a national thing. It is not just in this area but
anyplace where there is a military organization that develops
some sort of technology, they should have something more local
as well as in the big cities to have people there.
Senator Cardin. That is a good suggestion. You were able to
enter into licensing agreements and cooperative agreements.
That could be intimidating. You had the help of, as mentioned
earlier, TEDCO could help you in regards to some of that, as I
assume?
Mr. Collins. Actually for the licensing and the CRADA,
TechLink was instrumental in that. And of course, I have a
little bit of experience at negotiating contracts and things
like that so that helped quite a bit. I have no patent license
knowledge at all. We actually hired a patent attorney to review
those licenses for us, but at the same time TechLink
facilitated all that and made it really a not very painful
process at all. And the local people, the local patent attorney
for the Army here in Fort Detrick, he was very, very available
to us with suggestions and things we had to consider explaining
things to us. They were all a big help in getting that done.
Senator Cardin. I am pleased to hear that. I will take your
suggestion back as to how we can get more opportunities in
local communities on technology transfer information so that it
is more widely available. That is a good suggestion. I want to
get to the workforce issue. Ms. Dorr, if you go beyond your
current workforce, and we hope that you will because you are
going to go into these new fields and you are going to need
more people, can you find them?
Ms. Dorr. In some cases. Most of the way that I have grown
has been through talking about what I am doing with the company
and the conversations lead to I know somebody who, and fill-in-
the-blank what the need I am looking for so far. Then, we still
are heavily in the graphic design part of the business. And so,
I have resources that I use, colleges that I go to. We have
local associations like the American Advertising Federation
that has portfolio review days for that part of the business.
So yes, I do think, as we expand, there will be a challenge in
finding the right people to fit the need and also fit into the
existing team.
Senator Cardin. And Mr. Troutman, you are still in a
HUBZone. You know, we recognize there is some flexibility on
who you can hire and not everyone has to live in the HUBZone,
but are you going to be able to find, when you get that prime
contract, to hire another 15 people. Can you find them?
Mr. Troutman. It is going to be rough. It is going to be
rough especially in technology with the technology we are going
after, solutions with artificial intelligence, machine
learning. What I am doing is I am active in the High School
LYNX program. So I am ingratiating and incorporating IT
professions to the students here at Frederick County and trying
to get them interested because I will train them myself, you
know, and that is what I am doing.
I am planning to see now to try to build my workforce. It
is a lot of work, but at least programming. Yes, so am I going
to be able to readily find them if I finally got a contract
tomorrow? It is going to be a challenge, but give me a year,
after I put in this work with training the students, and then I
will at least have programmers.
Senator Cardin. And as far as access to capital, you did
not talk about that at all. I take it that was, you were able
to work that out when you acquired the business?
Ms. Dorr. I was, but as of the last couple of weeks, I have
had a need to expand even just a line of credit and talking
even today to the bank that I work with. We talked about SBA
Express line of credit.
Senator Cardin. Good. Mr. Troutman, anything on access to
capital?
Mr. Troutman. Yes, we have been with M&T since 2003, and we
did an SBA loan and line of credit maybe about eight years ago.
So yes, we are good with them, but we could go back and get
more. They call me all the time. They say, do you need more,
and I say no, I am good, right now working on it, working on
getting some that pushes me, that stretches me. So, yes.
Senator Cardin. So I don't know who found this panel, but
this is really a happy panel.
[Laughter.]
I must tell you, I mean it is a good way for a hearing to
conclude, to see that you have been able to use your own
ingenuity, and when you needed help, you were able to get the
help you needed. And all of you are going to be expanding. You
are going to be doing more business. You are all looking for
the next chapter of business and you are pretty optimistic. You
are going to get there. We are going to find some prime
contracts for you, and you are going to have to grow a little,
but you are going into a new field. So it is exactly what small
businesses should be doing is looking for innovative ways to
expand opportunity, which is going to mean job growth, but it
is also going to mean that you are going to show what
entrepreneurship is all about.
And it starts with the individuals, and we have three
really talented people here before us, so congratulations to
all three of you.
Mr. Troutman. Thank you.
Mr. Collins. Thank you.
Ms. Dorr. Thank you.
Senator Cardin. I do not believe I have to keep the record
open, do I? So I have to for two weeks. Thank you. I appreciate
that. The record will stay open for two weeks in case someone
is going to ask questions to you, which we are not planning to
do that I know of. But anyway, the record will stay open for
two weeks.
And with that, the Small Business and Entrepreneurship
Committee will stand adjourned. Thank you all very much.
[Whereupon, at 3:46 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[all]