- ANNUAL OVERSIGHT OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
[Senate Hearing 116-20]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-20
ANNUAL OVERSIGHT OF THE
SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON RULES AND ADMINISTRATION
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
MARCH 27, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Rules and Administration
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available on http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-990
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON RULES AND ADMINISTRATION
FIRST SESSION
ROY BLUNT, Missouri, Chairman
MITCH McCONNELL, Kentucky
AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee
DIANNE FEINSTEIN, California
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas
CHARLES E. SCHUMER, New York
RICHARD SHELBY, Alabama
RICHARD J. DURBIN, Illinois
TED CRUZ, Texas
TOM UDALL, New Mexico
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
PATRICK J. LEAHY, Vermont
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
CINDY HYDE-SMITH, Mississippi
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
Fitzhugh Elder IV, Staff Director
Elizabeth Peluso, Democratic Staff Director
C
O
N
T
E
N
T
S
----------
Pages
Opening Statement of:
Hon. Roy Blunt, Chairman, a U.S. Senator from the State of
Missouri.......................................................
1
Dr. David J. Skorton, Secretary, The Smithsonian Institution,
Washington DC..................................................
2
Prepared Statement of:
Hon. Amy Klobuchar, a U.S. Senator from the State of Minnesota...
19
Dr. David J. Skorton, Secretary, The Smithsonian Institution,
Washington DC..................................................
21
Questions Submitted for the Record:
Hon. Roy Blunt, Chairman, a U.S. Senator from the State of
Missouri to Dr. David J. Skorton, Secretary, The Smithsonian
Institution, Washington DC.....................................
27
Hon. Amy Klobuchar, a U.S. Senator from the State of Minnesota to
Dr. David J. Skorton, Secretary, The Smithsonian Institution,
Washington DC..................................................
43
ANNUAL OVERSIGHT OF THE
SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
----------
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 27, 2019
United States Senate,
Committee on Rules and Administration,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:30 a.m., in
Room SR-301, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. Roy Blunt,
Chairman of the committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Blunt, Fischer, and Cortez Masto.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HONORABLE ROY BLUNT, CHAIRMAN, A U.S.
SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF MISSOURI
Chairman Blunt. The Committee on Rules and Administration
will come to order. I want to thank my colleagues who will be
joining us shortly and particularly thank Senator Cortez Masto
who does a great job attending these oversight hearings, and
others, Senator Klobuchar and others, will be here very soon.
I want to welcome our witness today, Dr. David Skorton, the
Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution. Thank you Dr. Skorton
for joining us. The Congress established the Smithsonian in
1846. It was a bequest by British scientist James Smithson, who
generally left his estate to a country he had never visited,
the United States. The purpose was to found an establishment
for the increase and diffusion of knowledge.
So here we are almost 175 years later, the Smithsonian is
now the world's largest complex of 19 museums, numerous global
research and educational facilities, a zoological park, and a
growing collection of 155 million objects and specimens. Dr.
Skorton, the 13th Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution has
guided the Smithsonian through several important milestones,
including the 2016 opening of the National Museum of African
American History and Culture. A successful fundraising campaign
that raised nearly $2 billion. He has also started
implementation of the strategic plans for the institution, and
of course that is one of the things we want to discuss this
morning.
Regretfully, after 4 years of service, Dr. Skorton will be
leaving this post in mid-June to lead another organization, but
Dr. Skorton, on behalf of the committee I want to thank you for
your service. In order for the Smithsonian to carry out its
charge as an establishment for the increase and diffusion of
knowledge, there are challenges that have to be addressed,
including the aging facilities and a $737 million deferred
maintenance backlog that you will probably want to talk about
some today. Additionally, the lack of storage space for its
continually growing collections.
Finally, the Smithsonian like many other Federal agencies
also needs to strengthen and secure its information technology
infrastructure. I certainly look forward to discussing your
accomplishments, but also the challenges that you see, and we
see ahead for the Smithsonian. Dr. Skorton, if you want to go
ahead and make your opening comments, this would be the time to
do.
OPENING STATEMENT OF DR. DAVID J. SKORTON, SECRETARY,
SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION, WASHINGTON, DC
Dr. Skorton. Thank you, Chairman Blunt, and Senator Cortez
Masto, and Senator Fischer. It is a great honor to be here to
discuss the state of the Smithsonian today and how I believe it
can be an even more valued and effective resource for all
Americans and the world in the years and decades to come.
As the chairman mentioned, my time at the Smithsonian is
coming to an end in June. For the past nearly 4 years I have
been fortunate to head this uniquely American institution, and
as the chairman said, the world's largest museum, education,
and research complex. I know that the Smithsonian will have
many more opportunities to serve the American public and to
capitalize on the strengths of the museum's research centers,
libraries, and education centers, if we avoid potential
pitfalls ahead. The extent of the Smithsonian's endeavor is
really breathtaking. Our artistic, historical, cultural,
scientific, and educational expertise, and programs, and
collections are unparalleled.
Throughout the world there is really nothing like the
Smithsonian. It all starts of course with our people, the
researchers, collections management, exhibition staff,
curators, facilities' administrative staff, and of course, our
visitors. Today I would like to focus on our facilities. Many
of these facilities are National historic landmarks that in and
of themselves are actually part of our collections, and these
buildings are imbued with historic and architectural value.
Just as importantly, our facilities are critical to the
experience of our 30 million visits. Our buildings need to
provide safety and shelter for tourists, researchers, and
employees alike. They need to function in order to enable our
programs, exhibitions, research, and scholarship, and they must
protect and preserve our collections held within. These
collections in the aggregate are the Nation's collective memory
and the Nation's collective identity.
At the Smithsonian, our buildings host millions of visitors
each year, and each of these visitors, researchers, and staff
relies on the facilities being operational and dependable.
Thanks to you and your colleagues, and Congress's generosity,
we have been able to begin, for example, a much needed
revitalization of the National Air and Space Museum, the most
visited museum in the United States.
There is still however much to do beyond the Air and Space
Museum given the backlog that the chairman mentioned, and our
13.9 million square feet of leased and owned space,
prioritizing the long-term care of these facilities is a sound
and critical investment. Pennies spent on maintenance now can
save dollars in the future. In their wisdom, Congress and the
Administration have recognized the need for that investment and
have supported steady increases to our maintenance throughout
my time as Secretary. In fiscal 2020, the President's budget
includes $84.5 million for our facilities' maintenance, which
should be an increase of 6 percent above the enacted fiscal 19
level of roughly $80 million. We are committed to continuing on
this path toward a more sustainable level of care to our
physical facilities, and thankful, very thankful, that you all
and your colleagues have stood by us in this effort. In a short
time, as was mentioned, our leadership will change, but our
challenges will remain.
In the coming years it will be important not only to build
on the progress we have made with your help, but to accelerate
it. Our facilities are essential to the foundation on which our
reputation was built and upon which our future success relies.
Our growing maintenance backlog impedes that future in a number
of ways. It requires us to react to maintenance problems
instead of proactively maintaining assets. It forestalls our
ability to take on ambitious projects proposed to Congress like
new museums. It hinders our ability to preserve our ever-
expanding collections, the source of wonder and inspiration for
our visitors that underpins much of the critical research that
we do.
Finally, it limits our ability to attract and retain our
most under-appreciated resource which is our intellectual
capital. As my time comes to a close, I will be passing on to
my successor the humbling responsibilities that come with
leading this incredible organization. I will take many
Smithsonian memories with me for the rest of my life but
perhaps the most enduring, as the chairman mentioned, will be
the opening of the National Museum of African American History
and Culture. It embodies so much of what is special about our
great American institution. It is a public square for Americans
to have needed discussions about racial divisions and social
inequities rooted in our shared values and experiences. The
building itself, rising proudly on the National Mall in the
heart of our Nation, symbolizes the strength that comes from
diversity.
I thank you for your continued support. The Congress
enables the Smithsonian to remain a dynamic institution that
can and will adapt to the ever-changing needs of the American
people. It has been my great honor to serve as Secretary.
Thank you.
[The prepared Statement of Dr. Skorton was submitted for
the record.]
Chairman Blunt. Thank you, Secretary Skorton. I am glad--
again, we are glad you are here. I am sure there will be a time
for multiple rounds of questions and there are lots of things
that you brought up already and that we want to talk about that
would be included in that. What would you think, as we approach
this transition, you know, obviously transition planning,
leave-taking is probably the hardest thing to do in leadership
and I know you have given some thought to that.
But what would you see is the three biggest challenges for
the next Secretary of the Smithsonian, assuming that they will
serve in some portion of a decade or so, how would that--how
would you see those challenges laying out for the person that I
know the Search committee hopes to have in place before you
leave but anticipates that there will be some time without that
top job being filled. What should that person be thinking
about?
Dr. Skorton. Thank you, Chairman. The first thing I want to
say before I do answer a very important question that you asked
is that the good news is that it is the people of the
Smithsonian, the curators, the scientist, the researchers, the
senior staff, some of whom you see sitting behind me, and the
Board of Regents that are the glue that keeps the Smithsonian
going. I have every confidence that those folks are going to
make sure that any little ripples that might occur during the
transition are smoothed out, and I have every confidence in the
people who I just mentioned.
I do want to emphasize the Board of Regents is, to my
knowledge, a unique governance system comprising nine private
citizen, six Members of the Congress, three from the House,
three from the Senate, the Vice President of the United States,
and our Chancellor is the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.
They have a long view of the Smithsonian, and they will assure
that we do not miss a beat going forward. But having said that,
three things I will mention in no particular order.
One, because of the emphasis of my testimony, I am very
concerned about the maintenance of the physical facilities. And
of course every Federal agency has maintenance backlogs, and
every place that I have worked in my career has had a
maintenance backlog. I would never claim that we are unique,
but I will say that the large press of American and
international humanity that walks over our thresholds makes me
concerned about their safety in the buildings. The animals at
the National Zoo makes me concerned about their safety, and of
course our staff and volunteers. We have that press of humanity
that makes me very eager to follow the course that you all have
set with us and that the President has recommended to continue
to ratchet up the maintenance spending. So that is one.
Every time a suggestion is made for a new facility, and all
these suggestions have tremendous merit, we are faced with the
idea, if we are already behind on maintenance, `how can we take
on something that will eventually make us more behind?' So, I
think it is a very important thing for the American people that
working together we can find a way to close that gap as much as
humanly possible. That is one. The second one is the issue of
diversity, and diversity is a great strength of the United
States as I mentioned. There is abundant academic research that
shows that organizations and teams that are diverse make better
decisions, do a better job, than teams that are not diverse.
The cultural institution, industry if you will, and museums,
and yes, even the Smithsonian, we have a long way to go to
increase diversity.
We are making some progress. I am proud to tell you that in
my time as Secretary, a fully 68 percent of our hires at the
director level or above have been women or people of color, but
we have a long way to go, and I think emphasizing diversity and
diverse coverage in our public programs and exhibitions is
enormously important. As our country becomes more and more and
more diverse, our programs need to become more and more and
more diverse. So that is the second one that I would mention.
Then the third one, which I think is very, very important as
well, has to do with the mix of disciplines that we represent
and operate at, if you will bear with me for a moment.
I am a physician and a biomedical scientist, and I have
spent my career in the STEM disciplines, science, technology,
engineering, and math, but as the chairman knows, I am very,
very devoted to the idea that the Arts and Humanities and
Social Sciences are critical to our country solving our
thorniest problems. Interacting with people understanding the
sociology of our great country is a way of solving problems
that is necessary beyond the strict benefits of science. One of
the enormous attributes of the Smithsonian is that we do
everything from Astrophysics to Art History. We run the largest
astrophysics group in the country in Cambridge Massachusetts
with Harvard University. Then we have an enormous pool of art
historians and others in the Arts and Humanities.
Focusing on the breath as well as the depth in any one area
is a challenge. It is a challenge at the Smithsonian. My
predecessors have shown me the way to do that, and if I have
accomplished anything at all in that regard, please take this
as sincere, I have done it by following what Dillon Ripley did,
what Wayne Clough did, what people who came before me did. I
hope that the next leadership will see that as one of the great
strengths, the combination of diversity, intellectual
diversity, ethnic diversity on the one hand, and diversity of
what we study and show the American public on the other hand.
Chairman Blunt. Thank you. Senator Cortez Masto.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you, Chairman Blunt. Doctor,
thank you. Thank you for not only your service, I want to thank
the staff. Incredible people that work at the Smithsonian along
with the Board. You know, I am from Nevada, a Western State. It
is always a treat and a unique opportunity when we get to
travel to Washington and walk into the Smithsonian, any one of
the buildings, for free and see the incredible history. It is
very exciting for us, so thank you for all of the good work.
Doctor, you touched on really three issues and areas that I
wanted to followup with you on, the first being the diversity.
I so appreciate your comments there. I know, and I know you are
familiar with this, I think it was in September 2018, UCLA
published a report evaluating the Latino representation within
the Smithsonian. I think right now there is what, a 5 percent
of the employees are represented as Latinos and 6 percent Asian
Americans. Have you put anything in place or any policies or
protocols to increase that diversity when it comes to staffing,
and particularly staffing in leadership positions in the
Smithsonian? If you would talk a little bit about that, that
would be great.
Dr. Skorton. Thank you, Senator Cortez Masto. We have a
long way to go with the Smithsonian regarding every ethnic
group, and beyond the ethnic groups in terms of gender
diversity and every other way. As I mentioned, and I do not
want to repeat this too much, we have made some progress at the
director level and above.
As I mentioned, two-thirds of our hires have been women or
people of color, but that does not hide the fact that we have a
long way to go. The UCLA report, like the report that we
commissioned, 20 years ago of this, the report that ended up
having a title of willful neglect, showed us a big problem that
has not been entirely solved. With all respect to my colleagues
at UCLA, and I am UCLA person, there were some very helpful
things in that report and unfortunately there were some things
that were inaccurate.
For example, the amount of funds that they say we are
spending, they say it is still $1 million. It is actually $2.5
million. In the new year, we hope it will be $2.7 million and a
bit more, but I do not want to argue about the fact that we
need to do better. In terms--so that is in terms of the people
aspect. In terms of trying to diversify an organization, a non-
profit that is decentralized like the Smithsonian, in my
earlier career I have tried many different expedience to do
that. Many of them failed, and we are trying something new at
the Smithsonian and it is too new to tell you whether it will
rise or fall, but what I am doing is making the leadership
accountable for two aspects of diversity.
First, I have asked the Board of Regents to judge me every
year in part based on two aspects of diversity, the composition
of the institution, and the climate of the institution. As you
all know, and I feel foolish saying this to you because you are
so aware of it but I will say it, that you can recruit all you
want but if the climate of the institution is not one that
allows someone from a group not well represented to feel safe
and to feel the likelihood of success, then they will not stay
and retention rates will fall and fall and fall. So, I have
that as part of my job evaluation. The people, the nine people,
who report to me at the top of the institution, so to speak,
have that in their evaluations, and the provost, the Chief sort
of Content Officer, or the person to whom the museum Directors
report and the Research Center Directors report, he has charged
each of them in their evaluations for being accountable for
these two aspects of diversity. I do believe over the years
that that direct accountability will yield benefits, but
honestly it is too soon to say whether that is actually going
to work.
The last aspect I want to make a very important comment on,
specifically about the Hispanic and Latino programming, is
separate from the leadership and separate from the rank-and-
file staff and researchers and curators, the programs
themselves have to reflect the growing diversity of America. I
want to, I take no credit for what I am about to say now
whatsoever, but since 1997 when the Smithsonian Latino Center
was established, they have done an enormously, enormously
effective job of increasing the coverage of culture, and
science, and history, and other aspects related to the Latino
and Latina experience. You may know the happy news that we have
been able to establish a Latino Gallery, and a thanks to the
family of the late C. David Molina, a physician in California,
who developed a very prominent health care enterprise. The
family has given us a wonderful $10 million leadership gift.
So, we will have in the National Museum of American History
the first physical space to cover Latino issues ever on the
National Mall of the United States. I am thrilled and grateful
to the Molina family because they allowed us to put wind in our
sails to go forward, and I am especially thrilled that it will
be in American history for two reasons Senator. One is that the
fabulous foot traffic, if you will, over 4 million visitors a
year, is an amazing chance for us to have people as they walk
by see the Latino Gallery and walk in there. Then the other end
of it is that I believe having the Latino Gallery there will
draw a lot of people who want to come and see that, and then
will be able to enjoy many of the other wonders of the National
Museum of American History. It is a job not finished yet. It is
a job with a lot more to do, but I am very proud of my
colleagues. I think we are making progress.
Now there has been for several Congresses, the introduction
of a bill to establish a National Museum of the American Latino
and of course, if Congress in its wisdom decides to do that, we
will work with Congress and make sure that this is a museum an
American can be proud of. My orientation right now is that we
need to find some equilibrium about our maintenance issues, and
while we are figuring that out, we need to push ahead
vigorously with the diversity increase that we have mentioned,
with the Latino Gallery, but also with all the other programs
at the Smithsonian Latino Center.
I want to mention one other thing that is a National thing
that that Center does. In addition to welcoming people to
public programs and so on, the Latino Center for years and
years has done its bit to train tomorrow's Latino leaders at
various levels of their formal education. We have a very active
group of alumni, if you will, who have been through some of the
programs through the Smithsonian Latino Center, who are now
beginning to populate the museum industry around the United
States and begin to scratch the surface and make a difference
throughout the country in covering these important areas.
So, thank you for a very important question.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
Chairman Blunt. Senator let us just go back and forth for a
little bit. I will take a few minutes then you can have a few
more minutes. Dr. Skorton, as you mentioned, the organization
is unique, the structure is unique, the reporting to Congress
is unique, the way you get funding and some of your
restrictions even on how you can get private funding. You came
to this job with an incredible background of leadership but
again, the job is unique. What are a couple of things you know
now that you wish you had known then?
Dr. Skorton. Okay. Thank you, chairman. Thank you for
asking me a tough question. I appreciate it. The first thing is
that--so I am just rounding third base on my fourth year, and I
have to admit to you that it is a rare week that goes by that I
do not learn something that I did not know about the
Smithsonian. This year of calendar 2019 is the year of music,
and you probably are both aware of this, but many people are
not aware that we have a record label, a nonprofit record label
in its 71st year. It is fabulous. We have won seven Grammy
Awards.
One thing that is a challenge is how various and variegated
is the Smithsonian institution. Because of that variation,
everything as I said from Astrophysics to Art History--you
cannot run the Smithsonian as if it is a narrower kind of
organization. Being College President, as you well know from
your own experience as University President, has its own
challenges but there is a common core of education that is the
heart and soul of a college or university even though there is
research, and athletics, and many other things.
The Smithsonian is so various, it almost defies comparison
with anything else. One thing that I wish I knew when I came
was to have many more healthy helpings of humility about how
little I would know about the organization, and with respect to
whoever follows me in this fabulous job, whatever she or he has
as a background, they will also know sort of this much about
the Smithsonian where there is this much to learn. That is one
thing that I wish I would have known.
A second thing is that I have a long history of working on
issues with which I have had the honor of interacting with the
U.S. Congress and the executive branch, and even legislative
branch, in the higher education sphere and in the research
sphere. I was not aware of the extent to which I would have to
understand the complexities of running an organization that is
at one time a quasi-Federal organization and at the same time,
if you will, sort of a non-profit, a private nonprofit. We are
a trusted instrumentality as you well know it. It is sort of an
unusual organizational setup, and I think had I been aware of
the complexities of that, I would have availed myself of even
more tutoring, if I can use that term, and I have had enormous
tutoring, again, from these folks over my right shoulder. To
this day they are trying to bring me up to speed, right up to
about 5 minutes before the hearing started today. So that is a
very important thing.
Then the last thing I would say is the fact that we can
open our doors and accept tens of millions of people crossing
our threshold, as the Senator said, free which is so fabulous,
gives us this enormous responsibility not only to take care of
the facilities, but to recognize that that visitor experience
is the currency by which you would judge how we are serving the
American people. In serving the American people who cross those
thresholds, we have to serve those who have trouble seeing the
exhibits, who have trouble hearing audio, who have trouble
getting up a couple of steps, something that I have learned
about in a temporary way with this injury. Part of our
diversity work is also working on accessibility issues related
to the organization. I wish I would have known before I came
how much of a challenge that would be because of the, I believe
it is fair to say, unprecedented and unmatched amount of
visitors that we accept in.
Those are just some of the things, Senator, that I wish I
would have known. Of course, I will be at the service of the
Board of Regents and the new Secretary long after I am gone. I
will just be across town and very willing to tell them all the
things I wish I knew some 4 years ago. So, thanks for a great
question.
Chairman Blunt. That was a great answer, and hopefully your
successor will look at it and think about it, and benefit from
having that look back at what you would have known. Senator.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. So, Doctor, the
maintenance backlog. Let us talk a little bit more about that.
Did I hear you correctly, $84.5 million was requested to
address the maintenance backlog which is a 6 percent increase
from the previous budget. Is that correct?
Dr. Skorton. Yes.
Senator Cortez Masto. Is that in total what you need to
address the backlog?
Dr. Skorton. Well, Senator it is a complicated answer so
please, if you would bear with me----
Senator Cortez Masto. Yes. If you would--and breakdown for
this because I know there is always an ongoing cost from
maintenance.
Dr. Skorton. Right.
Senator Cortez Masto. That is different than what we need
for the backlog. If you could break that down, that would be
helpful.
Dr. Skorton. Sure. I would love to give you the context.
Thank you so much for asking for that detail, Senator. So, our
backlog, as the chairman mentioned, is hundreds of millions of
dollars actually approaching $1 billion of backlog. Now,
forgive me for talking about such a thing as industry
standards, but industry standards is to try to get somewhere
between 2 and 4 percent of the replacement cost of the
buildings in annual maintenance expenditures.
Now our replacement cost of our buildings is roughly $8
billion, and I want to hasten to emphasize a detail Senator,
that that is not a sort of a blue book value, so to speak. It
is what it would cost to actually replace those buildings, $8
billion. So, if you multiply that times 2 to 4 percent, you end
up somewhere between, you know, $160 and $320 million. Now
let's be optimistic and say we do get the $84.5 million, that
is going to be a little less than 1 percent or about 1
percent--call it 1 percent. So, it will be an increase and I
would never be anything but enormously grateful for any
increase that we would have. To stabilize the maintenance so
that we do not continue to grow the backlog, will be somewhere
between 2.3 and 2.4 percent of that $8 billion.
To begin to make progress on reducing the backlog, in other
words not just stay in equilibrium and not grow the backlog,
but to begin to reduce it, we have to go above that 2.3, 2.4
percent. We have estimated obviously, you know, somewhat as an
estimate, that a 3 percent goal would be terrific. Now i'm
naive about a lot of things. I am not naive about saying that
to change our maintenance budget to $240 million a year which
would be 3 percent of $8 billion is a heavy lift for a country
where there are so many competing demands.
That is why, as I mentioned in my testimony, oral
statement, that I am so grateful that you all, during the time
that I have been Secretary, have helped us to move slowly up
that hill, but I do believe that eventually we are going to
have to work with you all and your staff to begin to accelerate
that rate of increase.
Senator Cortez Masto. Even at 3 percent, what is the
timeframe to cover the backlog? I mean----
Dr. Skorton. Well it is going to take me to take a while,
and I want--I know I am being sort of long-winded. I am not
trying to run the clock down. I just want to make sure I give
you the context----
Senator Cortez Masto. Listen, it is only the two of us. We
have plenty of time.
Dr. Skorton. Well that is alright. That is alright. You
know, it is March madness so wearing down the clock could be a
cool thing anyway. But I do want to say that, again please
forgive me for being redundant, I am endlessly grateful for the
increase the President put in his budget and hopefully will
realize this year, but one of these days, for example, the
castle, the oldest building, the iconic, if you will,
Smithsonian building from which President Lincoln surveyed the
Confederate troops from that tall tower. One of these days that
building is going to fail catastrophically, and we will have
problems.
What we do, what our maintenance professionals do with
deciding where to put those precious dollars, that $80 million
hopefully plus dollars, is they break it into five different
sort of segments of how urgent it is to do something. The most
urgent segment being, if you do not do something there is an
immediate risk of harm to people or to collections, and the
fifth says you have, you know, maybe 7 to 10 years to do
something.
The longer we wait, Senator, the more buildings begin to
move up toward that more urgent end. Should you have time
afterwards, in addition to some of our treasures from the
collection, we also have some other things that I might not
call treasures, which are examples of some of our maintenance
challenges.
Senator Cortez Masto. I know, I noticed. I am glad you
mentioned that because I noticed you brought with you some
artifacts and some art it looks like, predominantly from
Missouri. Is there a connection here?
[Laughter.]
Dr. Skorton. My Chief of Staff told me if such a question
came up that I should talk about something else.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Blunt. That is one of the great coincidences----
Senator Cortez Masto. Oh, I see.
Chairman Blunt. What is the--this is not your
appropriations hearing so I do not want to go into a lot of
depth on that topic. But what is the revitalization amount that
you asked for every year, which is I actually think that
Congress has been pretty generous on that item, and what is
that money for?
Dr. Skorton. It is fabulous. The National Air and Space
Museum opened in 1976. Opened with the idea that we would in
equilibrium have about 2.5 million visitors a year. The first
year, we nearly doubled that and then we now have over 7
million visitors a year. So, the systems are worn out.
Secondly, because of some construction ideas that did not turn
out to be perfect, the cladding, the marble on the outside of
the building is beginning to warp and needs to be replaced.
So, between replacing the systems, which we have known for
years we have to replace because of the dramatic, dramatic
visitorship, and between the somewhat surprising problem with
the cladding, with the marble, we actually have to give America
basically a new National Air and Space Museum.
Our estimates both our professionals and external
consultations that we did at the time suggested that to do it
right would be a $900 million project. That about $250 million
of that would be money that we would raise philanthropically,
Mr. Chairman, to redo all 23 galleries of the National Air and
Space Museum, and $650 million we hoped would be the
contribution, enormous contribution of the taxpayer. You all
have been unbelievably generous, just as you mentioned. You
have used just the right word chairman. We are right on track.
The project is on track and on budget, and you have been
stalwart in that. Roughly $460 million has been committed to it
by Congress to the current year that we are in right now, the
enacted Fiscal Year 2019 budget, leaving us with $190 million
that presumably a $100 in the next Fiscal Year and $90 in the
last fiscal year.
As you know by walking by the Air and Space or driving by
it, we are at work right now. The museum will be open the whole
time, but half of it will be closed for construction while the
other half is being open and then vice versa. I want to thank
you for something else that you have done for us. In order to
deal with the precious artifacts that have to be put somewhere
else during the revitalization and then long afterwards, you
have given us funds to build a storage module out by Dulles.
After the revitalization is over, that will still allow us
enormous flexibility for continued collection storage.
I do want to emphasize if I might, I know it is a bit of a
digression so please forgive me. The collection storage is
another maintenance issue that we have quite separate and above
and beyond the maintenance of those parts of the buildings
where the people work. The collections, as you mentioned, you
got the number exactly right, 155 million objects and
specimens, is the completely irreplaceable part of the
Smithsonian. We need to make sure that we are holding those
collections, this is the collections of the United States of
America, in conditions in which we know they will be there for
the next generation and the next generation and the next
generation, and we have some real issues there.
We have about 2.1 million square feet of collection storage
all together, and we need to do something about roughly a
million of those square feet, either replacement or, if you
will to use your word, revitalization. I thank you on behalf of
the Smithsonian for helping us begin to make a dent in what we
have as a collection storage master plan.
Chairman Blunt. With all those numbers that we just went
through that--your maintenance backlog number again for the
record is what?
Dr. Skorton. Approaching $1 billion.
Chairman Blunt. Senator Cortez Masto.
Senator Cortez Masto. Let me change subjects a little bit.
Doctor, the strategic plan that was launched in 2017 includes
technology as one of the means to expand the reach of the
Smithsonian. As part of that goal, there is the idea of
creating a research and development and testing lab designed to
create and evaluate new applications and other technologies
that will enhance the visitors' experience at the Smithsonian
and museums all over the world. I just want to say I appreciate
that the Smithsonian is establishing leadership in this area.
In advancing museum related technology. Can you tell us a
little bit more about that and how it is progressing?
Dr. Skorton. Yes. Thank you very much. It is very, very
important that we serve everybody, not just the lucky few, so
to speak, who can come across our threshold. I want to say in
passing that we have 214 affiliate museums in 46 states, and
Panama, and Puerto Rico.
Those are locally owned and operated museums and other
facilities who bare our imprimatur and who work with us. They
help us and we help them. We also have the Smithsonian
Institution Traveling Exhibition Service, and we have a subset
of that service, Senator, called Museums on Main Street, MoMS.
I love that acronym. We take things out to communities around
the country with a median population of 8,000. The smallest
community so far had a population of 845. I am a corny
individual, but I love, almost brings tears to my eyes, to
think that we are taking some from the Smithsonian to a
community of 845 people and they get to enjoy some of this
magic without having to get to Washington, which a lot of folks
cannot afford to do.
The other way of getting there is through technology. We
have websites. We have a social media presence, and so on. Over
my shoulder is Julissa Marenco, who is our Assistant Secretary
for Communications and External Affairs. Julissa and many other
leaders are bringing us quickly into the 21st century by
utilizing technology better. One thing that we have discovered,
this will come as a big shock, is that we do not know
everything at the Smithsonian. Because we realize we do not
know everything, we are also working with partners, industry
partners, and recently we had the honor of kicking off a
project with Google at the National Air and Space Museum
through the Google Arts and Culture Initiative.
We have found very gratifying interest in the tech industry
of working with the Smithsonian. Why? Because the brand, if you
will, of the Smithsonian is so stellar. People trust it. In an
age where unfortunately Americans have lost certain trust in
many kinds of institutions, museums and libraries and the
Military tend to have high trust levels. We want to utilize
that trust to work with industry, to learn from them, and to do
things together. I want to give you a great example of that.
This year is the 50th anniversary of the magnificent
landing on the moon, and we have as part of the collection at
the National Air and Space Museum, the command module that was,
you know, up there while the astronauts went down and touched
on the moon's surface. You may or may not recall that the year
after the actual moon landing, NASA, the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration, took that capsule on a sort of a
victory lap around America so everybody could have, you know, a
chance to sort of be near that capsule.
Senator Cortez Masto. I think I was six.
Dr. Skorton. Sorry?
Senator Cortez Masto. I said I think I was six when that
occurred. I do not really recall that. I do recall the landing
though.
Dr. Skorton. Unfortunately, I was not six when it happened.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Skorton. I was 20. I was 19 that year. By the way, when
I was 19 I also thought I knew everything, but that lesson
comes hard. But anyway, we are doing a mini, micro version of
that, Senator, and we are sending it around to a few of our
affiliates.
One of the things that we realized is that we want America
to be able to enjoy that capsule without having to get close to
it. So, we work with a company called the Autodesk, a computer
aided design company and did an inside the capsule and outside
the capsule three-dimensional scan so that we could buildup
what computer people call a three-dimensional data structure,
which then can be turned into an image that can be sliced, and
diced, and rotated in 3D. Believe it or not, those folks, those
geniuses who did that, our geniuses and the geniuses at
Autodesk, found something that history had forgotten, some
scribbles on the inside of the capsule by the astronauts while
they were up there. How exciting that anybody can get access to
those imagery. That is another example, besides our inside
talent, how we are working with partners to learn what we can
from the tech industry as a way to spread the wealth more
broadly. So, it is a very, very important effort and we have a
long way to go but we are making some terrific progress.
Senator Cortez Masto. That is exciting. Thank you. Thank
you again for all the good work that you have done.
Dr. Skorton. Thank you, Senator.
Chairman Blunt. So, Secretary--in an impressive way raised
almost $2 billion from 500,000 donors. Will any of that money
go toward deferred maintenance?
Dr. Skorton. First chairman let me say this as strongly as
I possibly can, I take very little credit for that campaign.
Wayne Clough, my predecessor, got that going. Had the courage
to aim really high along with the people in our Office of
Advancement and the Board of Regents. I sort of went from third
base to home on that. So, I want to for the record say that
this was--I just sort of did some of the cleanup at the end.
But it was an amazing, amazing process. Almost $2 billion
dollars.
Most of that money, as any fundraising, as you all know
very well, goes to a restricted purpose. So those funds went
for things that are restricted. Some of them did go for
facilities type things, but usually a person of whatever means
will give something for a facility because of wanting to make
some improvement in some area, like an exhibition, a gallery,
something like that. In my experience, and I would never
pretend that this is gospel, but in my experience it is
relatively hard to get philanthropic support for real basic
infrastructure.
Not to be facetious but it is hard to get someone to help
us replace an HVAC implement. Now that does not mean you should
not try. That does not mean when someone gives us money to name
a portion of a building that we should not try and ask her or
him to help us with maintenance, but the big broad-shouldered
maintenance that has to occur everyday, sometimes every hour, I
think it is not reasonable to think we could get that from
philanthropy. I also want to say that opening a magnificent
museum requires not only the place, requires not only the
people who are the geniuses who make it possible to show the
public what we have, and teach, and inspire, it also requires
excellent professional security staff. It also requires a lot
of other kinds of worker, and those are all part of the
infrastructure of a running a museum, and those are also very,
very hard. Now those are not counted in the strict maintenance
backlog that we are mentioning, but those are all a part of
what needs to be done with, I believe with all respect, with
Federal support.
So, I think that we continue to be grateful. We continue to
show you value for the dollars that you are investing in us and
show you that we are not wasting the dollars and we are not
being silly about how we prioritize maintenance, but I hope as
time goes on, and perhaps you consider infrastructure spending
in a general sense, that you will think about this little
corner of America as a place that could use a little more help.
Chairman Blunt. The parking facility at the zoo. I think we
approved that on your recommendation and about a month later
you decided not to do it. Now I am not in favor of doing things
that you see flaws in that you did not see to start with, so I
do not mean for this to be critical, but that was a fairly big
decision on the part of you to ask for it in the Congress to do
it. What was--is there a minute-and-a-half version of why that
did not work out?
Dr. Skorton. Sure. Let me take the first 15 seconds of a
minute and a half to say that I think a critical piece of
leadership is to realize when you have to change course and not
to, you know, stubbornly pursue something that just does not
make sense. We had a turnover in leadership. We had a turnover
in thinking about it and in reassessing the idea.
Chairman Blunt. You mean leadership at the at the zoo?
Dr. Skorton. At the zoo.
Chairman Blunt. Okay.
Dr. Skorton. Also, just sort of thinking about it at the
top of the organization. Any change in leadership is a chance
to look at something a fresh, and nothing wrong with the first
idea but on balance, we decided, I decided after listening to
the new leadership and sort of reassessing it, that maybe it
was not the best use of funds right now. That is basically what
happened. The original idea of needing more parking and wanting
to free up space that is currently being used for surface
parking was still a good idea, but prioritizing all the things
we need to do, we just decided it wasn't the highest priority.
Chairman Blunt. Well there is no reason to pursue a
priority that you decide should not be the top priority. I do
not disagree with that. Senator, I know you have to leave in a
little bit. Do you have another question?
Senator Cortez Masto. One more. I know, Doctor, realizing
the sensitivity of security initiatives, are you able to
provide us with an update on the development of the strategic
plan for security? I know there was a report on that
previously.
Dr. Skorton. Thank you, Senator. Security is a massive
moving target in the world right now. Security for the
Smithsonian breaks into various different categories. I will
make this as quick as I can because I do not want to waste your
time, and you have a lot to do today.
First of all, we have the physical security of the
building. Unfortunately, we live in a time now where we have to
take that more seriously, and we are asking for some help,
additional help, in the 2020 budget to increase security, some
increases that we would have hoped to have gotten in days going
by and some increases that are more new.
I want to tell you that I am very, very grateful that you
have been able to help us with security at the National Museum
of African American History and Culture. We do think we need
more help than that. It also has to do with not just the
quantity but the quality, and we are reassessing a lot of how
we do the security, how the officers are trained, and so on,
and that is all an ongoing effort. Then there is also of course
cybersecurity which is massive. One of the things that I think
is an important part of any organization is to audit how we are
doing. We have the blessing of having an Inspector General.
The Inspector General Office for the Smithsonian has helped
us to keep our eye on the ball in terms of all those kind of
security that I mentioned, physical security, training of
people, and cybersecurity. Again, it is a moving target. We
will never be done trying to fine tune that security, but we
are well on our way. I want to say again, as we talked about
perhaps 45 minutes ago, that the continuity that the Board of
Regents supplies cannot be overemphasized in its importance.
They are keeping my feet to the fire and will, I predict, keep
my successor's feet to the fire to keep thinking about all
these security issues, the whole gamut, from physical security
to cybersecurity.
Nothing is ever perfect in that domain as unfortunately we
have learned, but we are doing well. I am proud of what we are
doing, and I am proud of the fact that we are not satisfied.
Chairman Blunt. Thank you, Senator, for your questions. I
have about three more things to ask about, Secretary. One is on
the information security front. I think one of the breaches was
the information of who the donors were to the campaign. Am I
right on that?
Dr. Skorton. You know, I am going to have to get back to
you, if you do not mind, to make sure I give you correct
information. I wonder if I have exactly the breadth of that
issue before I say something. It may not be correct. So, if you
could bear with me, either later today or first thing tomorrow,
we will give you chapter and verse on it.
Chairman Blunt. Right. I think my information suggests that
inadequate protection of the donors' personally identifiable
information, and if that was a problem, it certainly is not a
unique problem in the Federal Government. You know, we have had
serious problems with this, and we have to deal with it
Government-wide, but I think it is something that clearly you
and your team have to pay attention to as we all do. There is
way too much information out there without nearly enough
thought as to how to protect it.
Dr. Skorton. You bet.
Chairman Blunt. Much of it given up way too voluntarily by
the people that had it too and then not secured by others. On
Air and Space, and then on the Fossil Hall Exhibit at the
Natural History, what do you do to try to put information out
to people coming to visit the Smithsonian of what might not be
available that they would normally have expected, for instance,
as some of that Air and Space collection has moved somewhere
else while renovations are going on. How do you try to let
people know that the thing they wanted to see and would
normally be there, just might not be there when they come?
Dr. Skorton. Well, I say this genuinely that as so often
you have hit a really sensitive issue square on. This is an
everyday issue for us not just because of the change in Air and
Space and not just because of the imminent opening of Fossil
Hall, but because we can only show a very tiny part of our
collection any one time given the massive collection. The
Directors at the individual museums try to do this. We have
websites.
One of the things that Assistant Secretary Marenco, and I,
and others, and the museum Directors are working on is a way to
get more information out to people so they can plan their visit
because that is really what you are talking about, Mr.
Chairman, is planning a visit. Actually, we are stepping back a
couple steps and taking on the job of reassessing the whole
visitor experience at the Smithsonian, and that will include
what you are talking about, Mr. Chairman, but will not be
limited to that. That we want to make sure that the visitor
experience starts the day someone dreams about coming and
continues after they have left our premises.
One of the issues that we do run into is that not
everything is available when they come, and even if it is
available, how do you find it? Because people will sometimes,
who are new to the Smithsonian, it is a great thrill to welcome
someone who is new to the Smithsonian, they will think it sort
of one place. You know, like where is the Smithsonian, and then
they come and end up seeing that there is this big sprawling
thing all over the place and even to New York City. We know
that we need to do a better job of helping people plan their
visits. We know that that is going to be done through
technology largely, and through mobile technology at that.
We are on the path to doing that but far from the goal. One
of the aspects of that, as you have mentioned, is someone comes
thinking they are going to be able to see x, but x has been
moved because of construction, because of conservation of that
entity. One of the difficult decisions that our curators make
with the museum Directors to whom they report is what to have
open to the American public. Some are there because of an
actual exhibition on some topic, and then some are there
because they are perennial favorites, like for example the
first ladies' inaugural gowns is a sort of an evergreen
exhibition people just love to see.
Chairman Blunt. The last question I have for today and
there will be other questions. The record will remain open for
1 week. I am sure I will have some other questions and members
who were not able to come to the hearing will have some
questions, but what about facilities like the Panama facility
that are not in the United States? How many of those are there,
and is that the biggest one? What do you do with those
facilities located in other countries?
Dr. Skorton. So, we do research in 140 countries, and in
most of those places we do not have permanent capital
facilities. The Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute to
which you referred in Panama is our big overseas permanent
research footprint. It is a fabulous place. If you have not had
a chance to go there, Mr. Chairman, we would be honored to
arrange a visit for you if you ever wanted to do that.
Those facilities are taken care of by a combination of
local work, and work and expertise and advice from the
facilities of professionals here in the United States. Anywhere
we are a guest of the country, if you will, we believe it is
important to also work with local experts in that area,
maintaining the same standards that we do here. I might take
the moment that you brought that up to mention that we are
working on our first permanent exhibition space oversees. That
is a research space, and that exhibition space will be
partnering with the Victoria and Albert Museum in London, in
East London.
So, we work in a combination with locals and with the
expertise of our professionals in our facilities. Mr. Chairman,
we will get back to you right away on that campaign
cybersecurity breach.
Chairman Blunt. Alright. Well, thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Thank you for the time you have spent today. As I said earlier,
the record will be open for 1 week. We would like for you and
your team to respond to any questions as quickly as you get
them so that they can be put in that record.
[The information referred to was submitted for the record.]
Chairman Blunt. It was great hearing, and I appreciate it.
I am going to come down and look at the randomly selected
material from the Smithsonian before I leave. The hearing is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:33 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
----------
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]