- READY, WILLING, AND ABLE TO WORK: HOW SMALL BUSINESSES EMPOWER PEOPLE WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
READY, WILLING, AND ABLE TO WORK: HOW SMALL BUSINESSES EMPOWER PEOPLE
WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD
MAY 9, 2018
__________
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Small Business Committee Document Number 115-071
Available via the GPO Website: www.govinfo.gov
_________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
29-918
WASHINGTON : 2018
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
ROD BLUM, Iowa
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto Rico
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
JOHN CURTIS, Utah
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
STEPHANIE MURPHY, Florida
AL LAWSON, JR., Florida
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
VACANT
Kevin Fitzpatrick, Majority Staff Director
Jan Oliver, Majority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Adam Minehardt, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................
1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................
2
WITNESSES
Ms. Angela Timashenka Geiger, President and CEO, Autism Speaks,
Washington, DC.................................................
4
Mr. Dave Friedman, Founder and CEO, AutonomyWorks, Downers Grove,
IL.............................................................
5
Mr. John Cronin, Co-Founder and Chief Happiness Officer, John's
Crazy Socks, Melville, NY, accompanied by Mr. Mark X. Cronin,
Co-Founder and President, John's Crazy Socks...................
7
Ms. Lori Ireland, President, Extraordinary Ventures, Vice Chair
Autism Society of America, Chapel Hill, NC.....................
9
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Ms. Angela Timashenka Geiger, President and CEO, Autism
Speaks, Washington, DC.....................................
22
Mr. Dave Friedman, Founder and CEO, AutonomyWorks, Downers
Grove, IL..................................................
32
Mr. John Cronin, Co-Founder and Chief Happiness Officer,
John's Crazy Socks, Melville, NY, accompanied by Mr. Mark
X. Cronin, Co-Founder and President, John's Crazy Socks....
39
Ms. Lori Ireland, President, Extraordinary Ventures, Vice
Chair Autism Society of America, Chapel Hill, NC...........
47
Questions and Answers for the Record:
Questions from Hon. Brad Schneider to Mr. Dave Friedman and
Answers from Mr. Dave Friedman.............................
53
Additional Material for the Record:
Statement from Rep. Adriano Espaillat........................
57
READY, WILLING, AND ABLE TO WORK: HOW SMALL BUSINESSES EMPOWER PEOPLE
WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES
----------
WEDNESDAY, MAY 9, 2018
House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Steve Chabot
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Brat, Radewagen, Blum,
Comer, Fitzpatrick, Marshall, Norman, Curtis, Velazquez, Evans,
and Schneider.
Chairman CHABOT. Good morning. I call this hearing to
order. I want to thank everyone for being with us. I am Steve
Chabot, Chair of the Committee and Nydia Velazquez, the Ranking
Member. Last Friday, the Department of Labor reported that the
non-farm unemployment rate is a little under 4 percent, 3.9 to
be exact, the lowest rate in nearly 2 decades. The last time
the unemployment rate remained below 4 percent for a sustained
period was the late 1960's. April also marked the 91st
consecutive month of job gains, the longest streak of monthly
increases on record.
While this is great news for America, here at the Small
Business Committee, we continue to hear from small businesses
about a consequence of historically low unemployment and that
is the lack of qualified applicants or the skills gap. During
times of economic prosperity, small businesses often find it
more difficult to compete with large companies in attracting
qualified candidates leaving some jobs unfilled.
One segment of American society that is often overlooked
when discussing economic opportunities through new job growth
is the special needs community which brings us to the topic of
today's hearing.
About two years ago, this Committee held a hearing about
small business opportunities for individuals with intellectual
and developmental disabilities. While employment and labor
force participation rates for the disabled population have
increased since then, there are still many individuals who want
to obtain meaningful and sustaining employment. Given the
innovation, flexibility and diversity of small businesses, they
can offer inclusive environments for employees with
developmental disabilities and fill jobs vital to operating and
expanding their businesses.
Today, we are highlighting small business and entrepreneurs
who are successfully creating jobs and providing opportunities
for individuals with developmental disabilities. We will also
hear from advocates who are continuing to raise awareness to
small business employers that these individuals are ready,
willing and able to work.
I appreciate the witnesses being here today and if I ever
stop talking we will get to them. And I look forward to hearing
their testimony as I am sure we are all do. And I would now
like to yield to the Ranking Member, for her opening remarks.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For most people,
work is closely aligned with feelings of self-worth,
independence, and a general sense that one is contributing to
society. Generally, when small businesses are succeeding, the
result is greater employment opportunity for all Americans.
Small businesses open doors and create jobs in their
communities by helping people earn a living doing the things
that they are most passionate about.
Unfortunately, one particular demographic continues to face
persistent challenges when it comes to securing employment.
Individuals with autism, spectrum disorder or Down syndrome
have an unemployment rate significantly higher than the
national average. It is estimated that 80 percent are
unemployed or under employed.
Regrettably this population faces an uphill battle to
overcome false perceptions about their abilities and capacity
as employees. Many of those on the autism spectrum excel in
specialized kinds of work like software testing, lap work and
proofreading. They observe details that others miss and are
able to focus for long periods of time. Naturally, they take
well deserved pride in their distinctive abilities and atypical
ways of viewing the world.
Similarly individuals with Down Syndrome are valued members
of the work force when given the opportunity. Yet, despite
their proven abilities, desire to work and the benefits to all
parties involved, a lack of opportunity remains. Enhancing
opportunities for these employees is not only beneficial from a
business perspective but also from an overall society
perspective.
Research shows employing individuals with disabilities
reduces reliance on publicly funded adult services. With
increased public awareness and the excellence shown by those
already in the work force, many of the false notions about
those with autism are starting to be debunked.
Today, small businesses are at the forefront of creating
innovative business models that employ these highly competent
and hardworking individuals. We are very happy to have some of
them here today to share their experiences.
I hope this hearing will further dispel misconception while
making it clear that great things are being done across the
nation to bring more individuals with autism or Down syndrome
into the work force.
I would like to thank the witnesses for testifying and look
forward to your testimony. Thank you Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back and if Committee members have opening statements prepared
I ask that they be submitted for the record.
And I would like to take just a moment to explain the
timing lights and our rules here. It is pretty simple. You get
5 minutes to testify. You will have a lighting system. The
green light is on for 4 minutes, the yellow light will let you
know that you have a minute to wrap up and then the red light
will come on. And we would ask that you try to stay within
those limits and when the red light comes on that is kind of
it. So and I will now introduce our panel.
Our first witness this afternoon or this morning will be
Ms. Angela Geiger. Ms. Geiger is the President and CEO of
Autism Speaks here in Washington, D.C. Autism Speaks advocates
and supports individuals with autism and their families
including working with both employers and employees to increase
employment opportunities for individuals with autism.
And I might note for the record that my Chief of Staff,
Stacy, her daughter who is 18 years old has autism and she has
educated me a great deal over the years and I have had the
opportunity to speak to her class before and they have come to
Capitol Hill to visit Washington and it is very inspiring to
me. In fact Friday evening I got a text from Stacy and it was
her daughter's prom and so she was coming down their steps in a
very beautiful dress and she is just a beautiful young lady and
it was very, it was really nice. So if anybody wants to see
them they are on my iPhone here so.
And we will introduce our next witness. Our second witness
will be Dave Friedman and he is the Founder and CEO of Autonomy
Works in Downers Grove, Illinois. Autonomy Works is a small
business providing digital marketing services for their clients
and high tech jobs for individuals with autism and we welcome
you here, Mr. Friedman.
Our next witness will be Mr. John Cronin. John is the Co-
founder and Chief Happiness Officer of John's Crazy Socks in
Melville, New York. John founded the company with his father,
Mark, who is also with us here today and John's passion for
crazy socks and spreading happiness led to a startup business
that now employees 33 people including 15 with differing
abilities. And we welcome you, John and his dad is welcome
here, but John, you are especially welcomed here today. So
thank you for coming. Thank you.
And I would now like to yield to the Ranking Member to
introduce our final witness.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
introduce Lori Ireland. She is a Co-founder of Extraordinary
Ventures and the Vice Chair for Autism Society of America. For
the last decade she has devoted her time and energy to creating
jobs and opportunities for people with autism. She also serves
as a Director for the Ireland Family Foundation, an
organization that helps support research and direct services
for adults on the autism spectrum. Ms. Ireland earned a
master's in business administration from the University of
California Berkley. Welcome. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. And, Ms. Geiger, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENTS OF ANGELA TIMASHENKA GEIGER, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
AUTISM SPEAKS; DAVE FRIEDMAN, FOUNDER AND CEO, AUTONOMYWORKS;
JOHN CRONIN, CO-FOUNDER AND CHIEF HAPPINESS OFFICER, JOHN'S
CRAZY SOCKS; LORI IRELAND PRESIDENT IRELAND FAMILY FOUNDATION
STATEMENT OF ANGELA TIMASHENKA GEIGER
Ms. GEIGER. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman and Ranking
Member Velazquez and members of the Committee. I am Angela
Timashenka Geiger, the President and CEO of Autism Speaks. We
at Autism Speaks are dedicated to promoting solutions across
the spectrum and throughout the life span for the needs of
people with autism and their families. We do work on issues
across the entire lifespan but place a special emphasis on
adults with autism in part by providing tools and resources to
expand employment opportunities.
Thank you very much for giving us the opportunity to talk
to you about some of these overarching themes and trends for
employing people with autism and how small businesses
specifically are utilizing their unique ability to employ
individuals with autism.
As you have mentioned, the employment rates of adults with
disabilities is much lower than those for people without
disabilities. And the employment rate of individuals with
autism is lower still. 1 in 4 adults with disabilities like
autism is employed whereas 1 in 3 adults with other
disabilities hold a job in this current economy.
Each year an estimated 50,000 youth with autism transition
from school into adult life, and over half of these people are
disconnected from work or further education and training. But
despite this, progress is being made. In the last year
employment rates for people with disabilities have increased
continuing the upward trend over the last 24 months. In fact in
March of 2018 the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported the
employment participation age rate for working age people with
disabilities increased from 34.8 percent up from 32.3 percent
the previous year. This rate of increase really importantly is
greater than the rate of increase for people without
disabilities. So these gains are really encouraging and suggest
that some progress we are at least in the right direction.
So through our continued work on employment, we have
identified three trends employing people with autism that we
would like to highlight today. First, one of the most rapidly
reported and reproduced trends is mission driven businesses.
This is where social entrepreneurs create a business whose
mission is to hire people with autism. You will see some of
those examples here today.
Also an increasing number of large employers have announced
autism employment initiatives to diversity their work force and
certainly to attract more people into the work force with the
employment rate as it is. We are really working at Autism
Speaks to systematize some of those best practices so that they
can be used much more widely in the public.
And the third major trend we see is an increase in the
number of micro enterprises and small businesses established
and operated by entrepreneurs with autism. Again you will hear
more about that today from some of the other witnesses.
Some of the ways Autism Speaks directly impacts employment
people with autism is through consultation, through creating a
jobs portal workforce to providing absolutely free tool kids
and training to small businesses and other business alike and
we want to continue this trend and do more into the future. So
while these trends and themes are promising, there does remain
room for improvement in three specific ways.
First, transition services in schools must be improved and
consistently start earlier. These transition services can start
as early and should start as early as 14 or 16 depending on
your state and must include coordination or cross vocational
rehabilitation, special education and career services. Schools
must work with community employers to help match student with
available jobs.
Second, coordination, these coordination across service
needs to be improved. Autism Speaks absolutely agrees with
HHS's recommendation to Congress contained within the 2017
Autism Cares Report on a transition. What that did was increase
alignment between different entities serving transition age
youth. And that would result in more seamless service delivery
and improve employment outcomes for adults. Again this
coordination is so necessary for the success of people with
autism and other disabilities.
And finally, the state level implementation of the
Workforce Innovation Opportunity Act of 2014 and Medicaid home
and community based services needs to result in meaningful
outcomes for adults with autism. When this act was passed in
2014 it included preemployment transition services as a
strategy to improve employment outcomes for individuals with
disabilities.
We at Autism Speaks are really working hard with states to
figure out what is working really well and how we can replicate
those models across other states and communities. And so
employment truly is more than the key to independence. Our jobs
are, in large part in the way we define ourselves. People with
autism deserve the same rights in that as other people. And we
look forward to working with you to strengthen that
partnership. So thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. Mr. Friedman, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. FRIEDMAN. Thank you. Chairman and Ranking Member,
members of the Committee----
Chairman CHABOT. Do you want to turn the mic on?
STATEMENT OF DAVE FRIEDMAN
Mr. FRIEDMAN. Chairman and Ranking Member and members of
the Committee, thank you for inviting me to share my story and
a little bit about my team at Autonomy Works. I am Dave
Friedman. I am sitting in front of you for only one reason. I
am sitting here because of my son, Matthew. Matthew is 22 years
old and like a lot of 22-ear olds, he's an avid sports fan. He
runs. He plays in a basketball league. He loves his iPad and
his games. But unlike lots of 22-year olds, Matthew has autism.
He has lots of skills. He is exceptional at math. He is very
good with spatial learning.
But, his autism presents several challenges. He has a hard
time with social interactions. He has a hard time with planning
and organizing.
When kids with disabilities turn 14 and a half the school
system is required to start a process called Transition
Planning where you start to look at what a kid with a
disability is going to do after they graduate from high school.
Matt has a lot of talents, but he wasn't likely to be
successful in a traditional college environment. He doesn't
have the social skills or the organizational skills. My wife
and I started trying to figure out what he might do after he
graduated from high school. And we were shocked, stunned
literally, about how few opportunities existed in the
professional world for people with autism.
There are very few jobs and the jobs that exist are largely
low skill and don't take advantage of the talents that many
people with autism have.
As Ms. Geiger said, Matthew is not alone. People with
intellectual disabilities have very low work force
participation rates. Where they do participate in the
workforce, they have very high unemployment rates. Given that
50,000 people with autism graduate from the school system into
the world of work every year, this presents a significant
challenge for both families and communities.
For most of the people with autism, the challenge with
employment is not the result of technical or functional skills.
Many people with autism possess skills that are very valuable
in today's work force--intense focus, comfort with numbers and
process, and a passion for detail and quality. However, many
people with autism have challenges that make it difficult for
them to be successful in the workplace. Businesses large and
small lack the knowledge and experience required to hire and
manage this workforce. In 2012, I left my corporate career and
founded Autonomy Works to help close this gap.
Autonomy-Works is a for-profit commercial business. We
leverage the talents of people with autism to provide our
clients with essential services. We have been operating for
five years and serve more than 15 commercial clients. Each
week, our team of Associates delivers hundreds of discreet
tasks for our clients at exceptional levels of quality. We were
built from the start to employ people with autism. We created a
business system and a custom-tailored work environment to make
them successful.
Since our founding, we have generated more than 70,000
hours of paid employment for adults with autism. We are growing
and by the end of 2020 anticipate employing more than 100
people. Without their jobs at Autonomy-Works, most of these
individuals would be relying on public assistance or the
support of their families. Working at Autonomy-Works enables
them to earn income while building skills that are valuable for
many other jobs.
Across all of our employees, we have seen the challenge,
the potential, and the transformation that happens when people
get jobs. There are literally too many stories to possibly
share with you here today. But if I could speak just of one, if
I could speak as a father about my son, I have really seen how
it has changed his life. When Matthew graduated from school,
like lots of people with disabilities, he looked back to the
security and the supports that he had when he was in high
school and his transition program. Work has given him a new
purpose. He has mastered public transportation. He attends a
local community college so he can learn new skills to be able
to work and he is preparing to live independently. Matthew is
building a life.
There is a lot more to be done. Small businesses generate a
large portion of the jobs in the country. Small businesses are
going to have to be part of the solution for people with
disabilities. With your actions, this Committee has the ability
to support small businesses that are trying to hire people with
disabilities.
There are two specific things which I would like the
Committee to consider going forward. The first is to expand the
8(a) Business Development Program to include businesses that
hire people with disabilities. Today, participation is based on
other criteria that don't incorporate these types of business.
Second, I would like to ask the Committee to support small
business apprenticeship programs. Apprenticeships are a proven
approach for transitioning people with disabilities into jobs.
The scale of small businesses can make it difficult to develop
and operate apprentice programs. We encourage this Committee to
explore and support targeted initiatives that enable small
business to build these programs collaboratively.
With that, Chairman, Ranking Member and members of the
Committee, thank you for letting us share our story and more
importantly the story of my colleagues at AutonomyWorks. I look
forward to your questions.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. Mr. Cronin, you are
recognized for 5 minutes whenever you are ready.
STATEMENT OF JOHN CRONIN
Mr. JOHN CRONIN. Good morning, Chairman Chabot, Ranking
Member Velazquez and members of Committee. My name is John
Cronin, and I am the Co-founder and Chief Happiness Officer of
John's Crazy Socks. Thank you for inviting me to be here today
as a representative and self-advocate of the National Down
Syndrome Society.
I have Down syndrome and Down syndrome never holds me back.
I am 22 years old and I work hard every day to show the world
that people with Down syndrome are ready, willing and able to
work. Giving us a chance and we can be successful.
I founded this business with my dad, Mark. It was my idea
and I came up with the name. We have a mission to spread
happiness. I love my business.
In the fall of 2016 I began my last year of school. I was
ready to work. I did not need more school. I did not need more
training. I wanted a good job like my brothers Patrick and
Jamie. I told my dad that I wanted to go into business with
him. We opened John's Crazy Socks in December 2016.
We show everyday what is possible. We show can work a great
business. We have a ship over 100,000 orders and make over 300
million. I want you to know what people like us, like me can
do. Give a chance to us.
Mr. MARK CRONIN. Thank you. Good job. John is a hard act to
follow. My name is Mark Cronin and I am John's father and
partner in John's Crazy Socks. Last year, the National Down
Syndrome Society launched the End Law Syndrome Campaign. A
national effort to spotlight those laws that hinder individuals
with Down syndrome and other disabilities from fulfilling their
aspirations. As John puts it, Down syndrome doesn't hold me
back, Law Syndrome does.
In my written testimony I address many of the specific
legal changes we need to dismantle Law Syndrome. I want to
highlight tow this morning. John already told you we have been
fortunate enough to create 33 jobs, 15 of which are held by
people with differing abilities. We have a unified work place.
That leads to better morale, better retention and better
productivity and we hire people not out of altruism but because
it is good business.
We pay our minimum wage is $12 an hour. That's $1 more than
the New York state minimum wage on Long Island. Our colleagues
do not do minimal work so we don't pay them a minimum wage. The
sad reality is that we could pay much less and these people and
their families would still like them to come to work and that
is because of the scarcity of good jobs for people with
differing abilities.
But that would be wrong. Taking advantage of vulnerable
workers may put more money in a business bank account but it
would be morally bankrupt.
I was dismayed to learn that the section 14(c) of the Fair
Labor Act of 1938 allows employers to pay people with a
disability less than a minimum wage. This may have been
acceptable in 1938 and that was a time when my son would have
been institutionalized. But it's not acceptable today. It is
outrageous that we sanction such discrimination.
People with disabilities can and do provide valuable work
and should not be paid a wage that allows even well-meaning
organizations to take advantage of their labors. It is time
that all workers receive a fair wage for fair labor.
We ask that you support the TIME Act, HR 1377, a bipartisan
bill that would phase out the practice of paying subminimum
wage.
I also want to address the need to alter our Medicaid laws.
They, so they support people of differing abilities and not
hinder them. Our colleagues with disabilities work part-time.
Why? Because if they work too many hours why will lose their
Medicaid and they cannot afford to do so. I want you to take
Matt, one of our colleagues who has Asperger's. He started work
with us as a sock wrangler, that's what we call our pickers at
our pick and pack warehouse. And he has now shown a talent so
he is writing for our website. Matt would love to work 40 hours
a week but cannot because he cannot afford to lose his
Medicaid. Don't we all want Matt to work full-time? I know I
do. Then why have laws that limit how much he can work?
And my son John here is a classic entrepreneur. He doesn't
receive any benefits right now but he is entitled to them and
likely will need them in the future and then he would have to
choose between his benefits and his business. Do we want to
prevent people from engaging in entrepreneurship?
It is time to decouple the poor from the disabled in our
means tested programs so that people with differing abilities
can work full-time and maximize their contributions to society.
We want to encourage people to work, to find meaning in that
work and to pay taxes so let's remove the disincentives to
work.
Those are just two of the laws that discourage people with
disabilities from becoming active and productive participants
in their communities. Mr. Chairman and Committee members, lets
show the amazing things that people with differing abilities
can do. Give everyone a chance to demonstrate that they are
ready, willing and able to work. Thank you for your time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. Ms. Ireland, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF LORI IRELAND
Ms. IRELAND. Hi, I'm Lori Ireland. Thank you, Mr. Chabot
and Ms. Velazquez. I am the elected chair as noted of the--Vice
Chair of the Autism Society of America but I am here really as
one of the founders of Extraordinary Ventures in Chapel Hill,
North Carolina.
I am sure everybody is aware of the statistics that come
out from the CDC, et cetera. Angela, I think has mentioned the
low employment amongst people with IDD. Extraordinary Ventures
we founded in 2007 because and I'm going a little off script
here so don't get mad. Because a group of us decided, you know,
after age 22 it's called the cliff. There is, once you are out
of the IDEA, covered under IDEA in the public schools, there is
virtually nothing for you.
Now there are lots of rules and regulations that you all
are told about, not enforced. So one of the important things
that your Committee and our government at large is first of all
enforce the proper rules and make sure the states are in
compliance.
We have an operating budget of just over a million dollars.
We are 80 percent business revenues and 20 percent private
donations. We have 50 tax paying employees. They all, we think
and this is an important distinction, we think most of them
have a developmental disability. We don't have, we don't accept
any government funding directly nor are we a medical facility
so we don't know anybody's diagnosis. I think we could agree
that if we knew that they wouldn't be allowed to work together.
It is the way the people with IDD are treated in our
society is a civil rights violation in my opinion. The--anyone
else can choose to live together or work together except our
people. If they are identified as special needs then you have,
it can only be two or this or that and that's ridiculous. We
need to provide opportunities to everyone that wants to work
and if they want to live or work together that should be fine.
We have accomplished our mission through old fashioned
business practices. We operate real businesses. We decided we
would run for profit businesses under a not for profit
umbrella. So what we do is we match the skills of the people
who apply for a job with jobs so if somebody likes to cook, we
don't have cooking but we can make candles which is essentially
the same thing.
So again, usually when you are running a small business you
are solving at the bottom line for profit. We are solving for
hours of employment. And our people are fabulous. We do not
compete in any of our goods or services based on a disability.
We operate in the real market at the same competitive rate as
everyone else and that is the only way it can remain
sustainable in our opinion.
We run six businesses currently. A pickup and delivery
laundry business. I live in Chapel Hill so when I went to
college I had to do my own laundry but nobody does now so and
we are the preferred provider with a very long waiting list
because we do the best job. We do not--the students and the
private citizens who contract with us don't know until several
bags in that most of the people have a developmental disability
that are doing their laundry. So these are real small business.
Another one is a bulk mailing operation which is sort of
back office kind of things. We have a gifts business. As I
mentioned we make candles, lip balm, soaps, other things in
order to capture that market and the people who want to cook
without having to get into all the rules and regulations of
food.
We have an EV pet business which has turned out about
absolutely wonderful. These people are in the community,
walking people's pets and you will just love some of these
stories because we have a lot of senior citizens that contract
mainly so that I think they can have the person come over and
visit them every day. It's not--it is a win win situation. They
bake cookies for Ewan because he is coming over to walk their
dog. It's wonderful.
We also have a contract with the city of Chapel Hill and a
certain line of buses. We have a bus cleaning crew because that
is something we actually compete on a contractual basis with
other vendors and that's something that can easily be
regimented to a schedule. We also run an event center and that
does not employ as many of our people as we would like but it
does throw off revenue so that we can employee people in other
businesses.
I think our key and I'm almost out of time is that we have
flexibility to move people between businesses because your--the
parent or guardian will come in and be absolutely certain they
know what the person is good at and what they want to do. We
find out that isn't always the case and we can slide them
around amongst different business.
I also want to--I know I'm over time but we employee all
parts of the spectrum. We have people who are college graduates
and drive themselves to work and we have people who have to be
helped in the door. We need your help as Mr. Cronin was saying
to be able to support our people without them losing their
benefits. Because you can't--we pay everybody. Minimum wage at
least. And while I do advocate eventually getting rid of what
we call supported workshops please don told that without
replacing it with something else. There are many people in
there that have worked there their whole lives. And if you just
throw the baby out with the bath water we will have an even
worse problem. I have a whole lot of other things I was
supposed to say but my colleague said them so thank you very
much.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much and we will now move
to the questioning and I will recognize myself for 5 minutes
and I will start with you if I can, Mr. Friedman. How can we
make business aware of the value individuals with autism for
example can bring to the work force and move past maybe some
hesitation that some people might have to hire them due to a
perceived challenge or risk factors or whatever?
Mr. FRIEDMAN. There are an increasing number of
organizations, Autonomy-Works, Extraordinary Ventures and
others, that are starting to create case studies. One of our
objectives is to change the way the world views people with
autism. We are trying to create a story that can be told by
organizations like Autism Speaks and others through the small
business network to explain to people where successes have
happened and to share some of the tools, techniques, and
processes we have learned to make people successful in our
place. We are starting to get the stories and now it is time to
expand those and amplify them.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. Ms. Geiger, I will turn to you
next if I can. Are there incentives available to encourage
business to higher people with developmental disabilities? Are
there various things that they may--there may be an incentive
or a reward or whatever term you want to use?
Ms. GEIGER. I think some of the most important incentives
are actually intrinsic to the hiring process of people with
autism and other disabilities. We are finding that it is really
increasing the productivity, retention, quality of work.
Amazon, for example, did a pilot project in their pick and pack
facility and found that the people with autism were out
performing other employers so--or employees. And so the other
thing is with the millennial generation coming into the work
force, they are used to integrated environments and there have
an expectation what people with autism and other disabilities
are part of the workforce.
Chairman CHABOT. Very good. Thank you. Ms. Ireland, I will
turn to you next if I can. Are there any common misconceptions
about employing individuals with developmental disabilities and
if so what can be done to address those misconceptions that
perhaps others out there may have?
Ms. IRELAND. I think just exposure and education. If as my
gentleman over here has pointed out, Mr. Friedman, and myself,
we are--people that work for us sometimes leave us and go on to
other jobs because now they have experience, they have learned
how to be an employee. And they have proved to be wonderful.
Others are celebrating 10 years working for us and it's the
only job they have ever had. But the point is people need to
get out there.
Angela mentioned transition services. This is--we really
need to get people to understand our people are really good
employees. The retention rate is practically 100 percent and
they are very productive members but you have to see those
people. We have to give an opportunity for everybody in our
world to see them. And by running our small businesses in our
community everybody knows us and so they steal some of our
employees but that's okay.
Chairman CHABOT. Very good. Thank you. Mr. Cronin, I was
going to ask your son but I will ask you, I know he is having
some challenges coughing there which there is a lot going
around right now. But I wanted to clue you in to a potential
customer that you may want to consider. We had an election a
while back, the gentleman is smiling down there from Utah and
Jason Chaffetz left so there was an opening, an open seat there
and John Curtis won that seat. And I read this in, I don't know
if it was Roll Call or The Hill or Politico or something but he
is known for like being a collector of like really cool socks.
And I was touring small businesses back in my district, I
represent Cincinnati and it was--one of them happened to be a
sock shop and they had some really cool socks. So I told them
about John Curtis and so they gave me some socks to give to him
and I actually finally got around to giving them to him last
week, I don't know if he has got them on now, I'm guessing no,
but I think there is a possible customer right here for your
son. He is from Utah. His name is John Curtis and, John, how
any socks do you have now or different, cool socks?
Mr. CURTIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, somebody once asked me to
count and I stopped at 300.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay. So in any event you might want to
talk to your son about a potential Utah customer.
Mr. JOHN CRONIN. I think we can help. If I could I would
like to add on to the last question.
Chairman CHABOT. Yes, go right ahead.
Mr. JOHN CRONIN. I know part of our mission is to show what
is possible. We want people to see what our workplace is like
that, you know, it's a unified work place, people with
differing abilities side by side with neuro typical people. It
makes it a better place so when people come in and see that,
that opens their minds to what is possible and I know part of
what we do is we take that process and turn it into content
that we share on social media. We are going so far as to create
a John's Crazy Socks network that are going to feature shows,
you know, put online that are hosted by or feature people with
disabilities. Just so the world can see.
Chairman CHABOT. Yes, thank you very much.
Mr. JOHN CRONIN. The more people see the better off we will
be.
Chairman CHABOT. And my time is expired but I might just
mention that in our last hearing we had a young man who had
started up a popcorn store that's gone nationwide and worldwide
and universe wide and he has been making a lot of money and
they're doing well and they've hired a lot of people and so
these stories are all very inspirational. And, I mean, we ought
to be doing a whole lot more of this so thank you. Thank you
very much. And my time as I say is expired and I yield to the
gentlelady for 5 minutes. Thank you.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all.
It has been quite inspirational hearing to hear so many
beautiful stories. And so we need to look at ways where we can
improve the information that gets out there because at a time
when unemployment rate is so low, this offers a real
opportunity.
My first question is, have any of you reached out to the
Small Business Administration to see how we can best bring that
information to the small business community? Ms. Geiger?
Ms. GEIGER. We haven't done that in a formal way yet but I
think it's a really interesting opportunity for us because at
Autism Speaks we have actually created took kits for employers
that they can access free of charge. We have training for
businesses who want to learn how to do this and so I think that
that might be a fantastic venue to get more people aware of the
opportunities.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Sure. Mr. Friedman?
Mr. FRIEDMAN. We have worked a little bit with the Small
Business Administration looking for opportunities where we
could collaborate. We host lots of people, two or three groups
a week, at our facility to help explain what we do and how we
do it. We talk about ourselves as an open source business and
we share a lot of what we do. We would be very interested in
collaborating with the Small Business Administration to speak
or to create case studies or to talk to particular
organizations interested in hiring people with disabilities.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Great. Ms. Ireland, have you ever had?
Ms. IRELAND. Yes. We have really gone the route of not
using those sources because again it introduces a lot of
complexity and difficulty and road blocks actually. So instead
my husband and I in our private foundation along on a project
with Autism Speaks some years ago we went around the United
States and visited all these small business. We then ran town
hall meetings in about eight or nine cities, I can't remember
and then we culminated that in a conference in Chapel Hill
where all these small businesses, including the popcorn guy,
came together and it was such a joyful event because it showed
what you can do if you just try. Say you have 5 families and
maybe they saved for their child to go to college and they're
not going to college. Just with that much investment you can
start a business and employ people as we do.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. Mr. Cronin, what are the biggest
barriers your son has faced as a young adult preparing to leave
high school and transition into employment?
Mr. MARK CRONIN. Ms. Ireland refer to the 22 year old
cliff. In New York, we call it the 21 year old cliff. Right.
You finish school and this is kind of my large scale view of
it. We have made tremendous strides in the medical area with
John for example. He had intestinal bypass surgery on day 3 and
open heart surgery before he was 3 months old. That would not
have happened 10 years earlier, right.
We have done a pretty good job in the schools. It can
always bet better. So we have people who are healthy, who are
trained and then they hit that 21 year old cliff and there is
nothing. We have this vast untapped pool of labor. And which is
a great national resource and we are not able to put them to
work. Employers need to be able to see past that first
impression.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Yes.
Mr. MARK CRONIN. To see what the skills that people have as
opposed to what they can't do. And some of that I don't think
we can make them but we have to let them see through example
how this is a benefit and they're not really going to have a
choice because there is this growing shortage of labor and we
have this pool of people that are ready, willing and able to
work and they are great employees.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. Thank you. Mr. Friedman, one of
the common misconceptions about hiring individuals with
disabilities is the need for costly accommodations in the work
place. Can you elaborate on the actions Autonomy Works took to
accommodate its workforce?
Mr. FRIEDMAN. Right. We have discovered that the cost of
accommodations is very low. We have very small accommodations
for people. We have a sensory room where people can go take a
break if they become overwhelmed from a sensory perspective. A
number of people have headphones and so forth but the average
accommodation for our associates is less than $100.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Okay. My time has expired
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady's time
is just about to expire so the gentleman from Kansas, Mr.
Marshall, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. MARSHALL. All right. Well, thanks so much. I just, I
wish John was in here to tell him but, you know, today we are
going to meet astronauts, the Secretary of Energy, the
Secretary of Transportation. I met Peter Navarro, but John
Friedman is the most inspirational person I will meet today.
And that is just the message of hope I would give everybody. I
am so impressed that, you know, this concept that a job brings
value to people and that--and that's what folks want. I have
been able to visit 6, 7, maybe 8 different facilities that give
work opportunities to folks with disabilities and just to see
the happiness, the hop in their step is a great thing.
You know, what else can we do to empower you? We have got
legislation you have talked about. What else can we do to
empower as a Congress to put wind beneath your sails. Anything
else that you all might mention you want to talk about?
Ms. IRELAND. May I go first?
Mr. MARSHALL. Yes.
Ms. IRELAND. Okay. Increase the substantial gainful
activity level at least to the level of those who are blind.
Substantially increase the resource limit for SSI and annually
indexed for inflation. Enact simplification of work incentives
including allowing ongoing presumptive reentitlement to Title
II disability benefits and ongoing eligibility for Medicare for
those whose benefits and for those who lose benefits to be
continue to be employed. Provide cash assistance outside of
Social Security to assist working individuals with disabilities
in meeting their disability related costs regardless of their
income or assets. Enact technical and substantive changes to
the Ticket to Work and work incentives programs to ensure the
law works as intended. Protect the Affordable Care Act and
provide incentives to states to expand Medicaid authorized by
the law. Support the Able Act and bills to expand it. Thank
you.
Mr. MARSHALL. All right. And those last comments were meant
for John Cronin, sorry, Mr. Friedman, if I said you. I meant it
for John, he had stopped out a little bit. Mr. Cronin, anything
else you would add to help empower you all?
Mr. MARK CRONIN. I only half-jokingly say John and I are a
couple of knuckleheads from Long Island running a sock company.
We don't have any special training. We hire people. We make
accommodations that any employer would make for any employee.
The biggest hurdle we see are the limits that our employees
face to work and that is because they're dependent on their
Medicaid and that's means tested and that runs contrary to
wanting people to work. So we have to find the way to decouple
that so that people can work to the fullest extent possible and
still receive the benefits they need to support themselves.
Mr. MARSHALL. Okay. I mean, I would just add that we need
to drive the cost of healthcare down so you can afford to
purchase health insurance for these employees again equal
footing with the other types of----
Mr. MARK CRONIN. Well, there is one thing to know. We do
provide health insurance for our employees.
Mr. MARSHALL. Great.
Mr. MARK CRONIN. But Medicaid provides services that
traditional health insurance doesn't provide that is essential
for people with disabilities.
Mr. MARSHALL. Right. And that is why it is so important
that we prioritize Medicaid dollars for those who need them the
most. As opposed to people who are fully employable but choose
not to be. Mr. Friedman, did you have something you wanted to
add?
Mr. FRIEDMAN. Yes, first of all I would agree with
everything that these folks said. Two other things.
Transportation ends up being a significant issue for many of
our employees. Some of our employees commute as far as 90
minutes to get to work so improved infrastructure for
transportation would allow more people to work at a location
like ours.
And second, the WIOA spending bill calls out investment in
people with disabilities and we would encourage Congress to
maintain the flexibility in those numbers so that we can
continue to innovate and try to create new ways to hire people
with disabilities as opposed to just investing in old ways.
Mr. MARSHALL. Okay. Ms. Geiger, we have got 30 seconds left
if you want to add something.
Ms. GEIGER. Sure. I would just reiterate this idea of
starting early. You know, there are systems and laws and acts
in place and starting to plan for employment in adulthood at 14
is something that parents and people with autism themselves
really need to be aware of and take advantage of the resources
that are available within the school system so that you are
successful when you leave the school system.
Mr. MARSHALL. Thank you and I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. And
the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Evans, who is a Ranking
Member of the Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax and Capital
Access, is recognized for 5 minutes and I would like to
compliment him as well as other members on both sides of the
aisle who had bills passed on the floor of the House yesterday.
Almost all of them were bipartisan and this is one Committee
that actually works together in a bipartisan manner and I want
to commend the Ranking Member for that as well. So the
gentleman is recognized.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
you and the Ranking Member for both your leadership on allowing
all of us to participate so I thank you.
And I do want to stress that I have not met anybody who
doesn't want to work. I think that is very important to stress
because in my district, Temple University, the College of
Education has an institute on disability. They match eligible
people with intellectual and development disability to unpaid
internships at Temple University Hospital and Temple University
in Philadelphia. The goal of achieving long term and part time
employment.
What can we do to promote greater partnerships through
these small business owners and local universities to help
people with disabilities as well as how can we expand this
cross fertilization of local universities expertise to promote
the employment of people with disabilities and small business.
So that is for the panel. Two questions asked.
Mr. FRIEDMAN. The local community system, particularly the
community college system provides a great opportunity to
transition people as they finish transition programs. People
have talked about a 21 or 22 years old and it's a place to go
to start to develop skills. We recently participated in an
initiative with the vocational rehabilitation group in
Illinois, the Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity,
and the local community college to identify people with
disabilities, jointly enroll them in training at Autonomy-Works
and the community college and employ supports from the state to
enable them to transition into jobs. We ended up hiring 10
people at Autonomy-Works and trained and offered
apprenticeships to more than 50 through that program.
Mr. EVANS. Any other person on the panel?
Ms. IRELAND. Yes, I would like to go. When we founded
Extraordinary Ventures it was growing pretty slowly and so I
yielded my board seat to my husband who is a more creative
thinker than I am and he got this idea of tapping into the
social entrepreneurship sort of spirit in the United States and
again I live in a college town, University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill is right there. You have lots of young people.
Analogous to teach for America they want to be social
entrepreneurs. They want to come out. They don't necessarily
have any experience with disabilities but they get to run
businesses and start new business and learn a whole different
part of society and they work a little less expensively than
your typical employee. So I think tapping into the universities
and that spirit of social entrepreneurship amongst neuro
typicals would be very helpful.
Mr. EVANS. Thanks.
Ms. GEIGER. One of the other things that's really important
is getting the word out. Hearings like these, replicating
services, and one of the things we are really working on and
toward at Autism Speaks is really cataloging and codifying
these kind of best practices so that when someone is working in
a local university or a local college they don't have the
reinvent the wheel. Gosh, here is what works really well at
Temple or here is what works really well at another university.
And replication should happen as fast as we can make it.
Mr. EVANS. I would like to go to John. John, how can we
help schools better assist those with disabilities enter the
work force?
Mr. MARK CRONIN. The schools there are two general things
that they are addressing. There is generally life skills and
they do a pretty good job on that. It is more the transition
skills and specific job skills that could be used in the
community so that's I think doing a better job of matching
local schools with businesses so the schools know what jobs are
out in their local business.
I know some of what we do, we host school tours so we have
6 to 8 schools that come each week to visit our office and
warehouse and we host school work experience groups that they
will bring a group in once a week for an hour or two just to
know what it is like to get in the workplace. I think those are
the types of programs that would help make that transition from
schooling to employment.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back. The gentleman from Utah, Mr. Curtis, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. CURTIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member for
holding this hearing. I can't tell you how pleased I was to
hear that there was a John coming to talk about crazy socks.
And Washington, D.C. has lots of problems and one of those is
too many boring socks. And I have been trying to work with my
colleagues to get them to take the lunge and not having a lot
of success and so maybe John can help me. And I believe we have
an appointment later in the day and look forward to expressing
my admiration to him. He was pretty brave to be here this
morning. And look forward to a discussion with him.
Chairman CHABOT. If the gentleman would yield for just a
moment----
Mr. CURTIS. Please.
Chairman CHABOT. I, you might have a better audience with
our democratic friends. Maybe the Republicans, we are just kind
of concerned about our socks----
Mr. CURTIS. They are more progressive with things and maybe
socks is one of those right.
Chairman CHABOT. Maybe wrong but----
Mr. CURTIS. I think John has probably found this but they
make people smile. And they make people happy. I was mayor of
my town back in Provo and I found that by wearing a fun pair of
socks people would stop and talk to me that wouldn't otherwise
talk to me and I found myself pulling up my pant legs every
three or four feet down the road showing people my socks. So my
hat is off to him and what he has been able to accomplish.
I do have a couple of questions and maybe start with you,
Mr. Cronin, and the others please jump in. I have been thinking
a lot about your comments about equal pay and to be honest its
changed a little of a paradigm in my mind and so if you don't
mind I would just like to kind of explore that with you and if
I show some biases in my paradigm, please forgive me because I
am just trying to now understand what you have told me that I
haven't really heard before.
And my assumption before this was that there were a lot of
benefits to providing opportunities for people with
disabilities to work. One of which was compensation but there
were many other benefits as well. Can you just help me get my
arms around that as I would, might have an opportunity to
approach employers and lobby for your requests and help me
understand how, the whole picture of working?
Mr. MARK CRONIN. The work is important. Particularly here
in the States, right. What do we ask somebody? What do you do?
You meet somebody, what do you do? So having the job gives
value and meaning to people. The wage is part of it. The wage,
we don't feel better necessarily by being paid more but if we
are underpaid that gnaws at us and that applies to everybody
because if you are underpaid you feel undervalued. What we find
is people are doing work of real value. And I understand about
the sheltered workshops but they are people doing real value
there too. And we ought to be paying them at least the minimum
wage. That's part of what they're getting, what they should be
getting at work because everybody gets at work.
And we do find that we do have some, you know, we think of
them as they have evolved into special programs for our
differing abled employees because we are always helping them
learn things. So a small thing we gave everybody an email
address even if they didn't have a computer to use and we
showed them, we put it on their phone so everybody would learn
how to communicate via email. And we gave everybody a business
card because that gave them some pride in their job and we make
it pay. They have a discount on the back of it and we have a
discount contest going on.
We run programs now, we think of it as a program, of at
least once a month we have an after hours work program. So last
week we took them to a dinner. We took everybody in the company
to a dinner hosted by the Chamber of Commerce because a lot of
our folks don't have those social opportunities. So here is a
way for them to get out without necessarily mom and dad to
learn how to carry themselves.
The wage becomes part of that. If we want them to be
independent, if we want them to carry their weight in society,
we have to pay a fair wage and so when we turn and say you're
worth less--we have a bad history in this country of telling
people they're worth less than other folks in the country and
we shouldn't be doing that with the differing abled. We should
recognize what they do and one way to do that is with pay.
Mr. CURTIS. Thank you. Unfortunately I am almost out of
time but let me just emphasize that and thank you for helping
me understand that as well as treating them equally with things
like email addresses and the many other things that you listed.
As you explain it it seems so obvious to me but I am not sure
we have all thought about it.
Mr. MARK CRONIN. Its, none of what we do is rocket science.
It's fairly basic. Like I say and John will be back in a
minute, we are a couple knuckleheads from Long Island running a
sock business. And you're just treating people well and it
turns out they respond better and are better employees because
of it.
Mr. CURTIS. Thank you. I am out of time but I look forward
to seeing John and his knuckleheaded father a little in the
day, later in the day. I yield my time, thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady from American
Samoa, Ms. Radewagen, who is the Chairman of the Subcommittee
on Health and Technology is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. Good morning and thank you, Chairman
Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez for holding this hearing.
Thank you all for testifying here today. I think I am going to
go back to Mr. Cronin and direct my questions to you although
they have been partially answered along the way.
I think that John, John's success story is an inspiration
not only because of what he has been able to accomplish but
also because of the challenges he, you, his parents, and so
many other people with Down syndrome have had to overcome to
achieve their aspirations.
In fact, my sister Seena Tiana Coleman, she was born with
Down syndrome and she just passed away at the age of 59,
exactly one week ago on May 1. And we learned so much from her.
We were 13 children and she taught us about the joys over the
simple things in life, you know, and unconditional love. But
soon after she was born, the doctors said that she should be
institutionalized and not to ever put any assets into her name.
Well, my parents didn't pay much attention to that and they
raised her, she got an education and she led a very active life
and an independent life as long as there was an adult not too
far from where she was.
But at any rate, so you have told us about some of the
challenges you faced along the way and whether it was getting
the appropriate education or getting access to the support and
services that John needed. John is your son, right? Or is it
Mark? Yes, you are Mark and John needed to----
Mr. MARK CRONIN. I'm his chauffeur.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN.--to ensure that opportunities that are
available to all Americans would be available to people like
John and my sister Seena.
So I think you have partially answered this but what advice
would you give to future entrepreneurs and their families who
look up to John's success?
Mr. MARK CRONIN. Well, if you look at what we did, you
know, the story is John was in his last year of school. He
wanted, he had already had a job working with me in an office.
He wanted meaningful work. It was plain to him one way to do it
was create something himself. So he came and said I want to go
into business with you. He had a couple of nonstarter ideas. We
could tell you about the food truck. But when he came and said
we should sell socks and he had the name and drawings of a
website, it was really a matter of lets go test it.
There is a lean start up movement in this country that
instead of spending a lot of time on business plans, go and
test it and you will find out. You will find out whether or not
people respond and then learn as you go. When people approach
us, I don't have any magic answers. I encourage people if you
have an idea go and find out. Go and take that chance. The
worst thing that happens is you lose your startup money and for
a business like this, that was a couple thousand dollars.
That's, I wish I had a better answer to, you know, do A, B, and
C but it is, you know, John has to be like any other
entrepreneur. If you get an idea go out and stand in the
marketplace and see if it is going to succeed.
Mrs. RADEWAGEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back and I think on behalf of all the members of the Committee
we wish you condolences for the loss of your sister Seena. As
you may know I lost my brother two weeks ago as well so we have
got lots of, yes, he was my older brother. He was a Democrat by
the way too. I was the only Republican he ever voted for so. I
think he voted for me. He said he did but no, he was a great
guy.
In any event, I think the gentleman from South Carolina,
Mr. Norman is next. He is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. NORMAN. Thank you so much. I appreciate you all, your
being here and this is moving to see your son. We, my office
takes part in the Mason Light program and I am a small business
guy. We run a construction company, development company and
what would help and I know we have tried and we have had hired
those with disabilities. I don't need to tell you it's a
litigious society. The trial argues everywhere and as a small
business owner, we want to find ways to hire people with
disabilities.
What would help from a practical side is to reach out to
the businesses to say you have a particular child with, that
has a talent that may be good at something with construction
which is what we do. Or a particular field of mixing mortar for
a masons job. And then I will tell you it is not going to, I
don't have to have government to tell me what I am going to
have to pay. We will pay over because of just of the nature of
helping somebody.
So that would help in my mind to--as you move forward and
as you want to find ways, all the questions have been asked but
from a practical standpoint, reach out to us and say what need
do you have? Then I have this particular individual with a
disability. He can do I think give him a chance. I don't think
there is a business in this country that wouldn't reach out and
try to accommodate because it is the goodness of people that
wants to help your son but we just don't know a lot of times
and you get so busy running your company, I don't have time to
go to the vocational rehab and see who is there but reach back
out to us. That would pay dividends in my mind. But thank you
for what you are doing. You are bringing things to light that
is very useful and again, it is moving to see.
Chairman CHABOT. Does the gentleman yield back? Yes.
Mr. NORMAN. Yes, I am sorry, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. We
want to thank the witnesses here and the members on both sides
today. I would like to recognize somebody else who is in the
audience here, Chip Gerhardt who is from my district. I don't
know if Chip is the head of the Down Syndrome Society?
Mr. GERHARDT. Former board chair.
Chairman CHABOT. Former board chair. That's right. And
Chip's daughter Ann has been an inspiration to me and all the
rest of Cincinnati over the years as we have watched her grow
up and is now, you know, a wonderful young woman who is
working. Isn't she working at Kroger?
Mr. GERHARDT. Kroger.
Chairman CHABOT. Yes. So she is great and I have learned a
lot just be interacting with her and a lot of other great
constituents of mine back in Cincinnati who have Down syndrome
or autism or a whole range of other challenges in life. And
this hearing is about the most inspirational hearing that we
have had since the one we had about two years ago. And it was
basically the same topic and so thank you. And, Mark, thanks.
You have got a great son. We are really happy that we got to
meet him today and we hope you sell a lot of socks in the
future and I wasn't kidding when I said the guy from down
there, he is, he will keep you in business for a long time on
his own I think.
But in any event, we would ask unanimous consent that all
members have 5 legislative days to submit statements and
supporting materials for the record. Without objection, so
ordered.
And if there is no further business to come before the
Committee, certainly there couldn't be anything that has been
more inspiring than this morning and now into this afternoon.
We are adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 12:08 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]