- THE CHINA CHALLENGE
[Senate Hearing 115-735]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-735
THE CHINA CHALLENGE
=======================================================================
HEARINGS
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON EAST ASIA, THE
PACIFIC, AND INTERNATIONAL
CYBER SECURITY POLICY
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JULY 24, SEPTEMBER 5, AND DECEMBER 4, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Relations
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web:
http://www.fdsys.gpo.gov
___________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
38-989 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS
BOB CORKER, Tennessee, Chairman
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
MARCO RUBIO, Florida
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin
JEANNE SHAHEEN, New Hampshire
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona
CHRISTOPHER A. COONS, Delaware
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
TOM UDALL, New Mexico
TODD, YOUNG, Indiana
CHRISTOPHER MURPHY, Connecticut
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
TIM KAINE, Virginia
JOHNNY ISAKSON, Georgia
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
Todd Womack, Staff Director
Jessica Lewis, Democratic Staff Director
John Dutton, Chief Clerk
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
THE CHINA CHALLENGE
Part 1: Economic Coercion as Statecraft --
July 24, 2018
Gardner, Hon. Cory, U.S. Senator From Colorado...................
1
Markey, Hon. Edward J., U.S. Senator From Massachusetts..........
16
Blumenthal, Dan, Director of Asian Studies and Resident Fellow,
American Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC..................
3
Prepared statement...........................................
5
Ratner, Ely, Vice President and Director of Studies, Center for A
New American Security, Washington, DC..........................
9
Prepared statement...........................................
11
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
``China's Military Escalation: Mattis and Congress Push Back
Against Beijing's South China Sea Deployments,'' The Wall
Street Journal (Editorial), June 4, 2018.......................
33
Letter Sent to Senator Cory Gardner of Colorado from Secretary of
Defense James Mattis and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo,
Regarding Support for S. 2736, The Asia Reassurance Initiative
Act (ARIA).....................................................
35
----------
Part 2: Security and Military Development --
September 5, 2018
Gardner, Hon. Cory, U.S. Senator from Colorado...................
37
Markey, Hon. Edward J., U.S. Senator from Massachusetts..........
38
Mastro, Dr. Oriana Skylar, Jeane Kirkpatrick Visiting Scholar,
American Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC..................
41
Prepared statement...........................................
43
Denmark, Abraham M., Director, Asia Program, Woodrow Wilson
International Center for Scholars, Washington, DC..............
49
Prepared statement...........................................
51
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
Responses to Additional Questions for the Record Submitted to Dr.
Oriana Skylar Mastro by Senator Cory Gardner...................
78
Responses to Additional Questions for the Record Submitted to
Abraham M. Denmark by Senator Cory Gardner.....................
79
----------
(iii)
Part 3: Democracy, Human Rights, and The Rule of Law --
December 4, 2018
Gardner, Hon. Cory, Senator from Colorado........................
81
Markey, Hon. Edward J., Senator from Massachusetts...............
83
Busby, Scott, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Human Rights and Labor,
U.S. Department of State, Washington, DC.......................
85
Prepared statement...........................................
87
Stone, Laura, Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Bureau
of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, U.S. Department of State,
Washington, DC.................................................
91
Prepared statement...........................................
93
Steele, Gloria, Acting Assistant Administrator, Bureau For Asia,
United States Agency for International Development, Washington,
DC.............................................................
96
Prepared statement...........................................
97
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
Responses to Additional Questions for the Record Submitted to
Laura Stone by Senator Cory Gardner............................
114
Letter Sent by Senator Tim Kaine to Mike Pompeo, U.S. Secretary
of State, Regarding China's Retaliation Against the Families of
Radio Free Asia Journalists....................................
117
U.S. Department of State's Response to Senator Tim Kaine's Letter
Regarding China's Retaliation Against the Families of Radio
Free Asia Journalists..........................................
119
THE CHINA CHALLENGE
PART 1: ECONOMIC COERCION AS STATECRAFT
----------
TUESDAY, JULY 24, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee on East Asia, The Pacific, and
International Cybersecurity Policy,
Committee on Foreign Relations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:47 p.m. in
Room SD-419, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Cory Gardner,
chairman of the subcommittee, presiding.
Present: Senators Gardner [presiding], Risch, Young,
Markey, Merkley, Murphy, and Kaine.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CORY GARDNER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM COLORADO
Senator Gardner. This hearing will come to order.
I want to apologize to the witnesses for the vote that is
kind of making this a little bit discombobulated right now. I
will be starting, making my comments, then asking you for your
testimony. Senator Markey is voting on the second vote now. He
will be joining us, making his statements, coming back after
that. And then I will leave and go make the second vote. But we
do not want to delay the hearing any further. Thank you very
much for your understanding and starting this a little bit late
to begin with.
Let me welcome you all to the eighth hearing for the Senate
Foreign Relations Subcommittee on East Asia, The Pacific, and
International Cybersecurity Policy in the 115th Congress.
This hearing will be the first hearing in a three-part
series of hearings titled ``The China Challenge,'' and it will
examine how the United States should respond to the challenge
of a rising China that seeks to upend and supplant the U.S.-led
liberal world order.
The Trump administration has been clear on the scope of the
problem and gravity of the challenge before us. According to
the National Security Strategy, for decades U.S. policy was
rooted in the belief that support for China's rise and for its
integration into the post-war international order would
liberalize China. Contrary to our hopes, China expanded its
power at the expense of the sovereignty of others.
According to the National Defense Strategy, the central
challenge to U.S. prosperity and security is the reemergence of
long-term strategic competition by what the National Security
Strategy classifies as revisionist powers. It is increasingly
clear that China and Russia want to shape a world consistent
with their authoritarian model, gaining veto authority over
other nations' economic, diplomatic, and security decisions.
An opinion editorial in ``The Wall Street Journal'' last
week noted the following. Xi Jinping has proclaimed that China
has both the intent and capability to reshape the international
order. Yet, much of what passes for Chinese global leadership
to date is simply the pursuit of China's own narrow interests.
He has yet to demonstrate the key attributes of true global
leadership: the willingness to align and in some cases
subordinate Beijing's immediate interests to the great global
good and the ability to forge a significant agreement around a
global challenge.
The question before us now is identifying the tools the
United States has at its disposal to counter the disturbing
developments posed by China's less than peaceful rise.
This is why Senator Markey and I and a bipartisan group of
cosponsors in the Senate joined in introducing the Asia
Reassurance Initiative Act, or ARIA, on April 24th. The
legislation sets a comprehensive policy framework to
demonstrate U.S. commitment to a free and open Indo-Pacific
region and the rules-based international order. ARIA provides a
comprehensive set of national security and economic policies to
advance U.S. interests and goals in the Indo-Pacific region,
including providing substantive U.S. resource commitments for
these goals. I am joined in this legislation on the committee
by Senator Kaine, Senator Coons, Senator Cardin, Senator
Markey, by Senator Rubio and Senator Young, as well as Senators
Sullivan and Perdue and Graham.
This legislation has broad unanimous support. On June 4th,
``The Wall Street Journal'' editorial board endorsed ARIA,
stating Congress is trying to help with the bipartisan Asia
Reassurance Initiative Act. The Senate bill affirms core
American alliances with Australia, Japan, and South Korea,
while calling for deeper military and economic ties with India
and Taiwan. It notably encourages regular weapon sales to
Taipei.
The Chamber of Commerce has also endorsed ARIA, stating the
U.S. Chamber of Commerce supports the Asia Reassurance
Initiative Act of 2018 and thanks Senator Gardner for his
efforts to strengthen U.S. strategic and economic relationships
across the Indo-Pacific region. Particularly with regard to the
legislation's economic goals, we appreciate the bill's focus on
closer trade ties, stronger protections for intellectual
property, and a renewed focus on trade facilitation. We look
forward to working with Senator Gardner and the Congress to
advance these important objectives.
On June 21st, we received a joint letter from the State
Department and the Department of Defense formally endorsing
ARIA. The letter, which is signed by Secretary Pompeo and
Secretary Mattis, states: ``We value the ARIA legislation's
reaffirmation of the United States' security commitments to our
Indo-Pacific allies and partners. Furthermore, ARIA's focus on
promoting stronger regional economic engagement and its support
for democracy, the rule of law, and the development of civil
society is especially welcome as part of a diplomatically led,
whole-of-government approach to the Indo-Pacific region.''
I ask unanimous consent--I am going to ask myself.
[Laughter.]
Senator Gardner. We will put this in the record, both the
letter, as well as the editorial.
[The information referred to above is located at the end of
this hearing transcript.]
Senator Gardner. I expect the full committee to mark this
critical legislation up in the coming days, I hope, and hope
for its quick passage by the full Senate in the near future.
When Senator Markey joins us, we will turn to him for his
opening comments.
But I want to welcome both of our witnesses here today.
Our first witness is Senator--is Dan Blumenthal--I almost
gave you a demotion there, Dan--who serves as Director of Asian
Studies and Resident Fellow at the American Enterprise
Institute. Mr. Blumenthal has both served in and advised the
U.S. Government on China issues for nearly 2 decades. From 2001
to 2004, he served as Senior Director for China, Taiwan, and
Mongolia at the Department of Defense. Additionally from 2006
to 2012, he served as a commissioner on the U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, including holding the position
of vice chair in 2007. Welcome, Mr. Blumenthal, and thank you
for your time and testimony and being with us today.
I am going to go ahead and go to the next witness and stall
just a little bit more, if we can, for Senator Markey.
Our second witness today is Ely Ratner, who serves as the
Vice President and Director of Studies at the Center for a New
American Security. Mr. Ratner served from 2015 to 2017 as the
Deputy National Security Advisor to Vice President Joe Biden
and from 2011 to 2012 in the Office of Chinese and Mongolian
Affairs at the State Department. He also previously worked in
the U.S. Senate as a professional staff member on the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee and in the office of Senator Joe
Biden. Welcome, Mr. Ratner. Welcome back to the committee.
Thank you for being here.
And, Mr. Blumenthal, we will go ahead with your opening
statement.
STATEMENT OF DAN BLUMENTHAL, DIRECTOR OF ASIAN STUDIES AND
RESIDENT FELLOW, AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE, WASHINGTON, DC
Mr. Blumenthal. Thank you very much, Senator Gardner, and
thank you very much for your leadership on these issues and
with the bill that you have been working with your colleagues
so fastidiously on, and I am so glad that it is getting the
press it deserves and hopefully the support within the Senate
that it deserves as well.
What I want to do in my short time--and I am sure there
will be a lot of questions--is first, put in context the
Chinese course of practices and its grand strategy, then focus
on some of the most targeted countries of the Chinese course of
practices, including the United States, and then turn to some
actions that we might take both to defend ourselves, but also
to be a little bit more proactive against the Chinese Communist
Party and its coercive economic practices. And I do think we
have a lot of leverage there.
So no surprise to anyone who has been following the
subject: The party Secretary-General of the Communist Party and
President Xi Jinping are following a very robust grand strategy
of the China dream of national rejuvenation, rejuvenating the
nation to become again the Middle Kingdom, the center of
international politics, and perhaps international economics as
well.
And he is doing things to effectuate this China dream.
Building up a world-class military, of course, is known to
everybody who follows this topic, which has proceeded to
advance its unlawful claims in the South China Sea, in the East
China Sea, and increasingly now does operations in India and
further afield in the Gulf. And that military is a big part of
its economic course of strategies as well.
So the military is one tool. Economic coercion is another
tool of this grand strategy. We are waking up slowly to
political warfare, political influence operations that seeks to
build support and target nations for Chinese policies, or at
least defend Chinese policies, united front tactics, the
Confucian institutes, part of the things your colleagues have
focused on as well.
So, economic coercion is the topic of the day. I have to
state that the era of reform and opening in China is over. It
has been long over. It has been over probably for 10 years. And
China is back to being run by state-owned enterprises that are
related to the party. The private sector is diminishing. That
provides the Chinese state with a lot more control over
economic coercive policies.
Some of the economic policies we do not like here in the
United States are not necessarily coercive--they are predatory.
It has to do with the mass subsidization of Chinese state-owned
enterprises that make it uncompetitive for U.S. or other firms
to compete with. It has caused great dislocations inside the
U.S.'s and other countries' labor markets. It has to do with
the outright theft, of course, of intellectual property and
trade secrets. That is theft.
The coercive aspect, I think, when you talk about the
United States, is the targeting of specific businessmen and
businesses to get them to do Chinese bidding. So, for example,
in the latest round of tariffs with respect to what we have
levied on China, the first thing someone like Xi Jinping does
is call on U.S. business friends to get them to go back home
and lobby against any policies, whether you like them or not,
that he does not see in Chinese interests. And if you do abide
by them as a U.S. corporation or European corporation, you will
probably get favorable market access. If you do not abide by
them, then you will not. So, the specific targeting of U.S.
businesses that China thinks can have influence in the U.S.
political system is a major tool.
China uses that same tool very much against Taiwan, which
is kind of ground zero for Chinese economic coercion. And here
I would say it is military and economic coercion. So the
military is used to demonstrate to Taiwan that the Chinese, if
they want to, can cut off Taiwan completely, its economic
lifelines. Taiwan is an island nation and completely dependent
on seaborne trade. The Chinese constantly exercise the ability
to cut off their ability to exercise that seaborne trade. They
also target Taiwanese businessmen to go vote for parties in
Taiwan that they think will be more favorable to China and are
constantly cyber attacking, even just harassing Taiwanese
businesses, as well as attracting talent away from the top
Taiwanese tech companies.
I am running out of time in my opening statement. So let me
just go through.
Japan is another big target. Again, it is military and
economic. We famously woke up to this in 2010 when there was a
fishing dispute, and China decided that it was going to ban the
exports of rare earth materials that were key to the Japanese
economy. That woke up the markets, and there was a market
response to that. But China has shown that it will continue to
do so.
It did similar activities with respect to the Philippines
in a dispute over the Scarborough Shoal. Not only does it use
its military and quasi-military to cut off Filipino and
Vietnamese fishermen from using fishing zones that they had
lawfully allowed to use but also started to ban imports of
important agricultural products from those two countries as
well. And they are very dependent on those exports.
They have cut cables of exploration ships. They have
announced unilateral fishing bans, and they just continue to
put overt military and economic pressure on countries'
exclusive economic zones.
Since I am out of time, let me quickly just offer a few
ideas about how to fight back against this.
I think we have to be more directive against what the CCP,
the Chinese Communist Party, cares about the most and use more
scalpels rather than big jackhammers. So the Chinese Communist
Party has favored state-owned enterprises that are part of
patronage networks. We could certainly ban some of those from
accessing the U.S. market and the European market. Those are
the two markets that matter the most. The U.S. consumer still
fuels the Chinese economy. Ban the ones that are the worst
offenders in intellectual property theft. Ban the ones that
have benefited the most. Ban the ones that are closest to the
party.
Certainly we should consider, in terms of escalation, how
much party elites want their kids to come here to study. And I
am not saying ban all Chinese students. I am saying if you want
the party to stop acting in certain ways, go after what they
care the most about. So if we identify party elites' children
and so forth and they want to come into the United States, we
can certainly take a second and third look at their visas.
[Mr. Blumenthal's prepared statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dan Blumenthal
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking Member, thank you for the opportunity
to testify before you today.
We are slowly waking up to a set of strategies by the Chinese
Communist Party (CCP) meant to enhance Party power internally and
globally at our expense. The CCP has adopted a number of strategies to
strengthen the Party's grip on the country so that it can lead China
back to ``Middle Kingdom Centrality.'' These strategies have been in
place for a while, but have been accelerated by Communist Party
Secretary General Xi Jinping.
The broad strategic context for Chinese economic statecraft
includes:
China's Grand Strategy of the China Dream of Grand Rejuvenation,
which requires:
 Building a world class military to challenge the United States and
Allied military primacy;
 Strengthening political warfare and propaganda campaigns that
interfere in target nations' politics to both block activities
that the CCP does not like and to build more favorable support
for China abroad.
 Advancing unlawful claims in the South China Sea and militarizing
the seas to gain control of them.
 Challenging Japan's lawful claims in the East China Sea
 Building ports and facilities throughout the Indian Ocean
 Attempting to make certain countries dependent on China's loans and
construction projects as part of the ``One Belt One Road''
initiative
I am not including more benign diplomatic initiatives that are also
a tool in the CCP's broader strategy. And, as you can see, when I say
``China's policies,'' I mean those of the Chinese Communist Party. We
do not know what ``China's policies'' would be in a more pluralistic
society that is not completely dominated by a Leninist regime. I
imagine we would get along very well with a China that is not under the
CCP's grip.
Economic Coercion as a tool of the China Dream
Here is some more context. The era of reform and opening is over.
Now, state banks, state-owned enterprises (SOEs), and their associated
links with Party officials are what drive the Chinese economy. The CCP
is willing to accept slowing economic growth in exchange for a tighter
grip on the Chinese economy.
Thus, China's economic coercion cannot be thought of as absent the
needs of the CCP's grip on China, or its strategies for growth and
influence--which as we now know include massive technology theft, the
blocking of market access in key sectors, the control of capital
flight, efforts to make exports cheaper (through subsidies and consumer
repression), and other related measures.
The CCP has extensively targeted the United States and its key
allies in the region with this economic coercion. Let's go through the
CCP's tactics in each of these countries:
1. The United States
The CCP's unfair and illegal economic practices, such as mass
subsidization of SOEs, gives China an unfair competitive advantage.
This, coupled with the widespread theft of US intellectual property
(IP), hurts the US economy. We are slowly challenging them on these
fronts, and while these practices are the most harmful, they can be
separated analytically from direct economic coercion. Instead, direct
coercion includes:
Forced technology transfers. As U.S. Ambassador Dennis Shea
highlighted at the World Trade Organization (WTO) in June 2018,
China's ``forced technology transfers'' remain an implicit
requirement for overseas companies hoping to access China's
domestic market, especially through partnerships with SOEs.
Pressuring U.S. business executives. That same month, Xi
Jinping also spoke with a number of top American business
executives at the Global CEO Council in Beijing in an attempt
to pressure U.S. executives to convince the U.S. government to
ease trade tensions. A major form of coercion against the U.S.
has been the attempts to force U.S. businessmen to lobby the
U.S. government to adopt more favorable policies from China's
perspective. This practice has been ongoing for decades. The
CCP will split Americans into ``friends of China'' who might
lobby on their behalf and others who refuse to do so will not
be granted access to China's massive market.
2. Taiwan
Taiwan stands as ``ground zero'' for China's coercive economic
activities.
 There is a longstanding practice by China of pressuring Taiwanese
business people to vote for Taiwan political parties that are
perceived to be more pro-China or else lose market access or
face economic harassment, and to pressure the Taiwanese
government to accept terms that are unacceptable to the vast
majority of the Taiwanese people.
 As we have seen recently, the CCP is also pressuring international
companies to not identify Taiwan by name in an attempt to erase
Taiwan as a separate entity from the global ``mental map.''
Examples of these include the incited apologies from Marriot
and Delta for including ``Taiwan'' on the list of countries in
which they operate.
 Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA) military exercises in
Taiwan's surrounding waters are meant to remind the people of
Taiwan that the CCP can cut Taiwan off from international trade
altogether.
 China consistently targets and lures away top Taiwanese talent from
its information and communications technologies (ICT)
industries in an attempt to hollow out and dominate these
industries.
3. Japan
The CCP has used its military might and the blocking of exports and
imports to pressure Japan on political disputes.
 China's combined military-economic coercive tools caught the
world's attention in 2010, when a Chinese ship collided with
two Japanese coast guard vessels during a standard fishing trip
near the disputed Senkaku islands. The Japanese coast guard
arrested the Chinese fishing trawler, which lead to combative
rhetoric on both sides and China halting rare earth mineral
exports to Japan. At the time, China produced 93% of the
world's rare earth minerals, and essentially had a monopoly on
these materials. By halting these exports to Japan, Japanese
products such as hybrid cars, wind turbines, and guided
missiles were under threat.
 The CCP also incites the Chinese public into action after
controversial events that paint China in a bad light. Given
China's anti-Japanese sentiment that can be traced back
throughout history, the Chinese population has served as an
effective proxy that the CCP uses to indirectly pressure the
Japanese government into making concessions.
For example, in 2012 as tensions between China and Japan
became heated over the disputed islands, Japanese firms in
China such as Toyota and Honda had to shut down their
facilities after demonstrations and violent protests against
Japanese businesses broke out across China. Such demonstrations
reveal broader Chinese government attempts to ``hold foreign
businesses hostage to its political agenda.''
4. Philippines
The CCP has done the same thing towards the Philippines,
demonstrating a pattern in squeezing neighboring countries to achieve
aims favorable to Chinese interests across the region.
 After the Philippines began challenging Chinese claims in the South
China Sea in 2012, China restricted banana imports from the
Philippines and abruptly cancelled several Chinese tour groups
that were going to the Philippines.
 After the Philippines brought a case against China to the Permanent
Court of Arbitration challenging China's expanding territorial
claims in the South China Sea, China continued to squeeze the
Philippines economically by tightening controls on Philippine
fruit and continuing to cut the number of Chinese tourist
visits to the Philippines. As the third-biggest export market
for the Philippines and the fourth in foreign tourists, such
cuts have a severe impact on the Philippine economy. In
response to this, the Philippines was forced to ``intensify
[its] efforts to diversify [its] trade with other countries.''
5. South Korea
The pressure on South Korea after the deployment of the Terminal
High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) anti-ballistic missile defense
system reveals not only Beijing's pressure tactics, but also some of
the organizations involved and more specific practices used by the CCP.
 For example, when the CCP decided to limit tourists to South Korea
after announcements of the deployment, the China National
Tourism Administration became a key organization in
implementing the CCP's policies. Semi-private corporations such
as Chinese airlines also limited the number of plane tickets
sold or flights to and from the targeted country.
 When the CCP attempts to rally its citizens to boycott or protest
foreign businesses, as it did against South Korean supermarket
Lotte, Chinese state media will actively encourage it.
 As the CCP limits certain imports of foreign goods, the Chinese
Customs agency will not approve shipments, while Chinese ports
will wrap merchant ships up in new regulations delaying their
shipment.
 Local governments and actors have also gotten involved in Chinese
economic coercion efforts.
When the CCP targeted Korean supermarkets in China during a
particularly strained period of Sino-ROK relations, it was up
to the local governments to conduct ``inspections'' and shut
down Lotte for ``fire safety violations.'' Or, ``lone actors''
in China conducted ``patriotic hacks'' against South Korean
company databases to steal data from Samsung.
6. Vietnam and the South China Sea
Lastly, there is the troubling category of combined military-
economic coercive tactics that China employs particularly against
smaller countries in the region. For example, the CCP has used its
military and economic might against Vietnam and other nations that have
ongoing disputed claims to the South China Sea areas. China has engaged
in operations such as:
 Cutting the cables of oil exploration ships in the South China Sea.
In 2012, two Chinese fishing vessels cut cables of a Vietnamese
vessel doing seismic oil exploration work in the South China
Sea.
 Announcing and enforcing unilateral fishing bans. In May 2018,
China unilaterally announced a fishing ban in the South China
Sea for two months, directly affecting the livelihoods of
Vietnamese, Bruneian, Malaysian, and Filipino fishermen.
 Or even directly threatening countries with overt military
pressure, as was the case when China placed an oil rig in
Vietnam's exclusive economic zone in May 2014 and surrounded it
with an armada.
Fighting Back
Thus, China holds meaningful sway over most of the countries it
targets and the scale of China's economy and resources is its biggest
strength. Many countries--particularly smaller countries in Asia that
China actively targets--still hope for access to the China market or
seek to receive investment from the PRC.
However, there are limitations to China's economic coercion,
particularly with respect to the United States. For one thing, China's
economy is more dependent on the U.S. economy than vice versa.
Moreover, ``good money'' is leaving China to be invested here or other
Western safe havens. In fact, one of the biggest complaints by Chinese
elites is that the Xi administration is making it harder for them to
get their money out of China.
Since the U.S. is not dependent on China for as much as we think,
we should have plans for an economic coercion strategy of our own. Some
of these measures would include:
 Limits on the children of party elite's student visas;
 Bans on market access in accord with European actors on the worst-
offending SOEs (for example, those that consistently engage in
forced technology transfers);
 Targeted information campaigns within China in Chinese that
advertise the corrupt patronage networks that exist between the
CCP and key SOEs;
 Global armadas that convoy fisherman and oil exploration vessels to
areas they are lawfully allowed to conduct their economic
activities;
 Enhancing economic ties including the quick signing of a Bilateral
Investment Treaty and cyber-cooperation with Taiwan.
But our approach to CCP economic coercion needs to be more
comprehensive. Besides some of the defensive actions we could take
listed above, the United States should consider a more proactive trade
agenda that targets the countries that will become increasingly
important to the U.S. in the future--Vietnam, Indonesia and the
Philippines--as well programs to help strengthen the rule of law in
these countries so that they are not as susceptible to outright Chinese
bribery. The greatest economic coercion strategy we can place on China
is helping to build free-market trade agreements and free-market
economies in Asia whose standards are so high that a statist CCP will
not be able to join.
Senator Markey [presiding]. Let me just stop you right
there, if I may, Mr. Blumenthal. I think you can probably get
into more detail when we get into the question and answer
period. So let me just stop you right there so we can begin
with Mr. Ratner.
Again, Mr. Ely Ratner is Vice President and Director of
Studies, Center for a New American Security. We welcome you,
sir. Whenever you are ready, please begin.
STATEMENT OF ELY RATNER, VICE PRESIDENT AND DIRECTOR OF
STUDIES, CENTER FOR A NEW AMERICAN SECURITY, WASHINGTON, DC
Mr. Ratner. Great. Senator Markey, Senator Kaine, thank you
for the opportunity to testify today.
Let me start by thanking Chairman Gardner and the other
members of the committee for your efforts to reinforce
America's enduring commitment to Asia. I am encouraged to hear
that the bipartisan Asia Reassurance Initiative Act will be
marked up by the full committee. It is an important piece of
legislation, and I share Senator Gardner's hope for quick
passage by the full Senate.
For the purposes of my opening statement today, I am going
to focus on the increasingly common and consequential
phenomenon of Chinese economic coercion whereby China is using
economic punishments against governments and firms or threats
thereof to advance its foreign policy and domestic political
goals.
My home institution, the Center for a New American
Security, CNAS, released a report in June that represents the
most detailed and comprehensive study to date on this
phenomenon. I would encourage interested members and staff to
read the report in its entirety.
The report examines how Beijing is using economic coercion
to advance its illiberal, authoritarian, and revisionist aims
by employing a vast array of coercive economic tools, including
import restrictions, popular boycotts, pressure on specific
companies, export restrictions, limits on Chinese tourism,
investment restrictions, and targeted financial measures.
Beyond the immediate economic costs, these actions are having a
damaging, chilling effect on the world. Facing the specter of
Chinese retaliation, countries are less willing to stand up to
China, and U.S. allies and partners are increasingly reluctant
to work with the United States on certain diplomatic, economic,
and military issues.
In terms of how best to respond, my written testimony
provides a dozen specific policy recommendations for Congress.
Here are a few highlights.
First, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee should hold
hearings on the costs and benefits of rejoining the Trans-
Pacific Partnership. Rejoining TPP is among the most important
things we can do to advance our economic position in Asia and
erode the effectiveness of China's economic coercion.
By contrast, U.S. withdrawal has done substantial damage to
our standing in the region and is facilitating the development
of a Chinese sphere of influence in Asia and beyond. Rejoining
TPP would renew confidence in the credibility and commitment of
the United States, help to reroute supply chains in the region,
open new markets for U.S. companies, and ultimately reduce
China's economic leverage. It would also provide a mechanism
for coordinating with allies and partners to combat China's
predatory policies.
Second, Congress should pass legislation to constrain
President Trump's ability to levy tariffs against U.S. allies
and partners on specious national security grounds. The United
States will be far less successful if we attempt to address
China's coercive actions on our own. Instead, we should be
working closely with allies and partners, sharing information
on Chinese activities, coordinating on trade and investment
restrictions, and rerouting global supply chains.
Unfortunately, the Trump administration's tariffs against some
of our closest allies and partners have diluted attention away
from China's predatory practices and made it far more difficult
to coordinate on the China challenge.
Third, we have to engender the focus and political will to
enhance U.S. competitiveness. Bolstering our own national
strength and staying at the cutting edge of technology and
innovation are essential to reducing China's coercive capacity.
This will mean continuing to support increases in basic
research, investing in education, pursuing responsible fiscal
policies, developing strategic visa and immigration policies,
and generating a bipartisan consensus on the importance of
rising to this occasion. Succeeding in the China challenge is
ultimately about us, about our own national competitiveness,
not just taking defensive measures to deal with China's
predatory practices.
In this context, I also support bipartisan legislation
cosponsored by members of this committee that mandates the
administration to publish a national economic strategy.
Fourth, the effectiveness of China's economic coercion is
based in large part on perceptions and often misperceptions of
China's ascension and American decline. This leaves a vital
role for greater U.S. public diplomacy, information operations,
and strategic messaging to expound the strengths of the United
States and to cast a more skeptical shadow on certain elements
of China's leadership, government, and economy.
My written testimony includes several recommendations for
Congress in this area, including reconstituting a 21st century
version of the U.S. Information Agency, augmenting resources to
the Broadcasting Board of Governors to bolster China-related
content, carrying out Congress' essential role in publicly
criticizing China's economic coercion, and providing resources
and directing the Department of Defense to develop means to
circumvent China's great firewall and to make it easier for
Chinese citizens to access the global Internet.
Fifth and finally, we need to develop a stronger toolkit of
our own to blunt and deter Chinese economic coercion. Congress
can play a leadership role in limiting China's leverage over
key nodes in the world economy, by developing regulations and
export controls that build diversity and redundancy into
critical supply chains. Moreover, Congress should call upon
relevant U.S. departments and agencies to develop sharper
retaliatory tools to deter and impose costs on Chinese
companies and the interests of relevant Chinese Government
officials. In short, as China deploys more sophisticated,
nimble, and offensive tools of economic statecraft, so too
should we.
Senator Markey, I will stop there and look forward to your
questions. Thank you again for the opportunity to be here
today.
[Mr. Ratner's prepared statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ely Ratner
I. Overall Assessment
Chairman Gardner, Ranking Member Markey, distinguished members of
the committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss a topic of
vital importance to the United States. Before delving into the
specifics of Chinese economic coercion, I want to begin with four
topline observations on the current state of the U.S.-China
competition:
1. The United States and China are now locked in a high-stakes
geopolitical competition. How this competition evolves will
determine the rules, norms, and institutions that govern
international relations in the coming decades, as well as the
level of peace and prosperity for the United States. There is
no more consequential issue today in U.S. foreign policy.
2. The United States, on balance, is losing this competition in ways
that increase the likelihood not just of the erosion of U.S.
power, but also the rise of an illiberal Chinese sphere of
influence in Asia and beyond. If current trends continue, Asia
will see a future that is less democratic, less open to U.S.
trade and investment, more hostile to U.S. alliances and
military presence, and more often dictated by raw Chinese power
rather than mutually-agreed upon standards of behavior. To
avoid these outcomes, the central aims of U.S. strategy in the
near-term should be to enhance U.S. competitiveness and prevent
China from consolidating an illiberal sphere of influence.
3. The U.S. government has failed to approach this competition with
anything approximating its importance for the country's future.
Much of Washington remains distracted and unfocused on the
China challenge. The Trump administration sounded some of the
right notes in its first National Security Strategy and
National Defense Strategy, but many of its foreign and domestic
policies do not reflect a government committed to projecting or
sustaining power and leadership in Asia and the world. On
balance, I would characterize the Trump administration's China
policy as confrontational without being competitive.
4. Despite current trends, the United States can still prevent the
growth of an illiberal order in Asia and internationally.
Washington's ability to muster the necessary strategy,
attention, and resources will go a long way in determining the
character of international politics in the 21st century. The
foundations of American power are strong, and the United States
can successfully defend and advance its interests if only
Washington can manage to pursue the right set of policies.
II. The Phenomenon of Chinese Economic Coercion
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to a broader discussion this afternoon
on the wide-ranging question of China's economic statecraft-including
its Belt and Road strategy, its ambitious industrial policy, and its
continued use of unfair and illegal trade and investment practices-but
for the purposes of my opening statement today, I'm going to focus on
the increasingly common and consequential phenomenon of Chinese
economic coercion.
Economic coercion has become a fundamental part of Chinese economic
statecraft and has had a chilling demonstration effect on the world. If
left unchecked and unanswered, the shadow of Chinese coercion will
continue to undermine U.S. interests not just in terms of immediate
economic costs and changes in behavior, but more profoundly through a
future deterrent effect. Facing the specter of economic punishments
from Beijing, countries and companies are increasingly wary of standing
up to Chinese illiberalism and revisionism, and several U.S. allies and
partners are less willing to cooperate with the United States on
certain diplomatic, economic, and security matters. We already see
these damaging effects in a variety of regions and forums-in the South
China Sea and ASEAN; on human rights, including in Europe; and even in
the United States with U.S.companies, universities, think tanks, and
state and local officials reluctant to speak truth to Chinese power. If
the United States is going to rise to the China challenge, Washington
will have to find a way to blunt this particularly pernicious element
of China's toolkit.
In June of this year, a team at the Center for a New American
Security, the bipartisan national security-focused think tank where I
work, published a landmark study on China's use of economic
coercion.\1\ I would encourage Members and their staff to read the
report in full. The report defined economic coercion as the use, or
threatened or latent use, of economic punishment for foreign policy and
domestic political ends. To achieve such aims, China has used a vast
array of coercive economic tools, including import restrictions,
popular boycotts, pressure on specific companies, export restrictions,
limits on Chinese tourism, investment restrictions, and targeted
financial measures.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Peter Harrell, Elizabeth Rosenberg, and Edoardo Saravalle,
``China's Use of Coercive Economic Measures,'' Center for a New
American Security, June 2018, https://www.cnas.org/publications/
reports/chinas-use-ofcoercive-economic-measures.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although Beijing has employed these tactics primarily over
sovereignty disputes and other particularly sensitive areas for the
Communist Party, the set of issues that evoke Chinese coercion is
growing and the tools are being deployed more frequently. This reflects
China's expanding economic and security interests around the world,
greater coercive power enabled by its burgeoning economic clout, and
Communist Party Chairman Xi Jinping's more assertive, ideological, and
revisionist approach to international affairs. At times, this
international bullying is intended primarily for China's domestic
audiences, seeking to demonstrate the power and nationalism of the
Communist Party.
A series of incidents over the last decade have illuminated the
manner and circumstances in which Beijing uses economic coercion:
Banning the export of rare earth minerals to Japan in 2010 during a
clash over the disputed Senkaku Islands; freezing imports of Norwegian
salmon after Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo received the Nobel Peace
Prize in 2010; restricting imports from and tourists to the Philippines
during a standoff over Scarborough Reef in the South China Sea in 2012;
initiating popular boycotts and placing import and tourism restrictions
against South Korea following the deployment of a U.S. missile defense
system in 2016 and 2017; and imposing restrictions on imports from
Mongolia after a visit by the Dalai Lama in 2016. The message has been
clear: Don't oppose Chinese revisionism in Asia, and don't question the
Communist Party's worsening authoritarianism.
Over the last year, China has also attempted to coerce large
Western companies into toeing Beijing's line on Taiwan and Tibet. For
example, China has been pressing international airlines to stop listing
Taiwan as a separate country on their websites. And in February of this
year, Mercedes Benz was compelled to apologize to China for quoting the
Dalai Lama on a corporate social media account.
Chinese economic coercion differs in notable ways from U.S.
economic coercion. Beijing has largely used informal and extra-legal
measures, providing deniability and the flexibility to escalate and
deescalate at will. Moreover, as should be clear from the examples
above, China is often using its newfound power and influence to advance
narrow national and regime ``core'' interests, rather than to uphold
and enforce international rules and norms. Beijing was content to sit
quietly when Russia invaded Crimea, but has lashed out with economic
punishments when foreign leaders met with certain internationally-
recognized religious leaders or Nobel Prize laureates.
It can be difficult to gauge the relative success of these actions.
On the one hand, China's bullying does have negative repercussions:
publics resent the pressure and economic hardship, and governments have
at times sought ways to reduce future vulnerabilities. It is my firm
belief, however, that we should not overstate the downsides for China.
Beijing is making steady progress at building a sphere of influence in
Asia, even if in a manner that is two steps forward, one step back.
Indeed, even when an individual Chinese coercive action has little
immediate effect, Beijing can still succeed in sending a powerful
deterrent message to other countries making clear that they could be
next. It would be a considerable mistake to sit back and allow these
practices to go unchecked under the assumption that they will
eventually backfire for Beijing.
III. Guiding Principles
Blunting China's economic coercion is a strategic imperative for
the United States. As the United States embarks on addressing this
problem, it should do so with the following tenets:
1. The foundations of American power are strong: We should be
approaching the China challenge from a position of confidence.
Despite all the pessimism about American decline, the United
States continues to possess the attributes that have sustained
its international power and leadership for decades. Our people,
demography, geography, abundant energy resources, dynamic
private sector, powerful alliances and partnerships, leading
universities, democratic values, and innovative spirit give us
everything we need to succeed if only we're willing to get in
the game.
2. Rising to the China challenge is ultimately about us, not them:
Since the end of the Cold War, U.S. policy toward China has
sought to open its society and economy, while also encouraging
it to become a responsible member of the international
community. Instead, we find ourselves today confronting an
increasingly illiberal, authoritarian, and revisionist
power,\2\ and we should expect that China will continue heading
in this direction (at least) as long as Xi Jinping is in
charge. It is therefore no longer viable for the United States
to predicate its strategy on changing China. Rather, how the
United States fares in its strategic competition with China
will ultimately depend on our own competitiveness, and we
should be bolstering our own national strength and influence to
gear up for this challenge.\3\ In short, even as we strengthen
our defenses against China's predatory economic practices, our
China strategy should be focused on enhancing American
competitiveness.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Kurt M. Campbell and Ely Ratner, ``The China Reckoning,''
Foreign Affairs, March/April 2018, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/
articles/united-states/2018-02-13/china-reckoning.
\3\ Daniel Kliman, Elizabeth Rosenberg, and Ely Ratner, ``The China
Challenge,'' 2018 CNAS Annual Conference, June 21, 2018, https://
www.cnas.org/publications/commentary/the-china-challenge.
3. Tariffs should not be the principal economic policy tool against
China: U.S. tariffs raise prices on American consumers and
businesses, invite retaliation, and are unlikely to lead to
significant changes in China's economic policies. Although
limited tariffs are appropriate under certain circumstances, a
better strategy would put more weight on a combination of
highstandard multilateral rulemaking, investment restrictions,
export controls, targeted public diplomacy, sanctions against
Chinese companies guilty of stealing U.S. technology,
investments in U.S. domestic competitiveness, regulations that
encourage supply chain resilience and diversification, and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
closer coordination with allies and partners.
4. We need a comprehensive China strategy across all domains of the
competition: Regardless of the specific topic-Chinese economic
coercion, human rights, or the South China Sea-the United
States needs a comprehensive strategy that enhances U.S.
competitiveness across all domains of the competition,
including military, economics, diplomacy, ideology, technology,
and information.\4\ It would be a mistake to approach our China
policy as siloed and tactical responses to particular problems.
Succeeding on any individual issue will require strength and
skill across all areas of the competition.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Ely Ratner, ``Rising to the China Challenge,'' Testimony before
the House Armed Services Committee, February 15, 2018, https://
www.cfr.org/report/rising-china-challenge.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recommendations for Congress
1. Congress should hold hearings to re-examine the costs and benefits
of rejoining the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).
Rejoining TPP (now the Comprehensive and Progressive
Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership or CPTPP) is the single
most important thing the United States can do to advance its
economic position in Asia, and to erode the effectiveness of
China's economic coercion. Joining a high-standard trade and
investment regime will incentivize companies, including in the
United States, to diversify their supply chains away from
China, thereby lowering their dependence on and vulnerability
to Beijing. Returning to a multilateral trade mechanism will
also renew confidence in the credibility and commitment of the
United States, while leaving China as an outlier as long as it
pursues a state-led mercantilist model. The politics of this
are obviously difficult right now in the United States, but
both political parties need to find a way back to the deal. By
not joining and stewarding an agreement with strong U.S. buy-in
and protections, the United States is inviting continued
Chinese economic coercion and, ultimately, Chinese dominance of
Asia.
2. Congress should constrain the ability of the Trump administration
to levy tariffs against U.S. allies and partners on national
security grounds.
The United States should be working with-not alienating-
allies and partners to address the China challenge, including
sharing information on Chinese activities, coordinating on
trade and investment restrictions, and rerouting global supply
chains. It will be exceedingly difficult to address China's
coercive, unfair, and illegal trade and investment practices on
our own. It was a mistake to lead with Section 232 tariffs on
some of our closest allies, and similarly misguided to threaten
auto tariffs against the European Union or withdrawal from
NAFTA or KORUS. Instead, the United States needs an
international economic strategy that differentiates between
allies and strategic competitors. Congress should therefore set
limits on the Trump administration's ability to levy damaging
tariffs on close U.S. allies and partners on specious national
security grounds.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Peter Harrell, ``Congress must rein in White House economic
national security powers,'' The Hill, June 7, 2018, http://thehill.com/
opinion/national-security/390958-congress-must-rein-in-white-house-
economicnational-security-powers.
3. Congress should play an active oversight role on U.S. economic
policy toward China by mandating that the administration
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
produce a National Economic Security Strategy.
The U.S. government is not institutionally configured to deal
with the China economic challenge. The issue of economic
coercion, in particular, lacks a natural institutional home in
the U.S. government. This dearth of U.S. government
coordination invites further Chinese coercion and increases the
likelihood that U.S. companies will buckle to China's demands.
Congress should use its oversight authority to urge the U.S.
government to organize institutionally for the China economic
challenge, including by passing proposed bipartisan legislation
requiring the administration to publish a National Economic
Security Strategy.
4. Congress should focus on enhancing American competitiveness by
continuing to support increases in funding for basic research,
formulating strategic immigration and visa policies, and
investing in education, among other priorities.
Ensuring America's continued economic strength and
technological leadership is vital to reducing U.S.
vulnerability to Chinese economic coercion.\6\ The U.S.
government should therefore continue its long tradition of
providing seed funding for critical technological
breakthroughs. Additional domestic policies focused on
enhancing American competitiveness will be critical to the
strategic competition with China, including responsible fiscal
policies, strategic immigration and visa policies, skills
retraining for workers adversely affected by China's predatory
economic policies, emphasis on improving STEM education, and
efforts to build a bipartisan consensus on the China challenge.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Elsa Kania, ``China's Threat to American Government and Private
Sector Research and Innovation Leadership,'' Testimony before the House
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, July 19, 2018, https://
www.cnas.org/publications/congressional-testimony/testimony-before-the-
house-permanent-selectcommittee-on-intelligence.
5. Congress should explore reconstituting a 21st-century version of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the U.S. Information Agency.
The United States should revive its ability to engage in
information operations and strategic messaging, which have not
featured prominently in U.S. China policy for decades. The goal
should be to provide a counterpoint to the billions of dollars
China spends each year in propaganda to sell a vision of its
own ascendancy and benevolence, alongside U.S. decline and
depravity. The resulting perceptions of the inevitability of
China's rise and of future dependence on China have reinforced
Beijing's coercive toolkit. More U.S. media and information
platforms could provide a degree of level setting about the
facts and fictions of China's power, expound the strengths of
the United States, and cast a more skeptical shadow on certain
expressions of Chinese influence, including its governing
model, its ideological assertions, and the overall strength of
its economy. U.S. information operations could also highlight
Xi Jinping's deep unpopularity around the world, as well as his
mismanagement of China's economy and failure to deliver on
much-needed economic reforms.\7\ If creating a new institution
like the U.S. Information Agency is not feasible, the U.S.
government will still need more modern and sophisticated
information dissemination tools.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ This would not require the use of disinformation. For example,
a recent Pew Research Center poll found that only 28 percent of
respondents around the world had confidence in Xi ``to do the right
thing regarding world affairs.'' (http://www.pewglobal.org/2017/06/26/
u-s-image-suffers-as-publics-around-worldquestion-trumps-leadership/
#trump-putin-and-xi-all-unpopular-merkel-gets-highest-marks.)
Similarly, recent analysis by the Rhodium Group and Asia Society Policy
Institute on the pace of Chinese economic reforms found that, ``fourth
quarter 2017 indicators continued to diverge from official reports:
fundamental reforms are lagging while stated growth never seems to
change. This does not make good sense, statistically or logically. We
see eight of our ten policy assessments in neutral or negative
territory.'' (https://aspi.gistapp.com/china-dashboard/.)
6. Congress should increase funding for the Broadcasting Board of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Governors to augment China-related content in Asia and beyond.
Current efforts to enhance U.S. government broadcasting and
information operations in response to Russian disinformation
campaigns should be expanded to develop more Chinarelated
content in strategically significant countries. A larger budget
would allow Radio Free Asia to bolster its regional offices and
employ more journalists throughout Asia to report on China's
activities of concern, including those related to the Belt and
Road strategy. More resources for U.S. strategic messaging
could also help U.S. entities to operate with greater
sophistication on China's own social media platforms, such as
WeChat. Alternatively, failing to augment U.S. resources in the
information space will make it much more difficult to succeed
in other areas of the competition.
7. Congress should provide resources and direct the Defense Department
to develop the means to circumvent China's ``Great Firewall''
and make it easier for Chinese citizens to access the global
Internet.
It will be important at times for the United States to be
able to communicate directly with the Chinese people. The U.S.
government should therefore invest in developing and deploying
the technologies necessary to circumvent authoritarian
firewalls, including in China. This would involve both
developing cyber capabilities to disrupt China's censorship
tools, as well as finding new ways for citizens inside China to
access a free and open Internet.
8. Congress should reinforce the Trump administration's public
reproach of China's economic coercion by passing sense of the
Senate resolutions criticizing China's actions.
It is critical for the U.S. government to publicize and
criticize Chinese economic coercion. If the United States
remains silent during incidents of Chinese economic coercion,
it is unlikely that others will be brave enough to stand up.
Public statements by the Trump administration that highlight
and diminish China's actions in this area-including labeling
China's bullying ``Orwellian nonsense''--is good policy.
Official U.S. statements should also show support for targets
of Chinese coercion. Congress has a role to play in naming and
shaming acts of Chinese coercion, supporting U.S. allies and
partners, while also holding private companies publicly
accountable if they are compromising U.S. values and interests
for commercial gain.
9. Congress should task the Congressional Research Service with
publishing a regular report on Chinese economic coercion that
outlines the incidents, costs, and policy tools used by
Beijing.
As part of a broader public diplomacy campaign, the United
States government should make available data on Beijing's
coercive measures to highlight the tools, methods, and
consequences of Chinese economic coercion, limit Beijing's
plausible deniability, and facilitate further study by outside
experts.
10. Congress should support the economic pillars of the Trump
administration's IndoPacific strategy by passing the BUILD Act,
reviving the Export-Import Bank, and increasing foreign
assistance in strategically significant sub-regions.
Bolstering U.S. economic competitiveness in the Indo-Pacific
will require additional resources. Beyond simply criticizing
China's predatory policies, it is vital for the United States
to offer concrete alternatives to China's economic statecraft.
Although the Trump administration has been slow to develop its
strategy for a ``free and open Indo-Pacific,'' certain elements
of the policy are now coming into view. It will not be
necessary (or possible) to match China dollar for dollar.
Instead the Trump administration should-in concert with allies
if possible-pursue discrete development projects that showcase
attributes of transparency, good governance, skills transfer,
debt sustainability, and environmental protections, all in
contrast to China's way of doing business. Trump administration
officials at the working level should be commended for
beginning to advance an economic agenda for Asia despite strong
headwinds. The upcoming ``Indo-Pacific Business Forum'' on July
30 is a good start, and Members from both parties should attend
and participate if possible.
11. Congress should pursue measures to support supply chain
diversification and redundancy and consider a counter-coercion
fund to compensate targets of Chinese economic coercion.
The United States can take proactive steps to reduce the
salience of China's coercive economic power. Building diversity
and redundancy in critical supply chains, for instance, could
help to limit China's leverage over key nodes in the world
economy. Congress can assist by considering regulatory changes
that reduce incentives for companies to source critical inputs
from China. The U.S. government should also study the
feasibility of creating a funding vehicle-possibly in
cooperation with other developed economies-to compensate, in
real time, targets of Chinese economic coercion.
12. Congress should call upon Commerce, Treasury, and other departments
and agencies to develop tools to retaliate against Chinese
firms and the interests of relevant government officials.
The United States government needs more tools to retaliate
against acts of Chinese economic coercion, thereby helping to
deter and, if necessary, impose costs on Chinese companies and
the political interests of relevant Chinese officials. As a
result, Congress should call upon departments and agencies to
come forward with proposals for additional retaliatory economic
measures. Otherwise, there is little reason why Beijing will
hesitate from bullying American firms. Areas for consideration
should include U.S. anti-trust statutes, export controls,
licensing requirements, and investment restrictions. When
appropriate, Congress should also urge the Trump administration
to employ Executive Order 13694, which provides authorities for
sanctions against companies that have stolen intellectual
property for commercial gain.
Senator Markey. Great. We thank both of you for your
testimony.
And because of the roll calls, I was not able to make my
opening statement, which I will do here for a few minutes
awaiting the return of the chairman. And then we will begin the
question and answer period.
STATEMENT OF HON. EDWARD J. MARKEY,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MASSACHUSETTS
Senator Markey. For good reason, Congress has spent
considerable time working on the threats from North Korea
lately. But for those who follow the Asia Pacific region
closely and increasingly for those who do not, China has become
a significant strategic challenge that demands our attention.
We are witnessing a growing Chinese willingness to bend and
break longstanding rules, rules that the United States helped
create in an effort to spread peace and stability across the
globe in the wake of devastating world wars, rules that created
a level playing field and allowed the ingenuity and
productivity of American workers to flourish, creating high-
paying jobs and expanding our economy.
Unfortunately, the Chinese Government is undertaking
coercive activities across the board, economically, militarily,
and politically that threaten to alter this playing field in
China's favor.
So as Chairman Gardner mentioned, we intend to hold a
series of hearings on what these developments mean for the
United States. And today we are focusing on the Chinese
Government's coercive activities in the economic realm.
There are good reasons why we should be closely following
these issues. The Chinese Government has used this economic
coercion against our allies and partners undermining U.S.
foreign policy, and it has targeted American companies directly
threatening the livelihoods of American workers and
expropriating American innovation and ingenuity. Taken
together, these actions are eroding the principles of the
international rules-based system in an unprecedented way.
For example, the Chinese Communist Party is directing
targeted economic pressure against smaller countries to achieve
specific diplomatic goals. It has even been bold enough to
target American allies. In response to an alliance effort to
defend South Korea from North Korean missiles, China began an
economic pressure campaign targeting the South Korean
Government and people. This month's long, high profile campaign
reportedly caused the country more than $15 billion in damage.
Dollar figures like that tend to change minds. And this blatant
coercion should concern us all.
And this is not an isolated incident. China has used
similar measures against other U.S. allies like Japan and the
Philippines, and I fear that we will only see more of this
activity in the future.
It also is using economic pressure to persuade countries to
isolate Taiwan diplomatically and attempting to compel
companies to refer to Taiwan as a part of China. According to
media reports this morning, U.S. airlines are expected to cave
to the Chinese Communist Party's demands for them to refer on
their websites to Taiwan as a part of China. Many foreign
airlines have already capitulated.
And through its Belt and Road Initiative, or BRI, China is
burdening countries receiving infrastructure loans with debts
so extreme that they begin to undermine their own very
sovereignty. According to a recent ``New York Times'' report,
this Belt and Road Initiative amounts to a debt trap for
vulnerable countries around the world, fueling corruption and
autocratic behavior in struggling democracies.
The Chinese Government also is targeting U.S. and other
foreign companies in its bid to acquire technology that China
deems strategically important for its economic development. The
list of American companies on the receiving end of China's
ever-more aggressive economic coercion is long and growing.
In one example, American Superconductor, an energy
technology company from my home State of Massachusetts that
produces chips for wind turbines, partnered with a Chinese
company partially owned by the Chinese Government, which then
stole its intellectual property and used it against them.
These practices have victimized numerous other companies in
Massachusetts and across the country, including many that do
not want to be named for fear of retribution by the Chinese
Government.
This must stop. And the American Government must help
protect American businesses from being bullied by China. And
while the administration has sought to counter some of China's
efforts through tariffs, there are broader strategic objectives
that we need to keep in mind. Across the board, these coercive
measures hurt companies and their workers, damage our
international relations, and create vulnerabilities, and they
damage the international system that keeps peace and stability.
This is not about making China out to be the enemy, and it
is not, as China likes to complain, about constraining China's
rise. But rather, it is about all countries following the rules
of the road because these rules give every country, including
China, a chance to prosper and compete from an equitable
playing field.
So it is of the utmost importance that we stand up for the
interests, principles, and values that we care about. There is
no place in the modern world for powerful countries coercing
others, whether they be smaller neighbors or companies trying
to provide for their workers. There simply is no room for the
old ways of might makes right. We must ensure that we protect
U.S. economic and security interests, as well as the broader
international system that has helped provide peace and
stability across the globe. The United States cannot afford to
cede leadership on this issue.
So I thank you, Mr. Chairman. The witnesses have completed
their testimony, and we are ready to begin a round of
questions.
Senator Gardner [presiding]. Thank you, Senator Markey.
Again, thank you both for your time and testimony today,
and I thank the members for their time in participating in the
committee.
Mr. Blumenthal, you mentioned in your opening statement--
you talked about the economic opening in China being over.
Could you go into a little bit more detail of what you mean by
that?
Mr. Blumenthal. So the period of reform and opening, which
Deng Xiaoping began in 1978 and allowed for the great growth of
China, the great growth of the private sector, private sector
entrepreneurs and brought so many Chinese out of poverty and
benefited the world, ended probably 10 years ago. We now know
the Chinese have gone back to the state sector dominating,
taking out room for entrepreneurs to grow. They have gone back
to things like price controls. They have gone back to things
like lending on the basis of non-market, non-profitable
lending, but rather through patronage from the party to state-
owned enterprises. They certainly have not moved any further
than they were 10-12 years ago on market access, things that we
have been pressing for. They have not stopped subsidizing. In
fact, they have doubled down on subsidizing their state-owned
enterprises, which is probably the single biggest cause of
probably the WTO stalling as much as it has. And Xi Jinping is
certainly not taking China down the road of another round of
market reforms. Quite the contrary, he is statist and favoring
state-owned enterprises and the subsidization of state-owned
enteprises over the private sector.
Senator Gardner. It was the first opportunity I had through
the committee to visit China I think in 2015, and while I was
there, I met with a number of U.S. businesses. In those
conversations, these U.S. businesses said just give China more
time. There is just a little bit more time than now to see if
the reforms will work. And I think you have said it has been
about 10 years now where those reforms quit and then they kind
of went back. They have gone back to some of the bad actions of
the past.
I do not hear the same thing from American businesses
today. I do not hear give them time, just wait a little bit
longer. What I hear now is that the U.S. needs to act on the
predatory economics.
You have also talked about coercion. Could you explain the
difference between sort of coercion and predatory economics?
Mr. Blumenthal. Sure. So the Chinese economic system in
many ways is set up to be predatory without necessarily trying
to fulfill a geopolitical imperative. So when I talk about
coercion specifically, I am talking, for example, about trying
to stop U.S. tariffs to take an example right now. So call on
U.S. businesses--Xi Jinping calls on CEOs of U.S. businesses
and says, if you do not get the Trump administration to stop
these tariffs, your businesses will pay. They cannot do
business here. We will squeeze them out. That is coercion.
The same thing with Taiwan. If you, Taiwan CEO, do not go
back to Taiwan and vote for a more pro-Beijing party, you
cannot do business here. That is coercion. That is trying to
obtain a geopolitical objective.
The predatory nature of the Chinese economy is just
inherent and structurally in the system. The state-owned
enterprises and the state banks lend on a predatory nature and
a non-profitable nature. And the subsidization that they rely
so heavily upon in China in order to export is causing
structural stresses in the world trade system. So that is how I
divide it up analytically.
Senator Gardner. Supports in something like Sri Lanka would
be predatory economics.
Mr. Blumenthal. In that case, it could be both. So if you
are setting up--it is predatory in the sense that Sri Lanka
needs the funding for the port, and they will get favorable
terms at first from the Chinese. But then the Chinese will come
back and call for something in return like access to a port. It
can be coercive if the Sri Lankans do not actually deliver that
port, and they could more and more pressure on the Sri Lankans
politically to deliver. A lot of the BRI cases are cases of
both, a confluence of both those strategies.
Senator Gardner. And I mentioned before that I do not hear
from U.S. businesses just wait a little bit longer to see if
those reforms take effect. But yet, as Senator Markey mentioned
in his opening dialogue, we do see coercive efforts by China on
U.S. airline companies trying to get them to change their
websites, a word on a website, as it relates to Taiwan. And so
that is a coercion tactic. Is that correct?
Mr. Blumenthal. That is absolutely correct. The target
there is isolation of Taiwan using U.S. businesses as a proxy
to get at Taiwan.
Senator Gardner. And what is the ultimate consequence if
U.S. businesses, like U.S. airlines, start capitulating to
China and their demands over changing their website? That is
not the end of it. Right? It continues. There is something
else. There is something more.
Mr. Blumenthal. On Taiwan, there is a multifaceted coercive
strategy. It involves military coercion that constantly
exercises to demonstrate to Taiwan that if they want to, they
can cut their economic lifelines off from ports and
increasingly in the airspace. They are trying to wipe Taiwan
off the mental map of all of us, and that is what they are
doing with airlines and other types of companies, as well as
websites. They are trying to get the State Department and
others--they are constantly fighting with them over how to
mention Taiwan, the Olympics. What they want to do is wipe
Taiwan off the map as a separate entity.
Senator Gardner. I know in both of your statements, you
make recommendations for policies that we could put in place
that would help the United States address the rise of China.
And as Senator Markey said, the goal is not to try to make
people choose between friends but to have multiple friends to
have in a system that actually abides by international norms
and rules of the road that we all agree to. And so I look
forward to getting into those recommendations a little bit
more.
Senator Markey?
Senator Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
Mr. Ratner, where are we in this trade war? Just help us to
step back and get a perspective as to where this is likely to
lead.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture today announced they are
planning to announce $12 billion in emergency aid for farmers
that were hurt by President Trump's escalating trade war. And
obviously, there is going to be a line of other industries'
employees who are going to be showing up looking for aid as
well as part of this war. We might as well call it kind of a
trade defense budget. You need a whole defense budget here. It
is not just going to be for the ag sector. It is going to be
for every other sector, steel, aluminum, you name it. All the
way down the line are industries affected by those industries
who are all going to be looking for some help.
So can you talk a little bit, Mr. Ratner, where you see
this going and what the end game is from your perspective?
Mr. Ratner. Sure, Senator Markey. The direct answer is I
think we are about 20 years into this trade war. So this is not
something that Donald Trump started. This is something that
China started decades ago. And I do not agree with all the ways
that the Trump administration is going about dealing with this
problem, but I do think they should be commended for
highlighting it, and business as usual was not going to work.
So it is important I think.
And one of my critiques of the Trump administration is that
it was a serious mistake for them to lead with the section 232
tariffs against our allies and partners because it muddied the
message of Chinese predatory practices, and that is what we
should be focused on as a country in terms of our economic
strategy as we are thinking forward. That is what the Trump
administration should have been talking about from day one. And
I worry now that the message is very confused with both the
American people and the international community in terms of
where the China economic challenge and China's predatory
practices----
Senator Markey. So you are saying instead of imposing
tariffs on Canadian steel and aluminum that actually hurts many
sectors of our economy, that instead the President should have
been focusing on China right from the very beginning. Is that
your point?
Mr. Ratner. That is absolutely right. The term that I used
to describe the Trump administration's China policy is that it
is confrontational without being competitive. Tariffs are quite
confrontational, but there is a better basket of tools that we
could be using associated with high standard rulemaking,
investment restrictions, export controls, public diplomacy,
sanctions against particularly bad actors, investing at home,
rerouting supply chains, coordinating with allies and partners.
There is a whole suite of economic policies we should be making
here to be more competitive with China. That is what we should
be focused on.
Senator Markey. Okay.
Now, do you see any threat that this economic trade war
could spill over into national security areas as well?
Mr. Ratner. It depends what you mean by that, sir. I think
part of what the Trump administration----
Senator Markey. We need the Chinese for cooperation on many
national security issues. Do you think this could reduce the
likelihood that there would be cooperation where the United
States is looking for it most ardently?
Mr. Ratner. I think we may see issue linkage. Certainly
both President Xi and President Trump have drawn such issue
linkage.
I think one of the questions is what is the goal of the
Trump administration here, and they have not articulated that.
There are folks inside and the President himself who talk about
trade deficits. There are others who talk about restoring
American manufacturing, and there are others who talk about
tech transfer and intellectual theft. And then there are others
who talk about that the goal here is not actually to get a deal
that makes our economies more interdependent but one that leads
to less dependence between us that sees interdependence as the
problem.
So I think one of the reasons why I like the idea that
Senator Young and others have talked about about a national
economic security strategy is that it would force the
administration to be clear about what its aims are and then put
forward a strategy to achieve those aims because we have not
heard that yet clearly from the Trump administration.
Senator Markey. So, again, do you think that in the absence
of that, that we could just wind up with a never-ending cycle
of increased tariffs on both sides that ultimately harm the
global economy perhaps while not, in fact, achieving the
result, which the President says that he is aiming to achieve?
Mr. Ratner. Well, again, I do not think we know what the
result is exactly, but certainly tariffs are a blunt
instrument. They raise prices for consumers and businesses, and
they invite retaliation. And I do not think they are
necessarily going to achieve the types of concessions from the
Chinese on their industrial policies or their economic model
that some are talking about. So to me, they may be a small part
of a broader economic policy, but they should not be the
central tool of our economic approach to China, which should be
predicated on a more competitive strategy by the United States.
Senator Markey. So in terms of what the Chinese did to the
South Korean economy after the deployment of the THAAD system,
hitting it to the tune of $15 billion, what does that teach us
about China and its relationship with national security issues
from their perspective in terms of linking economic sanctions
as a response to those national security issues?
Mr. Ratner. Well, I think what it teaches us, Senator, is
that China is going to use its economic clout to try to achieve
its geopolitical aims, which include dividing American
alliances and eroding the influence of the United States in the
region. So I think that was a very important episode. It was
very revealing.
I think we can talk about trying to incorporate China into
a rules-based order. I do not think that is where we are going
to be in the next several years. I think what we have to do is
pull up our socks, get more competitive, slow down Chinese
momentum in its efforts to develop the sphere of influence.
That is a much more urgent task than a long-term goal of
developing a rules-based order.
Senator Markey. Looking at what happened in the Singapore
summit, there were reports before Singapore that the Chinese
had already increased trade with North Korea, and then there
were comments coming out of leadership inside of China that
they could now increase trade because of the, quote/unquote,
success of the Singapore summit. How do you view that? How do
you view the Chinese in terms of their use of trade or
withdrawal of it as a tool in their relationship with the
United States, South Korea, but with the North Koreans?
Mr. Ratner. Well, to link this question with the earlier
one, I tend to believe that China's behavior vis-a-vis North
Korea is predicated on its own narrow interests as it relates
to the peninsula and its geopolitical interests. I do not think
they are going to be more or less cooperative on North Korea as
a result of U.S. trade policy. In general, they may share the
hope in the long term of denuclearization of the Korean
Peninsula, but I do not think they are particularly interested
in any kind of instability that might come along with that. So
I tend to think they have been looking for any opening to get
where we are today, and they are going to push in that
direction and essentially support the United States and the
Trump administration when it is in their interests and oppose
it when it is not.
Senator Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Senator Markey.
Senator Young?
Senator Young. Well, I thank our witnesses for being here
today.
Mr. Ratner, thanks for your testimony. As I reviewed your
written statement, you seemed to be making a pretty simple
argument with very serious implications. In short, you seem to
be saying we are in a high stakes competition with China, that
China does not accept this rules-based international order we
had hoped to welcome them into back in 2000. The legitimacy of
that order and the institutions that were stood up to oversee
that order are not respected by China. China instead respects
power. And we as a nation have insufficient leverage, it seems,
to be able to effect the sort of change we want with respect to
intellectual property theft, joint licensing requirements,
dumping, and so many other things. What we lack--and this is
language you employed--is a comprehensive strategy.
Is that a fair summary of your viewpoint, Mr. Ratner?
Mr. Ratner. Yes, Senator.
Senator Young. Well, I appreciate your reference in your
prepared statement to my legislation, and I, of course, would
welcome my cosponsorship. I already know that Senator Gardner
has signed on to the national economic security strategy. You
have called on Congress to pass this legislation.
Why specifically do you believe Congress should pass this
legislation? And why do you believe the administration should
produce a national economic security strategy?
Mr. Ratner. Senator, my answer would be twofold.
First, clearly the economic dimensions of the geopolitical
competition are only becoming more important. You know, it is
common to say now that we are seeing the return of great power
politics. The role of economics in the strategic competition
will be greater I think than they were in the past for a
variety of reasons, in no small part because that is at the
leading edge of Chinese power and influence. So that is where
the United States needs, among other areas, to rise to this
challenge. So the economic component is very important and it
is a particular area where our government is not well
configured institutionally and where this particular
administration is not coordinating particularly well. And if we
are going to get serious about this, we are going to need the
government with a coordinated strategy where the different
elements are working together toward the same purposes.
Senator Young. So is it fair to say that you believe that
this legislation and the requirement that this and future
administrations produce a national economic security strategy
would catalyze critical thinking across different departments
of government? They would synthesize their different priorities
and objectives, and that would lead to a coherent and cohesive
whole-of-government economic strategy that would advance our
national interests.
Mr. Ratner. I think it could certainly help, Senator. I
will say to your last point, I am at times disappointed when
the Trump administration is taking actions that do not
represent its National Security Strategy or its National
Defense Strategy, which I think are actually quite good
documents. So it does not solve the problem in and of itself,
but having served in the White House and worked closely with
the National Security Council, these planning processes are
incredibly important for the kind of coordinating mechanisms
you are describing.
Senator Young. But any infirmities that might exist in the
strategy would then be exposed for lawmakers, academics, and
critics alike to remedy in a classified setting where a
classified annex would be required for the security strategy.
Is that how you see this?
Mr. Ratner. Yes. And frankly, I think there are new tools
that the United States is going to need. So this is not just
the process of digging up and putting together, cobbling
together old parts of our strategy. I think we need these
processes to bring together the foreign policy and security
dimensions of our foreign policy apparatus with the economic
and finance dimensions, and that is not something that we do
well. I will say again at my time at the White House in my role
as Deputy National Security Advisor to the Vice President, I
attended the deputies' committee meetings. There was an
economics pillar to those that were run by an entirely
different group of people than the normal national security
process, and it led to relatively incoherent policies at times.
And those worlds need to be brought together, and this type of
strategy process is one way to do that.
Senator Young. What I find coherent in, say, the National
Security Strategy is how they have been able to, through an
established process, look across the State Department,
Treasury, Department of Defense, and other agencies of
government. Their handiwork is synthesized within the National
Security Council. And that is what we envision working hand in
glove with the National Security Council and the National
Economic Council doing a similar sort of thing on the economic
front.
Would there be a signaling function by production of a
national economic security strategy, that is, a signaling to
our adversaries about what precisely our policy is and to the
American public who I find consistently asking back in Indiana,
whether they are farmers or manufacturers or others, what is
the plan?
Mr. Ratner. I think that is right. And just to inverse your
question to make the same point, I think the lack of
coordination, as I say in my testimony, I think invites Chinese
economic coercion because they see those divisions. And I think
it makes it harder for companies that are under the duress of
Chinese economic coercion to stand up for themselves because
when they look back, they are not sure anyone is behind them
standing firm either. So both for our folks and for our
competitors, I think it would send an important signal.
Senator Young. Thank you.
Mr. Ratner, in your prepared statement, you write, quote,
the United States should be working with not alienating allies
and partners to address the China challenge.
Now, look, I acknowledge that our trading partners could
give some with respect to their policies related to trade,
other economic policies, regulatory policies. But our
differences are marginal in comparison to the state capitalist
model that, say, China has adopted.
So why do you believe we need international partners like
the Europeans, like the Canadians, for example, in addressing
China's economic coercion despite the fact that we may have
some differences with those partners?
Mr. Ratner. Well, there are multiple functions that we can
do to address Chinese coercion and some of these predatory
practices with our partners. One, of course, is sharing
information and intelligence, which is a key part of this
effort, and then coordinating on things like investment
restrictions. For instance, if there were a company from
Indiana, whether it was a high tech company that was trying to
be bought by a Chinese company and CFIUS or its successor were
to block that, if the Chinese could then just go to the
Europeans and buy a similar technology or a similar company,
then your company in Indiana would lose out from that. So I
think to maintain our competitiveness and protect our IP is
going to be a team effort with our allies and partners. It is
not something we can do on our own.
Senator Young. And there is additional leverage as well,
which is a related point to yours. As we try and bring China
closer to what we would consider good behavior or a fair trade
model, enhancing our leverage by joining together with the
Europeans or our Asian friends and trading partners might make
sense. Would you agree with that assessment?
Mr. Ratner. I would agree with that, and when it looked
like the United States was going to join the Trans-Pacific
Partnership and that agreement was going to pass, the Chinese
were starting to ask questions quietly at senior levels with
American officials about what they would need to do down the
road to improve their practices to join that agreement, and
obviously, those conversations are no longer happening today.
Senator Young. So lastly, Mr. Chairman, if I could just
follow up on that. I noted that one of your recommendations,
Mr. Ratner, in your testimony was rejoining TPP or finding a
way into the Trans-Pacific Partnership. And I commend the
President of the United States for having indicated that he was
open to that prospect in the last State of the Union Address.
When I was in the House of Representatives, I co-chaired
the TTIP Caucus, the Transatlantic Trade and Investment
Partnership Caucus. And I wonder. Should the United States to
gain more leverage, in addition to the economic benefits, also
be vigorously pursuing TTIP negotiations in parallel with some
of these other efforts?
Mr. Ratner. Yes, Senator. I think if we were part of the
Trans-Pacific Partnership and we knitted that together with
TTIP, we would be in an extremely strong position in terms of
our economic competitive position toward China, and we would
not be having these discussions today.
Senator Young. Thank you, sir.
Senator Gardner. Senator Merkley?
Thank you, Senator Young.
Senator Merkley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ratner, under WTO, is China allowed to offer subsidies
to its businesses?
Mr. Ratner. Senator, I am not a trade lawyer, so I cannot
get into the weeds of WTO law. But I think the answer is no,
and there are several other dimensions in which they are not in
compliance with the agreement.
Senator Merkley. Under the WTO, China is required to do an
annual report of all of its subsidies to different enterprises.
Does it do that report?
Mr. Ratner. I believe not, Senator.
Senator Merkley. So when it fails to do the report, we are,
under the WTO, allowed to do a report on their subsidies. I did
an amendment a few years ago that said if China does not
produce a report, our trade representative will be directed to
produce our report. And before that amendment--the ink could
dry on it, our trade rep under President Obama produced a list
of 200 Chinese subsidies, subsidies we are well aware of but
rarely kind of articulated. So we certainly have an
understanding of massive Chinese subsidies that are not allowed
under WTO.
How about to offer loans at non-market rates?
Mr. Ratner. I believe not, sir.
Senator Merkley. Or to provide land for free as a form of
subsidy?
Mr. Ratner. I think that is right as well as forced
technology transfer and number of other practices.
Senator Merkley. And how about being required--for our
companies to be required--to locate in a particular part of
China where the infrastructure is inferior to other locations?
Mr. Ratner. Correct.
Senator Merkley. A couple of years ago when I was part of a
delegation to China, we were at a meeting of the U.S. Chamber
of Commerce in which many of these practices were highlighted.
But one company in particular stood up and said--and I will not
name the exact company because they probably did not want it
too much publicized at the time. But they said they were
basically told we have to put our manufacturing center in this
far western city, far from the port infrastructure. We are told
we cannot build any size of item that is in direct competition
with the Chinese items. They were told they only could build
larger versions that the Chinese were not yet building or they
would be shut down and shut out of the country.
Is that type of activity by the Chinese legal under the
WTO?
Mr. Ratner. No, sir.
Senator Merkley. And what about requiring American
companies to do joint venture arrangements in order to be able
to locate in China?
Mr. Ratner. Also not part of the agreement.
Senator Merkley. And you are familiar with how these joint
venture agreements are often used as a way to drain U.S.
technology.
Mr. Ratner. Yes, sir.
Senator Merkley. So what does one say to the American
citizen who says China is violating all of these rules, and the
WTO has no mechanism by which we appear to be able to hold them
accountable? Why should we not work intensely to create an
ability to hold China accountable to the structure of the WTO?
Mr. Ratner. I think that was the intention of the Trans-
Pacific Partnership. The WTO was written at a different time.
It was never designed for this type of state-led mercantilist
power, and it was not designed around investment issues and
other e-commerce issues and IP issues that we are facing today.
So certainly, a need for an updating. But, again, I think the
TPP, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, was the institutional
answer to many of these shortcomings.
Senator Merkley. Well, perhaps we can have that debate
another day because I do not share your opinion on that.
But turning back to the flaws in the WTO, what is the
average Chinese tariff on our manufactured goods?
Mr. Ratner. I do not know that off the top of my head,
Senator.
Senator Merkley. Are you familiar, in general, that their
tariffs are significantly more on average on our manufactured
goods than our tariffs on theirs?
Mr. Ratner. They are absolutely much, much higher. I think
the fact that again this is not well known among the American
people or in the international community is a shortcoming of
our public diplomacy and communications on this issue, and I
think we need to think about how we can do a better job of
telling this story domestically and internationally. But
absolutely, there is clear data on this particular finding.
Senator Merkley. And the Chinese are continuing to use a
lot of state-owned enterprises as a strategy to provide
subsidies that are rather hidden.
So under the WTO, if China engages in these practices and
says to our companies, you have to be part of a joint venture,
why do we not say, well, China, you want to locate in the U.S.,
you have to be part of a joint venture. Why should we give them
such easy access when they are putting up such fierce obstacles
to our investments in China?
Mr. Ratner. I do not think we should, and I think these
types of reciprocal rules would be fair and would likely cause
them to change their practices in certain ways. I think the
fact that they have been able to get away with these kinds of
practices for so long and take advantage of our open markets is
what all of us collectively are trying to solve here. But I
think a principle of reciprocity is a great one to apply to
this problem.
Senator Merkley. In my various trips to China, I have seen
China with bicycles. I have seen China with cars, and now I
have seen China with bullet trains, massive new metro systems
being built across the country, roads, bridges. Meanwhile, they
are investing massively in defense. They are proceeding to buy
up strategic minerals around the world. They are proceeding to
buy into a lot of companies in the United States.
Is China eating our lunch?
Mr. Ratner. I do not think they are eating our lunch. You
know, one of the things that I like to remind folks--and I know
you all share this confidence and I put it in my statement--is
that we ought to keep reminding ourselves that the foundations
of American power are strong. And the reason why, if they are
eating our lunch, I think we are losing this strategic
competition among almost every parameter, whether it is
economic or military or informational or ideological, is
primarily because we are not competing. I think if we got our
act together, we would be doing just fine.
Senator Merkley. As long as our market is very open to the
Chinese, and as long as they can pay wages that are much lower
than ours and have environmental laws that are virtually
nonexistent or non-enforced, is it not always going to be
pretty much cheaper for manufacturers to move their
manufacturing to China or to other states that have similar
low-wage, low enforcement, low environmental standards?
Mr. Ratner. I think that is right, which is again--it
sounds like we have differences about the Trans-Pacific
Partnership. But one aspect of that was to increase labor
standards and environmental standards and otherwise so as to
prevent countries from being able to race to the bottom and to
level the playing field for American workers.
Senator Merkley. Well, just as a reminder, we were giving
Malaysia access, which has some of the worst labor standards in
the world, but that is a conversation for another day. Thank
you.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Senator Merkley.
And this discussion on the TTIP and TPP I think is very
important because I think we have laid out a lot of concerns we
have with Chinese predatory economics, Chinese coercion, state-
owned enterprises, market access requirements. There were
reports several months ago about requiring certain people to be
in the chain of command of a business that is located in China.
Obviously, technology transfers are a part of it.
And that is how the administration responded through--that
is why the administration responded through, at least in part,
the tariffs that it has. But I believe a more appropriate
action would have been to get global communities, likeminded
interests, allies together through the Trans-Pacific
Partnership and other trade agreements to put pressure and
isolate China. Do you agree, Mr. Ratner?
Mr. Ratner. Absolutely, Senator Gardner. I think that is
the path forward. I think from a strategic perspective, it is
the obvious solution. From a political perspective, it is more
difficult. But this one is a no-brainer.
Senator Gardner. Mr. Blumenthal?
Mr. Blumenthal. I just have to correct a few things on the
Trans-Pacific Partnership. Free trade is mostly to the good,
but it would do nothing on Chinese coercive practices. We have
a free trade agreement with South Korea, and yet it was the
target of some of the harshest coercive practices in Asia. The
TPP is gone, and it is becoming kind of an excuse to do nothing
else. We have to take on Chinese coercive practices directly in
ways that hurt the Chinese Communist Party, and we know how to
do that. We have enormous leverage over China. China is
stagnating as an economy. China is dependent on the U.S.
consumer. I hope we do not go full bore into a tariff war, but
they will lose because they export more than we do.
So the answer to everything nowadays seems to be the TPP
that, again, may be an intrinsic good in and of itself. It may
or may not. That is debatable. But it is not the answer to
Chinese coercive practices.
Senator Gardner. I think it is important to point out too
that when it comes to South Korea, I believe at least in the
Korean National Assembly--conversations I had with members of
that legislative body--that the retaliation for THAAD cost
around $12 billion to South Korea's economy, including----
Mr. Blumenthal. Right, right.
Senator Gardner. So I think you make an interesting point.
I do want to get into, though, remedies. And, Mr. Ratner,
when you say the foundations of U.S. leadership are strong, I
think that is incredibly important. We should not be walking
around with our heads down on this. That is why I want to get
into remedies.
So, Mr. Blumenthal, then followed by Mr. Ratner, if you
would like to talk about some remedies that we should be
pursuing. How should we be responding to denials of market
access? How should we be responding to theft and forced
transfer of intellectual property? A lot of talk goes into
reciprocity. Is there an understanding of what reciprocity
would look like and what effect it would have, or would the
message be lost?
Mr. Blumenthal. Well, first of all, I disagree that there
is no strategy. For the first time, the National Security
Strategy mentioned China as a strategic competitor. It had a
big part of it that is protecting the national innovation base.
These tariffs are coming out of a section 301 investigation
that took a year and a half that was getting bipartisan
acclaim. And then next week, we are unveiling a big free and
open Indo-Pacific strategy, part of which is building
resiliency in the countries that are most targeted.
So there is nothing you can do if, in Indonesia, for
example, they are open to bribery except to build the rule of
law in Indonesia. The Trans-Pacific Partnership cannot do
anything about that. That is the work that the State Department
is going to roll out next week.
What you can do remedy-wise is, again, go out----
Senator Gardner. But I do think strong standards, though,
in agreements like TPP will help force people to abide by those
standards.
Mr. Blumenthal. It could. It could. It could. But it is
also the work of the State Department, USAID, and things that
you will see rolled out next week in terms of resiliency
within. Any other strategies on top of that are obviously
welcome.
But, again, if we want to--you know, the era, to a certain
extent, of strategies--the Chinese broke the WTO. The Trans-
Pacific Partnership was a response to a broken WTO. The era of
more documentation is over. It is time to go after CCP entities
that are benefiting.
Senator Gardner. What should we do in the case of denial of
market access?
Mr. Blumenthal. So we should pick some of the companies
that have benefited the most from IP theft or forced technology
transfer and through the enhanced CFIUS process that is already
passing its way through the Congress and working with the
Treasury deny them access to the U.S. market in coordination
with the European market. That is how you get results from Xi
Jinping. You target things that he cares about.
Senator Gardner. Mr. Ratner?
Mr. Ratner. Senator, I guess one thing I would say, another
thing that I mentioned in my written testimony, is that I do
think it is important that as we think about any discrete China
challenge, whether it is their predatory practices, the South
China Sea, human rights, et cetera, what we need is a
comprehensive strategy across the board. And that is what we
need rather than simply sort of specific targeted responses
only to these problems. So we need to be thinking about the
entire pie here.
Again, you stepped out of the room, but thank you for the
legislation that you are leading on this, and it is important.
And the fact that it is comprehensive across military and
economic and human rights and governance is exactly what we
need to be doing. So I would be thinking of these in terms of a
comprehensive package.
But as it relates the targeted piece, I completely agree
with Dan. TPP is not the complete answer. It should be part of
a broader answer set. I would start with investment
restrictions. As you know, the 301 decision was meant to
include potentially both tariffs, as well as investment
restrictions, and the Treasury Department--Secretary Mnuchin
came back with nothing on the investment restriction side. And
I think that is quite disappointing, particularly as the new
CFIUS reforms will take time to get implemented. So I would
start with investment restrictions and whether it is related to
reciprocal areas or areas that we are worried about for
economic security or military security reasons, I think we
ought to tighten up, as I know Congress is doing our export
control laws so that American companies actually cannot
transfer their technology even if they want to.
I agree with Dan. We need to think about sanctions against
companies that have benefited from IP theft. There is an
executive order on the books that was put in place during
Obama's second term that has not been used against Chinese
companies, even though Treasury has packages ready to go. And I
think it is unacceptable that we have not employed that
executive order yet.
And I think we need to think about regulations to diversify
supply chains and, again, coordinating with our allies and
partners. It is going to take a whole suite of policies.
But I do agree with Dan that the retaliatory tools are ones
that we need to think about, and if China is threatening
American airlines, our U.S. airlines, then we ought to have
tools in our back pocket, again, whether it is sanctions or
antitrust statutes or licensing agreements that we can say
quietly to the Chinese, if you do that, we are going to do
this. And until they see, what incentive do they have not to
keep going down this road? So we need to be able to strike back
in a way that is nimble and offensive.
Senator Gardner. Senator Markey?
Senator Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
ZTE. President Trump says he wants to be tough on China,
call them into account, but then he tweets out, Commerce
Department should find a way to give ZTE, quote, a way to get
back into business fast. And that is despite the serious
security issues that were raised by Trump national security
officials themselves, that there were violations of American
sanctions, widespread bribery committed by the company to
expand its footprint.
For both of you, do you believe that China is going to, in
fact, receive the wrong message by not imposing tough measures
on ZTE because of its allegedly close relationship with
President Xi and as a result, it is going to escape the types
of sanctions that would have sent a strong message to the
Chinese economic sector that no games are going to be allowed
to be played in the future? Mr. Ratner or Mr. Blumenthal?
Mr. Blumenthal. ZTE is a big mistake. It is a violator of
sanctions and also a threat to U.S. national security.
But I think right now we are focusing a lot on the U.S.
reverberations from the tariffs, not focusing enough on how
much China is suffering and how much of a panic they are in
about these tariffs. So I do not think Xi in any way views
Trump as a partner on economics. I think they idiosyncratically
got a pass on ZTE, but I think Xi very much views Trump as
somebody who is going to harm the Chinese economy if they
cannot export these goods. That is what their economy is based
on.
Senator Markey. Mr. Ratner, Mr. Blumenthal thinks it is a
mistake. Do you think it is a mistake?
Mr. Ratner. I think it was a mistake. I think it is
important to send the message that we are going to implement
our laws and hold these companies accountable. I will say there
are experts who have told me privately that when it comes to
ZTE, if we had taken that action, they would have reconstituted
the company under another name, over which we would have no
penalties and no control and that it is actually better--the
devil you know is better than the devil that you do not know. I
do not know if that is a correct argument or not. I think it is
worthy of consideration.
But separate from that detail, I do think we should be
approaching this as a law enforcement matter. They violated
export control laws, and they ought to face punishment for it.
The idea that they can somehow buy their way out of these
violations sends a really disturbing signal.
Senator Markey. So what are the implications of this,
though? We are seeing this erosion of response from the West,
including airlines which are now all going to be forced to
change the way in which they designate landing in Taiwan. So
what does that mean in terms of this never-ending inexorable
pressure which China is applying in the private sector in order
to enhance its overall leverage and its relationship with
everyone, including us?
Mr. Ratner. I think the question of what does it mean for
the future is the right question because often in these
instances the specific, near-term economic consequence is not
what matters. What matters is that down the road countries or
companies are going to be self-deterred from standing up to
China, and that is what I worry about. And I think we see that
every day of the week now in the South China Sea. It is what we
see on human rights, even in countries in Europe that should
know better. I think, as I said, there has been a chilling
effect from this type of intimidation, and I think if the
United States does not lead the way on standing up to it, then
we are only going to see it get worse and worse as time goes
on.
Senator Markey. All right.
For you, Mr. Blumenthal, China's Belt and Road Initiative,
which aims to position China as the, quote, uncontested leading
power in Asia, may further coerce its neighbors through loans
that they cannot repay. So, for example, in a highly publicized
example, Sri Lanka's government struggled to make payments on
the debt it had taken on as a part of a deal with China under
heavy pressure, and after months of negotiations with the
Chinese, the government handed over Hambantota Port and 15,000
acres of land around it to a Chinese company partially owned by
the Chinese Government for 99 years. Transferring this land
gives China control of territory near India and a strategically
important commercial and military waterway. And this is but one
example of what appears to be a growing trend around the world
with regard to a Chinese leveraging of their economic might as
a way of then extracting concessions that have longer-term
profound implications.
So what are the risks of increased debt burden amongst
companies and countries receiving loans from the Chinese, Mr.
Blumenthal?
Mr. Blumenthal. It is very high. I would also point out,
though, that the BRI is a mixed bag for China. So China is
incredibly indebted, probably 270, something like that, percent
of GDP. And a lot of what BRI is is forcing debt burdened
Chinese state-owned enterprise is to go and invest or do
construction in places that otherwise other countries would not
do and draw down their foreign reserves to do so. So there are
certain cases where we should just ignore and tell the Chinese,
please, go ahead, do construction in Pakistan as much as you
would like.
When it comes to strategically placed countries like Sri
Lanka or Bangladesh or certain countries in the Gulf, that is a
different story because they are, indeed, trading investment on
bad terms for those countries--well, first for good terms but
then with a cost for strategic access and for geostrategic
space.
Senator Markey. Mr. Ratner?
Mr. Ratner. I would agree with most of that. Again, the
Chinese are making progress with BRI in part as a
communications strategy and a public relations win, and it is
incumbent upon us to do some level setting about the facts on
the ground.
That being said, I think it is important also that the
United States put forward its own positive vision. I think the
Trump administration, as I understand, is thinking about ways
to do that with the BUILD Act and strategic use of foreign
assistance. And I am hopeful that they will come forward with
some demonstration projects that put forward what U.S. and
Western development looks like in terms of being
environmentally safe and anti-corruption and skills transfer
and good governance and all these issues. So we need to put
something forward in comparison. We cannot just spend our time
criticizing what they are doing out there.
Senator Markey. Okay, great.
We thank both of the witnesses.
I want to thank you again, Mr. Chairman, for your great
work on the Asia Reassurance Initiative Act. I think it is
something that hopefully can bring our committee and the
Congress together and backing before the end of the year. Thank
you.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Senator Markey.
Thank you to the witnesses. I think, as we wrap this up, do
you have----
Senator Markey. No, no.
Senator Gardner. I think just to leave the concern that we
started with, and that is, what we can do to show U.S.
leadership to make sure that we do not fall behind. In recent
writings in ``The Wall Street Journal,'' quotes from President
Xi, China has its own ideas about how the world should be run
and, as he put it, to lead in the reform of global governance.
Another statement. In at least eight African countries, as
well as some Southeast Asia, Chinese officials are training
their counterparts in how to manage political stability through
propaganda and how to control media and the Internet and that
the China model provides a new option for other countries who
want to speed up their development while preserving their
independence.
And finally this. China has committed to train 10,000
political elites in Latin America by 2020.
All of this speaks to the need for what you have described,
Mr. Ratner, what you have described, Mr. Blumenthal, is U.S.
leadership and U.S. response, whether it is the BUILD Act,
whether it is legislation that Senator Young has described, the
legislation that we have cosponsored together, the Asia
Reassurance Initiative Act, this is a time for U.S. leadership.
And it is a time to stand boldly for our values that have
empowered the world to be a better place, that has lifted up
hundreds of millions of people around the globe up and out of
poverty through a system of rules and standards that do not
favor one country over another, but that give people a chance
to participate in global governance and that global rise. So
now is the time for U.S. leadership.
I thank both of you for your time and testimony today. And
I have a homework assignment here today somewhere, if I can
find my closing script here. Basically we will keep the record
on till the end of the week. I think I am screwing it up here.
We are going to hold the record open till Thursday afternoon.
If members have questions for the records, they will submit
them. I would ask for your prompt response. They will be made a
part of the record.
And with that and the thanks of this committee, this
hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:02 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
----------
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
China's Military Escalation: Mattis and Congress Push
Back Against Beijing's South China Sea Deployments
Wall Street Journal Editorial, June 4, 2018
While President Trump focuses on trade and North Korea, China is
aggressively building military outposts beyond its borders in the South
China Sea. Beijing wants to push Washington out of the Indo-Paci?c, and
the Trump Administration and Congress may ?nally be developing a
serious strategy to respond.
Trillions of dollars of trade annually float through the Indo-
Pacific, which stretches from East Africa through East Asia. In recent
years China has built military bases on artificial islands hundreds of
miles from its shores, ignoring international law and a 2016 ruling by
a United Nations tribunal.
The buildup has accelerated in recent weeks, as China has deployed
antiship missiles, surface-to-air missiles and electronic jammers on
the Spratly islands and even nuclear-capable bombers on nearby Woody
Island. This violates an explicit promise that Chinese President Xi
Jinping made to Barack Obama in 2015 that ``China does not intend to
pursue militarization'' on the Spratlys.
The next step could be deployed forces. At that point ``China will
be able to extend its influence thousands of miles to the south and
project power deep into Oceania,'' Admiral Philip Davidson, who leads
the U.S. Indo-Pacific Command, said in April.
In the face of China's buildup, the U.S. has shown uneven
commitment. Mr. Obama limited freedom-of-navigation patrols to avoid a
confrontation and never committed the resources to make his ``pivot to
Asia'' a reality. China saw Mr. Obama's hesitation and kept advancing.
The growing concern is that China will begin to dictate the terms of
navigation to the world and coerce weaker neighboring countries to
agree to its foreign policy and trading goals.
Defense Secretary Jim Mattis lately has been putting this concern
front and center. He recently rescinded an invitation to the Chinese
navy to participate in the multinational Rimpac exercises off Hawaii
this summer. And at the annual Shangri-La security dialogue in
Singapore this weekend, Mr. Mattis said that ``the placement of these
weapons systems is tied directly to military use for the purposes of
intimidation and coercion.''
He pointed to the Rimpac cancellation as a ``small consequence'' of
this behavior and said there could be ``larger consequences,'' albeit
unspecified, in the future.
One such consequence could be more frequent and regular freedom-of-
navigation operations inside the 12-mile territorial waters claimed by
China. Joint operations with allies would have an even greater
deterrent effect, and the U.S. should encourage others to join. Beijing
will try to punish any country that sails with the U.S., but that will
underscore the coercive nature of its plans.
Believe it or not, Congress is also trying to help with the
bipartisan Asia Reassurance Initiative Act (ARIA). The Senate bill
affqirms core American alliances with Australia, Japan and South Korea,
while calling for deeper military and economic ties with India and
Taiwan. It notably encourages regular weapons sales to Taipei.
The bill authorizes $1.5 billion a year over five years to fund
regular military exercises and improve defenses throughout the region.
It also funds the fight against Southeast Asian terror groups,
including Islamic State. This will help, but more will be needed. This
year's $61 billion military spending increase was more backfill than
buildup, and China recently boosted its defense budget 8.1%.
ARIA also tries to address Mr. Trump's major strategic blunder of
withdrawing from the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal, which didn't
include China. The Senate bill grants the President power to negotiate
new bilateral and multilateral trade deals.
It also calls for the export of liquefied natural gas to the Indo-
Pacific and authorizes the U.S. Trade Representative to negotiate a
deal with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean). If the
U.S. had a trade rep who believed in trade, this could strengthen the
U.S. relationship with Vietnam and the Philippines--countries at odds
with China over its territorial claims and militarism.
The bill is backed by Republicans Cory Gardner and Marco Rubio and
Democrats Ben Cardin and Ed Markey, which is a wide ideological net.
China's rise, and Mr. Xi's determination to make China the dominant
power in the Indo-Pacific, is a generational challenge that will
require an enduring, bipartisan strategy and commitment. A firmer stand
to deter Chinese military expansionism is an essential start.
Appeared in the June 4, 2018, print edition as ``The Other China
Challenge.''
Letter Sent to Senator Cory Gardner of Colorado from Secretary of
Defense James Mattis and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, Regarding
Support for S. 2736, The Asia Reassurance Initiative Act (ARIA)
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
THE CHINA CHALLENGE
PART 2: SECURITY AND MILITARY DEVELOPMENTS
----------
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 5, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee on East Asia, The Pacific, and
International Cybersecurity Policy,
Committee on Foreign Relations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:34 p.m. in
Room SD-419, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Cory Gardner,
chairman of the subcommittee, presiding.
Present: Senators Gardner, Risch, Markey, and Kaine.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CORY GARDNER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM COLORADO
Senator Gardner. This hearing will come to order.
I welcome all of you to the ninth hearing of the Senate
Foreign Relations Subcommittee on East Asia, The Pacific, and
International Cybersecurity Policy in the 115th Congress.
This hearing is the second hearing in a three-part series
of hearings titled ``The China Challenge,'' which will examine
how the United States should respond to the challenge of a
rising China that seeks to upend and supplant the U.S.-led
liberal world order.
During our first hearing on July 24th, dedicated to Chinese
economic coercion, one of our distinguished witnesses testified
that we are slowly waking up to a set of strategies by the
Chinese Communist Party meant to enhance party power internally
and globally at our expense. The CCP has adopted a number of
strategies to strengthen the party's grip on the country so
that it can lead China back to middle kingdom centrality. These
strategies have been in place for a while but have been
accelerated by Communist Party Secretary-General Xi Jinping.
The Trump administration has come to see the same
conclusion regarding the China threat. According to the
National Security Strategy released in December of 2017, for
decades U.S. policy was rooted in the belief that support for
China's rise and for its integration into the post-war
international world order would liberalize China. Contrary to
our hopes, China has expanded its power at the expense of the
sovereignty of others.
According to the National Defense Strategy released in
January, it is increasingly clear that China and Russia want to
shape a world consistent with their authoritarian model,
gaining veto authority over other nations' economic,
diplomatic, and security decisions.
And according to the most recent Department of Defense
report on Chinese military power released in August, in support
of the goal to establish a powerful and prosperous China, the
China Dream includes a commitment to developing military power
commensurate with that of a great power. Chinese military
strategy documents highlight the requirements for a People's
Liberation Army able to secure Chinese national interests
overseas, including a growing emphasis on the importance of the
maritime and information domains, offensive air operations,
long-distance mobility operations, and space and cyber
operations.
So today's hearing will examine these security and military
developments and the U.S. policy options to prevent China's
coercion from undermining peace and stability in the Indo-
Pacific and beyond.
Countering China's less than peaceful rise represents a
grave challenge for the United States' national security. I am
pleased that both the administration and Congress are now
recognizing this reality and taking steps to rebuild our
military to meet the challenges of tomorrow, including those
emanating from Beijing.
In the Senate, Senator Markey and I are leading a
bipartisan effort--Senator Kaine is also a cosponsor of the
legislation--called the Asia Reassurance Initiative Act, or
ARIA, which will set a new course for U.S. policy toward the
Indo-Pacific, including significantly boosting U.S. security
presence in the region and enhancing partnerships to resource
and meet the administration's goal of a free and open Indo-
Pacific.
We are expecting the full committee to consider the
legislation in the coming weeks and passage through the Senate
soon thereafter.
When signed into law, ARIA will become a generational
approach that will put American interests first by reassuring
our allies, deterring our adversaries, and securing U.S.
leadership in the region for future generations.
Now I will turn it over to Senator Markey, the ranking
member, for his comments.
STATEMENT OF HON. EDWARD J. MARKEY,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MASSACHUSETTS
Senator Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much, and
thank you for convening another very timely and important
hearing.
And I want to thank our excellent witnesses today as well
for your willingness to participate in this very important
conversation that you are running, Mr. Chairman. While both of
them are here as outside experts, both have served in
government throughout their careers and have worked to further
U.S. foreign policy and national security interests.
As you have stated, Mr. Chairman, this is the second in our
series of subcommittee hearings on the evolving challenge China
poses to the United States, to our allies and partners, and to
the international system we built together to ensure stability,
prosperity, and equality of all.
For those who follow the Indo-Pacific region closely and
increasingly for those who do not, China's concerted efforts to
institute economic security and domestic policies that advance
its interests alone are significant and demand our attention.
And I think our shared goal for these hearings, Mr. Chairman,
is to increasingly shine a light, a bright light, on China's
efforts in this regard and to try to understand their
implications for the security and wellbeing of us all.
In our last hearing, we investigated China's efforts to use
economic coercion across the board to advance its interests. We
discussed how predatory loans contained within its Belt and
Road Initiative threatened to bury countries in debt and
undermine their sovereign decision-making. We explored how
China uses access to its vast markets to pressure American
companies into sharing sensitive intellectual property or even
changing the way they refer to Taiwan on websites and maps. And
in its most blatant form, we discussed the pure economic
retaliation Beijing is now willing to openly impose against
countries whose policies it does not like.
In the future, we will address China's human rights record
and several recent and concerning developments in that arena,
but today we are exploring China's extensive military
modernization and expansion, as well as its implications which,
given China's size and influence, are potentially quite large.
Beijing is no longer content just to exert its influence
behind closed doors. Instead, it is building an evermore
capable military increasingly able to undermine the
international rules and norms that, thanks to American
leadership, have governed the Indo-Pacific since the end of
World War II.
According to the recently released Defense Department
report on Chinese military and security developments, ``in
support of the goal to establish a powerful and prosperous
China, the China dream includes a commitment to developing
military power commensurate with that of a great power.'' And
as a result, the People's Liberation Army is, ``undergoing the
most comprehensive restructure in its history.'' As part of
these efforts, China is building a blue water navy. It is
streamlining and modernizing its ground forces. It is updating
its nuclear arsenal and developing hypersonic weapons, and it
has built military bases on artificial islands in contravention
of international law in the South China Sea.
These developments, taken together, are significant. In
some cases, the United States should continue to proactively
build its economic and diplomatic toolkit to ensure that no one
military advancement upends the established order.
In other cases, we must respond, but we need to start by
better understanding what these Chinese developments mean so we
can ensure that they do not undermine peace and stability so
that countries throughout Asia and beyond are not physically
bullied and coerced, and that Americans can continue to uphold
and support the fundamental right to which we believe all
people are entitled.
At the same time, however, we need to maintain a realistic
view of the challenges. We are not heading to war with China
tomorrow, nor should we be. Conflict is in no one's interest.
So we should be sober in our assessments and resist the urge to
err too far towards alarmism.
But as the values we hold dear come under increasing threat
from an ever larger and more assertive Chinese military, it is
incumbent upon us to consider thoughtfully how best to ensure
no effort, military or otherwise, undermines the values we and
so many other Indo-Pacific countries hold dear.
To do this, we must invest time, yes; resources, yes; and
above all, leadership. No other country can bring to bear on
this challenge the breadth of resources that we can.
But an America-alone strategy will not lead to the peaceful
outcomes that we seek. Now more than ever, we must work even
more closely with the allies and partners who share our values
throughout the region and around the world. We must show them
that they are not fighting for these values on their own. And
we must do it through more than military might.
It is equally important that we adequately fund the State
Department, USAID, and others so that our diplomats and our
foreign assistance advisors can provide a better, more durable
alternative to quick Chinese inducements.
Only such a multifaceted approach will truly help us meet
the growing challenge that China poses. We simply cannot afford
to cede leadership on this. Doing so risks being confronted
with a situation where defending our values, our interests, and
our allies raises the risk of conflict to unacceptably high
levels. Understanding and then solving these challenges are
upfront investments that will pay immeasurable dividends in the
end.
So I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to exploring
these issues with our witnesses today. And again, I thank you
for your willingness to participate.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Senator Markey, and thank you
to Senators Risch and Kaine as well for your participation.
I will introduce our witnesses. I greatly appreciate your
willingness to be here today.
Our first witness is Dr. Oriana Skylar Mastro, who is the
Jeane Kirkpatrick Visiting Scholar at the American Enterprise
Institute, where she focuses on Chinese military and security
policy in the Asia-Pacific. She is also an Assistant Professor
of Security Studies at the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign
Service at Georgetown University and serves in the United
States Air Force Reserve as a political military affairs
strategist at Pacific Air Forces. Previously, Dr. Mastro was a
fellow in the Asia-Pacific Security Program at the Center for a
New American Security. Welcome, Dr. Mastro. Thank you very much
for your service and for being here today.
Also joined on the panel by Abraham Denmark, who is
Director of the Asia Program at the Woodrow Wilson
International Center for Scholars. Prior to joining the Wilson
Center, Mr. Denmark served as Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense for East Asia where he supported the Secretary of
Defense and other U.S. senior government leaders in the
formulation and implementation of national security strategies
and defense policies toward the region. Mr. Denmark also
previously worked as Senior Vice President for Political and
Security Affairs at the National Bureau of Asian Research, a
fellow at the Center for a New American Security, and held
several positions in the U.S. intelligence community. But most
importantly he is from Fort Collins, Colorado, home of the
great Colorado State University, welcome Mr. Denmark. Thank you
for your service.
And Dr. Mastro, if you would like to begin.
STATEMENT OF DR. ORIANA SKYLAR MASTRO, JEANE KIRKPATRICK
VISITING SCHOLAR, AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE, WASHINGTON, DC
Dr. Mastro. Thank you. Thank you, gentlemen, for giving me
the opportunity to provide testimony today, and the views I am
about to present are my own and do not represent any of those
institutions which you mentioned in your introduction.
The annual report to Congress that the Defense Department
put out is a crucial tool for putting together information and
maintaining awareness about China's growing military
capabilities. And in the questions and answers, I am happy to
answer any questions about specific platforms and developments
and what they mean for the United States' ability to operate
militarily in the East China Sea, South China Sea, and Taiwan.
But today I want to talk about something I think that the
United States Government is less adept at doing, and that is
assessing the implications of these military developments, what
they bode for the future, and the best way for the United
States to respond. Specifically, I want to talk about two issue
areas: cooperation and then competition.
The term ``cooperate'' and its various derivations are used
three times more often than ``competition'' in the 2018 annual
report. And I think this is indicative of the underlying logic
of U.S. military strategy and national security strategy, which
highlights the importance of pursuing cooperation with China,
and in my written testimony, I speak specifically about the
military-to-military exchanges we have with the PRC.
However, I think there is a number of misconceptions that
make it so the United States is failing to effectively leverage
cooperation as a tool of our national strategy. And in my
written testimony, I list five of these misconceptions, though
given time I will highlight two of them here.
The first is that there is a common belief that cooperation
in some areas will lead to a reduction in tensions and perhaps
increase cooperation in other areas. Specifically, there is
this underlying belief that if we cooperate with China on less
contentious issues, for example, humanitarian aid and disaster
relief, perhaps global endemics, for example, that this will
build goodwill and help us move forward in other issue areas
that have more tension like the South China Sea and East China
Sea.
This might be the case of the primary driver of the tension
between the two countries with strategic mistrust, but
unfortunately, it is actually conflicting interests. And so
this dynamic in which we are hoping to build cooperation by
building good will does not work.
So in the written testimony, I recommend that we should not
think about cooperating militarily with China for the sake of
generating this good will or momentum for cooperation in other
areas. If we are hoping China is going to give us something in
return for a concession we make, we need to make that explicit
because those implicit issue linkages never really work with
the PRC.
There is another problematic assumption, which is that
cooperation, and the benefits of cooperation, are going to
outweigh the costs. Now, many people have probably talked about
the costs of cooperation, but not enough people have questioned
the actual benefits. I think there is a lack of consideration
for what Chinese capabilities, tactics, and preferences might
do in certain issue areas. Specifically, there are areas like
counterterrorism, for example, in which I think the lack of
Chinese capabilities, a weakening of those capabilities could
actually hurt U.S. efforts if we invite Chinese cooperation.
And so in the cases in which Chinese interests clash with those
of the United States or where China lacks any relevant
capabilities, I think it is fine for the United States to
continue to encourage Chinese free-riding in these areas.
The other problematic assumptions I lay out in my written
testimony have to do with the global nature of the threat. And
the basic bottom line is, I think, that the United States
should be cooperating more with other militaries outside of the
region to help us confront and provide a united front to China
on the global stage, as well as enhance our contacts with China
outside of the Indo-Pacific Command to other theater commands.
The second area I want to talk about is competition. And
specifically, my main concern is that even though in the annual
report to Congress and in general we are recognizing the
Chinese global influences increasing, we fail to understand
what this increase in influence means. We have a tendency to
mirror image, which means we misinterpret Chinese behavior. And
specifically, I want to talk about something which I label
entrepreneurial actions.
In every case of a rising power over the course of history,
the United States included, Great Britain before that, and the
Mongolian empire--in every case, the rising power will try to
accumulate power in a new way, in a different way and tap new
sources of power to delay a reaction on the part of the great
power. And they do this by creating uncertainty in two ways.
The first is that the United States might not recognize what
China is doing because it is new, and the second is that the
United States might think that the payoffs of that strategy are
going to be low.
I think the Belt and Road Initiative is a good example of
this, and I list other examples in my written testimony. But
when it was first announced, the bottom line of commentators
was ``this was going to be a failed strategy because it was not
economically viable.'' Also, even though now the United States
is paying close attention to economic coercion, this has been a
part of Chinese strategy for over 2 decades, and it was
mentioned for the first time in 2015.
So the fact of the matter is that China is pursuing power
in a new, different way. So even if BRI did not turn out to
have strong military dimensions, it does not mean it is not
designed to limit U.S. power.
So I list a number of recommendations that I think could
help us deal with this.
The first is that we need a whole-of-government approach.
We need a USAID report on foreign aid. We need a State
Department report on Chinese diplomatic efforts in addition to
the DOD annual report.
We need a new type of red-teaming, in which we not only
look at things from China's perspective, but we also look at
how they might be trying to create this uncertainty. We are too
quick to assume the U.S. way is the best way and that China
will follow suit if it can, which makes us blind to new ways
China is seeking to overtake the United States.
The last two recommendations, since I am out of time.
The first is just that the United States needs to be
entrepreneurial in its own right. We cannot just do more of the
same, doubling down on building capability with allies and
partners. We need to think more about building our
relationships with other countries in new ways.
And lastly, I think we need a China tsar of sorts. We need
a point person on this great power competition to ensure the
United States is taking appropriate matching actions.
So the bottom line is that we find ourselves in an
unprecedented situation. China is rising and it has primarily
accumulated and exercising political and economic power for
now. And it is facing the United States, which is more
constrained than any leading power before it. So what we need
is new approaches, new institutions, and new processes to
ensure that this rise does not come at the expense of the
United States.
I welcome any questions. Thank you.
[Dr. Mastro's prepared statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Oriana Skylar Mastro
On August 18, 2018, the Department of Defense released its
seventeenth Annual Report to Congress on Military and Security
Developments Involving the People's Republic of China. Since 2002, the
annual reports have addressed the current and probable future course of
the military-technological development of the People's Liberation Army
(PLA), as well as the development of Chinese grand strategy, security
strategy, military strategy, military organizations, and operational
concepts through the next quarter-century.\1\ Since 2012, the reports
have tripled in length to incorporate more information on China's force
modernization and special topics. This year's report includes five
special topics: China's expanding global influence, China's approach to
North Korea and its diplomatic history and objectives, the PLA's
progress in becoming a joint force, overwater bomber operations, and
Xi's innovation-driven development strategy and the push to turn China
into a science and technology powerhouse by 2050.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``S. 1059--106th Congress: National Defense Authorization Act
for Fiscal Year 2000,'' 1999.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The annual report to Congress is a crucial tool for collating
information and maintaining awareness of China's growing military
capabilities. Its systematic collection of data is a useful resource
for scholars like me, and in this testimony I do not challenge the
facts or assessments it presents. However, the U.S. government
generally is less adept at understanding the implications of these
developments, what they bode for the future, and the best way to
respond. Therefore, in this testimony, I will discuss several
misconceptions about cooperation and competition with China that may
hinder U.S. attempts to deter Chinese aggression and compete
effectively with China regionally and globally. I will also present
recommendations about what Congress should do to improve the U.S.'s
ability to interpret and respond to China's challenge. The bottom line
is that great power competition requires expanding U.S. efforts beyond
traditional friends and allies, and the U.S. needs a whole-government
approach to identifying and responding to the China challenge.
Cooperation with China
The term ``cooperate'' and its various derivations are used three
times more often than ``competition'' in the 2018 annual report. This
highlights the central role of cooperation as a longstanding part of
U.S. strategy in navigating the potential challenges of a rising China.
As the report states: ``The United States seeks a constructive and
results oriented relationship with China. U.S. Defense contacts and
exchanges conducted in 2017 were designed to support overall U.S.
Policy and strategy toward China. They are carefully tailored to
clarify and develop areas of cooperation where it is in our mutual
interest and to manage and reduce risk.'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Office of the Secretary of Defense, ``Annual Report to
Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People's
Republic of China 2018,'' U.S. Department of Defense, iii. Hereafter
cited as Annual Report to Congress 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One way the United States seeks to enhance cooperation with China
is through military exchanges. The annual report to Congress describes
three goals of developing military-to-military contacts with China:
``(1) building sustained and substantive dialogue; (2) promoting risk
reduction and risk management efforts that diminish the potential for
misunderstanding or miscalculation; and (3) building concrete,
practical cooperation in areas of mutual interest.'' \3\ Overall,
military-to-military contacts between the two nations are meant to be a
``stabilizing element'' for the U.S.-China relationship.\4\ In 2017,
these contacts ``focused on risk reduction'' and ``developing the
capacity to cooperate in multilateral settings.'' \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Annual Report to Congress 2018, 105.
\4\ Annual Report to Congress 2018, 105.
\5\ Annual Report to Congress 2018, 106.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In furtherance of these aims, the U.S. and China engaged in high-
level military contacts to facilitate the ``exchange [of] views,
identify common interest areas, manage differences, and facilitate
common approaches to shared challenges. \6\ In addition, the U.S. and
China have engaged in recurring military exchanges through forums such
as the Defense Policy Coordination Talks, the Army-to-Army Dialogue
Mechanism, the Joint Staff Dialogue Mechanism, and the Asia-Pacific
Security Dialogue.\7\ The U.S. and China also maintain functional and
academic exchanges that ``focus on advancing risk reduction,
understanding, and communication channels to promote deconfliction and
coordination,'' in addition to conducting ship visits and exercises to
``promote trust between the two sides and improve the ability to
interact and coordinate in providing international public goods in
areas of mutual interest.'' \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Annual Report to Congress 2018, 106.
\7\ Annual Report to Congress 2018, 108.
\8\ Annual Report to Congress 2018, 108-09.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While cooperation is thus a critical pillar of U.S. strategy, in
practice it comes with at least five key assumptions that must be
recognized and moderated.
First, there is the common belief that cooperation in some areas
will lead to reduced tensions in others. Specifically, this is the
belief that the two countries should establish greater cooperation in
less contentious (but also less important) areas, and that this will
facilitate cooperation in more contentious areas that are currently
driving the tense relationship. This would be the case if the source of
tension were strategic distrust; then greater dialogue and interaction
could mitigate this obstacle. But my view is that the problems in the
U.S.-China relationship are primarily the result of conflicting
fundamental interests, not misunderstandings. Therefore, cooperation in
areas such as global health or humanitarian assistance is unlikely to
lead to breakthroughs in dealing with the critical security challenges
in the South China Sea, East China Sea, Taiwan, and North Korea. This
does not mean, however, that the two sides should not pursue
cooperation when possible, but rather that we need to adjust our
expectations and strategies. In other words, cooperation is not a good
for its own sake, but a means to accomplish specific policy goals.
Recommendation 1: The United States should consider working
more closely with China only when Chinese involvement decreases
the costs and/or increases the likelihood of success of a
particular U.S. policy. We should not cooperate simply for the
sake of generating goodwill or momentum for cooperation in
another area.
The second problematic assumption is that there are more benefits
than downsides to cooperation when it can be obtained. In fact, there
are situations in which the benefits of cooperation outweigh the costs.
Currently, the goal of cooperation seems to be greater Chinese
involvement with insufficient consideration of Chinese capabilities,
tactics, and preferences. In some spaces, like global health, Chinese
involvement is crucial because of the transnational nature of the
threat. But in other spaces, like counterterrorism, Chinese involvement
depends largely on Chinese capabilities and preferences. There are two
situations in which it would be better to discourage Chinese
involvement. First, when China has the capability to contribute but has
goals that conflict with those of the United States. Second, when China
shares the same goals as the United States but possesses limited
capability. This is because in the security realm, operational missteps
can worsen a situation on the ground.
Recommendation 2: If China's interests clash with the U.S.'s,
or if China lacks relevant capabilities, the United States
should encourage Chinese `free-riding' on certain security
issues. Only when Chinese preferences and capabilities
contribute to U.S. policy goals should the United States
actively seek cooperation with China. An exception to this is
when China is already involved, in which case the United States
may pursue cooperation as a means to shape the nature and
degree of its involvement.
The third problematic assumption is that the U.S.-China
relationship can improve only with active cooperation. Here I define
cooperation as the process of working together for greater benefits,
even if each side has somewhat differing interests. But another
mechanism for improving bilateral military relations is coordination, a
situation in which states may be agnostic about which policy to adopt,
but would be better off if they did the same thing (for example, it
does not matter which side of the road we drive on, only that we all
choose the same side). And then there is deconfliction, a situation in
which each side simply ensures that its independent policies have no
negative impact on the other side. We unnecessarily narrow the
prospects for U.S.-China relations when we focus only on cooperation.
Recommendation 3: The U.S. should welcome the use of use of
deconfliction and coordination with the PLA, rather than always
seeking only active cooperation on security issues.
Deconfliction, for example, is desirable for military operations to
ensure that our forces do not unnecessarily come into contact with each
other in the South China Sea or the East China Sea, or in the event of
a crisis on the Korean Peninsula. Notification of operations and
exercises, coupled with military dialogues and exchanges about the
nature of both sides' military operations, could reduce the likelihood
of an accident. With coordination, there is a lower likelihood of
operational risk if China is operating separately from the United
States. The Gulf of Aden operation is a good example of coordination:
China coordinates with the international community to ensure that its
participation contributes to the broader goals, but its navy does not
conduct operations with other navies.
A fourth troublesome assumption is that there are generally laws or
norms against which we can measure Chinese behavior and hold China
accountable. According to the annual report, ``the military-to military
relationship seeks to encourage China to act in a manner consistent
with international law and norms.'' \9\ But in reality, certain aspects
of the international order are nonexistent, weak, unstable, ambiguous,
or incomplete. Cybersecurity norms are one example. And China will
exploit this uncertainty to its benefit. In such cases, the U.S. must
work hard to forge an informal consensus among countries and present
that united front to China on the global stage.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Annual Report to Congress 2018, 105.
Recommendation 4: In addition to documenting the bilateral
U.S.-China exchanges, the Defense Department should report on
military contacts with other countries and the ways they are
being used to establish broader consensus on contentious issues
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
in the U.S.-China relationship.
In the past year, the United States has had high-level military-to-
military exchanges in which China would invariably have been a central
topic of discussion - but the outcomes of such exchanges are not
systematically collated with reference to China. Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff Gen. Joseph Dunford visited his Thai military
counterparts in February to discuss ``opportunities to strengthen the
alliance and interoperability between the two militaries,'' and with
Australian military officials in April to discuss ``the global threat
of terrorism and security in the Pacific region.'' \10\ Dunford also
visited South Korea in October 2017 to discuss the North Korean
crisis.\11\ The Commander of U.S. Pacific Command visited the
Philippines in August 2017, followed by a visit from the Chief of Staff
for the Armed Forces of the Philippines to Pacific Command headquarters
in October of that year.\12\ New Zealand and Vietnam have also received
visits from high-level U.S. military officials in the past year.\13\
The United States and India have established an ongoing Military
Cooperation Group that will be ``the primary forum for developing,
implementing, and refining a 5-year mil-to-mil plan, in support of the
emerging 2+2 U.S.-India ministerial dialogue and the Defense Policy
Group.'' \14\ However, none of the readouts from these bilateral
military contacts refer to China as a topic of discussion (although
many refer to the topic of regional security).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ ``Readout of Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen.
Dunford's Visit With Thailand Counterpart Royal Thai Armed Forces
General Tarnchaiyan Srisuwan,'' Joint Chiefs of Staff, February 7,
2018, http://www.jcs.mil/Media/News/News-Display/Article/1435026/
readout-of-chairman-of-the-joint-chiefs-of-staff-gen-dunfords-visit-
with-thaila/; ``Readout of Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen.
Dunford's Visit with Australian Counterpart Chief of the Defence Force
Air Chief Marshal Binskin,'' Joint Chiefs of Staff, April 20, 2018,
http://www.jcs.mil/Media/News/News-Display/Article/1499720/readout-of-
chairman-of-the-joint-chiefs-of-staff-gen-dunfords-visit-with-austra/.
\11\ Tara Copp, ``Dunford, Mattis Visit South Korea Amid Heightened
Tensions,'' Military Times, October 26, 2017, https://
www.militarytimes.com/news/your-military/2017/10/26/dunford-mattis-in-
south-korea-amid-heightened-tensions/.
\12\ ``Commander of U.S. Pacific Command Visits the Philippines,''
U.S. Embassy in the Philippines, August 24, 2017, http://www.pacom.mil/
Media/News/News-Article-View/Article/1289109/commander-of-us-pacific-
command-visits-the-philippines/; James D. Mullen, ``Armed Forces of the
Philippines and U.S. Pacific Command Reinforce `Historic Alliance,'''
U.S. Pacific Command, October 2, 2017, http://www.pacom.mil/Media/News/
News-Article-View/Article/1331886/armed-forces-of-the-philippines-and-
us-pacific-command-reinforce-historic-allia/.
\13\ ``Commander U.S. INDOPACOM Visits New Zealand,'' U.S. Embassy
& Consulate in New Zealand, August 17, 2018, https://nz.usembassy.gov/
commander-u-s-indopacom-visits-new-zealand/; ``COMPACAF Visit to
Vietnam Affirms Growing Partnership,'' U.S. Indo-Pacific Command,
December 21, 2017, http://www.pacom.mil/Media/News/News-Article-View/
Article/1402716/compacaf-visit-to-vietnam-affirms-growing-partnership/.
\14\ Cassandra Gesecki, ``Readout of the 16th U.S.-India Military
Cooperation Group,'' U.S. Indo-Pacific Command, November 30, 2017,
http://www.pacom.mil/Media/News/News-Article-View/Article/1384848/
readout-of-16th-us-india-military-cooperation-group/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fifth, the U.S. has traditionally considered China an actor only in
the Indo-Pacific, when in fact it is an increasingly global actor. As a
corollary, the scope of U.S.-China military exchanges remains largely
confined to bilateral issues, when in fact the PLA increasingly has a
routine global presence. For example, it is likely that in the future
U.S. naval forces will have greater (or even routine) interaction with
the PLAN in the Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea, and that U.S.
ground forces will increasingly encounter PLA ground forces through
peacekeeping actions and potentially in counterterrorism and stability
operations.
Recommendation 5: U.S.-China military exchanges should not be
limited to U.S. Indo-Pacific Command; they should include other
relevant geographic combatant commands, such as Central Command
and Africa Command. These exchanges should focus on confidence-
building and awareness of operational methods to mitigate the
risk of unintended consequences or crises.
Competition with China
China's expanding global influence is changing the contours of
great power competition. With millions of Chinese nationals overseas
and hundreds of companies doing business abroad, it is not surprising
that one mission of the PLA is to secure Chinese interests abroad. \15\
The 2018 DOD annual report to Congress notes that China's
``international interests have grown,'' and that its military
modernization is ``more focused on investments and infrastructure to
support a range of missions beyond China's periphery, including power
projection, sea lane security, counterpiracy, peacekeeping,
humanitarian assistance/disaster relief (HA/DR), and noncombatant
evacuation operations.'' \16\ The 2018 report also predicts that China
will look to follow its establishment of a base in Djibouti by
expanding its military logistics agreements with friendly countries
around the world.\17\ China's growing global mission is also seen in
PLAN's mission expansion to include ``open seas protection'' in
addition to its previous limited focus on ``offshore waters defense.''
\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Annual Report to Congress 2018, ii. For more on how overseas
interests drive Chinese military modernization, see Oriana Skylar
Mastro, ``China Can't Stay Home,'' National Interest, November/December
2014: 38-45.
\16\ Annual Report to Congress 2018, ii.
\17\ Annual Report to Congress 2018, ii-iii.
\18\ Annual Report to Congress 2018, 46.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There are, however, a range of other Chinese activities that may
portend different forms or arenas of competition in the future. The
2018 DoD report recognizes that China's trillion-dollar Belt and Road
Initiative (BRI), which has already funded serious projects across
Africa and Asia, is part of an effort to ``leverage China's growing
economic, diplomatic, and military clout to establish regional
preeminence and expand the country's international influence.'' The
report notes that countries participating in the BRI might ``develop
economic dependence on Chinese capital, which China could leverage to
achieve its interests.'' \19\ On the face of things, the Chinese are
using this economic initiative to build infrastructure for developing
countries. But the money comes with strings attached. Many of these
developing nations are susceptible to Chinese influence on the
political, military, and economic levels. For example, in July 2017,
Sri Lanka and China signed a 99-year lease for the Hambantota Port,
which is both a militarily and economically strategic location in the
Indian Ocean.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Annual Report to Congress 2018, i.
\20\ Maria Abi-Habib, ``How China Got Sri Lanka to Cough Up a
Port,'' The New York Times, June 25, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/
2018/06/25/world/asia/china-sri-lanka-port.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given our tendency to mirror-image, we may misinterpret Chinese
behavior and craft ineffective policy responses as a result. Over the
course of history, great powers have relied on a particular model of
interaction with other states to accumulate, exercise, and maintain
power. The Mongol empire connected lands through trade for the first
time to fuel its growth; the Qing dynasty built a tributary system;
Great Britain built an empire of colonies; the Soviet Union expanded by
land, creating a Communist bloc in Eastern Europe and various spheres
of influence around the world; the United States established an
institutionalized order and a global military presence. In the same
way, China is accumulating and exercising power in a way that is
different from that used by the United States.
These examples highlight a common feature of countries that
successfully rose to great power status: entrepreneurial actions. A
rising power is entrepreneurial if it looks for new sources of power
and accumulates and exercises power in a way not previously attempted.
There are many types of actions that could be considered
entrepreneurial. A country can introduce new types of international
organizations, provide new services or benefits to other countries, or
increase influence in a different geographic area. A rising power can
also attempt to do something that other countries do, such as provide
foreign aid, but do it in a different, more efficient way. Lastly, like
corporations, countries can identify supply shortages and respond to
them by providing knowledge, products, or services that the incumbent
power cannot or will not supply.
China has, in recent years, displayed an effective entrepreneurial
strategy. The BRI is the centerpiece of its strategy to accumulate and
exercise power in a way that diverges from historical patterns and that
therefore does not elicit a proportionate backlash. China would
probably have met greater resistance if it sought to build colonies, as
Britain did in the nineteenth century, or to establish a global
institutional framework, as the U.S. did in the twentieth. Instead,
China has built influence in novel ways. Its provision of advice to
autocrats on best practices in internal surveillance and its provision
of aid without any strings attached are good examples of this type of
entrepreneurial action.\21\ Delaying military modernization and then
focusing on asymmetric defensive capabilities, coupled with conducting
nonthreatening military operations such as the UN peacekeeping and
antipiracy missions in the Gulf of Aden, have also been innovative ways
to create ambiguity about its intentions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ This discussion on types of entrepreneurship is inspired by
Curtis M. Grimm, Hun Lee, and Ken G. Smith, Strategy as Action:
Competitive Dynamics and Competitive Advantage (Oxford University
Press, 2006), 112.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Entrepreneurial action allows China to accumulate power and
influence without triggering a strong response, because it creates
uncertainty that hinders the U.S.'s ability to respond. This
uncertainty is about the nature of the action itself - an action may go
undetected because the United States understands power accumulation
according to its methods and therefore is looking for actions similar
to its own. For example, the DoD is looking for indicators that ``China
require[s] access to selected foreign ports to pre-position the
necessary logistics support to sustain naval deployments,'' \22\
because this is how the U.S. projects power, failing to realize that
China may seek to strengthen its position in a different way. In other
words, even if the BRI did not turn out to have strong military
dimensions, that does not mean it is not designed to limit U.S.
military power. China could use its economic clout to more efficiently
constrain the U.S. Also, even though China has overseas interests, it
may not pursue a global military presence like the U.S.'s, choosing
instead to rely primarily on local authorities to protect its
interests.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Annual Report to Congress 2018, 111.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
China's entrepreneurial actions may also delay a U.S. response if
the U.S. is skeptical about whether these actions will be successful.
When the BRI was first announced, for example, many commented that the
initiative was likely to fail. The BRI's infrastructure development is
carried out by Chinese state enterprises, which do not fear bankruptcy
because they expect to be bailed out by the government. Thus, these
Chinese firms are economically and politically incentivized to invest
in countries where they have little to no experience compared to their
Western counterparts, and are likely to invest in projects that are
deemed unprofitable or risky to other investors.\23\ Moreover,
countries that benefit from long-term loans can easily default on loans
from China and put China's economy in a dangerous position.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ David G. Landry, ``The Belt and Road Bubble Is Starting to
Burst,'' Foreign Policy, June 27, 2018, https://foreignpolicy.com/2018/
06/27/the-belt-and-road-bubble-is-starting-to-burst/.
\24\ Christopher Woody, ``China's Massive `Belt and Road' Spending
Spree Has Caused Concern Around the World, and Now It's China's Turn to
Worry,'' Business Insider, July 2, 2018, https://
www.businessinsider.com/belt-and-road-spending-and-growing-debt-cause-
for-concern-in-china-2018-7.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We can see the delaying effects of entrepreneurial actions in the
DoD report to Congress itself. China has been leveraging its economic
power to achieve its national goals for almost two decades now, but the
2015 annual report to Congress mentions this fact for the first time,
identifying China's use of punitive trade policies and limits on
foreign direct investment as instruments of coercion in low-intensity
conflict.\25\ U.S. analysts have a viewpoint about how threatening
countries will behave and how the international system operates based
on U.S. experience and thus may misjudge China's challenge by applying
traditional critical success criteria without recognizing how these
criteria have changed.\26\ My research shows that countries like the
United States may recognize the challenge posed by a rising power, but
tend to underestimate the rising power's capabilities and the
effectiveness of its strategies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Office of the Secretary of Defense, ``Annual Report to
Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People's
Republic of China 2015,'' U.S. Department of Defense, 3.
\26\ Report to Congress 2018, 53.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
China's strategy of diversifying the types of power it accumulates
coupled with its efforts to build power in an entrepreneurial way leads
me to three policy recommendations.
Recommendation 6: The United States needs a whole-government
approach to ensure that we are accurately and completely
identifying what China is doing across domains. There should be
not only a DoD annual report to Congress on Chinese security
and military developments, but also a USAID report on Chinese
foreign aid, a State Department report on China's diplomatic
efforts, a Commerce Department report on its growing economic
clout, and so on.
Recommendation 7: All agencies need to engage in a type of red
teaming not only to evaluate the strategic environment from
China's perspective, but also to explicitly ask how China may
approach an objective given that its main goal is to create
uncertainty about what it is doing and the payoffs associated
with that action. We are too quick to assume that the U.S. way
is `best' and that China will follow suit if it can, which
makes us blind to new ways China is seeking to challenge the
U.S.
Recommendation 8: Engaging successfully in great power
competition with China (per the NSS) requires a global
strategy, not a U.S.-China strategy. The United States needs to
look beyond its traditional partners and allies to increase its
influence across the board. Also, the U.S. needs to be
entrepreneurial in its own right, identifying what countries
need and providing those services in new ways instead of
defaulting to what the U.S. currently has to offer.
Recommendation 9: Once we get the collection of information and
interpretation right, we need a point person on great power
competition, a China Czar of sorts, to ensure that the U.S. is
taking appropriate matching actions and counteractions to
maintain its influence and power around the globe. This could
be an expansion of the current role of the National Security
Council's Senior Director for Asian Affairs. However, given the
additional responsibilities of coordinating with all agencies
on U.S. policies beyond Asia (with a focus on what China is
doing in those countries), across all issue areas, an
additional position may be necessary.
The bottom line is that while we can learn from history and
experience, we find ourselves in an unprecedented situation. China as a
rising power that is primarily accumulating and exercising political
and economic power (for now), within an institutionalized and
integrated international system such as we have never had, facing the
United States as a hegemon more constrained than previous ones, in a
region that is also rising on the whole. As a result, we need new
approaches, new institutions, and new processes to ensure that China's
rise does not come at the expense of the United States.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Dr. Mastro.
Mr. Denmark?
STATEMENT OF ABRAHAM M. DENMARK, DIRECTOR, ASIA PROGRAM,
WOODROW WILSON INTERNATIONAL CENTER FOR SCHOLARS, WASHINGTON,
DC
Mr. Denmark. Thank you very much, Chairman Gardner, Ranking
Member Markey, other members of the committee. I appreciate the
opportunity to express my personal view regarding China's
remarkable military modernization and its implications for
American interests.
The People's Liberation Army, or PLA, today is large,
increasingly modern and sophisticated, and capable of operating
far from China's mainland. While it still faces several
significant challenges, the PLA today has the ability to
challenge the U.S. military to defend its interests in East
Asia, the Western Pacific, and beyond.
I will summarize my prepared testimony by making three main
analytic points.
First, China's military modernization supports Xi Jinping's
broader objectives to achieve the so-called Chinese dream of
national rejuvenation. This means ensuring that China is stable
and prosperous at home, dominant in Asia, and influential
around the world in a way that ensures that the Chinese
Communist Party, or CCP, is able to pursue its interests and
prerogatives without restriction.
Since coming to power, Xi has overseen a significant
transformation of the PLA in terms of composition, structure,
and missions. Ultimately these changes are intended to enhance
the PLA's ability to conduct joint operations, improve its
ability to fight short duration, high intensity regional
conflicts at greater distances from the Chinese mainland and a
diverse set of contingencies, and strengthen the Chinese
Communist Party's political control over the military.
My second point. China's military modernization program has
significant implications for the United States, our allies, and
our interests in the Indo-Pacific. China's rise is already
changing the balance of power in the region and will have
profound implications for the future of the liberal
international order. For the United States, for our allies, for
our partners, a more capable Chinese military should be a major
issue of concern.
The result of China's military modernization is a force
that presents a layered set of capabilities spanning the air,
maritime, space, electromagnetic, and information domains
designed to conduct long-range attacks against adversary forces
that might deploy or operate within the Western Pacific Ocean.
China is also increasingly capable of projecting power further
afield from China's mainland, enhancing Beijing's ability to
assert its preferences, defend its interests, and potentially
to coerce its adversaries at great distances.
These developments raise the risk of U.S. operations
throughout the Indo-Pacific and especially within what Chinese
strategists refer to as the first and second island chains. In
peacetime, these risks are in my estimation manageable, but in
war, while personally I believe that the U.S. retains the
ability to prevail against China in every conceivable
contingency, such victories will likely come at an increasingly
high cost.
In my prepared testimony, I focus on Taiwan, the Korean
Peninsula, and the East and South China Seas as examples of how
China's military modernization already poses significant
challenges for the United States, for our allies, and for our
interests.
Most distressingly, in each of these areas, Chinese
assertiveness and its burgeoning military capabilities raise
fundamental questions about critical aspects of traditional
American foreign policy, such as freedom of navigation, and
implicates explicit U.S. commitments to its allies. A
miscalculation by Beijing in either of these areas could
rapidly escalate into a crisis and confrontation with the
United States.
My third point. The U.S. has several options it could
utilize to enhance its ability to address the security
challenge posed by China. Sustained significant investments in
relevant military capabilities will be essential for the United
States to sustain its advantages and address emerging
challenges vis-a-vis China. This does not just apply to the
U.S. defense budget. The U.S. competition with China
encompasses all elements of national power, and all tools of
competition will require resources.
There are other areas where the U.S. has the opportunity to
significantly enhance its ability to compete militarily with
China. Specifically, the U.S. could develop policies and
initiatives to enhance its posture in the region while also
developing initiatives designed to empower its regional allies
and partners to do more, to contribute to public goods and
enhance their defense capabilities. Allies and partners have
played an important role in American foreign and national
security policy since before the founding of our nation, and we
should continue to play to our strengths. By implementing such
a strategy, the United States has an opportunity to proactively
address regional challenges and sustain American power and
leadership in the region.
At the geopolitical level, this will mean sustaining the
key attributes of the international order that has been
supported by the United States since the end of the Second
World War, which were described by Dr. Henry Kissinger as, ``an
inexorably expanding cooperative order of states observing
common rules and norms, embracing liberal economic systems,
forswearing territorial conquest, respecting national
sovereignty, and adopting participatory and democratic systems
of government.''
As Secretary of Defense James Mattis said during his
confirmation hearing, ``History is clear: nations with strong
allies thrive, and those without them wither.'' I entirely
agree and strongly believe that a focused and engaged United
States, along with empowered and capable allies and partners,
are our best answer to the significant challenges posed by an
increasingly capable Chinese military.
Thank you very much. I look forward to your questions.
[Mr. Denmark's prepared statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Abraham M. Denmark
Chairman Gardner, Ranking Member Markey, members of the Committee,
I appreciate the opportunity to give testimony today to examine China's
remarkable military modernization and its implications for U.S.
interests. The strategic challenge posed by China is one of the most
profound foreign policy issues the United States will confront in this
century, and I commend the Committee for devoting appropriate time and
attention to this critical subject.
Forty years after Deng Xiaoping's decision to embrace reform and
opening, China has emerged as a major player in international politics.
Its rise has resulted in a rapid and profound shift in the global
balance of power, with China today representing our most significant
long-term strategic challenge.
A significant aspect of the China challenge is the implications of
its military modernization program. From a single-service force of
``millet plus rifles,'' the People's Liberation Army (PLA) today is
large, increasingly modern and sophisticated, and capable of operating
far from the Chinese mainland. While it still faces several significant
challenges, the PLA today has the ability to challenge the U.S.
military to defend its interests in East Asia, the Western Pacific, and
beyond.
Advancing Military Modernization
While China's leaders have to date refrained from publicly
detailing a specific vision of a grand national strategy, a review of
their statements and official Chinese state media suggests a fairly
clear vision for the future. At the heart of this vision is a
revitalized China that is stable and prosperous at home, dominant in
Asia, and influential around the world in a way that ensures that the
CCP is able to pursue its interests and prerogatives without
restriction or interference--what I refer to as the establishment of a
neo-tributary system.
In his major address to the 19th National Congress of the CPP,
Chinese President Xi Jinping encapsulated much of these objectives as
the ``Chinese dream of national rejuvenation.'' To achieve his
objectives, Xi has laid out a two-stage development plan to realize
socialist modernization between 2020 and 2035, and between 2035 and the
middle of the 21st century to develop China into a great modern
socialist country ``that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally
advanced, harmonious, and beautiful.'' \1\ These broader objectives
correspond to similar objectives for the PLA identified by Xi in the
same speech: ``that by 2035, the modernization of our national defense
and force is basically completed, and that by the mid-21st century our
people's army forces have been fully transformed into worldclass
forces.'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Remarks by Xi Jinping Delivered at the 19th National Congress
of the Communist Party of China, Secure a Deceive Victory in Building a
Moderately Prosperous Society in All Respects and Strive for the Great
Success of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era,''
Delivered October 18, 2017, http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/download/
Xi--Jinping's--report--at--19th--CPC--National--Congress.pdf, 2425.
\2\ Ibid., 48.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since coming to power, Xi has overseen a significant transformation
of the People's Liberation Army in terms of composition, structure, and
missions.
 Composition. While Beijing does not publish authoritative
statistics on its military investments, it is clear that recent
years have seen a significant shift in the PLA away from its
traditional ground-centric orientation toward air power, naval
power, and other capabilities that are essential to projecting
power and fighting advanced adversaries. Indeed, while the
overall size of the PLA has reportedly shrunk by 300,000 in
recent years, the size of the PLA Navy and Air Force has
actually increased. Indeed, the PLA Navy, Chinese Coast Guard
(CCG), and the People's Armed Forces Maritime Militia (PAFMM)
form the largest maritime force in the Indo-Pacific today.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military
and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of China,
2018, 16.
 Structure. Beginning in late 2015, the PLA began to implement the
most significant set of reforms it has seen since the founding
of the PRC in 1949. It included the disbanding of the old
general departments, establishing a ground force headquarters,
restructuring seven military regions into five joint theater
commands aligned against specific regional challenges,
transitioning the PLA service headquarters to an exclusive
focus on ``organize, train, and equip'' missions, establishing
a Strategic Support Force and a Joint Logistics Support Force,
and establishing a new joint command and control structure to
coordinate China's responses to regional crises and conduct
preparations for wartime operations.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Joel Wuthnow and Phillip C. Saunders, Chinese Military Reform
in the Age of Xi Jinping: Drivers, Challenges, and Implications,
(Washington, D.C.: National Defense University press, 2017).
 Missions. The PLA has dramatically expanded the aperture of
missions and contingencies it must prepare for. According to
the U.S. Department of Defense, Taiwan contingencies remains
the PLA's main ``strategic direction,'' while other focus areas
for the PLA include the East China Sea, the South China Sea,
and China's borders with India and North Korea. In 2015, China
outlined eight ``strategic tasks'' that the PLA must be
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
prepared to execute:
 Safeguard the sovereignty of China's territory;
 Safeguard China's interests in new domains such as space and
cyberspace;
 Maintain strategic deterrence;
 Participate in international security cooperation;
 Maintain China's political security and social stability; and,
 Conduct emergency rescue, disaster relief, and ``rights and
interest protection'' missions.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress, 45-46.
These represent a broad mandate for the PLA. Safeguarding
sovereignty, and conducting ``rights and interest protection''
missions, are clear references to Chinese efforts to assert its claims
in the East and South China Seas. Moreover, the 2017 establishment of
China's first overseas military base in Djibouti, and expanded PLA Navy
operations in the Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean, are further
examples of how broadening national interests are driving PLA
operations at increasingly greater distances from the Chinese mainland.
Xi has also sustained decades of significant investments in the
military. China's announced 2018 military budget--$175 billion, an
increase of 8.1 percent from 2017\7\--sustains decades of spending
increases, making China the second-largest military spender in the
world after the United States. Yet it does not tell the entire story;
China's announced military budget omits several major categories of
expenditure, making China's actual military-related spending
significantly greater. The Department of Defense estimates China's
actual military-related spending at more than $190 billion in 2017.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Brad Lendon, ``China boosts military spending 8 percent amidst
ambitious modernization drive,'' CNN, March 5, 2018, https://
www.cnn.com/2018/03/04/asia/chinese-military-budget-intl/index.html.
\7\ U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress, 82.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ultimately, these dramatic changes are intended to enhance the
PLA's ability to conduct joint operations, improve its ability to fight
short-duration, high-intensity regional conflicts at greater distances
from the Chinese mainland in a diverse set of contingencies, and
strengthen the CCP's political control over the military.\8\ As a
result of these changes, Xi has declared that China has ``initiated a
new stage in strengthening and revitalizing the armed forces.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Ibid., 1.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is also important to note that other Chinese security forces
such as the People's Armed Police, the CCG, and the PAFMM also play
significant roles in defending and advancing Chinese security
interests.\9\ This is especially true of China's efforts to take
advantage of the ``gray zone'' to advance China's claims in the East
and South China Seas.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ See Conor M. Kennedy and Andrew S. Erickson, ``China's Third
Sea Force, The People's Armed Forces Maritime Tethered to the PLA,''
China Maritime Report, No. 1, March 2017.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Continued Challenges
While some in the United States may in the past have not
appreciated the significance of the challenge posed by China's growing
military power, it would also be a mistake to overestimate China's
military capabilities. Despite the incredible transformation we have
seen from the PLA in recent years, it continues to face significant
challenges--many of which Xi has sought to address with his recent
reforms.
 Experience. the last time the PLA fought a war was against Vietnam
in 1979. While it some units of the PLA have gained operational
experience by conducting Peacekeeping Operations or counter-
piracy operations off of East Africa, such experience is
necessarily limited. Unfortunately, the U.S. military has much
more experience in conducting combat operations and extended
power projection--though not against an advanced military like
the PLA.
 Political Loyalty. Party officials and PLA leaders repeatedly
admonish officers and enlistees not to heed calls for ``getting
the Party out of the Army,'' ``depoliticizing the military,''
or ``nationalizing the armed forces.'' These repeated
remonstrations, as well as Xi Jinping's focus on enhancing the
PLA's political loyalty as part of his reforms, suggests that
these are issues of particular salience for China's leaders.
Yet as scholars at RAND have pointed out, ``for the CCP
leadership, the PLA's status as a Party army is an important
strength, not a weakness.'' \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Michael S. Chase, Jeffrey Engstrom, et. al., China's
Incomplete Military Transformation (Monterey: RAND Corporation), 2015,
44.
 Joint Operations. Like the United States, China is likely to find
joint operations easier to describe on paper than to conduct in
reality. I expect that achieving true effective ``jointness''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
will be a long-term objective for the PLA.
 International Relationships. Unlike the United States, China does
not enjoy a network of alliances. Indeed, in my experience,
Chinese scholars and officials often describe these
relationships as fundamentally transactional and coercive in
nature, suggesting that Beijing will be hard-pressed to
establish the kind of close relationships that Washington has
cultivated for decades. This will likely impose a fundamental
limit on the PLA's ability to project and sustain power,
especially during a conflict.
Implications for the United States
China's rapid and significant military modernization program has
significant implications for the United States, our allies, and our
interests in the Indo-Pacific. China's rise is already changing the
balance of power in the Indo-Pacific, and will have profound
implications for the future of the liberal international order. While
China does not seek to fundamentally undermine this order, it does seek
to exempt itself from the restrictions and responsibilities that such
an order would entail--a version of ``Chinese exceptionalism''--to a
degree that would render it largely irrelevant. For the United States,
its allies, and its partners, a more capable Chinese military should be
major issue of concern and a driver of some significant shifts in
policy and investment.
I agree with the current administration's explicit recognition of
the great power competition that is currently underway between China
and the United States.\11\ Military issues play a significant role in
that competition--the United States will not be able to sustain a
``Free and Open Indo-Pacific'' unless it accounts for the challenges
posed by an increasingly capable PLA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ President Donald J. Trump, National Security Strategy of the
United States of America, December 2017; Secretary of Defense James
Mattis, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United
States of America.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unlike the United States, China does not have global
responsibilities or the need to defend interests around the world
against the full spectrum of military threats. Rather, the PLA can
focus its investments and strategies in a relatively limited geography
(e.g., China's periphery and vital maritime sea lanes) against a
relatively limited number of potential external threats (e.g., China's
neighbors and the United States). As a result, the PLA has been able to
tailor its capabilities to exploit the perceived vulnerabilities of its
potential adversaries while maximizing China's geographic advantages in
various contingencies.
The result is a layered set of capabilities spanning the air,
maritime, space, electromagnetic, and information domains designed to
conduct long-range attacks against adversary forces that might deploy
or operate within the western Pacific Ocean.\12\ China is also
increasingly capable of projecting power further afield from China's
mainland, enhancing Beijing's ability to assert its preferences, defend
its interests, and potentially to coerce adversaries at great
distances.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress, 59.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These developments raise the risk of U.S. operations throughout the
Indo-Pacific, and especially within what Chinese strategists refer to
as the ``first and second island chains.'' Every day, U.S. forces
likely fly, sail, and operate within range of advanced Chinese military
capabilities. Our military bases in Japan and the Republic of Korea
similarly live within range of Chinese military power. In peacetime,
these risks are in my estimation manageable--we simply must reacclimate
ourselves to life with an advanced military competitor. Still, even in
peacetime, China's growing military power will be a significant asset
for Beijing in their efforts to assert territorial claims, undermine or
adjust international law, and coerce nations smaller, less powerful,
and with less capable militaries than the United States.
In a war, China will also pose significant challenges. While I will
leave official military estimates to my former colleagues in the U.S.
military, I will convey my personal assessment that the U.S. retains
the ability to prevail against China in every conceivable contingency.
Yet as the PLA grows increasingly capable, such victories will likely
come at an increasingly high cost.
Several recent scholarly works have focused on the potential for
conflict between rising great powers and established powers.\13\ Yet
one point often lost in these historical analyses is that major power
conflicts often include, and at times are triggered by, interventions
in peripheral geographical areas. It is for this reason that I am most
concerned about the potential for crisis and conflict between China and
the United States along China's periphery, and why I will focus on
three of those areas to illustrate the implications for the United
States of China's military modernization.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Graham Allison, Destined for War: Can America and China Escape
Thucydides's Trap? (New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2017); Evan B.
Montgomery, In the Hegemon's Shadow (Ithaca: Cornell University Press,
2016); Kori Schake, Safe Passage: The Transition from British to
American Hegemony (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2017).
\14\ Chinese officials and scholars would likely dispute that it is
appropriate to include Taiwan as part of China's periphery, arguing
that Taiwan is part of China itself. I have not included Taiwan in this
analysis as a way to make a statement about Taiwan's formal status, but
rather to point out the geographic realities of a potential conflict
between China and the United States over Taiwan.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Taiwan
After years on the strategic back burner, Chinese pressure on
Taiwan is reemerging as a major issue in East Asia and in relations
between China and the United States. Since Tsai Ing-wen was inaugurated
as President of Taiwan in 2016, five countries have switched diplomatic
relations from Taipei to Beijing: Sao Tome and Principe, Panama, the
Dominican Republic, Burkina Faso, and El Salvador. Cross-strait tourism
has dropped dramatically, and Beijing has dramatically increased
military pressure on Taiwan. As described by the U.S. Department of
Defense, the PLA continued to develop and deploy increasingly advanced
military capabilities intended to coerce Taiwan, signal Chinese
resolve, and gradually improve capabilities for an invasion. These
improvements pose major challenges to Taiwan's security, which has
historically been rooted in the PLA's inability to project power
decisively across the 100nm Taiwan Strait, the natural geographic
advantages of island defense, Taiwan's armed forces' technological
superiority, and the possibility of U.S. intervention.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress, 93.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As a result of China's military modernization effort, Taiwan's
historic technological and geographical advantages have significantly
eroded. Taiwan has made important shifts in both investments and
strategy to account for these changes, and is reportedly working to
develop new concepts and capabilities for asymmetric warfare. According
to the Department of Defense, some specific areas of emphasis include
offensive and defensive information and electronic warfare; high-speed
stealth vessels; shore-based mobile missiles; rapid mining and
minesweeping; unmanned aerial systems; and critical infrastructure
protection.\16\ Yet more will need to be done to develop an effective
asymmetric and innovative strategy for Taiwan to defend itself. One
critical aspect will be in the defense budget: Taiwan has consistently
under-invested in its military, and costs associated with transitioning
to an all-volunteer force have already diverted resources away from
defense acquisition programs as well as training and readiness.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress, 102.
\17\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unlike with its formal allies, the United States does not have a
formal commitment to defend Taiwan. Rather, as codified in the Taiwan
Relations Act, it is the policy of the United States ``to maintain the
capacity of the United States to resist any resort to force or other
forms of coercion that would jeopardize the security, or the social or
economic system, of the people on Taiwan.'' \18\ As China's military
grows increasingly capable, the United States will need to make the
necessary investments to ensure it retains the capacity to defend
Taiwan, enhance Taiwan's ability to defend itself, and make it clear to
Beijing and to the rest of the world that Taiwan is a priority.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Taiwan Relations Act of 1979, Pub. L. 96-8, 22 U.S.C. 3301 et
seq.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Korea
The Korean Peninsula has been at the center of East Asia's
geopolitics for centuries. Since the late 19th century, the question of
which regional major power would dominate the peninsula has been a
central issue for three major regional wars.\19\ Considering the
historic significance of the Korean Peninsula as a flashpoint in U.S.-
China relations, and the pressing realities generated by North Korea's
illegal nuclear weapons and ballistic missile programs, demand a
careful consideration of U.S.-China military dynamics on the Korean
peninsula.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ The First Sino-Japanese War (1894-1895), the Russo-Japanese
War (1904-1905), the Korean War (1950-1953).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Beijing's objectives for the Korean Peninsula are to maintain
stability, to denuclearize the Korean peninsula, and over the long-term
to diminish U.S. power and influence in the Peninsula. But the first
objective--maintaining stability--is the fundamental driver of
Beijing's approach, and has two aspects. First, China seeks to avoid a
war on the Korean Peninsula. Beijing sees both Pyongyang and Washington
as dangerous and potentially destabilizing, and modulates its strategy
over time to ensure neither side goes too far. Concurrently, Beijing
seeks to prevent severe economic sanctions that could threaten to
undermine the stability of the Kim regime in Pyongyang.
Relations between China and North Korea may have seen a nadir in
2016 and 2017, as Pyongyang conducted a series of ballistic and missile
tests in direct contradiction of UN security council resolutions and
despite China's publicly-expressed ``grave concern and
opposition.''\20\ Yet it is clear that relations have improved since
that time, and relations between China and North Korea have warmed
considerably. Xi Jinping has met with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un
three times in 2018, and the propaganda produced by both sides from
those summits sent a strong signal of two leaders with a close working
relationship. While it is doubtful that relations between Beijing and
Pyongyang will ever return to the ``lips to teeth'' alliance of decades
past, it is clear that China sees significant value in keeping
relations with North Korea productive--at least while Pyongyang
continues to refrain from taking provocative and destabilizing actions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Holly Ellyatt, ``China has `grave concerns' about North
Korea's latest missile test,'' CNBC, November 29, 2017, https://
www.cnbc.com/2017/11/29/china-north-korea-missile-reaction.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Should a crisis or conflict occur on the Peninsula, China's leaders
would have several military options to choose from, including securing
the China-North Korea border and coming to the defense of North Korea
to defend Kim Jong Un. As my friend and colleague Dr. Mastro has
written, China's military modernization has given its leaders more
options than before--China now has the ability to manage instability on
its borders while also conducting major military operations in the
Peninsula. I agree with her assessment that China may intervene
extensively and militarily on the peninsula.\21\ But any decision by
Beijing to intervene in a Korea contingency would not be taken out of a
legalistic commitment to the 1961 Sino-North Korea Mutual Aid and
Cooperation Friendship Treaty, but rather as the result of a
calculation of China's likelihood of success, of the potential for
escalation, and which option is believed to maximize China's
geopolitical position in the region vis-a-vis the United States.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Oriana Skylar Mastro, ``Why China Won't Rescue North Korea,''
Foreign Affairs, January/February 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Today, the threat of war on the Korean Peninsula is diminished
compared to the ``fire and fury'' rhetoric of 2017. I expect Beijing is
pleased that Pyongyang has refrained from taking any provocative
actions, and that both Washington and Pyongyang are committed to a
diplomatic process that involves the suspension of U.S.-ROK joint
military exercises. By conducting three summits at the leader level,
Beijing has sent a clear signal that it has a major role to play on
this issue, and it will not just go along with Washington's
preferences.
The East and South China Seas
In recent years, China has dramatically enhanced its capabilities
and intensified its operational posture in the East and South China
Seas. Beijing's goal is to advance its territorial claims in those
areas, and more broadly to expand its geopolitical power at the expense
of its neighbors.
In the East China Sea, Beijing's efforts to advance its claims has
involved the use of lowintensity coercion operations by the PLA Navy,
the CCG, and the PAFMM. These so-called ``gray zone'' tactics fall
below the level of a confrontation that would demand a traditional
military response, yet over time have the effect of gradually
increasing pressure on Tokyo and testing its resolve and that of the
U.S.-Japan Alliance.
Similarly, in the South China Sea, Beijing seeks to use its
military and paramilitary forces to assert its claims and gradually
intensify pressure on its neighbors. Yet unlike in the East China Sea,
Beijing in the South China Sea has conducted a campaign of island
reclamation and military construction that is unprecedented in terms of
speed and scale. China has added over 3,200 acres of land to the seven
features it occupies in the Spratly Islands, and has constructed
aviation and port facilities, barracks, weapons stations, sensor
emplacements, and communication facilities.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress, 17.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These outposts are undeniably military in nature, and are capable
of supporting military operations in the Spratly Islands and throughout
the region. As described by the U.S. Department of Defense, ``This
would improve China's ability to detect and challenge activities by
rival claimants or third parties, widen the range of capabilities
available to China, and reduce the time required to deploy them.'' \23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress, 17.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
During his confirmation hearing earlier this year, Admiral Philip
Davidson stated that China's militarization of the Spratly Islands
means ``China is now capable of controlling the South China Sea in all
scenarios short of war with the United States.'' \24\ I agree with the
Admiral's assessment, and I would note that this has significant
implications for the other claimants in the South China Sea and for the
United States. As we are currently engaged in a peacetime competition
with China, it is incumbent on the United States to make it clear that
it will not be cowed or coerced. This is why it is critical that the
United States--and its allies and partners--continues to fly, sail, and
operate in the South China Sea and wherever else international law
allows--it is an undeniable demonstration to our competitors, allies,
and partners of U.S. resolve and capability.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ ``Advance Policy Questions for Admiral Phiilp Davidson, USN
Expected Nominee for Commander, U.S. Pacific Command,'' April 2018,
https://www.armed-services.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Davidson--APQs--04-
1718.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Most distressingly, China's assertiveness in the East and South
China Sea both questions fundamental aspects of traditional American
foreign policy--freedom of navigation\25\--and implicates explicit U.S.
commitments to its allies in Japan and the Philippines. A
miscalculation by Beijing in either of these areas. could rapidly
escalate into a crisis and confrontation with the United States.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ This is about more than international law as codified by the
UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). Recall that the first war
ever fought by the United States--against the Barbary Pirates (1801-
1815)--was fought over freedom of navigation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I do not see China's actions in the East and South China Seas to
date as fundamentally altering U.S. calculations when it comes to
China. At the most, these actions increase the potential for, and
severity of, crises between Beijing and Washington. Though I can no
longer state so authoritatively, my expectation is that U.S. will and
ability to defend its allies and interests in the region are unchanged.
The challenge for Washington is to develop realistic and effective
strategies to counter China's ``grey zone'' tactics and to enhance
relationships with its allies and partners to form a more effective
resistance to Chinese assertiveness.
U.S. Options
Sustained, significant investments in relevant military
capabilities will be essential for the United States to sustain its
advantages and address emerging challenges vis-a-vis China. This does
not just apply to the U.S. defense budget--the U.S. competition with
China encompasses all elements of national power, and all tools of
competition will require resources. This includes diplomacy, security
assistance, and trade and investment policies that deepen ties between
the United States and the rest of the Indo-Pacific.
There are other areas where the U.S. has the opportunity to
significantly enhance its ability to compete militarily with China.
Specifically, the U.S. should develop policies and initiatives to
enhance its posture in the region. This could include a multi-billion
dollar initiative to enhance deterrence and U.S. posture in the Indo-
Pacific by investing in new capabilities, new exercises, and new
infrastructure tailored to enhancing U.S. capabilities in the Indo-
Pacific.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ For this and other ideas, see Eric Sayers, ``15 Big Ideas to
Operationalize America's Indo-Pacific Strategy, War on the Rocks, April
6, 2-18, https://warontherocks.com/2018/04/15-big-ideas-to-
operationalizeamericas-indo-pacific-strategy/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, the U.S. could develop initiatives designed to
empower its regional allies and partners to do more to contribute to
public goods and enhance their defensive capabilities. Allies and
partners have played an important role in American foreign and national
security policy since before the founding of our nation, and we should
continue to play to our strengths. By implementing a strategy to
empower its allies and partners in the IndoPacific and more effectively
drive them to contribute to the health and success of the regional
liberal order, the United States has an opportunity to proactively
address emerging regional challenges and sustain American regional
power and leadership. Such a strategy would not only enhance regional
stability and prosperity--it will also enhance the ability of the
United States to compete with China. While this would not necessarily
be an anti-China strategy, it does recognize the extent of the
challenge posed by China and would represent a positive approach to
advance the interests of the United States and its allies and partners.
This approach was suggested by Secretary of Defense Ash Carter's
speech at the 2016 Shangri-La Dialogue in Singapore. Secretary Carter
described the U.S. role in the IndoPacific as providing, with its
network of allies and partners, the ``oxygen'' of regional stability
that has underwritten rapid economic growth and the development of
security ties. He advocated for the further development of the
increasingly interconnected region into a ``principled security
network.'' Such a network would entail ``nations building connections
for a common cause, planning and training together, and eventually
operating in a coordinated way.'' \27\ The United States would continue
to serve as the primary provider of regional security and a leading
contributor to the region's principled security network, while at the
same time empowering its allies and partners in the region to do more
for themselves.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ Secretary of Defense Ash Carter, ``Remarks on `Indo-Pacific's
Principled Security Network' at 2016 IISS Shangri-La Dialogue,'' U.S.
Department of Defense, June 4, 2016, https://www.defense.gov/News/
Speeches/Speech-View/Article/791213/remarks-on-Indo-Pacificsprincipled-
security-network-at-2016-iiss-shangri-la-di/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Considering the challenges it faces, the United States should work
with its allies and partners to preserve the key principles that have
enabled the region's stability and prosperity, while also adapting its
approach to reflect the requirements of a changed world. At a
geopolitical level, this will mean sustaining the key attributes of the
international order that it has trumpeted since the end of World War
II, which were described by Henry Kissinger as ``an inexorably
expanding cooperative order of states observing common rules and norms,
embracing liberal economic systems, forswearing territorial conquest,
respecting national sovereignty, and adopting participatory and
democratic systems of government.'' \28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ Henry Kissinger, World Order, (New York, NY: Penguin
Publishing), 2014, 1.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As Secretary of Defense James Mattis said, ``History is clear:
nations with strong allies thrive, and those without them wither.''
\29\ I agree entirely, and strongly believe that a focused and engaged
United States, along with empowered and capable allies and partners,
are our best answer to the significant challenges posed by an
increasingly capable Chinese military.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ ``Stenographic Transcript Before the United States Senate
Committee on Armed Services To Conduct a Confirmation Hearing on the
Expected Nomination of Mr. James N. Mattis to be Secretary of
Defense,'' January 30, 2017, https://www.armed-services.senate.gov/imo/
media/doc/17-03--01-12-17.pdf
The views expressed are the author's alone, and are not necessarily
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
those of the Wilson Center or of the U.S. Government.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Denmark.
And we will begin with questions I think starting where you
and Mr. Denmark talking about an engaged United States, talking
about empowered allies.
The legislation that I mentioned in my opening statements
that Senator Markey, Senator Kaine, and others on the committee
are all a part of, the Asia Reassurance Initiative Act, aims at
sort of building that long-term strategy into law where the
Congress and the executive branch can speak with one voice. I
think under the Obama administration, the Asia pivot or
rebalance was a good idea in concept, but what more can we do
to actually back that up in law through policy and funding and
other opportunities to engage diplomatically not just from a
security standpoint?
So the bill focuses on three pillars: security and the
economy and human rights, rule of law. Under the security
provisions of the bill, it authorizes, the Asia-Pacific
Security Initiative funds at $1.5 billion over the next 5
years. From an economic standpoint--it has language dealing
with North Korea, Taiwan, continuing our commitment to the Six
Assurances, the Taiwan Relations Act, and other languages to
help build up counterterrorism capabilities, training efforts,
maritime domain awareness, issues in the South China Sea. From
an economic perspective, it highlights the importance of
multilateral, bilateral trade engagement using USAID
opportunities to develop better trade capacity and, of course
dealing with the human rights issues, whether that is Uighurs
and the situation facing them in China or the challenges we
face in Myanmar and the Philippines.
Is an approach like that something that we ought to be
pursuing? What more can we be doing within legislation like
that to show our commitment and meat on the bone, so to speak,
to an Indo-Pacific strategy? Dr. Mastro and then Mr. Denmark.
Dr. Mastro. So I think that is a good start to what the
United States could do, but it does fall somewhat in the
category of what I would label of doing just more of the same.
Specifically, we focus on our partners and allies, and that is
important. But what China is doing is exploiting gaps in the
order. So we talk about the U.S.-led international order and
whether China is challenging it or not. But in reality there
are many areas of the order that lack certainty, are ambiguous,
do not have consensus. I would label cybersecurity as one of
these areas. And so what China does is it is trying to build
consensus or work on the periphery of the order. So, for
example, when they did One Belt, One Road and they initially
moved into Central Asia, they were not challenging the United
States because the United States was not there. And so I would
say that in addition to strengthening our relationship with
traditional partners and allies, the United States needs to
think more broadly about its relationships with countries
around the globe.
Also, in terms of the security initiatives, I would
recommend that we think more about demand not supply in kind of
business terms. You often--at least in my experience, you think
about what the United States has to offer in terms of security
assistance. And then we try to put together packages, whether
it is visits, port visits, or a rotation of a squadron, or what
have you, instead of looking at what those countries actually
demand. And so we should move away from this model of
increasing advertising and hoping that countries around the
world will decide they want what we have to offer and instead
try to look at what they actually want and start supplying
that.
Senator Gardner. Mr. Denmark?
Mr. Denmark. I think Dr. Mastro has some very good points
there.
If I could build off of what she said, in my conversations
that I have had over the past 2 years in Asia, there is a broad
sense amongst both our allies, our partners, and other
countries that the United States is easily distracted and is
not devoting the kind of resources that would be required in
order to effectively compete. While in some areas some
countries what to see the United States being open about its
competition with China, other countries find themselves
uncomfortable with such an idea. So it is difficult to develop
a strategy for an entire region in which one size fits all. So
I agree with Dr. Mastro that we need to be able to tailor our
approach to various countries based on their interests, based
on their objectives.
But broadly speaking, there is a sense across the region
that the United States is not as powerful as we once were, that
China is more powerful, and that they need to have a good
relationship with China. But I think what is interesting, that
despite those conceptions of American and Chinese power,
universally each country wants to engage the United States.
They want us there. In terms of demand signal, the main demand
signal I see broadly speaking for most of these countries in
the Indo-Pacific is they want the United States engaged. They
want us to be doing more in the region.
So while I welcome the idea of additional resources being
devoted to these things not just on the defense side but across
all elements of national power the way you described, I also do
think that we need to be careful at how we tailor these
initiatives to make sure that they are implemented in a way
that is acceptable and sustainable for countries that have at
times very different interests than the United States and at
times have interests that are not necessarily compatible with
one another.
So while I personally welcome more resources for these
issues, I often say that there is a difference between
competing verbally or competing in a document and actually
competing in terms of resources. I think this would help in
that direction. But at the same time, I completely agree with
Dr. Mastro. They need to tailor those investments for really
what is needed both in terms of our potential adversaries but
also what our allies and our partners are looking for.
Senator Gardner. Thank you.
Senator Markey?
Senator Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
A recent survey conducted by the Chicago Council of Global
Affairs said that China is a rising military power. 62 percent
of all Americans believe that. But at the same time, only 39
percent see China's military power as a critical threat facing
the United States of America.
So could you each deal with that issue in terms of the
public perception and, I guess, answer the question of whether
or not China's growing military might is, in fact, a critical
threat to U.S. interests? Mr. Denmark?
Mr. Denmark. Well, I do agree with the minority of
Americans who see China as being a critical threat in the
military sense, but I would say more over the long term. At the
current time, I think China is a military challenge in ways, as
I explained in my testimony, both to American security,
American interests and those of our allies. And I would focus
especially on China's threat to our allies, Japan and the
Philippines being most immediate. And I discuss this in my
prepared testimony.
I do think that the nuances of these issues are generally
lost on the American public about why China and Japan are
having problems or why what China is doing in the South China
Sea is a challenge. And it is difficult to explain to the
American people why a few thousand acres in the South China Sea
represents such an important and critical challenge. I am
sorry. While I believe that China is a critical threat, I also
understand the phenomenon that the majority of the American
people do not see it as critically as maybe as those who focus
on it do.
Senator Markey. Dr. Mastro, so how do we close that gap, if
you agree with Mr. Denmark's conclusion that it is a real
threat? How would you recommend that the Congress or those that
care about this issue ensure that there is a full understanding
of what is happening?
Dr. Mastro. So I am not an expert on American domestic
politics. But I think the big point here is that what this poll
represents is that China has done a very good job at what I
have mentioned, which is creating a great deal of uncertainty
about its intentions.
Senator Markey. They have done a very good job of doing
what?
Dr. Mastro. So what they are doing is they diversified
power, and they did it in a sequential way such that anything
that you point to, for example, a certain military threat,
someone could equally point to how they are cooperating in the
Gulf of Aden, for example. Or if you talk about them
undermining the international order, someone could equally
point to, well, they are actually a part of the WTO or they
support the United Nations----
Senator Markey. So you are saying that results in the 39
percent thinking that it is not that big--that only 39 percent
believe that it is a big threat to us.
Dr. Mastro. Exactly. It creates a delay. Most of our threat
perceptions come from identifying military forces, and Chinese
military modernization only began in a big way about 10 to 15
years ago and the United States has been focused on other
issues. And so because of this, I think that is why the
American public is not focused on the potential for conflict
with China.
I would just like to conclude that by saying we are too
focused, I think, on the possibility of war with China. If you
look historically, the big question is not only whether or not
the United States and China is going to fight a war, but that
80 percent of rising powers overtake the great power. So I
doubt that we would think it is a mark of successful U.S.
policy if China even peacefully became the dominant global
leader and we were second to them.
Senator Markey. Well, we do not want to over-hype that
threat, though, that we are the world power and they are the
rising power and that they would overtake us. Is that what you
are saying? Eight out of 10 times that is what happens.
Dr. Mastro. Eight out of 10 times that is what happens
peacefully or through war.
Senator Markey. So we do not want to over-hype that,
though, because we clearly have a far superior military right
now. So what is your recommendation to us that we undertake as
a strategy in order to make sure that we avoid that result?
Dr. Mastro. I think we need to switch from a deterrence by
punishment to deterrence by denial strategy.
Senator Markey. Deterrence by what?
Dr. Mastro. By denial strategy.
So we have this understanding based on our decades of
experience with our superior military force, as you mentioned,
sir, that we could force China to give up in certain scenarios
by inflicting a lot of costs on them. But my understanding of
Xi Jinping and his military strategy is if they can succeed,
they do not care what the costs would be. And so instead of
trying to convey that it would be costly for them, for example,
to invade Taiwan, we need to start building military forces and
positioning them such that no matter what level of resolve
China has, they could not physically accomplish their goal.
Senator Markey. Great.
So do you agree with that conclusion, Mr. Denmark, that Xi
Jinping just does not care what the cost is? They are going to
do whatever they want and there can be complete indifference to
what the impact is upon the fiscal wellbeing of their country?
Mr. Denmark. I think that Xi Jinping has demonstrated
himself to be willing to take risks, willing to accept
turbulence in relations with the United States and with his
neighbors, willing to assert Chinese interests. But at the same
time, China's leaders are also careful to avoid outright
conflict and confrontation.
I do believe that China remains sensitive to risk and to
cost. I also believe that the idea of the two versions of
deterrence that Dr. Mastro mentioned, deterrence by denial,
deterrence by punishment, are not necessarily mutually
exclusive.
To get to the fundamental question, though, and I think one
of the challenges we have when talking about this--and,
Senator, you gave an example of this--is that when Americans I
think who are not specialists in this--when they think about
what would be a threat to the United States, they think about a
military that is roughly equivalent to the United States, a
global military power capable of defeating a wide variety of
forces all around the world.
And the point that I make in my testimony that other China
specialists have made in the past is that in order to cause
significant problems for the United States, for our allies, for
the broader liberal order, China does not need to equal the
United States as a military power. Even as a dominant regional
power or even an equal regional power in the Indo-Pacific, they
still have tremendous capabilities to cause challenges and to
be potentially a threat to the United States and their allies.
And that is the challenge that we face in describing the
threat, that they do not need to be equal to the United States
in order for it to be a significant challenge.
Senator Markey. Okay, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Senator Markey.
And along the lines of cost, you know, in the past several
years we have seen increased investment in new military
equipment by China, increased arms, armaments, aircraft
carriers. We have seen the expansion of Chinese military
operations, the South China Sea expansion. We have also seen
the base now in Djibouti. We have seen the efforts that China
is aggressively undertaking as it relates to Taiwan, which is
an ebb and flow it seems like, but recently, though, we have
seen their successful efforts in El Salvador, Panama, the DR,
and others as they have led to sort of de-recognition of Taiwan
at the behest of China.
You look back to efforts during the Cold War, U.S., Russia,
and the U.S. efforts to sort of follow this cost imposition
model where we would invest in arms, we would invest in
ballistic missile defense systems and ideas, military
placements to impose costs on the Soviet Union and how that led
to the end of the Cold War because, in part, they simply could
not keep up with the cost that they were being placed under.
Do you see that same kind of threat, though, that we face
from China right now where you mentioned they do not have to
spend equal to the United States? Do we face sort of a Cold
War-like cost imposition challenge where China forces us to
spend money in investing arms, basing that we simply cannot
keep up with? And what does that mean for the U.S. long-term
competition with China? Dr. Mastro?
Dr. Mastro. I think that is a very important point. We
cannot outspend China. This type of competitive strategy is
something that China has learned about and they are dead set on
not being tricked into spending more money on things that they
think they do not need. Even if the United States has superior
technology, which we absolutely do--I would put my bet on a
U.S. pilot over a Chinese pilot any day--given the fact that
they are also developing technologies that are not so sexy that
we do not hear about in these hearings but are cheaper and they
can develop more of them means that we are playing this numbers
game that even if we shoot down, for example, you know, 10
aircraft for every one they shoot down of ours, they still win
because they have so many of them.
And so this is what goes to the point of having maybe a new
approach, not thinking about what we did in the Cold War but
thinking if we cannot outspend them, what would we possibly do
in the Asia-Pacific. I know politically it is not very
feasible, but I would encourage us at least as an exercise to
think about if we were to engage in military operations in the
Asia-Pacific, where would we want forces in Asia? And I will
tell you we would not want them in Japan and Korea. Those are
not places from which we can operate effectively against the
Chinese threat.
And so maybe it is time that, in addition to strengthening
our relationships with our partners and allies, we think about
new ways to be doing military operations, new ways to position
our forces in that region so that we actually are more
effective at dealing with this China challenge that Mr. Denmark
laid out.
Senator Gardner. Mr. Denmark, do we face a sort of cost
imposition parallel with China?
Mr. Denmark. I think there are some examples of particular
cost challenges that we face within the military challenge. For
example, a Chinese ballistic missile costs a lot less than a
U.S. anti-missile defense system, for example. But more
broadly, I do not see that dynamic at play yet.
I think there are questions, though. There are challenges
about how the United States prioritizes its spending. The
Department of Defense estimates that China spent about $190
billion in 2017 on defense, which is less than a third of what
the United States is spending on defense. And I have not seen
examples of China having a guns versus butter debate yet. To me
the sustained increases in China's defense budget seem fairly
sustainable.
Senator Gardner. But I guess I mean that they would force
us to spend money, so the reverse of the Cold War.
Mr. Denmark. So the question to me--I think personally
speaking that within a $700 billion defense budget, I believe
that we would have the ability to out-compete with China, but
it would require for the United States to prioritize
investments specifically tailored to the China challenge rather
than funds going elsewhere. And that is a question for the
executive branch. That is a question for the Congress about
where our priorities lie.
There are multiple examples of where the United States--in
our documents, we say the Indo-Pacific is important. We say
that we want to compete with China. Yet, in several measures of
budget expenditure, the numbers tell a different story. For
example, look at the numbers for security assistance in which
U.S. security assistance towards East Asia is lower than--I
think it is the lowest region that the United States spends
than any other region in the world, including like Latin
America. So to me it speaks to the old Washington axiom of show
me your budget and I will show you your strategy.
I think the language of competition, the strategy of
competition is very important. As you said, Senator, the Obama
administration's rebalance I thought was a good start to those
prospects, but I think we will need to continue to shift our
budget allocations or begin spending more in order to be able
to effectively compete.
Senator Gardner. Dr. Mastro?
Dr. Mastro. And if I can just add to that by saying if the
United States is successful in its spending and builds a
military that China cannot challenge, we still have to have a
whole-of-government approach because what China is going to do
is shift to different tools in its toolbox like economic
coercion, like political persuasion. If China gives some
benefits to our allies and partners such that they kick out the
United States military, it does not matter how advanced our
systems are. So we also have to be very cognizant and look for
those indicators as well.
Senator Gardner. Thank you.
In your testimony, you both talked about increasing
engagement to China around the globe. Their interests have
increased, you know, the concern over sea lane security, anti-
piracy efforts, investments in that within their military,
their business location around the globe, the Chinese business
community now global indeed. If you look at its actions in El
Salvador, you look at some of the agreements that it appeared
that they may have made or at least El Salvador was asking
them--Taiwan in order to deny China's request involving money,
dollars, financing of political parties, those kinds of
things--and perhaps I am going to turn it over to Senator
Markey. Maybe we can get back to this because I am out of time.
But I want to get into a little bit about the threat perhaps
that we face within this hemisphere of Chinese military
operations, basings in a place like El Salvador if that is part
of it. But Senator Markey. We will come back to that.
Senator Markey. Great. Thank you.
So I am trying to get a frame for this. So let us just say
roughly for the sake of the discussion that we are having that
the United States military budget is in the ballpark of $700
billion, and the Chinese military budget is in the ballpark of
$180 billion to $200 billion per year. Do you agree with that?
And that the bulk of their dedication of that $180 billion to
$200 billion is in the Asia-Pacific area, while ours is spread
out, although they are beginning operations in other parts of
the world, but still the large concentration is in that region.
So talk about that in the context of President Trump's
America First policy and our need for alliances to deal with
the fact that while our budgets may look very different in that
region, the gap is not nearly as great and why it would be
important for us to keep our alliances intact and in fact to
enhance them. Mr. Denmark?
Mr. Denmark. So thank you, Senator.
I think that the fundamental assessment from my point of
view is that U.S. alliances in Asia are fundamental to our
power, our access, and our interests in the region. Not only do
they host tens of thousands of U.S. service people, but they
also act alongside us. Their security forces, their militaries
operate shoulder to shoulder with ours, providing public goods,
maintaining stability, allowing for the stability and
prosperity that we have enjoyed in Asia for so long.
The challenge, of course, as Dr. Mastro has pointed out, is
that for our allies and our partners, this is not just a
military question. This is a whole-of-government question. And
other aspects of American power, particularly trade and
investment, have geopolitical effects. We have entered a
situation now for most countries in Asia. They see China as the
main source of economic opportunity and the United States as
the main source for security. And the dilemma that these
countries face is that they want to avoid being forced to
choose. There is not necessarily a lot of trust towards China,
even as the dollars come in. In fact, my sense is that the more
renminbi that comes into a country in terms of Chinese aid, the
more worried they get about maintaining their own independence,
their own sovereignty.
Senator Markey. Just in the context of that region when we
are talking about the Quad, the multilateral security
arrangement with Japan, India, Australia, the United States in
that region as a pact, how important is that and what do we
have to do to make sure that it does not deteriorate?
Mr. Denmark. So I would say the Quad is important in
conception but so far is very limited in terms of what it
actually brings primarily because the different countries have
very different approaches to China and very different
geopolitical orientations. So, for example, India--they are
worried about China. They want to improve their relations with
the United States, but at the same time, they have no interest
in being seen as an ally of the United States. They have no
interest in being seen as directly trying to confront the
Chinese. They want to have a more independent approach. And
because these countries have such different orientations, it
complicates the effectiveness of these mini-laterals.
But I do think that the various institutions springing up
in Asia, be it ASEAN, the various trilaterals, the bilateral
alliances involving the United States, the emerging
relationships between various countries like India and Vietnam,
for example, I think are all important as part of building a
network of alliances and partnerships that help strengthen the
international order but also complicate Chinese efforts to put
themselves at the center of regional geopolitics.
Senator Markey. So should the United States abandon the
rules-based international system? And what would the
concessions be that we would try to extract in order to take
such a step? Dr. Mastro?
Dr. Mastro. So, sir, I do not think we should abandon it.
Instead, what I am arguing for is an expansion of that system.
I think that actually the rules-based international order is
very limited. If you look at the definition, the party to that
order, the amount of countries that actually might be involved
in certain treaties, it is not every country possible. For
example, India has very different views on things like
cybersecurity than the United States does. And so I think if we
could manage to build consensus in these areas of uncertainty,
we could actually shape China's choices.
And to that end, that gives the United States a lot of
political power because the bottom line is one of the main
differences between today and maybe 10 years ago is for the
United States, the security benefits that we give to our
partners, allies in the region are no longer enough to outweigh
the economic benefits that they get from interacting with
China. And so we need a security benefits-plus type of strategy
in which we think also about the economic benefits, which is
difficult under the current administration given the trade
policy, but also those political benefits by building new
international institutions and building new norms and consensus
around areas where that consensus has failed to date.
Senator Markey. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Gardner. Going back to the question I started to
talk about, just the investments that China has made in South
America, the investments China is making in Central America, if
you look at investments in Panama and El Salvador and at least
apparently in El Salvador as perhaps part of an agreement as it
relates to the decision El Salvador made on Taiwan, look at the
sale of submarines to countries, Thailand, do we see that as a
continued opportunity for China's military expansion? Will we
see military basing affecting U.S. operations in Thailand? Will
we see perhaps opportunity for military entrance into Central
America, into South America, China basing even perhaps? Mr.
Denmark?
Mr. Denmark. Well, I think there is a lot that remains to
be seen. I do not think there is a definitive yes or no answer
to that question, but I do expect that Djibouti, being the
first overseas base that China has established--I fully expect
that that will not be the last. Where additional facilities may
pop up remains to be seen. I personally would expect more
facilities to be established along the trade routes from the
Western Pacific through the Indian Ocean into the Middle East.
I would expect to see more there before I would expect to see
them in Latin America primarily because of China's economic
interests, but it remains to be seen.
I do think--and I addressed this in my prepared statement--
that China's thinking about overseas basing and especially
thinking about alliances and partnerships is very different
from how the United States thinks about it. Based on my
conversations with Chinese academics, my sense is that Chinese
officials and Chinese academics see these relationships as
fundamentally transactional and fundamentally coercive to a
degree. And so I think that will ultimately limit the
effectiveness and the breadth of these facilities in peacetime
and especially during potential conflict and crisis when these
countries will suddenly be forced to make a choice to allow
Chinese military forces to operate from their country. When
there is a longstanding, deep, values-based alliance, that
calculation for an ally is very different when the arrangement
is purely transactional.
Senator Gardner. Dr. Mastro?
Dr. Mastro. I do not think China is going to pursue the
same type of global military presence that the United States
has. This goes to one of the points in my written testimony
about entrepreneurial actions. China sees what the United
States does globally as something that is ineffective being
largely not only with a global military presence but being very
intimately involved in the politics of countries and then
supporting different sides to ensure that you have someone in
power that is supportive of your military operations or your
general policies in that region. A lot of Chinese strategists
will write that this is what is costing the United States so
much money and will ultimately lead to our demise. And so I
think China is going to pursue a different way, not because
they do not have the capabilities to emulate the United States,
but because they think that is actually what is leading to the
U.S. decline.
What might that different thing look like? I think, for
example, China is much more likely to rely on local authorities
to protect their interests abroad than the United States would
feel comfortable with. We already know that they are
indifferent to who is in power in whatever country. They are
more than happy to change whatever deal they had with the
previous administration or leader to a different one right
after that.
Also, I think it is telling that Mr. Denmark referred to
facilities, not bases because the fundamental structure of a
lot of what China is doing is more right now logistics-focused
and they are not prepositioning offensive systems there. So I
think that is important as well.
The main point is if they do move any sort of military
operations beyond their immediate region, the purpose is going
to be not so much to impact U.S. operations but to facilitate
their own. But the bottom line is, when I saw the National
Security Strategy and its promotion of this idea that we are in
a great power competition with China, to me that signaled that
what becomes important is no longer the U.S.-China competition,
but the United States' relationship with the rest of the world,
and it enhances the influence of countries like Djibouti in
U.S. strategy. So more resources, military or otherwise, need
to be focused on some of these smaller countries.
Senator Gardner. Mr. Denmark, you talked a little bit about
the security versus economic sort of relationship, that they
look at the United States as a security relationship, they may
look at China as an economic relationship. But eventually that
cannot sustain itself because if there is no sort of economic
interest--or can it sustain itself I guess is the question. If
there is no economic opportunity and if the benefit of the
relationship is flowing one way and the expense of the
relationship is flowing another way, can that continue and will
nations--and regional in particular--look at that and say there
is a danger in not having any kind of a--of moving too far down
the path of a security versus an economic relationship?
Mr. Denmark. Yes, sir. I believe that countries are
generally uncomfortable with such a scenario in part because
they want to avoid being forced to make a choice informed by
their distrust of Chinese intentions, informed by longstanding
relations that many of them have with the United States. And to
me, this points out to the need for the United States to
enhance other aspects of its engagement with these countries.
Having worked in the Pentagon, I tried to enhance our security
relationships with these countries as best I could. But the
need to enhance other aspects of this engagement, particularly
on the trade and investment side, is geopolitically critical in
my estimation to ensure that these countries are not put in the
difficult position of needing to choose between Washington and
Beijing because for many of these countries, they may not like
China, they may prefer to work with the United States, but the
reality is that China is close, China is large, and the United
States is far away. And so making sure that they have the
ability to avoid that choice I think is an important aspect for
American strategy in the region.
Senator Gardner. Thank you.
Dr. Mastro?
Dr. Mastro. I also just add that I think it is important to
communicate to our partners and allies that we will not
negotiate their security with the People's Republic of China.
For example, when President Trump announced that we had reduced
military exercises in South Korea, this was music to China's
ears. This was their key strategy to enhance their relationship
with North Korea in order to use that to get the United States
to reduce their military presence. And so if we want to
maintain those strong security relationships, we have to
demonstrate to our partners and allies that we are not going to
sacrifice, for example, our security relationships for the sake
of economic benefits or cooperation in a different area with
China.
Senator Gardner. That is an interesting point. I think a
question, Dr. Mastro, that I would have to follow up with that
is if China sees an opening to reduce--and I think testimony
before us today talked about the interests in the Korean
Peninsula, China's interests in the Korean Peninsula. I think,
Mr. Denmark, it was your testimony. You talked about sort of
the three varying interests of U.S. involvement in the
peninsula with the ultimate hope of getting the U.S. out of its
involvement in the Korean Peninsula. Why do you think China has
not pushed further on North Korea to perhaps widen that
expectation that President Trump said that he would pursue
fewer exercises? There have been discussions of whether or not
troops would be removed from the peninsula. Why has China not
pushed harder on North Korea to actually denuclearize in hopes
that perhaps President Trump would further withdraw from the
Korean Peninsula?
Dr. Mastro. I think China's assessment is that what North
Korea is doing, making the promises to consider
denuclearization, was enough already to get the United States
there. And so potentially by pushing it too much, you are
really calling attention to the fact that--I do not want to
create this image of China as a puppet master, but that this is
part of a bigger strategy for China to overall reduce U.S.
military presence and operations in the region. If that is what
the discussion is about on the Korean Peninsula more openly, I
think the United States would smartly be more resistant to
making those types of changes. So I think that is why China is
kind of indirectly behind the scenes trying to pursue these
types of strategies.
Senator Gardner. Senator Markey?
Senator Markey. Great. Thank you.
Let us go to North Korea and China and the promise that we
would end or curtail those military operations and kind of
reports that China would like to increase trade with North
Korea just as a way of kind of maybe getting closer to them on
the one hand but also kind of undermining our objectives with
North Korea at the same time.
Could you talk about that issue and what you think China's
goals are in North Korea at this time?
Dr. Mastro. I have written extensively on this issue, sir,
and I think that China's goals are very similar to ours if we
are looking just in the context of North Korea. Obviously, they
would prefer a denuclearized Korean Peninsula.
The difference is that China sees the Korean issue in the
context of its broader competition with the United States. And
so that denuclearization no longer becomes the top priority. So
initially about a year ago, China was actively preparing for
military contingencies in which they were going to invade North
Korea without a North Korean invitation. The relationship
between China and North Korea was very bad at that time, and
they felt like if there was some sort of contingency involving
the United States, they would have to get involved to protect
their own interests.
Once the diplomatic options became more viable and
President Trump agreed to talk to Kim and Kim agreed to talk to
President Trump, China shifted its strategy to try to use
diplomacy to get the United States to decrease its presence in
the region.
So in the end, China would be more than happy, one, for
North Korea to denuclearize, but two, Xi Jinping himself has
said that the ideal scenario in the future is a unified Korea
under South Korean control. Their views of North Korea have
changed significantly. The issue is they do not want to pay
costs to get rid of North Korea if that is to the benefit of
the United States, if all that means is an increase of U.S.
influence. And so I firmly believe that--and I am not
advocating for this, but if the United States promised to leave
the Korean Peninsula if North Korea no longer existed, that
China would push North Korea so much and be more than happy to
risk its collapse.
Senator Markey. Your thoughts, Mr. Denmark.
Mr. Denmark. I am less confident in my reading of Chinese
intentions. I do broadly agree with Dr. Mastro about that
China's approach to this has changed fairly radically, but I do
think there are some differences between how China approaches
the North Korea issue and how the United States does.
First, I think fundamentally China seeks to manage the
nuclear issue, not to solve it. And a piece of that is to
prioritize stability over denuclearization. And within that,
when the Chinese talk about stability on the Korean Peninsula,
traditionally they seek to avoid the collapse of the North
Korean regime.
Yet, at the same time, they also have seen the United
States as dangerous as well, the United States as a potential
driver of instability. And so historically when the United
States has appeared to Beijing to be more unpredictable or more
likely to begin a conflict, China tries to placate the United
States and tries to do things to reduce the potential that the
United States would start a war.
So I do think they have very different approaches to this
issue than the United States. But I think right now the
ultimate sense from Beijing right now is that they see the
dynamics on the Korean Peninsula fundamentally through the lens
of geopolitical competition with the United States.
Senator Markey. Thank you.
In September of 2013, China began a concerted effort to
build artificial islands in the South China Sea by crushing
coral reefs into sand. It built land features where none
previously existed. On top of that, China expanded small
outposts into military bases capable of conducting operations.
Admiral Philip Davidson, the Commander of the United States
Indo-Pacific Command, stated this year that China's
militarization of the Spratly Islands in the South China Sea
means, quote, China is now capable of controlling the South
China Sea in all scenarios short of a war with the United
States.
Ms. Mastro, what considerations or challenges do these
bases pose for other claimants and the United States in
peacetime in the gray zone or in conflict? In other words, what
are the implications of China's military bases in the South
China Sea?
Dr. Mastro. So militarily, sir, they expand the range of
Chinese capabilities. And so I think I made the point
previously that it is difficult for us to conceive of fighting
a war with China using our bases in Korea and Japan, and that
is primarily because of the range of conventional precision-
guided munitions that China has that can reach those bases and
render them inoperable.
In the South China Sea, which is about the size of the
United States, China's power projection capabilities
historically have been quite limited. And in the report, for
example, one thing that was highlighted was the H-6K, one that
has LACMs now. China can extend its range to 3,300 kilometers.
But if you actually have bases there coupled with carriers,
then China is able to sustain combat sorties, for example, for
longer periods of time at farther ranges than it was before.
And this is what allows it to be able to control, as the quote
suggested, large areas of the South China Sea, the air and the
sea.
I would just mention on the gray zone side that China can
engage in gray zone activities only because the United States
allows it to. As far as I understand it, there is nothing that
tells us that, for example, if China says, well, this is a
coast guard, then we cannot respond with the use of the U.S.
Navy. We are too concerned about escalation, and Chinese knows
this. They do not believe in miscalculation and inadvertent
escalation, and so they use this to their advantage. And we
should start being very clear about what our red lines are and
obviously being then able to follow through with that.
Senator Markey. So how does their presence there alter our
military calculations in that region? What is changing now in
your opinion because of their enhanced presence out in the
South China Sea?
Dr. Mastro. So there is a debate, sir, about how the United
States will operate in that contingency. So certain bases or
areas that used to be safe would no longer be safe as the
Chinese are able to operate farther and farther out. So
something like should the United States be dispersing its
forces more or should we be spending more money on the defense
of our bases once China is able to meet them, this is the type
of debate that then extends beyond Japan to areas farther and
farther out.
Senator Markey. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Denmark, what do you make of China's apparent plans to
use floating nuclear power plants to provide power to these
bases in the Spratlys? What are the implications of floating
nuclear power plants out in the ocean?
Mr. Denmark. I have heard those reports too, Senator. I
think it is concerning to me, both the idea of adding nuclear
materials into an already very complex situation that also
involves tremendous environmental problems created by China.
I worry both about the sustainability of potentially
introducing nuclear power into the South China Sea primarily
because of the very dangerous weather that happens in the South
China Sea. Personally, I would not want to be stationed on any
of these islands with a nuclear reactor floating a few hundred
yards off of the coast. And I think it would be irresponsible
on the part of China to introduce nuclear materials, fissile
materials, hazardous materials into the South China Sea in an
area that does not need them and is already very much
environmentally damaged by their actions.
Senator Markey. Thank you.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Senator Markey.
The South China Sea--obviously in the conversations we have
had today, we have talked about the positioning of U.S. troops
or forces, making different strategic decisions on where we
place our investments from a defense perspective and an ally
perspective.
What are we left with in the South China Sea? I mean, they
have militarized the islands. They have built the islands. What
are we left with? Are we relegated simply to a freedom of
navigation operation? Is there more that we should be doing?
Should we talk with other--we should talk with other nations
about other opportunities, but what are those other
opportunities? Dr. Mastro?
Dr. Mastro. So, first I will say that this militarization
of the South China Sea is not over. In my discussions with
Chinese Government officials, what I have been told is that
movement of weapon systems to those islands has barely begun,
and what they are going to do is maybe wait for a freedom of
navigation operation or some excuse so that they can say they
are responding to U.S. action in order to help them move more
of their forces there. So what we are going to see is a
hardening and also the movement of more weapon systems to these
islands over the next few years.
That being said, what can we do about it? This goes back to
my previous point about sort of deterrence by denial versus
deterrence by punishment. There is no amount of freedom of
navigation operations which will stop China from militarizing
these islands. Either we decide we are going to physically stop
the supply or we do not have those other options.
So what I would recommend is we promote something like a
coalition that we had in the Gulf of Aden. I mean, we could
even invite China to be a part of it for legitimacy reasons,
but the idea would be that we have multinational patrols of the
South China Sea waters to ensure freedom of navigation because
right now no one doubts that the United States has freedom of
navigation. So our ability to conduct these operations--they do
not actually reassure anyone. Is the United States prepared to
protect vessels that fly a Vietnamese flag, that fly a
Malaysian flag? My understanding is we are not there yet, and
as long as we are not there, then we are not actually going to
be able to deter Chinese actions.
Senator Gardner. Mr. Denmark?
Mr. Denmark. So I agree that conducting freedom of
navigation operations does not send a very robust reassurance
signal, but I would say that to not conduct the operations
would send a terrible----
Senator Gardner. I agree.
Mr. Denmark.--lack of reassurance, de-surance maybe, if
that is a word.
So I do think it is important for the United States to
continue freedom of navigation operations and beyond that to
fly, sail, and operate wherever international law allows. I
think the key message to send is that China may be doing these
things in ways that are incompatible with international law,
but it does not change the United States' behavior or it does
not intimidate us, that we are going to continue to do what we
do.
But I do think there are things that we could do in
response to China's actions in terms of enhancing the ability
of our allies and partners to defend their islands. Also, I
think there are legal options to use the arbitration tribunal
ruling on the South China Sea as a diplomatic tool against the
Chinese.
And another piece of this is that the U.S. has been very
ambiguous in its take on which country rightfully owns which
islands. And I think one of the challenges that we have had in
the South China Sea is that we have called on the Chinese to
comply with international law, to restrain themselves, but we
have not had a statement on what happens if they fail. What
happens if they continue to ignore our requests and the
requests of the entire international community? And to my mind,
one of the things that could come after that with the Chinese
failure to comply with international laws and norms is to
clarify where the United States has been ambiguous in the past
and to use those sorts of diplomatic capabilities in order to
show China that their behavior has consequences.
Senator Gardner. Now, are you suggesting that we actually
then would side with a claimant? Is that what you are saying?
Mr. Denmark. What I would do is to look at what the
arbitration tribunal ruling says in terms of China's rightful
claims and the rightful claims of other countries and the
rights of other countries and to use that as the basis for
American policy going forward and to actively demonstrate U.S.
commitment to that ruling.
In terms of whether one country should control that island
or not, I am not there yet, but I do think we need to be able
to show the Chinese that their actions have consequences. And
by enhancing the ability of our partners to defend themselves
by maintaining a robust presence and expanding that presence
and by using international law as a tool of diplomacy, I think
we can show that their actions do have consequences.
Senator Gardner. As our attention is drawn to the Korean
Peninsula, as our attention is drawn in the South China Sea,
where else is China actively pursuing a, either on land or by
sea, South China Sea, another one, the South China Sea 2.0, so
to speak? Is there another area that we are not paying
attention to right now sufficiently with either a strategy or
concern that they are encroaching, building, developing in the
same manner or a similar manner?
Mr. Denmark. To me, the area that is most like the South
China Sea would be in the East China Sea. And there are some
important differences. China is not conducting island building.
They are not doing military construction there, but there is a
very heated dispute between China and Japan over those islands
in the East China Sea. China has been doing more to elevate
their presence----
Senator Gardner. We have given a security guarantee to the
East China Sea. We have not to the Philippines on Scarborough.
Should we be putting the same kind of security guarantees in
place?
Mr. Denmark. Well, it is a bit different because the
language of the treaties are different. The treaty with Japan
specifically refers to territory that is administered by Japan,
in which case the Japanese islands clearly fall within that.
The treaty with the Philippines is worded differently. So I
think the way we talk about territory controlled by the
Philippines would necessarily be different.
But I do think that the Obama administration decision to
clarify the U.S. position at the top level on Japan in the East
China Sea definitely sent a strong signal to the Chinese and,
at least for a time, my belief is decreased the amount of
pressure that China was putting on the East China Sea. But I
also think that is an area that we need to keep an eye on in
terms of Chinese efforts to put pressure on our allies and to
expand their claims into other people's territorial areas.
Senator Gardner. Senator Markey?
Senator Markey. Thank you.
Now I would like to turn to nuclear weapons in China. The
Defense Department reports that China is now in the process of
completing their nuclear triad and is updating all legs of that
nuclear force. The People's Liberation Army Rocket Force is
enhancing its intercontinental ballistic missiles, of which it
has between 75 and 100, to make them more survivable, more
mobile. Among other updates, China is building a new stealth
bomber, and the People's Liberation Army Air Force is upgrading
its aircraft with two new air-launched ballistic missiles, one
of which may include a nuclear payload. And at the same time,
the PLA Navy is improving its submarine-launched ballistic
missiles.
Are China's nuclear force developments destabilizing? Do
you see any indications that the Chinese Communist Party
intends to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in its national
security policy, or is it on an upward trajectory that would
perhaps suggest to us that we should engage in nuclear arms
control talks with the Chinese as we have traditionally with
the Soviet Union and Russia? Ms. Mastro?
Dr. Mastro. Thank you, Senator, for that question. It gives
me the opportunity to say some things for which I am optimistic
about the U.S.-China relationship.
China's modernization of their nuclear forces, both
quantitative and qualitative, is actually a stabilizing force
in the U.S.-China relationship. For many decades, China has
been uncertain about its second strike capabilities,
specifically whether or not if the United States launched a
first strike, they would have the capabilities to retaliate.
And this has led to a number of rethinkings about Chinese
nuclear strategy, which has traditionally been a no first-use
strategy and a launch on attack versus launch on warning in
terms of their exercises.
And so from the United States' perspective, there has
always been this gray area. There has been a concern that if
the United States attacks, given Chinese conventional
capabilities, this might be misconstrued as a first strike,
causing China to launch other nuclear weapons because they do
not have that second strike. So the development of the triad at
sea and in air hopefully will make the Chinese more optimistic
about their survivability of their nuclear forces and can
actually lead to stabilization in a crisis.
Senator Markey. You are saying that it reduces the hair-
trigger relationship between the United States and China with
regard to its nuclear arsenal, that because they are deploying
in a triad, because they are enhancing their capacity to
withstand a first strike, that they are less likely to just
push the button in a use it or lose it situation that may be
ambiguous, that may ultimately trigger an accidental nuclear
conflict between the United States and China?
Dr. Mastro. Yes, sir. If it does change the perception of
their ability to conduct a second strike, yes, it would be
stabilizing.
Senator Markey. So from your perspective--to get your
comment as well, Mr. Denmark--Dr. Mastro, do you believe that
we should begin to have arms control negotiations with the
Chinese?
Dr. Mastro. Sir, if we could, that would be a good idea,
but there is no way the Chinese would be willing to talk to us
about arms control over nuclear weapons because their position
is when the United States reduces its arsenal to reach the
level that China currently has, then they can begin those types
of negotiations.
Senator Markey. And do you agree with that, Mr. Denmark?
Mr. Denmark. I do. The only other reason I would add for
Chinese reluctance both because they see a wide disparity of
nuclear capabilities and the size of our nuclear programs, but
also they tend to see arms control negotiations, as we had with
the Soviet Union, as evidence of a Cold War relationship. So if
we were to begin to engage with them in some dialogue about
nuclear weapons, whatever it may be, it would have to be
couched in a way that is clearly different than how we handled
these issues with the Soviet Union.
Senator Markey. That is interesting.
And of their military budget, do you know what percentage
they are now putting into their nuclear triad?
Dr. Mastro. I do not have specific numbers for that, but I
would say that has been a lower priority of their military
modernization. They have allowed it to go this long without
having a secure second strike, and I think it is only because
they do not have to make those tradeoffs between butter and
guns at this point that they are starting to modernize their
nuclear force.
Senator Markey. Mr. Denmark, do you have any idea?
Mr. Denmark. I have nothing else to add on that.
Senator Markey. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Senator Markey.
And the final question for me. We talked a little bit about
Taiwan earlier. China's intention as it relates to Taiwan.
Today Senator Markey and I and Senator Rubio, Senator Menendez
introduced a bill called the Taipei Act, which would create a
U.S. strategy to work with countries that have relationships
with Taiwan, what we can do to encourage those relationships to
continue to counter Chinese efforts as it pursues the policy
toward Taiwan.
What is the ultimate goal of China as it relates? Is this
an actual invasion force we are going to see? Is this continued
economic rattling of the sword that we will see further pull
Taiwan back into its policies, in line with its policies? What
do you believe the ultimate goal is as it relates to Taiwan,
Dr. Mastro?
Dr. Mastro. The ultimate goal is reunification ideally by
peaceful means. However, Xi Jinping made a number of statements
in which he promised to the Chinese people that that
reunification was going to happen I think he said by 2035.
I was less concerned originally about those statements. I
thought they were just something rhetorical that a leader says
originally because I thought Xi Jinping was going to be
stepping down in a couple years and no one could hold him
accountable to those statements. But now that he has extended
his tenure indefinitely, it does change the picture for when he
made those statements about Taiwan and whether or not he thinks
he is going to be held accountable to actually live up to them.
I think the bottom line is China is prepared and is going
to be willing to use force if they have to for that
reunification, but they want to do it peacefully in the
meantime.
In terms of what the United States can do, I just want to
highlight a basic point, which is provocation is not
necessarily a bad thing. We are always worried about some
action that is going to provoke China. Provocation can lead to
escalation or tension, but it can also lead to the opposite,
depending on what China learns from U.S. actions.
Senator Gardner. So the legislation we introduced would
also allow the administration to downgrade diplomatic
relationships with the country that were to follow China as it
relates to Taiwan. Is something like that an approach that you
would agree with?
Dr. Mastro. I think that, if the bottom line is we want to
signal that we are willing to stand by Taiwan and that we do
not want China to successfully engage in coercion vis-a-vis
other countries the United States has to be willing to either
impose costs on those countries, as you suggested, or provide
certain benefits or positive inducements to get them----
Senator Gardner. You mentioned provocation.
Dr. Mastro. Yes.
Senator Gardner. Give me an example.
Dr. Mastro. So something like that, if you wanted to, for
example, improve your relationship with Taiwan--I have heard
maybe putting military members in uniform that are stationed
out in Taiwan--or have high level leaders of the United States
visit, that is really going to upset Beijing. But that is not
necessarily going to be a bad thing in the end. It might mean
that they understand that now is not the time to push the
United States on Taiwan policy.
Senator Gardner. Mr. Denmark?
Mr. Denmark. So I agree the ultimate goal is unification
with Taiwan preferably by peaceful means although China has
never renounced the use of force.
Senator Gardner. Have the odds increased that they would
use force under Xi Jinping?
Mr. Denmark. I think that the potential for Chinese force
is dependent on several different factors, and they have talked
about publicly what those factors may be. They are fairly
vague, but I think broadly speaking so long as China's leaders
believe that there continues to be progress made towards
unification, that time is on their side. So long as they
believe that it is possible that any military intervention
would fail, I think those are some of the issues that they look
at.
But I do think it is important that when the United States
thinks about its relationship with Taiwan, that the primary
question is focused on what helps our relationship, what helps
Taiwan. And questions of how China may react should be at most
secondary, if considered at all.
But the corollary to that to me is that to recognize that
China will react. So I tend to look for policies related to
Taiwan that substantively and substantially help Taiwan, that
are not symbolic alone because what often happens and what I
would hope to avoid is symbolic gestures that feel good for a
bit to help Taiwan but ultimately drive a Chinese response that
does not hurt the United States substantially but hurts Taiwan.
So I tend to favor policies that are substantive and less
symbolic.
In terms of options on how to maintain Taiwan's
international space, I do think that we are talking to a lot of
these countries to maintain the relationship is important to
convey that maintaining that relationship with Taiwan is in the
U.S.'s interests. There is a bit of an awkward piece of it for
our diplomats to handle is that we do not have an official
relationship with Taiwan, but I think that is manageable.
The key, though, to me for all of this is to think
fundamentally: How does this help Taiwan? How does this
maintain Taiwan's international space? And how do we convey to
Beijing that maintaining a robust if an unofficial relationship
with Taiwan is in the interest of the United States?
Senator Gardner. Thanks, Mr. Denmark.
Senator Markey?
Senator Markey. And I just have one final area of
questioning, if I may, and that just goes back to the Belt and
Road Initiative which has resulted in a very generous policy by
China of loaning money to countries, which they then cannot pay
back, which then results in China being able to extract huge
long-term concessions from those countries, Sri Lanka is just a
perfect example where they have now had to give up a 99-year
lease to the Chinese company, which is partially owned by the
Chinese Government, 15,000 acres of land.
And now it appears there are more countries that are
deciding to reconsider how far in debt they want their
countries or companies to be to a Chinese entity. But at the
same time, President Xi just in the last few days has announced
a new $60 billion program of grants, of loans around the world
on top of the $60 billion program that they have had in the
past that now has these consequences.
So what are the implications for the United States, for
global security of these Chinese strategies in country after
country to gain access to or control over ports in countries?
And what would you recommend to the United States that we do to
try to make sure that we minimize the ability of this Belt and
Road program to build economic and security relationships with
companies in a way almost giving them offers they cannot refuse
so that they become deeper indebted and more entangled into
Chinese foreign policy objectives? Dr. Mastro?
Dr. Mastro. I think just like we mentioned that the Chinese
military does not have to be as strong as the U.S. military to
be competitive, the United States does not have to offer as
much money as China does to be competitive in the economic
sphere. We really just have to show up and this is because one
you already mentioned, that there is an increasing backlash
against what China is doing, but also locally Chinese business
practices lead to a reduced quality of a lot of these things.
So I was in Djibouti last year, in Ethiopia, and this made
me actually very optimistic about the United States' ability to
compete when it comes to aid because while the United States
was--for example, our base in Djibouti hires over a hundred
Djiboutians and we insert hundreds of millions of dollars into
the economy, the Chinese base hires zero Djiboutians and does
not contribute to the economy. And they have built a railroad
that does not even extend to the port, and the only reason they
got that contract was through bribery.
So I think what we are seeing now is that countries are
learning. These economic policies on the part of China are
relatively new and if they had the opportunity, they would
rather have a road built by--at least what I heard in
Ethiopia--like Japan that actually will last them longer versus
a road built by China which they know they are going to have to
rebuild in 5 years. And so at least in this area, I think it
would actually be very easy for the United States to be
competitive if we were contributing time, resources, and effort
to being competitive in the economic sphere.
Senator Markey. You are saying ``made in China'' may not be
exactly what people are looking for in these countries after
they have experienced some of the early examples of what that
means for their country.
Dr. Mastro. Yes, sir. In a lot of cases, like in the Japan
example I gave with Ethiopia, our allies or partners have a lot
stronger presence or relationships with countries than we do.
And so it might be the case that instead of the United States
trying to give aid or investing in these infrastructure
projects, we would be working with our allies and partners to
do the similar type of thing.
Senator Markey. So, Mr. Denmark, Dr. Mastro says we have
got to show up. We have got to have something that we are
presenting here that demonstrates the United States' interest
in these countries. So what do you recommend?
Mr. Denmark. Thank you, Senator.
Every year several senior Chinese officials will go to
China with CEOs in tow, have a high level meeting with dozens
of presidents, announce all these big deals, announce
infrastructure projects, and it is a consistent high-level
engagement. I completely agree with Dr. Mastro that we got to
show up, but I would add that we need to show up with something
in hand. Good intentions are not going to be sufficient in
Africa.
I think the Chinese miscalculate or overestimate the
geopolitical effects of their economic moves. One of the
problems I think of being a Marxist is that you tend to
overestimate the political effects of economic ties.
As I said, my sense is that as countries become more and
more economically tied to China, the more they are worried
about maintaining their own independence. So I do think they
are looking for the United States. I do think they would rather
work with the Americans or the Japanese or the Europeans or
whomever, but we do need to show up.
The initiative announced several weeks ago by Secretary of
State Pompeo in this vein to enhance U.S. economic engagement
in these areas I thought was a good indication of seeing the
problem and trying to address it, not trying to copy the
Chinese system, but playing to American strengths of the free
market and American corporations. Secretary Pompeo received
some criticism for the number he announced of $113 million. I
think that is sort of an unfair comparison to what the Chinese
announced especially in an off budgetary cycle announcement.
But I do hope that as this initiative becomes more funded we
are able to put more resources behind it because I do think it
is the beginning of a very important geopolitical response to a
lot of these challenges.
Senator Markey. Thank you.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Senator Markey.
Thanks to Senators Risch and Kaine for participating in the
hearing today.
And I think, Mr. Denmark, Dr. Mastro, the Asia Reassurance
Initiative Act that I talked about at the very beginning of the
hearing is something that will allow the U.S. to show up with
policies and resources in hand to develop greater economic
ties, greater security alliances and help on human rights and
democracy throughout the region. And so with the Asia
Reassurance Initiative Act, with the BUILD Act, I think that is
a great step towards U.S. leadership and presence in Asia
providing opportunities for a strategic balance and continued
economic growth for the region.
So thanks to both of you for your time and testimony today.
Your homework assignment: the record will remain open for
members to submit questions through Friday, until the close of
business on Friday. I would ask that you return your answers to
those questions as soon as possible.
And with the thanks of the committee, the hearing is now
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:05 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
----------
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
Responses to Additional Questions for the Record
Submitted to Dr. Oriana Skylar Mastro by Senator Cory Gardner
Sensitive Technologies
Question 1.
There have been instances of U.S. technology companies
willingly partnering with Chinese entities in critical technology
sectors, including with state-owned Chinese entities or entities tied
to the People's Liberation Army.
 Do you believe that the United States companies should continue to
partner with Chinese entities, including in sensitive areas
such as processor memory chips? Should the U.S. Government be
concerned about such partnerships?
 What is the appropriate role of government when a U.S. company
willingly partners or transfers technology to a Chinese entity
that may threaten overall U.S. competitiveness in that sector
or raise national security concerns? What options should
Congress and the U.S. Government consider in such cases?
Answer. First, there needs to be a distinction between private
sector activity that hurts U.S. economic competitiveness and that which
raises significant national security concerns.
I do not believe the U.S. Government should regulate the former if
done willingly. However, Washington needs to continue to pressure China
on issues of industrial espionage and cyber-enabled IPR theft. An FBI
investigation in 2015 indicated that China paid Chinese nationals to
work at U.S. technology companies where they became insiders and
transferred sensitive technology back to China. Cyber theft is another
area where China has targeted U.S. assets. The report for IP Commission
in 2013 showed that 96% of the world's cyber theft was from China which
resulted each year in 100 billion in lost sales, 2.1 million in lost
jobs, and $300 billion worth of stolen intellectual property.
In the case of the latter, if technology transfer improves PLA
lethality, it should be prevented, even at significant economic cost to
U.S. companies. This issue is that currently the U.S. Government does
not have a system to monitor venture investing or transferring early-
stage technology. More importantly, the Committee on Foreign Investment
in the United States (CFIUS), one of the primary tools to mitigate
foreign investment, is only partially effective in protecting national
security since transactions that do not result in a foreign controlling
interest cannot be reviewed by CFIUS. This is the first step in
monitoring and investigating the partnerships and transactions between
U.S. and Chinese companies that work in sensitive sectors--this can
potentially be done by expanding the authority of CFIUS.
UAS/MCTR
Question 2.
The recent Department of Defense report to Congress on
Chinese military power notes that the Chinese continue to exploit the
void left by the U.S. in the unmanned aerial system (UAS) space, due to
U.S. Government concerns about the Missile Technology Control Regime
(MTCR).
 How should the Trump Administration ensure that we quickly respond
to the urgent UAS requirements of our partners and allies given
the MTCR restrictions, especially considering the growing
Chinese role in the UAS market?
 What are the concerns about our partners and allies obtaining
Chinese UAS technology?
Answer. There are three main concerns with partners and allies
obtaining Chinese UAS technology: 1) Foreign Military Sales are often
used as a tool of diplomacy, and thus U.S. allies and partners could
become closer to, and more technologically intertwined, with China; 2)
If allies are reliant on China for certain platforms and technologies,
then in a conflict scenario they may not have access to needed
replacements, refurbishments and maintenance, which could impact their
military effectiveness, 3) External sales provides financial support to
the
Currently, MTCR constrains U.S. ability to export UAS. Since China
does not sign the MTCR, China can sell drones to all nations without
clear standard and regulations, including countries in the Middle East
that the U.S. does not sell to due to national security concerns. For
instance, in 2015, China sold CH-4s to Iraq, Saudi Arabia, UAE and even
U.S. allies such as Jordan and Egypt. While the U.S. had a deal to sell
UAVs to Jordan and Egypt, its slow approval processes forced its allies
to purchase China's drones instead.
MTCR has played an important role in limited the proliferation of
missile technology--and the United States should continue to support
the control regime. A unilateral U.S. move that violates its MTCR
commitments could weaken the regime. If possible, the best course of
action is to work within the regime to change, update and specify its
coverage over UAS and aspects of its emerging technology.
__________
Responses to Additional Questions for the Record
Submitted to Abraham M. Denmark by Senator Cory Gardner
Sensitive Technologies
Question 1.
There have been instances of U.S. technology companies
willingly partnering with Chinese entities in critical technology
sectors, including with state-owned Chinese entities or entities tied
to the People's Liberation Army.
 Do you believe that the United States companies should continue to
partner with Chinese entities, including in sensitive areas
such as processor memory chips? Should the U.S. Government be
concerned about such partnerships?
 What is the appropriate role of government when a U.S. company
willingly partners or transfers technology to a Chinese entity
that may threaten overall U.S. competitiveness in that sector
or raise national security concerns? What options should
Congress and the U.S. Government consider in such cases?
Answer. Partnerships between American and Chinese companies, if
structured correctly, offer significant opportunities for both sides.
Yet China's practices of demanding technology transfers, its history of
using any means to steal intellectual property, and the close
relationship between many large Chinese companies and the Chinese
Communist Party raises national security concerns that cannot be
ignored. I personally have significant concerns about partnerships
between Chinese entities and U.S. companies that manufacture components
of critical infrastructure and/or the defense industrial base for the
United States.
The U.S. Government would need to balance the interests of
maintaining a free market and supporting legitimacy trade and
international investment with national security considerations of
defending critical technologies from theft or exposing critical
infrastructure to potential malign activities. Personally, I would
argue that government should focus on the national security
implications of any particular partnership or technology transfer
between an American company and a Chinese entity.
UAS/MCTR
Question 2
The recent Department of Defense report to Congress on
Chinese military power notes that the Chinese continue to exploit the
void left by the U.S. in the unmanned aerial system (UAS) space, due to
U.S. Government concerns about the Missile Technology Control Regime
(MTCR).
 How should the Trump administration ensure that we quickly respond
to the urgent UAS requirements of our partners and allies given
the MTCR restrictions, especially considering the growing
Chinese role in the UAS market?
 What are the concerns about our partners and allies obtaining
Chinese UAS technology?
Answer. UASs offer unique capabilities at a lower cost than some
manned systems, making them particularly attractive for countries that
face significant security challenges but limited resources.
Reclassifying UAS as aircraft, rather than missiles, could help the
U.S. Government bypass MTCR restrictions. Yet further and more
stringent end-use constraints may be required to ensure that such
capabilities do not proliferate. Yet I would argue that this decision
should be made from a national security perspective--to build the
capabilities of, and maintain interoperability with, key allies and
partners.
My primary concern would be regarding a lack of interoperability.
One of the reasons U.S. forces are able to operate so effectively with
those of our allies and partners is because our platforms are often
built for interoperability. By acquiring Chinese UAS capabilities,
allies and partners may limit the ability of their forces to operate
effectively with their American counterparts. Even if work-arounds
could be developed, the U.S. military would need to examine any
potential vulnerabilities involved with operating Chinese-origin UAS on
U.S. networks.
THE CHINA CHALLENGE
PART 3: DEMOCRACY, HUMAN RIGHTS, AND THE RULE OF LAW
----------
TUESDAY, DECEMBER 4, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee on East Asia, The Pacific, and
International Cybersecurity Policy,
Committee on Foreign Relations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:33 a.m. in
Room SD-419, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Cory Gardner,
chairman of the subcommittee, presiding.
Present: Senators Gardner, Rubio, Markey, and Kaine.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CORY GARDNER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM COLORADO
Senator Gardner. This hearing will come to order.
Let me thank you all, all the witnesses, to the 11th and
final hearing for the Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on
East Asia, The Pacific, International Cybersecurity Policy in
the 115th Congress.
I first want to again thank Senator Markey for being an
incredible partner, absolutely incredible partner, on this
subcommittee. You could not have asked for anybody better to
work with.
The East Asia has held the most hearings of any Foreign
Relations subcommittee in the 115th Congress. It is quite an
achievement for the American people who sent us here to conduct
vigorous oversight over our nation's foreign policy. And I
thank Senator Markey for the work that we have done together
throughout the Indo-Pacific region.
In conjunction with this hearing, we authorized the Asia
Reassurance Initiative Act, or ARIA, the landmark legislation
that will strengthen our alliances and deter our adversaries in
the Indo-Pacific for generations to come. To inform this
legislation, we conducted five hearings, examining a range of
national security, economic, and rule of law challenges in the
Indo-Pacific. We concluded with a hearing on May 15th, 2018
featuring State Department and Department of Defense officials.
On June 21st, 2018, Secretary Pompeo and Secretary Mattis
formally endorsed ARIA in a letter to this committee. ARIA
passed this committee unanimously on September 26th, 2018, and
I am hopeful that it will be signed into law before the end of
the year.
In this subcommittee, we also held two hearings on North
Korea, examining the shift from strategic patience policy of
the last administration to the maximum pressure and engagement
policy of this one. We agreed that clearly much more work needs
to be done to achieve complete, verifiable, and irreversible
denuclearization of the North Korean regime, as required by
U.S. law.
We also held an important hearing on cybersecurity policy,
examining state-sponsored threats in cyberspace as a vital
national security concern for the United States that needs to
be seriously and immediately addressed.
This hearing today will be the final hearing in a three-
part series of hearings titled ``The China Challenge'' that
examines how the United States should respond to the challenge
of a China that seeks to upend and supplant the U.S.-led
liberal world order.
Our first two hearings focused on security and economic
aspects of China's authoritarian rise. Today's hearing will
focus on democracy, human rights, and the rule of law, values
that have been fundamental to the conduct of U.S. foreign
policy for generations.
As these values relate to China, the Trump administration
has been clear on the scope of the problem and gravity of the
challenge before us. According to the National Security
Strategy, for decades U.S. policy was rooted in the belief that
support for China's rise and for its integration into the post-
war international order would liberalize China. Contrary to our
hopes, the report stated China expanded its power at the
expense of the sovereignty of others.
According to the National Defense Strategy, the central
challenge to U.S. prosperity and security is the reemergence of
long-term strategic competition by what national security
strategy classifies as revisionist powers. It is increasingly
clear that China and Russia want to shape a world consistent
their authoritarian model and gaining veto authority of over
nations' economic, diplomatic, and security decisions.
The so-called authoritarian closing under President Xi
Jinping has resulted in an unprecedented and intensifying
crackdown on civil society, ethnic minorities, and religious
freedom in China. The news of mass concentration camps for
Uighur Muslims in the Xinjiang autonomous province has shocked
the conscience and necessitates a serious response from the
United States and the international community.
The crackdowns in the Tibet autonomous region is
intensifying while Beijing continues to refuse negotiations
with the Central Tibetan administration. Human rights defenders
are routinely jailed, tortured, and otherwise deprived of
liberty. A genuine freedom of speech and assembly are
nonexistent. Corruption and abuse of power are rampant. The
judicial system is a tool of the state and the party and not an
impartial arbiter of legal disputes.
So today, we have three distinguished administration
witnesses to shed light on how the United States should
approach democracy, human rights, and the rule of law as they
relate to strategic competition with China and how the United
States should advance these values on Chinese soil.
With that, I will turn it over to Senator Markey for his
opening comments.
STATEMENT OF HON. EDWARD J. MARKEY,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MASSACHUSETTS
Senator Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much. And
again, thank you for this incredible set of hearings which we
have had in this subcommittee over the past 2 years. They've
been just absolutely fantastic, and I want to compliment you
for that.
This hearing is just a continuation of them, looking at
Chinese policies and influences. These challenges are not
insurmountable, but they do require our thoughtful study and
close attention.
Around the world, all countries, including the United
States, rely on the rules-based international order to underpin
security and prosperity, to help provide a level playing field,
to provide the maximum opportunity for the greatest number of
people, and to defend and protect certain fundamental rights.
So, it is of the utmost importance that we do everything in our
power to ensure that this system remains.
Our first hearing focused on economic policies of the
Chinese Government that ran counter to these tenets.
The subsequent hearing explored China's military
modernization and expansion and its implications for the
security interests of America, our allies, and the fundamental
peace and stability of the Indo-Pacific.
Today's hearing seeks to capture developments in Chinese
domestic policy that could have broad implications for the way
people are treated around the world. After all, what has made
American foreign policy strong and effective is not just our
economic and military strength, but our commitment to certain
values. The world has looked up to the United States. It
watched as our democratic experiment developed--one that
prioritized the promotion of basic individual freedoms and
liberties.
But we must make clear that this was not just an
experiment, that American democracy is not obsolete, and that
U.S. leadership on human rights is not temporary. While
American democracy has been messy at times, it has also been
the envy of the international community. It is what has allowed
us to be a moral leader in the eyes of the world.
As China rises, it grows evermore influential around the
world, and elements of China's policies have challenged long-
established concepts of rights and freedoms.
I, like many others, at one point believed that China's
entry into the international community would lead to increased
political openings, the promotion of freedom of expression, and
greater commitment to human rights.
Unfortunately, we are seeing just the opposite trend. We
are seeing the Chinese Government's authoritarian attitudes
influence five key areas.
First, it seeks to politically curb dissent through
censorship of all types of freedom of expression, including
online. This approach is drawing American companies such as
Google into this way of thinking and, along the way,
compromising data privacy provisions on their online platforms
in exchange for greater market access for American companies.
Second, it is employing extrajudicial tactics to intimidate
citizens, including those from the United States. Along with
Senators Cardin, Rubio, and Gardner, I am concerned that this
administration is not raising these issues with the Chinese
Government, including its use of exit ban policies to prevent
innocent Americans from leaving China, which violate
international conventions and bilateral agreements. We have to
do more.
Third, we are seeing the continued ethnic and religious
repression of minority communities in China. The Chinese
Government's tactics to repress Tibetan Buddhists is being
replicated in Xinjiang. There are reports that as many as 1
million Muslim Uighurs have been forced to take part, quote, in
reeducation camps where they must renounce their religious and
ethnic identity. This policy is an abomination and defies all
forms of basic human rights principles. This sadly falls into a
pattern of state behavior as the Government's policies to
target Christians and members of other faiths is well known.
Fourth, the Chinese Government is now exhibiting the bold
behavior of targeting activists and dissidents overseas. In one
case, Chinese authorities have threatened the family members of
Radio Free Asia's Uighur news service journalists, should they
continue to report on the activities inside of China.
And finally, China's Government has protected other
governments accused of significant human rights violations.
China is working through the United Nations Security Council to
protect the Government in Burma from international condemnation
for its brutal assault on the Rohingya. It is weakening the
international efforts to pressure the Hun Sen regime in
Cambodia by offering financial loans. It is giving lucrative
lines of credit to Venezuela as the world tries to isolate
President Maduro. And it is noticeably silent on President
Duterte's drug war in the Philippines, as it strengthens the
economic and security partnership with Manila. Such policies
undermine established human rights standards internationally,
and they challenge the individual freedoms and liberties the
majority of the world holds dear.
So it is imperative that we confront this challenge. We
must engage with our Chinese counterparts head-on about our
concerns and work with our allies and partners to establish a
collective front against this malign behavior. And we have to
do it at the highest levels, starting with the President,
because we cannot credibly defend human rights without the
backing of the Office of the President.
And there are many unanswered questions about how this
administration is dealing with China's authoritarian behavior.
How effective are we in calling out Chinese behavior?
Especially when we pull out of institutions like the Human
Rights Council, which can serve as an effective venue to
applying pressure. How are we raising our concerns with the
Chinese Government, and what is our President saying to
President Xi about human rights? Did this come up at the G20,
and if so, how did the conversation go? If not, why not? We do
not know.
We need to shed light on these questions if we want to help
stem the tide of its authoritarian challenges to democracy,
human rights, and the rule of law. We must ensure our
diplomatic efforts are comprehensive and effective. Our moral
leadership of the planet depends upon it.
So I thank you, Mr. Chairman, once again, and I thank this
very distinguished panel for being here today. And I yield
back.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Senator Markey.
And I am going to introduce all three witnesses, and then
we will begin with you, Mr. Busby.
Our first witness is Scott Busby who serves as Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State at the Bureau of Democracy, Human
Rights, and Labor. Previously he served as Director for Human
Rights on the National Security Council in the White House from
2009 to 2011 where he managed a wide range of human rights and
refugee issues. Welcome to the committee and thank you for your
service.
Our second witness is Laura Stone, who serves as Acting
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State at the Bureau of East Asian
and Pacific Affairs. Previously she served as the Director of
the Office of Chinese and Mongolian Affairs, Director of the
Economic Policy Office in EAP, and Economic Counselor in Hanoi,
Vietnam. Thank you for being here.
Our third witness is Gloria Steele, who serves as Acting
Assistant Administrator at the Bureau for Asia of the United
States Agency for International Development, or USAID. A career
member of the U.S. Senior Executive Service, she was USAID
Mission Director for the Philippines and the Pacific Islands
prior to her appointment. I look forward to your testimony.
Secretary Busby, please begin.
STATEMENT OF SCOTT BUSBY, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, HUMAN
RIGHTS AND LABOR, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE, WASHINGTON, DC
Mr. Busby. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Markey, and members of the subcommittee. We very much
appreciate your attention to the human rights situation in
China and the invitation to appear before you today.
Defending universal rights and fundamental freedoms has
been and will continue to be an essential element of American
foreign policy. Governments that respect human rights remain
the best vehicle for promoting prosperity, happiness, and
peace.
Vice President Pence aptly summed up the current human
rights situation in China in his recent speech at the Hudson
Institute where he said, quote, ``For a time Beijing inched
toward greater liberty and respect for human rights. But in
recent years, China has taken a sharp U-turn toward control and
oppression of its own people.'' I think you both fully
described that situation in your own remarks this morning.
As both of you mentioned, some of the most widespread and
worst human rights abuses taking place in China right now are
occurring in the Xinjiang Region. The U.S. Government assesses
that since April 2017, Chinese authorities have indefinitely
detained at least 800,000 and possibly more than 2 million
Uighurs, ethnic Kazakhs, and members of other Muslim minorities
in internment camps. Reports suggest that most of those
detained are not being charged with crimes, and their families
have little to no information about their whereabouts.
At first, China denied the existence of such camps, but as
public reports have emerged, Chinese authorities now assert
that they are, quote, vocational education centers, closed
quote, which glosses over the fact that many renowned Uighur
intellectuals and retired professionals are also detained in
these camps.
Former detainees who have reached safety have spoken of
relentless indoctrination and harsh conditions. For example,
praying and other religious practices are forbidden. The
apparent goal is to force detainees to renounce Islam and
embrace the Chinese Communist Party.
The recent testimony of Marigall Terson is a chilling and
heart-wrenching account of just how badly the Chinese
Government is mistreating many of the people who have been
detained in the Xinjiang Region.
Life outside the internment camps is not much better.
Neighborhoods have entry and exit checkpoints manned by armed
police. Families have been forced to accept Chinese officials
into their homes for extended home stays. Thousands of mosques
have been shuttered or destroyed. Some have even been converted
into communist propaganda centers.
Unfortunately, fleeing China is not enough to escape the
long arm of the Chinese Government. China has routinely
pressured other countries to return Uighurs, ethnic Kazakhs,
and members of other Muslim minority groups, which has often
proven successful. Even when such individuals reach safety,
China continues to harass and intimidate them.
China's repression of minority groups does not end in
Xinjiang. Its policies have spread hundreds of miles away, for
instance, to Hui Muslim communities. Tibetans also face
continued repression and pervasive surveillance. Indeed, the
Tibetan Autonomous Region was the testing ground for many of
the techniques now used in Xinjiang.
Chinese authorities also continue to restrict the freedom
of religion of Christian communities and others. Protestant
house churches are being shut down, and even officially
registered churches are under increased government scrutiny. In
September, the Holy See and China signed a 2-year provisional
agreement on the selection of bishops in China, which raises
additional religious freedom concerns. Falun Gong members and
members of the Church of Almighty God also reportedly continue
to face detention, forced labor, and torture.
As both of you noted, the Government also continues to
abuse lawyers, human rights defenders, and other activists. We
are particularly concerned about the cases of Wang Quanzhang,
Jiang Tianyong, and Huang Qi, who have been imprisoned and
abused for their efforts to fight for the rights of others and
to document abuses.
Any organizing to raise collective concerns or advocate for
social change, it seems, including the efforts of women's,
LGBTI, labor, and migrants' rights groups runs the risk of
intimidation and harassment.
Journalists also continue to have their practices
restricted and rights abused.
As members of this committee have previously noted, China's
system of repression is exacerbated by the Government's
increasing technological sophistication.
In sum, we see a concerted effort to use both new advanced
technology and old-fashioned repression to control all aspects
of Chinese society.
Despite these developments, the United States continues to
advocate for human rights in China. While Laura will speak to
how we seek to advance human rights in the bilateral
relationship, my bureau, DRL, is implementing $10 million of
fiscal year 2018 economic support funds to support human rights
in China, just as we have done for the past several years.
Nevertheless, such programs are increasingly challenged by the
difficult operating environment in China, including the new and
highly restrictive foreign NGO management law.
We are also working with our allies and using multilateral
fora to encourage China to improve its human rights situation,
as demonstrated through our recent engagement in China's
universal periodic review. And we, along with the U.S. Agency
for Global Media, continue to push back against China's closed
Internet by, among other things, funding programs that support
anti-censorship technologies and promote digital safety.
We welcome the spotlight that this hearing shines on the
human rights situation in China, and we will continue to work
closely with this subcommittee to support the efforts of those
in China, who are seeking to stand up for their rights.
Thank you.
[Mr. Busby's prepared statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Scott Busby
Chairman Gardner, Ranking Member Markey, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to appear before you today
to testify on the human rights situation in China. This hearing is
particularly timely coming one week before the 70th anniversary of the
United Nation's adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
This Declaration, which the General Assembly adopted by consensus,
states that every individual has the rights to freedom of thought,
conscience, religion or belief, expression, peaceful assembly and
association.
Defending these universal rights and fundamental freedoms has been,
and will continue to be, an essential element of American foreign
policy, including U.S. policy toward China. As the President's National
Security Strategy states, ``the United States supports those who seek
freedom, individual dignity, and the rule of law . . .
and we will
advocate on behalf of religious freedom and threatened minorities.''
Governments that respect human rights remain the best vehicle for
prosperity, human happiness, and peace.
Vice-President Pence aptly summed up the situation in China in his
speech at the Hudson Institute on October 4: ``For a time, Beijing
inched toward greater liberty and respect for human rights. But in
recent years, China has taken a sharp U-turn toward control and
oppression of its own people.''
Today, the Chinese Communist Party is implementing a system where,
to quote President Xi Jinping, ``the Party exercises overall leadership
over all areas of endeavor in every part of the country.'' Space for
civil society and free thought continue to shrink. There is mass
detention of Uighurs, ethnic Kazakhs, and members of other Muslim
minority groups in the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region (Xinjiang).
Surveillance is intrusive and omnipresent, not only in Xinjiang but
also in many other parts of China. The Government blocks U.S. press and
social media websites and imprisons its own people for sharing their
opinions online. Those who call on China to live up to its own laws and
commitments to protect human rights have been punished. And China is
doing the same to Chinese citizens abroad, including harassing
political dissidents on foreign soil, detaining journalists' family
members who remain in China, and coercing members of Chinese Muslim
minority groups to return from overseas.
Some of the worst human rights abuses are occurring unchecked in
the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region. Since April 2017, Chinese
authorities have detained at least 800,000, and possibly more than 2
million, Uighurs and members of other Muslim minorities in internment
camps for indefinite periods of time. This is the U.S. Government
assessment, backed by our intelligence community and open source
reporting. Reports suggest that most of those detained are not being
charged with crimes, and their families lack information about their
whereabouts, their well-being, and for how long they will be held. The
reasons given for detention appear to vary widely; in some cases,
police have claimed they are detaining someone merely because they
travelled abroad, or because they have family abroad. There appears to
be no ability to contest such detention.
At first, China denied such camps existed. As numerous public
reports emerged through the testimony of brave victims and intrepid
researchers and journalists, the international community began to speak
out about the mass internments. Chinese authorities have recently
asserted that these internment camps are ``vocational education
centers'' designed to help young, unemployed people in Xinjiang learn
job skills and the Chinese language, glossing over the fact that
renowned Uighur intellectuals and retired professionals are also
detained there. Former detainees who have reached safety have spoken of
relentless indoctrination and harsh conditions. They report mandatory
classes where detainees are required to recite Communist slogans and
sing songs praising the Chinese Communist Party. Failure to quickly
learn these lessons leads to beatings and food deprivation. There are
reports of the use of stress positions, cold cells, and sleep
deprivation in the camps. We have also seen reports of other forms of
torture or cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment, including sexual
abuse. One common goal in reports from former detainees seems to be to
forcing detainees to renounce Islam and embrace the Chinese Communist
Party. For example, praying and using common Muslim greetings are
forbidden in the camps. There are reports that authorities constantly
surveil detainees to ensure that they do not pray, even in their own
beds in the middle of the night. Detainees are reportedly forced to eat
pork and drink alcohol. Some have reported being forcibly medicated
with unknown substances.
Life in Xinjiang outside these internment camps is not much better.
The Chinese Government is engaged in an effort to monitor every aspect
of life for Uighurs and members of other Muslim minority groups.
Families have been forced to accept Communist officials into their
homes for extended ``home stays.'' Thousands of mosques have been
shuttered or destroyed; some have even been converted into Communist
propaganda centers. Those that are still open are often guarded and
monitored, and entry is limited via checkpoints with electronic ID
scanners.Neighborhoods also have entry and exit checkpoints manned by
armed police. The pervasive surveillance in place across Xinjiang today
has been frequently described as an ``open-air prison.''
Unfortunately, fleeing China is not enough to escape the long arm
of the Chinese Communist Party. China has routinely pressured other
countries to return Uighurs, ethnic Kazakhs, and members of other
Muslim minority groups to China, many of whom are seeking asylum
overseas. In 2015, Thailand returned nearly 100 Uighurs to China and
roughly 50 remain in detention in Thailand today. In July 2017,
Egyptian authorities deported two dozen Uighurs, who promptly
disappeared upon arriving in China. According to civil society groups,
most Uighurs involuntarily returned to China face arbitrary
imprisonment, disappearance, torture, or summary execution. In some
cases, most recently in Malaysia, foreign governments have resisted
Chinese pressure--often at the urging of the United States and other
like-minded countries--and refused to deport or return Uighur
individuals to China, instead considering their asylum claims or
allowing them to travel onwards to safe destinations.
Even when Uighurs, ethnic Kazakhs, and other members of Muslim
minority groups reach safety, Chinese security services and their
proxies continue to harass and intimidate them. In 2017, Uighurs
worldwide reported being contacted by Chinese police and ordered to
return home. Those who complied often disappeared; those who did not
received calls from family members begging them to return, for fear of
retribution. The Government also threatens the family members of
Uighurs abroad whose work the Government opposes. For example, six
Uighur journalists for Radio Free Asia (RFA) living in the United
States have reported that family members have been disappeared or
detained. Of those, five have said Chinese authorities raised their
work at RFA with their families prior to the disappearances and
detentions of family members. China has also exploited international
law enforcement cooperation mechanisms, like INTERPOL, in attempts to
persuade countries to arrest Uighur dissidents on politically motivated
charges. For instance, Dolkun Isa, the president of the World Uyghur
Congress, has been repeatedly detained and harassed around the world
due to an INTERPOL Red Notice issued based on China's false accusation
of terrorism. INTERPOL rescinded this Red Notice in February.
While the focus is often on Uighurs, who at 45% of the population
of Xinjiang are the largest of the Muslim minority groups targeted by
China's repressive campaign, it is not limited to them. . Several
ethnic Kazakh Chinese nationals have given public interviews about
their own experiences in camps. We also have reports from family
members in the United States that ethnic Uzbeks have also been detained
by Chinese authorities.
China's repression of minority groups does not end in Xinjiang.
China's repressive policies toward minority Muslim groups have spread
hundreds of miles away to Hui Muslim communities with plans to shut
down mosques in the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region. Tibetans also face
continued repression and pervasive surveillance; the Tibetan Autonomous
Region (TAR) was the testing ground for many of the techniques now used
in Xinjiang, especially the pervasive surveillance based on ethnicity.
Outside the TAR, the Chinese Government maintains harsh controls on
Tibetans and religious and educational centers focused on the study of
Tibetan Buddhism. For example, within the past few years, authorities
have reduced the number of people living in the monastic communities of
Larung Gar and Yachen Gar by forcibly evicting thousands of monks,
nuns, and laypersons and destroying thousands of their homes. According
to RFA, authorities forced many monks and nuns evicted from Larung Gar
to attend patriotic re-education classes for up to six months, with
eerie parallels to the repressive practices on Muslims in Xinjiang.
Chinese authorities also continue to restrict the freedom of
religion of Christian communities in China. Unregistered Protestant
``house churches'' like the Zion Church in Beijing and the Early Rain
Covenant Church in Chengdu continue to be shut down throughout the
country; in one notable case in January, authorities used dynamite to
demolish a house church in Shanxi province. Even officially registered
churches are under increased government scrutiny, with the Government
requiring the removal of crosses and, in some cases, the hanging
pictures of Xi Jinping and Mao Zedong inside the church and the
installation of surveillance equipment. We have received reports of
officials destroying or limiting the access to religious materials,
like the allegations that Chinese authorities have burned both Bibles
and Qurans. In September, the Holy See and China signed a two-year
provisional agreement on the selection of bishops in China. The
agreement has not been made public, however reports suggest the Vatican
committed to filling vacant bishop positions from a slate of candidates
selected by the Chinese Government-run Chinese Catholic Patriotic
Association (CCPA). Such procedures raise concerns regarding the
freedom of religion. Falun Gong members and members of the Church of
Almighty God also reportedly continue to face detention, forced labor,
and torture on account of their religious beliefs.
China's repression is not limited, though, to members of religious
groups or ethnic minorities. The Chinese Government continues to abuse
lawyers, human rights defenders, and other activists. Despite the
restrictions China puts on information gathering, the Congressional-
Executive Commission on China maintains a database with detailed
information on more than 1,400 current Chinese political prisoners. I
would like to highlight a few of the most egregious cases. Authorities
have held Wang Quanzhang incommunicado for over three years because of
his work defending in court those whose human rights were abused. In
April, his wife, Li Wenzu, attempted to walk the 100 kilometers from
their home to Beijing to the Tianjin detention facility where Wang was
rumored to be held. Chinese authorities forced her to turn around and
placed her under house arrest instead. Her courage and dedication in
the face of adversity is inspiring, and we highlighted Li Wenzu's story
during our series on women human rights heroes in March.
Huang Qi, who founded the Tianwang Center for Missing Persons,
later renamed the Tianwang Human Rights Center, is another priority
case. His initial mission was to stop trafficking in persons, and he
created a website to track missing persons thought to have been
trafficked. Over time, the site began tracking all manner of human
rights abuses. Since 1998, Huang has been in and out of prison, but has
not given up his fight for human rights. In 2016, authorities arrested
him again. Reports suggest he is suffering from a number of illnesses
and is at risk of dying in prison. Despite this, the Government
reportedly has stopped providing him with necessary medical care.
Moreover, officials have reportedly tortured him to extract a
confession to ``leaking state secrets overseas.'' Despite this, he has
persevered and refused to confess.
Students, independent labor activists, and others advocating for
fair and safe working conditions are also increasingly under threat.
For example, in August, authorities in Guangdong, Beijing, and other
parts of China detained approximately 50 workers and students from
several universities who had been supporting workers that had been
dismissed for trying to organize an independent trade union. This case
is only the latest in a long-standing crackdown on independent labor
organizers, which includes coordinated efforts by the Chinese
Government at all levels to disrupt labor rights advocacy. Workers'
ability to freely associate and advocate for decent working conditions
are both human rights and critical to ensuring a level playing field in
global supply chains. The only unions allowed in China are affiliated
with the All-China Federation of Trade Unions, or ACFTU, which is a
Chinese Communist Party organ chaired by a member of the Politburo.
This ban on independent unions contravenes workers' freedom of
association.
We also have ongoing concerns about forced labor in China. Despite
China officially ending its ``re-education through labor'' system, we
continue to receive reports of detainees compelled to perform menial
labor in ``administrative detention facilities'' and ``drug
rehabilitation centers'' without appropriate compensation or judicial
processes. And though information is limited, we've also heard
anecdotal reports about forced labor in Xinjiang's internment camps as
well. Every year, the Department addresses forced labor around the
world in our Trafficking in Persons report; China remains a Tier 3
country, the lowest ranking.
Any organizing or political mobilization in China to raise
collective concerns or advocate for social change runs the risk of
intimidation and harassment by Chinese authorities. Women's rights
advocates are routinely evicted from their homes on the orders of
police. LGBTI content is routinely removed from the Chinese internet.
Prior to one event to celebrate ``International Day Against
Homophobia,'' students were warned to avoid the event as it was being
organized by ``an illegal organization that may collude with Western
powers.'' In November 2017, Beijing authorities evicted tens of
thousands of migrant workers without advance notice, despite the
freezing weather. When locals organized to assist those evicted,
authorities evicted them from their homes and offices as well.
And despite changing the infamous one-child policy to a two-child
rule, coerced abortions and sterilization continue across China.
National Public Radio recently published a story about Chinese
authorities forcing an ethnic Kazakh woman to abort her baby, because
she already had two children, by threatening to detain her brother in
the internment camps in Xinjiang. After she had the abortion, officials
detained him anyway.
Journalists also continue to have their rights abused. The
Committee to Protect Journalists ranks China as the country with the
second highest number of journalists jailed. The Government controls
most media outlets, dictating what stories journalists can cover and
often the language they must or cannot use. Regulations passed in 2017
requires online content providers to obtain licenses from the
Government or be shut down, subjecting online content to censorship.
China's restrictions are not limited to domestic media outlets. U.S.
and international journalists in China face various undue restrictions
and harassment, including limitations on visa issuances or renewals in
retaliation for objectionable content.
China's weak adherence to the rule of law only exacerbates these
issues. The new ``liuzhi'' detention system, which replaced the Party
``shuanggui'' system by formally combining Chinese State and Communist
Party investigatory mechanisms, does not represent any
improvement.Under the old system, Party members could be informally
held and subjected to solitary confinement, beatings, sleep
deprivation, and stress positions to force a confession. The new
system, legally codified under the National Supervision Law, can target
any public official, and those held are not entitled to appeals or to
file suit against their captors. This is the rule by law, not the rule
of law.
China's human rights abuses are being assisted by the Government's
increasing technological sophistication. For example, Chinese
authorities have many capabilities to filter and block access to
objectionable online content, known collectively as ``the Great Fire
Wall.'' These techniques include the ability to inspect data at a deep
level in transit, to reset connections with sites sending data with
blacklisted keywords, and to identify and block the use of encrypted
protocols. China is also capable of attacking sites it dislikes and it
employs various methods to interrupt or intercept online content. The
online activities of Tibetans, Uighurs, and others are frequently
subject to monitoring.
China is also investing heavily in artificial intelligence and
machine learning, especially in pattern recognition software. The
security services seek to use facial and voice recognition to rapidly
identify and track individuals in a crowd. To support these systems,
the authorities have initiated the mass collection of biometric
information including voice samples, pictures, fingerprints, and DNA.
In total, we see a concerted effort by the Chinese Communist Party
to use both new advanced technologies and old-fashioned repression to
intensify control or constraints on social interaction and civil
liberties in China. One concerning example is the creation of a
``social credit system'' to provide real-world incentives to people for
being ``good citizens'' and punish those who are not.
The United States continues to advocate for human rights in China.
While my colleague, Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Laura
Stone, can speak better to the bilateral relationship, our bureau is
implementing $10 million of FY2018 Economic Support Funds for human
rights in China. This funding will support programs that improve rights
awareness, strengthen citizen participation in policy formation,
promote transparency and accountability, increase the ability of
rights-focused civil society groups to work together, promote
internationally recognized labor rights, and engage on rights-focused
issues of broad concern to the Chinese public. Our strategy is to
support existing reform trends within Chinese society where they exist,
seeking out reformers and activists who are already having success
advocating for and protecting the rights of their fellow citizens, and
giving them the tools and support they need to deepen and expand their
impact.
The operating environment in China continues to be highly
constrained due to the intensified Chinese Government crackdown on
civil society organizations, lawyers, and activists; increasing
restrictions on and closures of organizations receiving foreign funding
and partnering with foreign organizations; and heightened scrutiny of
foreign NGOs and their staff. The Foreign NGO Management Law that went
into effect on January 1, 2017 also has cast a shadow over the
operating environment by subjecting international NGOs to greater
scrutiny, leading many international funders to suspend their China
programs. In the face of these difficulties, Chinese activists,
lawyers, and civil society continue to request U.S. Government support
for their work, and DRL programs make progress within their areas of
focus as implementers work creatively and courageously faced with these
Chinese Government restrictions.
We are also using multilateral fora to encourage China to improve
its human rights situation. Prior to China's Universal Periodic Review
in November, for example, we submitted advance questions to push China
to answer for its human rights abuses on a range of topics, including
Xinjiang, Tibet, religious freedom, and the rule of law. During our
intervention at the review, we specifically stated our concern about
the situation for Muslim minority groups in China and called on China
to abolish arbitrary detention, including within the internment camps
in Xinjiang; cease the harassment, detention, and abduction of human
rights defenders; amend the definition of subversion to remove all
exercise of an individual's human rights and fundamental freedoms from
its scope; and cease interference in the selection and education of
religious leaders, such as Tibetan Buddhist lamas.
We also continue to push back against China's vision of a closed
internet under state control. The United States, through the State
Department and the U.S. Agency for Global Media, is funding several
programs, including proven anti-censorship technologies and the
creation of protocols to be adopted by tool developers to make their
technology less susceptible to censorship or interception.
We welcome the spotlight that this hearing shines on the human
rights situation in China. The Chinese people deserve a government that
respects their human rights and governs under the rule of law. We
continue to call on the Chinese Government to end the counter-
productive repression in Xinjiang, to release all political prisoners,
and to respect the fundamental freedoms of all in China. We will
continue to work closely with this subcommittee to support the efforts
of those in China who are seeking to realize their rights.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Busby.
Ms. Stone?
STATEMENT OF LAURA STONE, ACTING DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
STATE, BUREAU OF EAST ASIAN AND PACIFIC AFFAIRS, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE, WASHINGTON, DC
Ms. Stone. Chairman Gardner, Ranking Member Markey,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, I truly appreciate
the invitation to appear before you today on this important
issue.
The United States wants a constructive, results-oriented
relationship with China, grounded in the principles of
fairness, reciprocity, and respect. China's protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms is essential to our ability to
achieve this vision and to realize a sustainable U.S.-China
relationship.
Today, however, China is clearly doubling down on
repressive domestic controls in stark contrast to the universal
values that the United States and its partners have championed
for many decades. In recent years, we have witnessed a
regression in terms of China's respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including religious freedom, the rule of
law, and civil society.
While my colleague, DAS Busby, can speak more to many of
these items in more detail today and written statements
highlight them as well, today I will share with you some of the
action the State Department is taking to reinforce our support
for human rights and fundamental freedoms in China in the face
of these challenges.
In Xinjiang, we are particularly alarmed by reports of
China's mass detention of Uighurs, Kazakhs, and other members
of Muslim minority groups in so-called camps. We consistently
urge China to reverse counterproductive policies that conflate
terrorism with peaceful expression of religious beliefs or
political views.
I have received reports that U.S. lawful permanent
residents, family members of U.S. citizens, and individuals who
have participated in State Department exchange programs have
been detained in camps. We regularly raise these cases with
Chinese authorities and insist that China provide information
on the locations and medical conditions of those detained and,
more importantly, immediately release them.
Secretary Pompeo with Secretary Mattis highlighted these
very issues just last month in Washington at the Diplomatic and
Security Dialogue press event. The Vice President spoke about
this issue publicly in early October, and U.N. Ambassador Haley
did the same in speaking about the security challenges that
China's campaign in Xinjiang poses to the international
community.
The State Department is leading interagency efforts within
the administration to review and develop a U.S. whole-of-
government strategy to address the campaign of repression in
Xinjiang. Elements of the strategy could include utilizing a
number of tools to promote accountability by Chinese officials
for human rights abuses, preventing China's use of U.S. goods
and services to perpetuate its egregious activities in
Xinjiang, and strengthening our diplomatic and public diplomacy
efforts throughout the world to attract like-minded partners.
Department officials continue to meet with members of the
Uighur diaspora and coordinate with U.S. law enforcement
agencies to prevent the harassment of Uighurs in the United
States. The Department has conducted outreach to U.S. and
Chinese companies with business in Xinjiang to draw attention
to the risks of their exposure to Chinese abuses and to
underscore the U.S. commitment to avoid complicity.
U.S. embassies around the world are providing assistance to
survivors of Xinjiang's camps. We have engaged dozens of
foreign governments to successfully prevent the refoulement to
China Uighurs and other members of Muslim minority groups whose
lives or freedom would be threatened. If we are to
fundamentally China's behavior in Xinjiang, the international
community must act together.
Beyond Xinjiang the Department of State officials regularly
attend the trials and sentencing of Chinese human rights
lawyers and activists, and I and others have met with the wives
and family members of those who have been detained. We press
for the release both publicly and privately of all political
prisoners, and many of their names appear in my written
testimony. Though we were unsuccessful in our intensive efforts
to secure the freedom of Liu Xiaobo, persistent public and
private advocacy secure the long-sought release of his widow,
Liu Xia, in July this year. Ambassador Branstad has been
especially active in engaging China's leadership on cases such
as these.
When we speak up, we try to do so in concert with allies
and partners throughout the world that are similarly concerned.
Again, though, speaking out publicly is just one tool we have.
A Chinese security official was among the first ever tranche of
foreign officials sanctioned using Executive Order 13818, which
builds on the Global Magnitsky Human Rights Accountability Act
for his role in the death of an activist held in government
custody.
America's critical role in protecting and promoting human
rights and fundamental freedoms in China is in many ways more
important today as China attempts to take a global leadership
role. And there is more the United States can do.
We look forward to working closely with this subcommittee
to support the efforts of the Chinese people to realize their
human rights and fundamental freedoms and to promote
accountability for those who seek to violate or abuse those
rights and freedoms.
Thank you for the invitation to testify today on these very
important issues. And, of course, I am happy to answer any
questions that you might have.
[Ms. Stone's prepared statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Laura Stone
Chairman Gardner, Ranking Member Markey, and distinguished members
of the subcommittee, I appreciate the invitation to appear before you
today to testify on the human rights situation in China. President
Trump wants a constructive, results-oriented relationship with China
grounded in principles of fairness, reciprocity, and respect. Improving
China's respect for and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms is essential to our ability to achieve this vision and realize
a sustainable U.S.-China relationship.
Today, however, China is doubling down on repressive domestic
controls in stark contrast to the universal values that the United
States and its partners have championed for many decades. In recent
years, we have witnessed a regression in terms of China's respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms, including religious freedom; the
rule of law; and civil society. China's mass detentions of members of
Muslim minority groups in Xinjiang, while perhaps the most egregious
example, is only one of many recent actions taken by the Chinese
leadership that run counter not only to China's international human
rights commitments, but also to Chinese law.
Today I will share with you the actions that the State Department
is taking to reinforce our support for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in China in the face of these challenges.
China's Human Rights Situation
The State Department's annual Human Rights Report and its
International Religious Freedom Report document how China routinely and
severely restricts freedoms of expression, peaceful assembly,
association, and religion or belief. Deputy Assistant Secretary Busby
outlined many of them in his testimony.
Chinese security officials reportedly elicit forced confessions
through torture and other abuse, target members of religious and ethnic
minority groups, arrest human rights lawyers, censor media and online
speech, and restrict citizen participation in the political process.
The death of Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Liu Xiaobo while in custody in
July 2017, and the prolonged, unfounded house arrest of his wife, Liu
Xia, are glaring symbols of China's mistreatment of those seeking to
defend the rights of all individuals to exercise their fundamental
freedoms.
Beijing is also significantly strengthening censorship controls on
the internet, media, and academia. Its 2016 law on foreign
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) constricts the activities of these
groups by imposing stringent registration requirements and granting
supervisory authority to public security agencies. Many of the American
NGOs that have been negatively affected by this law have contributed
significantly to China's economic and social development over several
decades and have facilitated important people-to-people exchanges
between our two countries.
There have been continued reports that Tibetan Buddhists have been
subjected to forced disappearance, physical abuse, arbitrary detention,
and arrest. The Chinese Government asserts authority over the
selection, approval, and veneration of reincarnations of Tibetan
Buddhist lamas and supervises their religious education. We remain
concerned about the lack of meaningful autonomy for Tibetans, and we
regularly urge China to cease restrictions on the rights of Tibetans,
as well as their unique religious, linguistic, and cultural traditions
and practices.
Recently, oppressive activities aimed at residents of the Xinjiang
Uighur Autonomous region reportedly have severely intensified, as
documented by the dogged reporting of diplomats, reporters, academics,
and Muslim communities abroad. The concluding observations on China by
the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination further
shined a spotlight on the worsening human rights crisis there. Under
the guise of fighting ``terrorism'' and so-called ``religious
extremism,'' China's leadership is intensifying long-standing
repressive policies targeting individuals who practice non-violent
cultural and religious practices in Xinjiang, including by reportedly
torturing and abusing prisoners held for their beliefs and forcing
individuals to renounce their religion and pledge allegiance to the
Communist Party.
We are particularly alarmed by reports that since April 2017,
extremely large numbers of Uighurs and other members of Muslim minority
groups have been detained in camps. Detainees are reportedly trained to
diminish their ethnic identities, religious beliefs, and nonviolent
cultural and religious practices. There are reports of abuse, including
torture, and deaths in these camps. China's claims that these camps are
all ``humane job-training centers'' are preposterous. These brutal
tactics risk creating the very radicalization to violence that China
seeks to avoid. We consistently urge China to reverse its
counterproductive policies that conflate terrorism with the peaceful
expression of religious beliefs or political views.
We have received reports that U.S. lawful permanent residents
(LPRs), family members of U.S. citizens, and individuals who have
participated in State Department exchange programs have been detained
in these internment camps. This treatment of U.S. citizens, U.S. LPRs,
and their family members is unacceptable. We regularly raise these
cases with Chinese authorities and insist that China provide
information about the locations and medical conditions of those
detained and immediately release them.
We are also concerned by Chinese security services harassing
Uighurs abroad in order to compel them to act as informants against
other Uighurs, or return to Xinjiang, sometimes by detaining their
family members in these centers, or keep silent about the situation
there. This includes harassment of American citizens, LPRs, and
individuals legally residing in the United States.
China has applied similar pressure to dual nationals or family
members of citizens in other countries. The detention and persecution
of Uighur and other Muslim minorities in Xinjiang reportedly have
compelled them to stop communicating with their family and friends
based abroad, including in the United States, for fear of retribution
by authorities.
U.S. Policy and Advocacy Regarding Human Rights
The administration regularly condemns human rights violations and
abuses in China. We routinely raise and advocate for individual cases
of concerns with our Chinese counterparts. The Secretary has made clear
in his engagements, including this past month with his counterpart in
the Politburo and China's Defense Minister, that the United States
would continue to advocate for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The Vice President spoke about this publicly in early October, and U.N.
Ambassador Haley did the same in speaking about the security challenges
that China's campaign in Xinjiang pose to the international community.
Department of State officials regularly attend the trials and
sentencings of Chinese human rights lawyers and activists, and hold
meetings privately with the wives and family members of those who have
been detained. We press for the release of all political prisoners,
including but not limited to prominent figures like Ilham Tohti, Tashi
Wangchuk, Li Yuhan, Yu Wensheng, Pastor Cao ``John'' Sanqiang, and
Huang Qi. Last July, State Department officials highlighted the third
anniversary of the Chinese Government's nationwide campaign of
intimidation against defense lawyers and rights defenders and the fact
that Wang Quanzhang has been detained more than three years without
trial. We expressed concerns about the detention of Swedish citizen and
Hong Kong bookseller Gui Minhai, the sentencing of Chinese human rights
defenders Wu Gan and Xie Yang, and the conviction of human rights
lawyer Jiang Tianyong. Though we were unsuccessful in our intensive
efforts to secure the freedom of Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Liu Xiaobo,
persistent, public and private advocacy secured the long-sought release
of his widow Liu Xia in July this year. Ambassador Branstad has been
especially active in engaging China's leadership on cases such as
these.
Speaking out publicly is just one tool we have. The Department of
State has also taken actions to promote accountability for those
responsible for human rights abuses in China, including Chinese
Government and party officials. In December 2017, the Department of
Treasury, in consultation with the Department of State, designated a
former Chinese prison official, Gao Yan, for the detention and torture
of human rights activist Cao Shunli using Executive Order 13818, which
builds on and implements the Global Magnitsky Human Rights
Accountability Act. We have also used our high-level meetings with the
Chinese to urge China to address our concerns on China's foreign NGO
management law and unfair exit bans placed on U.S. citizens.
Last month in Geneva, the United States delivered comprehensive and
strong recommendations on human rights at China's Universal Periodic
Review. At every opportunity, we urge China to address policies in
Tibetan areas that threaten the rights and distinct religious,
cultural, and linguistic identity of the Tibetan people, and to end
counterproductive policies in Xinjiang that restrict peaceful
expression and religious freedom and risk inciting radicalization to
violence.
The United States will continue to stand up and speak out when the
Chinese Government cracks down on civil society, imprisons peaceful
reformers, silences legitimate dissent, or enacts legislation at odds
with the freedom of religion and expression, including for members of
the press. When we speak up, we will do so in concert with allies and
partners throughout the world that are similarly worried about China's
human rights abuses.
U.S. Policy and Advocacy Regarding Xinjiang
The most severe human rights crisis in China--perhaps since the
Cultural Revolution--is the mass detention and deployment of high-tech
surveillance technologies to systematically repress Uighurs, Kazakhs,
and other Muslim minority groups in Xinjiang. In April, Spokesperson
Nauert met with the six brave U.S.-based Radio Free Asia (RFA)
journalists, who shared troubling reports of Uighurs and other Muslims
in Xinjiang, including their families, who have been harassed and
arbitrarily or unlawfully detained. Secretary Pompeo and Vice President
Pence highlighted our concerns about the situation in Xinjiang at the
Ministerial to Advance International Religious Freedom in July, where
they also met with Survivors of Religious Persecution representing
China's Christian, Uighur Muslim, and Tibetan Buddhist communities. The
Secretary raised this again at the U.S.-China Diplomatic and Security
Dialogue last month.
Department officials meet with members of the Uighur diaspora and
coordinate with U.S. law enforcement agencies to address the harassment
of Uighurs in the United States. The Department of State has conducted
outreach to U.S. and Chinese companies with business in Xinjiang to
draw attention to the risks of their exposure to China's abuses and to
underscore the U.S. commitment to avoid complicity. There is a steady
drip of asylum seekers from Xinjiang seeking refuge outside of China
for fear of detention, torture, or worse. U.S. embassies around the
world are providing assistance to survivors of Xinjiang's camps,
including Ms. Miriguli Tuerson Mahmoud, who testified here before
Congress last week and spoke about the horrifying abuses in these
camps. In addition to consistently pressing China to end its campaign
of repression, we have engaged dozens of foreign governments to
successfully prevent the refoulement to China of Uighurs and other
members of Muslim minority groups whose lives or freedom would be
threatened on account of their religion or where there are substantial
grounds to believe they are in danger of being subjected to torture.
The State Department is leading interagency efforts within the
administration to review and develop a U.S. whole-of-government
strategy to address the campaign of repression in Xinjiang. Elements of
this strategy could include utilizing a number of tools to promote
accountability of Chinese officials for human rights abuses, preventing
China's use of U.S. goods and services to perpetrate its egregious
activities in Xinjiang, and strengthening our diplomatic and public
diplomacy efforts throughout the world, not just in the West. If we are
to fundamentally change China's behavior in Xinjiang, the international
community must act together.
Conclusion
America's critical role in protecting and promoting human rights
and fundamental freedoms in China is more important today than in many
years. There is more the United States can do to lead on global human
rights; this is part of our moral responsibility as Americans, and it
is profoundly in our interests. We look forward to working closely with
this subcommittee to support the efforts of the Chinese people to
realize their human rights and fundamental freedoms and promote
accountability for those who seek to violate or abuse those rights and
freedoms.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
Senator Gardner. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Ms. Steele, please proceed.
STATEMENT OF GLORIA STEELE, ACTING ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR,
BUREAU FOR ASIA, UNITED STATES AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT, WASHINGTON, DC
Ms. Steele. Chairman Gardner, Ranking Member Markey, Mr.
Kaine, thank you very much for this opportunity to talk about
democracy, human rights, and rule of law in China.
In support of America's foreign policy, the U.S. Agency for
International Development leads the U.S. Government's
international development and disaster assistance. Our work
saves lives and helps countries to become more self-reliant and
stronger partners to America.
For the purposes of today's hearing, I will first highlight
USAID's work with the Tibetans and then provide a brief
overview of our support to strengthen democracy and respect for
human rights and rule of law in Asia.
Thanks to strong bipartisan support in Congress, USAID
partners with Tibetans to help them protect and preserve their
threatened way of life. Within China, we support the
preservation of Tibetan culture, the development of sustainable
livelihoods, and assistance with environmental conservation. To
date, USAID has supported the preservation of nearly 7 million
Tibetan cultural heritage items. And in part, due to our
environmental conservation support, Tibetan communities are
empowered to lead the management of their natural resources
from rangelands to rivers.
In India and Nepal, USAID helps Tibetan communities
strengthen their self-reliance and resilience. This includes
strengthening their health and education systems. For example,
our work in training teachers in modern methods has benefited
more than 21,000 students at 75 Tibetan schools in India and
Nepal.
We are helping Tibetans maintain the vitality of their
communities and institutions while sustaining their unique
identity and culture. We have bolstered the public service
leadership of more than 330 Central Tibetan Administration
staff. And in support of sustainable livelihoods, USAID has
launched a pilot program to help garment vendors sustain or
grow their businesses through small, low-interest loans. In
fiscal year 2017, the program benefited over 800 micro-
enterprises and boasted a 100 percent on-time repayment rate.
Next, I will highlight our democracy, human rights, and
rule of law work in Asia.
Over the last 5 years, democratic institutions across Asia
have been significantly tested. Some foreign influences have
overtly and covertly co-opted political leaders and exploited
institutional weaknesses. This has given rise to increased
corruption, opaque commercial deals, and subversions of
national sovereignty. We are seeing competing development
models that can lead to unsustainable debt or limit economic,
political, and social freedoms. These unfortunate developments
undermine the long-term stability of our partner countries. In
contrast, the U.S. Government offers an alternative development
approach that fosters strategic partnership and self-reliance,
not long-term dependence.
In support of the Indo-Pacific strategy, USAID promotes
democratic citizen-centered governance that is representative
of the will and interests of the people and is infused with
democratic principles of participation, inclusion,
transparency, and accountability. We promote adherence to
international rules and standards, and we support legal
institutional respect for human rights, the protection of which
is a cornerstone of strong democratic governance.
We have achieved some notable progress. However, we
recognize that we still have a lot of way to go and must remain
steadfast in our engagement.
Before closing, I would like to mention our work concerning
improving governance in the natural resource sector. The
natural resources, upon which many of our partner countries
depend for their long-term economic growth, are increasingly
threatened by irresponsible extraction, predatory behavior, and
poor governance. That is why USAID prioritizes improving the
management of natural resources across Asia. We promote
transparent government policies, regulations, and transactions
that foster adherence to internationally accepted standards,
including environmental safeguards that help to mitigate the
entry of predatory players. Of particular note is a new 3-year
program that we are launching called Mekong Safeguards that
will support responsible infrastructure development in the
lower Mekong Region.
There is no doubt that China is increasingly exerting its
influence across the region. This presents challenges to our
partner countries' sustainable development and can threaten
countries' sovereignty. The strategic partnership we offer
provides a clear alternative development choice, one that
invests in increasing country self-reliance and sustainable
prosperity and helps countries to make informed decisions about
their own futures.
Thank you and I look forward to your counsel and questions.
[Ms. Steele's prepared statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Gloria Steele
Chairman Cory Gardner, Ranking Member Edward Markey, and members of
the subcommittee: Thank you for inviting me to this important hearing
on democracy, human rights and rule of law in China.
On behalf of the American people, the U.S. Agency for International
Development (USAID) promotes and demonstrates democratic values abroad,
and advances a free, peaceful and prosperous world. In support of
America's foreign policy, USAID leads theU.S. Government's
international development and disaster assistance through partnerships
and investments that save lives, strengthen democratic governance,
assist countries with emerging from humanitarian crises, and help
partner countries move forward on their journeys to self-reliance.
For the purposes of today's hearing, I will first highlight USAID's
support for Tibetans and then speak more broadly about our support for
democracy, human rights and rule of law in the Asia region.
Support for Tibetans in China, India and Nepal
As an oppressed religious minority in China, Tibetans face
restrictions on their rights, as well as their unique religious,
linguistic and cultural traditions and practices. With strong
bipartisan support in Congress, USAID partners to help protect and
preserve Tibetans' threatened way of life. For nearly 20 years, USAID
has supported Tibetan communities in and around the Tibet Autonomous
Region and in other areas of China. Since 2012, we have supported
Tibetan communities in India and Nepal.
Within China, we support the promotion and preservation of Tibetan
culture and the resilience of Tibetan communities. This includes the
development of sustainable livelihoods and assistance with
environmental conservation. We are helping Tibetan communities preserve
their cultural and religious traditions, including the Tibetan
language. To-date, USAID has supported the preservation of nearly seven
million Tibetan cultural heritage items, including documented cultural
traditions and historically important Tibetan texts--many previously
unknown, including text composed by the Fifth Dalai Lama. All items
have been digitized and made available online. Thanks to our
environmental conservation support, Tibetan communities are empowered
to lead the management of their natural resources, including
grasslands, rangelands and rivers, which are important to maintaining
their traditional way of life.
We have helped advance sustainable livelihoods for Tibetans. For
example, we have helped nearly 4,000 Tibetans secure new or better
employment opportunities. We have helped Tibetan-owned small- and
medium-sized businesses attract investment valued at approximately $2
million. And we have developed the life skills of thousands of
Tibetans, including hundreds of English Language Program graduates over
the past decade. These individuals are now widely recognized as leaders
in their communities and hold critical roles within NGOs and local
civil society organizations.
Outside of China, in India and Nepal, USAID helps Tibetan
communities strengthen their self-reliance and resilience, including by
strengthening their health and education systems. This support is
managed by our mission in India and implemented primarily by The Tibet
Fund. On health, we are working to improve the Tibetan health system in
ways that help expand access to care, including maternal, child and
tuberculosis-related care. The Tibetan health system serves a
population of approximately 107,000 Tibetans in India and Nepal. On
education, we are working to strengthen the Tibetan education system in
innovative, replicable ways. We have provided training and professional
development to more than 1,100 teachers at 75 Tibetan schools,
benefitting more than 21,000 students in India and Nepal.
We are helping Tibetans thrive economically, become effective
leaders and maintain the vitality of their communities and institutions
while sustaining their unique identity and culture. We have bolstered
the public service leadership and management of more than 330 Central
Tibetan Administration (CTA) staff through high-quality trainings. And,
in support of sustainable livelihoods, USAID launched a pilot program
to help garment vendors make their businesses viable or grow their
operations through small, low-interest loans. In fiscal year 2017, the
program benefited over 800 microenterprises and boasted a 100 percent
on-time repayment rate.
Supporting Democratic, Citizen-Centered Governance in Asia
Across Asia, USAID sees countries making short term economic
decisions that can lead to unsustainable debt, undermine sovereignty,
or limit economic, political and social freedoms, which ultimately
undermines a country's path to self-reliance. Put simply: the
alternative choice we offer is one of strategic partnership, not
strategic dependence.
Over the last five years, democratic institutions across Asia have
been significantly tested. Some foreign influences overtly and covertly
have co-opted political leaders and exploited institutional weaknesses,
giving rise to increased corruption, opaque commercial deals and
subversions of national sovereignty. These developments consequently
undermine the democratic institutions and the long-term stability of
our partner countries.
Across Asia, and in support of President Trump's vision of a Free
and Open Indo-Pacific region, USAID promotes democratic, citizen-
centered governance that is representative of the will and interests of
the people, and is infused with the democratic principles of
participation, inclusion, transparency and accountability. We support
legal and institutional respect for human rights--the protection of
which is a cornerstone of democratic governance and ensures meaningful
citizen engagement. We promote adherence to international rules and
standards and the integrity of electoral processes. Our work helps
protect human rights and promote religious freedom, support the
independence of media and information integrity, strengthen reliance on
evidence-based policy analysis and advocacy, and foster anti-corruption
initiatives. We advance these objectives through support for like-
minded civil society leaders and strategic alliances between current
and emerging democratic leaders.
We have seen some promising developments. For example, in the
Philippines, USAID improved the independent detection, investigation
and prosecution of corruption in the public and private sector. The
conviction rates for Office of Ombudsman cases increased from 45
percent to 77 percent from 2012 to 2017 while simultaneously increasing
the number of cases filed against high-ranking government officials
from 395 to 2,513 over the same period. And in Indonesia, USAID helped
the country rebuild, launch and expand its first-ever integrated
national complaint handling system. The system now processes more than
20,000 citizen complaints per month--a tenfold increase from fewer than
2,000 a month in 2015 before USAID's assistance--and has been formally
adopted by the national government. Despite this and other progress, we
recognize that we are far from where we'd like to be and must remain
steadfast in our engagements.
We are also working to improve governance in the natural resource
sector. The natural resources upon which many of our partner countries
depend for their long-term growth and economic sustainability are
threatened by a variety of factors, including irresponsible extraction,
predatory behavior and poor governance. That's why USAID prioritizes
improving the management and resilience of natural resources across
Asia. We promote transparent government policies, regulations and
transactions that foster adherence to internationally-accepted
standards, including environmental safeguards, and mitigate the entry
of predatory players. For example, some poorly conceived infrastructure
projects on the Mekong River threaten the food, water and livelihoods
of 60 million people who live downstream in Southeast Asia. USAID is
launching a three-year program called Mekong Safeguards that will
support policies that lead to high-standard, high-quality
infrastructure development in the region. Under the Indo-Pacific
Strategy, we are also supporting the Infrastructure Transaction and
Assistance Network (ITAN), which aims to promote sustainable, private
enterprise-driven infrastructure development in the region.
Conclusion
Mr. Chairman, there is no doubt that China is increasingly exerting
its influence across the region. This presents challenges to our
partner countries' sustainable development and can threaten country
sovereignty. The strategic partnership we offer to countries throughout
the region provides a clear, alternative choice--one that invests in
increasing country self-reliance and sustainable prosperity, and helps
countries to make informed decisions about their own futures.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. I look
forward to your counsel and questions.
Senator Gardner. Thank you for your testimony. I think the
testimony from the three of you has presented one of the most
damning views of China's rise the committee has heard. And I
want to go through some of Secretary Busby's statement again
because I think it is important in this context to again
reiterate what was said here.
We are talking about mass detention of Uighurs, ethnic
Kazakhs.
Surveillance is intrusive and omnipresent.
Harassment of political dissidents, not just in China but
by Chinese on foreign soil.
Detaining journalist family members who remain in China to
harass those abroad.
Coercing members of Chinese Muslim minority groups to
return from overseas.
Reports that suggest that most people detained are not
charged with crimes. Their families lack information about
their whereabouts, their wellbeing, or for how long they will
be held. Some are being merely detained because they traveled
abroad or because they have family abroad. There appears to be
no way to contest such detentions.
Failure to quickly learn the lessons taught in these camps
leads to beatings and food deprivation in your testimony.
Reports of the use of stress positions, cold cells, and
sleep deprivation in the camps.
Reports of torture or cruel, inhumane or degrading
treatment, including sexual abuse.
One common goal in the reports from former detainees seems
to be forcing detainees to renounce Islam and embrace the
Chinese Communist Party. You said that.
Reports that there is constant surveillance of detainees to
ensure they do not pray even in their own beds in the middle of
the night.
Forced to eat pork and drink alcohol.
Reportedly being forced to medicate with unknown
substances.
Civil society groups say most Uighurs involuntarily
returned to China face arbitrary imprisonment, disappearance,
torture, or summary execution.
One case you cite in your testimony, authorities in China
used dynamite to demolish a house church in Shangxi province.
They are requiring the removal of crosses, in some cases
the hanging of picture of Xi Jinping and Mao Zedong inside the
church and the installation of surveillance equipment inside
the church.
Reports of officials destroying or limiting the access to
religious materials like the allegations that Chinese
authorities have burned the Bibles and Korans.
We are talking about one of the most significant trade
partners this country and many countries around the globe have
with over a billion people. We are not talking about some tin-
pot dictatorship. We are talking about a country that people
look to more and more for leadership around the globe. What you
have described are damning evidence of horrendous human rights
violations.
Could you please explain, Secretary Busby, some of the
steps this administration has taken to hold people accountable
for these actions and what we are doing at the United Nations
and other places to perhaps provide inspectors, access, and
pressure from these kinds of activities from continuing--to
prevent these kinds of activities?
Mr. Busby. Thank you, Chairman Gardner for the question.
First of all, we have been trying to raise public awareness
about the situation. At the first-ever religious freedom
ministerial that Secretary Pompeo hosted in July, both he and
the Vice President called attention to the abuses in Xinjiang
province. And we circulated among other attendees a statement
on human rights abuses in China that talked about the abuses in
Xinjiang province. Ever since then, we have been trying to
continue to spread the word about what is going on in Xinjiang
province.
In the United Nations, we recently participated in the
universal periodic review, which is something that every
country has to go through. And in our brief statement--it had
to be brief because of the number of folks who wanted to speak
at this event--we called attention to the human rights abuses
in China, in Xinjiang province in particular, and called for
them to cease.
As my colleague, Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary Stone,
mentioned, there is a very robust interagency process underway,
led by the National Security Council, to look at specific
concrete steps we can take to respond to the horrific things
happening in Xinjiang province and try to bring them to a stop.
Senator Gardner. Thanks, Mr. Busby.
Secretary Stone, have any sanctions been leveled against
any Chinese officials involved in these suspected or confirmed
events, actions? Has any passport been suspended? Has any
official action been levied against the Chinese Government?
Ms. Stone. Thank you very much for the question, Chairman.
I obviously share, at a personal level, our concerns about
what is going on in Xinjiang. I do not think anybody who is
working on these issues for a long time could have any other
position.
The tools that the Congress has given us--we really do
appreciate them. They are the kind of things that we can use.
It is a little frustrating. I understand. It is frustrating
for us as well. The process sometimes is not as fast as we
would like. That is actually a good feature of our system.
Senator Gardner. I am going to run out of time, and I want
to give Senator Markey--just quickly. So I apologize. Has any
action been taken?
Ms. Stone. Okay. So we are working through a process right
now in order to get through to the appropriate actions, using
the tools that you have given us. And the process is moving
along. We hope to move on those issues and we hope to take
action as soon as the process has continued.
Senator Gardner. Well, I hope those processes move quickly.
I know Treasury is involved in those decisions as well, but I
encourage action to be taken quickly.
Senator Markey?
Senator Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
I want to raise the issue of the missing Chinese-based
relatives of six Radio Free Asia Uighur reporters. What is the
administration doing about this? How are we raising that issue?
It undermines, obviously, the credibility of that whole
mission, and it creates a chilling effect in terms of our
ability to be able to deliver an honest message about what it
is that we see happening in that region. So what are we doing
to protect these relatives?
Mr. Busby. Well, first off, we have raised the cases with
the Chinese Government so far to no avail. Our spokesperson,
Heather Nauert, met with the RFA journalists here to hear about
the situation of their relatives. And at that meeting, she
called out again the Chinese Government for undertaking these
actions against the relatives. So it is an issue we continue to
track and we continue to press----
Senator Markey. But thus far, we have been unsuccessful in
receiving any change in policy by the Chinese Government. Is
that correct?
Mr. Busby. So far, to my knowledge, we do not have any
relatives who have been released as a consequence of these
efforts.
Senator Markey. What else could we do in this area in order
to get the proper response?
Ms. Stone. Obviously, there is a lot we can do, and many
them are, as I referred to, tools that have been provided by
Congress, which we are very appreciative of. I referred to in
my testimony some of the actions that we are considering. I
cannot prejudge exactly the process. Obviously, we are a
country--we really are a country ruled by law. So we are going
through that process. We want to make sure that these are
actions that can stand up under legislative scrutiny, judicial
scrutiny. And we will continue to move forward on those
actions.
I mean, I think the real point on this, though, is that
even if we do not have an immediate impact on what we are
doing, I think that it is still important that we take these
actions.
Senator Markey. I agree with you. Just more must be done.
Ms. Stone. Yes.
Senator Markey. I want to move on to online censorship.
Google, Apple, and Facebook are reported to have aided the
Chinese Government Internet censorship efforts as part of their
efforts to access the Chinese market. For example, Google
disables domain fronting capacity used to evade censors and is
working on a censored version of the search engine Dragonfly to
launch in China. Apple has removed more than 400 virtual
private networks while handing over their China iCloud user
data to the Chinese state-owned mobile operator.
Has the State Department engaged the administration to
monitor and discourage these corporate behaviors which go
against the fundamental value of freedom of expression?
Mr. Busby. Thank you for the question, Senator.
Yes, we have. Indeed, we recently met with senior officials
from Google in the wake of the news story about the development
of the Dragonfly application and expressed our strong concerns
that any collaboration by them with the Chinese Government to
develop a censored version of their search tool would be very
problematic for us.
Senator Markey. I think that must continue to escalate in
terms of the pressure that we are applying. We just cannot
separate ourselves and our corporations from the goals which we
have in China and other countries.
And, Ms. Stone or Mr. Busby, there are some calls for
Uighurs to be given temporary protected status to ensure
Uighurs are not sent back to China to face repression. Other
European governments have halted extraditions of Uighurs. Do
you support that move?
Mr. Busby. I mean, that is one of many options that is
being considered.
Senator Markey. Do you support that move? We are not
extraditing people back to a country which is repressing them.
Mr. Busby. We are generally opposed to return of any
Uighurs back to China, and the issue of TPS itself, again, is
one of the many options being considered.
Senator Markey. Yes. Well, I think it is the option, which
should be considered and implemented. We just cannot, as a
country, be sending people back to what we know is repression.
And what is our diplomatic strategy to engage Muslim
majority countries to condemn Chinese behavior? It seems like
there should be more of an outcry from the Muslim world. We
have not heard them. These are Muslims who are being oppressed
inside of China. What is the United States strategy to get more
cooperation from Muslim countries to speak up for their co-
religionists?
Mr. Busby. Senator, a very good question point.
I was recently in Malaysia and raised this very issue with
the Government there and we have been raising with other Muslim
majority countries, again with a goal of establishing a
likeminded----
Senator Markey. Have we raised it with Saudi Arabia?
Mr. Busby. I cannot speak to Saudi Arabia.
Senator Markey. Do you know, Ms. Stone, if we have?
Ms. Stone. We would be happy to get you a list of the
countries that we have raised it with. I know it has been the
majority of Muslim majority countries. So I assume so, but I
would have to check.
[Ms. Stones's response to Senator Markey follows:]
Ms. Stone. The Department of State has a global diplomatic campaign
to raise awareness about China's human rights violations and abuses
against Uighurs, ethnic Kazakhs, and members of other Muslims in China.
We have directly reached out over 50 governments to raise the issue of
China's crackdown in Xinjiang.
There has been a focused effort, led by U.S. embassies and visiting
senior officials, to reach out to Western allies on human rights
issues, China's neighbors worried about the security threat of
radicalization to violence, and Muslim majority countries across Asia
and the Middle East.
We have asked these governments to:
 Support stronger diplomacy and public messaging about China's
abuses
 Support all those affected by this repressive campaign;
 Comply with their respective obligations under international law;
and, where applicable,
 Ensure respect of the non-refoulement principle.
Senator Markey. This is a lot of Muslim clout out there. We
just do not see it at work here. I do not think China is going
to respond unless they know that in the Muslim world--from
government to government, we should be telling Saudi Arabia and
other countries we expect that as their policy.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Gardner. Senator Rubio?
Senator Rubio. Thank you.
This whole topic of China I think is so much more than just
the balance of trade. President Xi certainly views himself as a
historic and transformational figure, and one of their goals is
to remake the global order more in their image and more
advantageous to them. And many of the things that are being
talked here today are a part of it. If you look at the record,
the abuses that are well documented against the Uighur Muslims,
trying to strip the people of Tibet of their identity and their
religion, the longstanding attacks on Falun Gong practitioners.
Obviously, we know the stress that Christianity has faced.
And then on the field of democracy, we have seen the
erosion of it in Hong Kong, the disqualification of four pro-
democracy lawmakers from the ballot, the jailing of three
prominent pro-democracy student leaders. And then you see sort
of what the global reaction has been to it, and there is reason
to be concerned that this post-World War II pro-democracy, pro-
human rights, global norms are being eroded and reshaped and
that China is using its geopolitical heft and its economic
power to push it in that direction. Senator Markey just
mentioned the silence of the Muslim world in the face of the
forced internment of hundreds of thousands of Muslim Uighurs.
And the U.N., for example, in April security forces ejected
an ethnic Uighur representing an accredited nongovernmental
organization, clearly at the request of somebody. He was
accredited.
And Greece blocked the European Union from issuing a
statement or a position at the Human Rights Council for the
first time I believe ever a definitive statement--delivering a
statement. And we can all surmise why. They own every port in
Greece. They have incredible economic leverage on Greece.
I mean, the list goes on. In 2017, the U.N. Secretary-
General introduced President Xi at an event that was closed to
civil society, by the way, and he made no reference of the
human rights environment in China.
The EU Council and Commission at a summit in Brussels on
the first and second of June publicly, quote/unquote, expressed
concern about human rights abuses in China, but did not call
for the release of political prisoners, including their own
citizens, citizens of the EU, or even the repeal of abusive
laws.
This is all from a report, I believe, from Human Rights
Watch. But in June Italian police briefly detained and later
released the same ethnic Uighur NGO representative who had been
invited to speak at the Italian Senate, and they briefly
detained him, even though he had been invited to be there.
Again, it is not clear whether the Chinese requested it.
On issue after issue, it appears to us you can see around
the world that even nations that long have been committed to
democracy and human rights, when it comes to China are either
being quiet, looking the other way, or frankly are now
leveraged to the point where they cannot speak out.
And so that is why it is so important for the United States
to be forceful about it because no one else can or wants to.
And whether others do want to, you are concerned when we do not
join them.
So as an example, earlier this month, there were 15 Western
ambassadors in Beijing, spearheaded by Canada. They reportedly
sent a letter to Xinjiang's Communist Party Chief, Chen
Quanguo. He is seeking a meeting and expressing deep concern
regarding the growing crackdown. No one thought that meeting
was going to happen per se.
But I am curious, Ms. Stone, why did the U.S. not sign onto
that letter? Do you know?
Ms. Stone. So we agree with you completely. Thank you very
much for the question and the clear statement of support for
the U.S. speaking out strongly on the human rights conditions
in China and also the conditions in Xinjiang.
The specific letter--sometimes the countries involved--they
are likeminded partners, and we may or may not join on any kind
of particular measure that is coming out of the embassies in
Beijing. But I do want to assure you that we are working
consistently with those likeminded partners to do real action.
And the thing is we have many more tools and we also have a lot
more spine sometimes to be able to take real action----
Senator Rubio. And I appreciate it. I am running out of
time.
I just want to make the point that if we are here
complaining, on the one hand, about how all these countries are
not doing enough, when they actually do something, we cannot
even sign onto a letter. I do not know if that decision was
made here in D.C. as part of the broader relationship with
China or made by the Ambassador. But I think it was a big
mistake.
In your written testimony, you mentioned the fact that
Chinese security services are harassing Uighurs abroad. We have
heard firsthand from people who say this is the case.
Can you tell us if the Department is working with other
agencies on this issue, in particular, protecting U.S. citizens
and legal permanent residents? And what sort of outreach is
anyone doing to these communities who feel like the long arm of
China is reaching them here within the United States?
Ms. Stone. Yes, we are. We are working closely with the FBI
to make sure that any information that comes our way goes to
them. And we would be very happy if you hear of anything
additional to also work with you to pass that along.
And in terms of making sure that the message gets out,
whenever we meet with the communities, we do everything we can.
We also ensure that we are constantly updating our travel
guidance to make sure that people are aware of the situation.
Senator Rubio. Well, again, my last question is in this
particular case, these are people inside the United States. But
I agree with the travel part.
Finally, in your written testimony, you indicated that the
Department of State had conducted outreach to U.S. and Chinese
companies with businesses in Xinjiang to draw attention to the
risks of their exposure to these abuses.
There is a company, Thermo Fisher Scientific, which has
sold DNA sequencers to the police there. This is against the
backdrop of these grave human rights violations including, by
the way, mandatory data banking of the entire population. I had
testimony last week at the Bicameral Commission on China that
they are forcing people to turn over blood to get a passport or
just compelling it. Thermo Fisher Scientific, an American
company, is selling them DNA sequencers. That is what it is
used for.
Can you tell us whether that is one of the companies that
the Department of State has reached out to and expressed
concerns about how their technology could be used by the
Chinese to do these horrifying things?
Ms. Stone. I cannot speak to that particular company, but I
can tell you that is the kind of company that we are definitely
speaking with.
Senator Gardner. Senator Kaine?
Senator Kaine. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thanks to the witnesses for your service and your
testimony.
Senators Gardner, Markey, Rubio, Daines, Warner, and I
wrote a letter to Secretary Pompeo about the Radio Free Asia
journalists' families on the 26th of July. To my knowledge, we
have not received a reply to this letter. It was a letter to
ask Secretary Pompeo to brief us on the status of the cases and
what is being done to try to help the family members who are
detained. Four of the six journalists are residents of
Virginia.
I would like to introduce the letter into the record
hopefully without objection.
Senator Gardner. Without objection.
[The information referred to above is located at the end of
this hearing transcript.]
Senator Kaine. Secretary Pompeo is busy. We are not
expecting him to drop everything and do a response. But
somebody needs to respond to this letter. It is more than 4
months old.
And it may not be within any of your purviews to do that
response, but I hope you would take back to the committee that
when we write a letter like this, we are not just doing it for
our health. I mean, take it back to the State Department. We
would like an answer.
Do you know, for example, whether--has Secretary Pompeo
raised the issue of the imprisoned journalists' families
directly with his counterpart? Are you aware of whether he has
or has not?
Ms. Stone. Sir, on that specific issue, he obviously has
raised it in Xinjiang, as you could see in the diplomatic and
security dialogue press conference with the Chinese standing
right next to him. Whether he has raised that particular case,
could I take that and get back to you?
Senator Kaine. Please.
[Ms. Stones's response to Senator Kaine follows:]
Ms. Stone. As he mentioned publicly following the U.S.-China
Diplomatic and Security Dialogue, November 9, 2018, Secretary Pompeo
highlighted to his Chinese counterparts the strong concern of the U.S.
and the international community with respect to China's repression of
religious groups.
In addition to Department officials' regularly raising the specific
case of the Radio Free Asia journalists and their families with Chinese
counterparts, senior officials have publicly spoken out regarding
China's harassment or imprisonment of the Radio Free Asia journalists'
families:
 State Department Spokesperson Heather Nauert in April 2018 spoke
publicly about the case following her meeting with the RFA
journalists,
 Secretary Pompeo mentioned the case in a July 24, 2018 USA Today
OP-ED titled ``Religious Persecution in Iran, China Must End
Now,'' and
 Vice President Pence cited the case in an October 4, 2018 speech at
the Hudson Institute.
Senator Kaine. I would like to also know whether Ambassador
Branstad has directly raised the issue of these journalists'
families with his counterpart, and I would like to know an
answer to whether President Trump has directly raised this
issue in dialogue with the Chinese. And again, we would
appreciate a response to this letter, which is now more than 4
months old.
And I got to tell you I am nervous about this issue and
these journalists' families. Just last week, the Secretary of
State wrote an editorial in the ``Wall Street Journal'' with
respect to another journalist, Virginia resident Jamal
Khashoggi, who was murdered by the Saudis. And this is a quote
from his editorial. Quote: The October murder of Saudi national
Jamal Khashoggi in Turkey has heightened the Capitol Hill
caterwauling and media pile-on.
You know, we are not raising this issue about journalists
who are being targeted and their families being targeted just
to score political points. It is not about caterwauling and
media pile-on. We put it in the First Amendment for a reason
here in this country. We put it in the First Amendment for a
reason. And when people living in Virginia, my home State,
living in this country lawfully are being murdered or their
families are being targeted and we are silent, we are not
taking ample steps, it raises questions about whether we are
being faithful to a value that we proclaim.
I will give Secretary Pompeo credit. The first paragraph of
that editorial suggests that our raising the question of
Khashoggi is caterwauling. In the eleventh paragraph, he says,
well, of course, the murder of a journalist is against American
values. But I do not like being accused as a Member of this
body when I raise a question about the murder of a journalist
who lawfully lives in my State of being engaged in caterwauling
or media pile-on. And I do not think my colleagues appreciate
it either.
Let me switch for a minute and ask this. Do you have a good
estimate of the number of Uighurs that are currently being
detained in detention camps in China?
Mr. Busby. Thank you, Senator, for the question.
In my statement, what I said--and this is derived from what
our intelligence bureau has estimated, that there are at least
800,000 and possibly up to a couple of million folks in these
detention facilities. It is hard for us to get precise data
because we do not have full access to that region, but that is
our current----
Senator Kaine. That is staggering. And I have seen public
reports or press reports that it is a million. And I think you
right. It is hard to get a fix on the exact number, but that is
a staggering number.
Press reports also indicate that a million Han Chinese have
been recruited to essentially forcibly occupy the homes of
Uighurs. So those who are not in detention camps are having Han
Chinese placed in their homes so that people will be studied to
make sure there is not a Koran visible, they are not praying
during the day.
You know, we have a constitutional provision, the Third
Amendment, that is one of the least used of all, which
prohibits the quartering of government troops in people's
homes. It has never really been used because no government is
stupid enough to try to do it. But the notion of a million Han
Chinese being deployed into Uighur homes--and you have also
indicated other things, guarding checkpoints into Uighurs
neighborhoods. I mean, this is very significant.
The last thing I would like to ask, if you would--I am
over, Mr. Chair. But the situation of the Falun Gong is also an
interesting one. What exactly is the Chinese Government's
rationale for imprisoning Falun Gong members? Is it just a
general suspicion of any kind of concerted or coordinated
activity, or is there a Chinese Governmental belief that the
Falun Gong ideology is somehow counter to the state? Explain
that to me please.
Mr. Busby. Thanks for the question, Senator.
I think your analysis is right. The mere fact that there is
a group of people meeting independently with views that
independent of the Communist Party is viewed as a threat by the
Communist Party. I think that is the primary source of their
suspicion of the Falun Gong.
Senator Kaine. So there is no allegation that Falun Gong
are participating in terrorist activities or things like that,
as far as you know.
Mr. Busby. Not to my knowledge.
Senator Kaine. All right. Thank you very much. I appreciate
your testimony.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Senator Kaine.
I want to go back to one of the comments that I made during
my first round of questions. I talked about inspectors, U.N.
observation, ambassadorial visits to the region.
Secretary Busby, in your opening statement, you talked
about the universal declaration of human rights. Have official
U.N. envoy, inspectors visited the region?
Mr. Busby. Not to my knowledge recently, Senator. There are
people called special rapporteurs who are mandated by the Human
Rights Council to look into issues like freedom of expression,
freedom of association and assembly, freedom from torture. My
understanding is that virtually all of them have asked for
access to China in recent years, but none of them have been
granted such access. So to my knowledge, no U.N. official
charged with looking into human rights issues has been allowed
access to China.
Senator Gardner. Has the U.S. presence at the U.N. pushed
for such access with China and attempted to build a coalition,
encouraging China to accept such----
Mr. Busby. We have regularly raised that issue with the
Chinese Government, urging to receive such special----
Senator Gardner. Has our ambassador asked to visit the
region?
Ms. Stone. We have not asked recently. It is on a list of
places that we do want to visit. The United States diplomats do
occasionally visit Xinjiang. It is not a closed area. Our
concern is that we need an independent body from the United
Nations to be able to go in and do a proper investigation.
Senator Gardner. And I would encourage the ambassador to
visit, to request such a visit. I would encourage us to do
everything we can at the United Nations to the rappateurs or
whoever it is responsible--inspections to get in there
immediately. This is not acceptable. I mean, again, this is
somebody that we are doing billions upon billions of trade with
each and every day. And some of the most heinous human rights
violations are occurring right before our very eyes.
Mr. Busby. Mr. Chairman, that is a very good point.
Unfortunately, such access obviously depends on the assent
of the Chinese Government, and so far we have not been able----
Senator Gardner. Let me ask you this. In the trade
discussions that are taking place, the tariffs that have been
levied--has human rights ever been associated with those
tariffs in the trade conversations?
Ms. Stone. I actually have not been in the trade meetings.
In the discussions that I have been in, they have been at a
technical level. But I do want to reassure you that whenever we
are doing preparations for any visit, I always raise these
issues. I feel very strongly about it, and I also feel that the
U.S. Government has a real role in making sure that China knows
that to the extent that they want to play a greater role in the
world, that this is just essential. These are the kinds of
international norms that they have to abide by.
Senator Gardner. Perhaps I will follow up with this
question too on China and North Korea. Is China still receiving
laborers from North Korea?
Ms. Stone. I am sorry, sir. I would have to get back to you
with the exact information, the latest on that.
Senator Gardner. I guess one of the concerns that I have
had over the past several years, China's willingness to accept
laborers and basically violations by North Korea of human
rights. Are you familiar with any of the actions China has
taken regarding the laborers?
Ms. Stone. I am familiar with the fact that in the past,
China certainly accepted a large number of laborers from North
Korea. Because the North Korean laborers do not have the
ability to keep their own salaries and have any kind of
freedom, we do consider them to be slave laborers. And one of
the things that we worked with our likeminded partners in the
U.N. Security Council resolutions was to ensure that the
laborers and new laborers going into countries has to be
tapered off.
But in terms of where the exact situation is at the moment,
I am afraid that I would have to get back to you.
Senator Gardner. Thank you.
[Ms. Stone's response to Senator Gardner follows:]
Ms. Stone. Thousands of North Koreans are sent abroad every year to
work in slave-like conditions, earning revenue for the regime. We
remain deeply concerned about the condition in which these workers live
and work and regularly raise these concerns with other governments.
There continue to be reports of North Koreans working in China. We
maintain an ongoing dialogue with China regarding their UNSCR
obligations, which include capping the number of North Korean workers
at levels as of August 5, 2017, not issuing new work authorizations
after September 11, 2017, and expelling all North Koreans earning
income in their jurisdiction as soon as possible, but no later than
December 22, 2019. Simultaneously, we have engaged with the business
community to remind them that all goods made in whole or in part by
North Koreans are banned from import into the United States and to urge
them to carefully review their supply chain for North Korean workers.
The international community must remain united in implementing U.N.
sanctions until the final, fully verified denuclearization of the DPRK
is achieved. The United States and our allies and partners are
committed to the same goal--the final, fully verified denuclearization
of the DPRK.
Senator Gardner. Administrator Steele, when it comes to
Tibet, conversations regarding the Dalai Lama and the Catholic
Church's decision to agree with the Chinese Government about
positions within the Catholic Church in China, how does that
affect the Dalai Lama and future actions taken in Tibet?
Ms. Steele. We have been working in Tibet for over 20 years
and helping them with livelihood development and environmental
conservation. We have stayed around the same areas that they
have indicated that is of interest to them, and we believe we
will continue to stay in those areas.
Senator Gardner. And that is probably not the best question
for you, but perhaps, Ms. Stone, if you would like to comment
about that question as well.
Ms. Stone. So in terms of the recent agreement with the
Catholic Church and the Chinese, obviously it is something that
we are watching very closely. The U.S. Government has not taken
a position in the actual agreement. But we are very aware of
the fact that the Chinese Government in the past has taken a
very aggressive and oppressive role towards religion, and so we
do want to track this very closely.
Senator Gardner. Thank you.
Senator Markey?
Senator Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
I would like to turn to the United Nations, the Security
Council, China blocking condemnation of the Burmese Government
over their treatment of the Rohingya in Burma and in
Bangladesh.
So what is the strategy which the United States has to put
pressure on China using our other allies in order to ensure
that there is maximum pressure which is imposed upon the
Chinese Government so that they do not continue to block
official statements of global condemnation about the Burmese
policy?
Mr. Busby. Thank you for the question, Senator.
As you have seen, Ambassador Haley in New York has raised
Burma on multiple occasions in the context of the Security
Council. Indeed, when our report on abuses in Rakhine State was
first finalized, she was the one who raised the conclusions in
that report in the Security Council.
So we continue to raise our concerns about what has
happened in the Security Council. We continue to discuss with
our allies how to raise the situation of Rakhine State and
Burma in the U.N. generally. But obviously, so long as China
has a veto, it is very difficult to overcome that in any way.
I believe there have been discussions with the Chinese
about this. China has an interest in stability in the region.
But so far, they have not indicated a willingness for a
concrete Security Council action when it comes to Burma.
Senator Markey. Did President Trump raise these human
rights issues with President Xi in his discussions at the G20?
What was that conversation, if any, that took place between
President Trump and President Xi on the issue of human rights
in Burma, and other countries around the world where China is
actually helping governments to engage in repressive behavior?
Ms. Stone. So, unfortunately, I was not--well, maybe not
unfortunately. I was not in the room, and so I do not know the
discussion that went on during the meeting between President
Trump and President Xi. But I can assure you that on the
margins, we certainly raised these issues, and we certainly
raised the exit bans as well. We acknowledge that the State
Department's most important role is the protection of American
citizens, and so we certainly raised that as well.
Senator Markey. I appreciate that, but I think you used the
right phrase: ``on the margins.'' There is no guarantee, no
evidence that the President raised the issue himself,and that
is the only level, ultimately at which it works, especially if
President Trump is meeting with President Xi. That is the point
at which American values are restated very strongly and that Xi
understands that the United States is willing to pay a price
for our maintenance of our leadership of human rights issues
around the planet. So, that clearly has not taken place.
Now, with regard to the issue in Tibet that Chairman
Gardner raised and what we are saying to the Chinese Government
about the Dalai Lama, and the protection of religious liberty
in Tibet, could you give us, again, a summary of what our
statement of policy is that we are sending to the Chinese
Government?
Ms. Stone. Thank you very much for that important question.
The United States is deeply concerned about the lack of
meaningful autonomy for the Chinese people. We have certainly
pressed for the release of detained activists throughout the
entire country, but very importantly on the Tibetan plateau and
in historical Tibet. And we have been pushing for reciprocity
of access. I know that that is an important issue. We do want
to work with Congress on that shared goal. And we do continue
to have very serious concerns about the ability of the Tibetan
people to continue to have the ability to express their unique
culture, their unique language, and their religious practices.
Senator Markey. So it is pretty clear that there is a
systematic effort by the Chinese Government, not just inside of
China, but around the world, to back those policies which are
most repressive and allow for a compromise of human rights. It
may be Facebook or Google, it may be the Uighurs, may be the
Rohingya, or it may be other countries like Venezuela. Anyplace
they are putting their footprints is a place where they are
willing to turn a blind eye, use economic power, and encourage
repression by a government of human rights--the natural
aspirations of human beings to express their views to be able
to be who they were born to be.
So we have high expectations for you, but we have higher
expectations for Donald Trump to express those views clearly,
concisely, powerfully, insistently, and persistently with the
Chinese leadership. We have not seen evidence of that thus far,
but we thank you for your service.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Gardner. Senator Kaine?
Senator Kaine. Briefly. Mr. Busby and Ms. Stone, will you
endeavor to get us a response to the letter that we sent the
Secretary in July?
Mr. Busby. Senator, I am sorry there has not been a
response. I do not believe I have seen the letter, but we will
take it back and we will get you a response.
Senator Kaine. That would be appreciated. Thank you.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Senator Kaine.
I want to follow up a little bit on the questions on Tibet.
I asked the question regarding Catholic Church policy, the
agreement they reached with China and the Dalai Lama. China has
said that they will pick the next Dalai Lama.
The Tibetan Policy Act of 2002 mandated that American
officials should visit Tibet on a regular basis.
I want to get into both of these.
If China proceeds and tries to impose a Dalai Lama, what
will the U.S. response be?
Ms. Stone. Thank you very much, and I think that is a very
important question because the fact that you are asking that
question is an important signal in itself to the Chinese
Government that this is the kind of issue that we are watching
very closely and at very senior levels.
The United States has a very clear position that religious
decisions should be made within religious organizations, that
this is not the role of the state. I would not want to prejudge
exactly how a future scenario would roll out, but I would like
to lay a marker that that is the clear position of the United
States Government and I think widely supported within American
society that those are the kinds of decisions that should be
made by religious communities on their own and without outside
interference.
Senator Gardner. Thank you. I think it is clear that this
Congress would not recognize a Chinese imposition.
The 2002 Tibetan Policy Act mandated that American
officials should visit Tibet on a regular basis. We know that
very few diplomats, officials have been able to visit Tibet to
date primarily because issues of the Chinese Government
refusing to grant access.
Could you describe perhaps the level of access to Tibet
that your agency has received over the last 3 years? If anybody
else wants to answer this on the panel as well.
Ms. Stone. I am sorry, sir. I do not have at my fingertips
the exact number of visitors. So I would ask that we be allowed
to get back to you on that.
But I do want to state very clearly that I do understand
that the Senate is considering the Reciprocal Access to Tibet
Act. We do want to continue to work very closely with Congress
and with your staff with the goal of seeing that Americans do
have access to Tibet.
Senator Gardner. Well, thank you. I think it is important
that we know what exact access we have had to Tibet from our
diplomatic corps.
I know Chinese officials who purport to represent Tibet
have freely come to the United States. I do not know if you
know that number, but I would like to know those numbers.
You mentioned the legislation itself. I think we need to
consider reciprocal access as part of our policy and approach
to Tibet and China and what is being done to address this and
to promote our access to Tibet.
Do you share the goals of our reciprocal act?
Ms. Stone. We certainly share the goals, and we do look
forward to working with you to figure out how best to achieve
those goals.
Senator Gardner. And if passed, you would work to implement
it?
Ms. Stone. Of course.
Senator Gardner. Thank you.
Senator Markey?
Senator Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just have one final question, and that is on the Human
Rights Council. We are trying to push China on their human
rights abuses, and the Human Rights Council is one aspect of
our ability to coordinate with allies to put pressure on those
who are violating human rights.
We are now pulling out of the Human Rights Council. How
does that hurt our ability to rally other nations to put
together a plan that targets China and do so in a comprehensive
way using that Human Rights Council as a mechanism to
accomplish that goal? Mr. Busby?
Mr. Busby. Thank you for the question, Senator.
Well, as you know from Secretary Pompeo's and Ambassador
Haley's statement at the time of the decision to withdraw from
the council, our concerns had to do with the membership on the
council which, as you point out, included China--China has been
a member of the council for a lot of the council's years--as
well as the process by which members are elected to the
council.
And our second concern was the fact that the council pays
disproportionate attention to Israel, and after years of trying
to fix both of those problems, we were not succeeding. And that
is what prompted the decision to withdraw.
However, the fact that we have withdrawn from the council
does not mean we are withdrawing from advocacy around human
rights in China. Indeed, in New York on multiple occasions at
the U.N. there, we have raised our concerns about China. We
have raised it in multiple statements publicly. In the case
that Senator Rubio raised in which China sought to preclude a
Uighur representative from joining a meeting, our mission there
actually pushed back and succeeded in getting that person
access to the U.N. in New York. So we continue to look at any
and all venues in which we can push back on China's own
situation and China's own efforts to influence the U.N.
Senator Markey. Well, I do not think ``any and all'' is
accurate. I do not think we have any evidence the President is
using his leverage with President Xi to communicate our values
at the highest level. So, it is in that short list of
considerations for the Chinese Government as they are trying to
decide what their relationship with our country is.
And I disagree. I think that being in the Human Rights
Council does help because it is the organizing principle, and
we might not be happy with all aspects of it. But on this China
issue I think it is an additional point of significant
pressure, which we should be using as an organizing principle
to send a very strong message on human rights. I think down the
line, there are many tools that just are not being used from
the Oval Office right down to the Human Rights Council as well,
and there is evidence that as a result, we are not really
seeing any response from the Chinese on these issues. So I just
think that a change in direction is absolutely necessary.
So thank you.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your incredible leadership on
this committee, and we thank the witnesses as well for your
input.
Senator Gardner. Thank you.
Secretary Busby, you talked about some of the dollars used
toward democracy training. I would point out how important that
those efforts are, a civil society, teaching about democracy,
teaching young leaders about the values of human rights. And
the bill that Senator Markey and I have introduced, Asia
Reassurance Initiative Act, would greatly increase dollars for
democracy, human rights, rule of law programming, training, and
I hope that you will work with us on implementation of those
dollars to provide a better, stronger voice for that.
Administrator Steele, I do not know if there is anything
you would like to add. It looks like you do.
Ms. Steele. Yes, I did. Strengthening democratic
institutions is a major component of the administration's Indo-
Pacific strategy which was part of my testimony here. We all
realize that development assistance can play an important role
in counterbalancing the effect that China has in weakening
countries through its own very adversarial methods. I just
wanted to confirm and verify that it is going to be a very
important component of the administration's Indo-Pacific
strategy.
Senator Gardner. Very good. Thank you for that.
Thank you again to all of you for your time and testimony
today, providing us with your testimony.
For the information of members, the record will remain open
until the close of business Thursday for members to submit
questions for the record. I would ask that the witnesses
respond as promptly as possible. Your responses will be made a
part of the record.
With the thanks of this committee, the hearing is now
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:48 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
----------
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
Responses to Additional Questions for the Record Submitted to
Laura Stone by Senator Cory Gardner
Question 1. Since 2010, the Chinese Government has suspended the
official dialogue with the Dalai Lama's representatives to resolve the
Tibetan issue. Secretary Mike Pompeo has said that he ``will express
publicly, and at the highest levels of government, that Chinese
authorities need to engage in meaningful and direct dialogue with the
Dalai Lama or his representatives, without preconditions, to lower
tensions and resolve differences.'' What has the State Department done
so far to encourage the facilitation of this dialogue?
Answer. The United States continues to encourage engagement in
meaningful and direct dialogue, without preconditions, to lead to a
settlement that resolves differences.
We urge Chinese authorities to resume a dialogue with the Dalai
Lama or his representatives without preconditions.
The Government of China continues to characterize the Dalai Lama as
a separatist and to assert that it will not allow "outside
interference" in Tibetan issues.
Question 2. The Tibetan Policy Act of 2002 mandates that American
officials should visit Tibet on a regular basis. What is the level of
access to Tibet that U.S. Government officials have received? Can you
provide a list of visits by U.S. Government officials in the last three
years?
Answer. Below is a list of visits by U.S. Government officials to
the Tibetan Autonomous Region (TAR), although it may not be
comprehensive. U.S. Government access to the TAR is not regular and is
more restricted than travel to other regions or provinces of China.
During the past three years, Chinese officials have denied multiple
U.S. Government requests to meet with TAR officials. Regular trips
granted to other U.S. officials are heavily scrutinized.
Visits by U.S. Government Officials to the Tibetan Autonomous Region (TAR)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date
U.S. Official
Purpose
Location
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
May 2015
Ambassador Max Baucus
Met with TAR officials
Lhasa
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
November 2015
Consular officer
Routine consular visit
Lhasa
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
November 2015
CODEL Pelosi
Met with TAR officials;
Lhasa
discussed TAR access
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
June 2016
Consular officer
Routine consular visit
Lhasa and Shigatse
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 2016
Consular officer
Routine consular visit
Linzhi
April 2017
CODEL Daines
Met with TAR officials
Lhasa
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
August 2017
Consular officers
Routine consular visit
Lhasa, Shigatse,
and Everest Base
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
November 2017
Consul General in Chengdu as
Met with TAR officials; raised
Linzhi, Lhasa
well as Political/Economic and
religious freedom and U.S.
PAS officers
Business access issues
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
April 2018
Consular officer
Routine consular visit
Shannan
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
May 2018
Regional security officers
Advance for Ambassador
Lhasa
Brandstad's trip
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
October 2018
Consular officers
Routine consular visit
Lhasa
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
November 2018
Consul General in Chengdu and
Met with Lhasa Party Secretary;
Lhasa
Political Officer
raised TAR access issues for
U.S. citizens and U.S.
businesses, religious freedom,
as well as cultural and
education exchanges
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 3. Tibetan-Americans, attempting to visit their homeland,
report having to undergo a discriminatory visa application process,
different from what is typically required, at the Chinese embassy and
consulates in the United States, and often find their requests to
travel denied. Are you aware of this practice and have you investigated
these allegations, as they represent a clear discrimination against
certain U.S. citizens?
Answer. We have received anecdotal reports that Tibetan-Americans
must undergo strict screening and meet conditions required only of
Tibetans when applying for visas at Chinese embassies. We do not have a
means to collect comprehensive data about how many applications are
submitted, accepted, or denied by the Chinese Government.
We are aware of instances when Chinese authorities have denied
Tibetan-Americans' entry into China despite those individuals
possessing valid Chinese visas and travel documents. For example, On
February 22, 2018, according to Radio Free Asia, authorities at
Shuangliu International Airport in Chengdu denied entry to a U.S.
citizen of Tibetan ethnicity who possessed a current and valid Chinese
visa. Radio Free Asia journalist Palden Gyal reported that in August
2017 customs officials at the Baiyun International Airport in
Guangzhou, China detained him at the airport, seized his electronic
devices, and denied his entrance into China.
The Consul General at the U.S. Consulate General in Chengdu has
raised the issue of U.S. citizens' access to the Tibetan Autonomous
Region (TAR) in every meeting with TAR officials, including on specific
cases such as these.
Question 4. The Foreign Correspondents Club of China reports that:
a) 2008 rules prevent foreign reporters from visiting the Tibet
Autonomous Region without prior permission from the Government of such
Region; b) such permission has only rarely been granted; and c)
although the 2008 rules allow journalists to travel freely in other
parts of China, Tibetan areas outside such Region remain ``effectively
off-limits to foreign reporters.'' Do you monitor the number of
requests made by U.S. journalists to travel to Tibet and how many have
been rejected over the last three years?
Answer. While we do not have the means to monitor comprehensively
the requests made by U.S. journalists to enter Tibet, we regularly
engage with U.S. journalists to discuss this issue, including the
Foreign Correspondents' Club. We understand that U.S. journalists seek
access to Tibet on a regular basis.
In the last three years there have been a limited number of
instances in which Chinese officials selected and escorted U.S.
journalists to pre-designated places in the Tibetan Autonomous Region
(TAR). Outside of these trips, U.S. journalists are not allowed to go
to the TAR.
Question 5. How many visas have you granted to Chinese journalists
over the last three years?
Answer. Below are the number of I Visas issued to Chinese nationals
for the last 3 years:
FY 2018: 587
FY 2017: 732
FY 2016: 836
Please note that the FY 2017 and FY 2016 data (along with prior
years) is available on http://Travel.State.Gov on the Nonimmigrant Visa
Statistics page (https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/legal/visa-
law0/visa-statistics/nonimmigrant-visa-statistics.html) under the
section called Nonimmigrant Visa Issuances by Visa Class and
Nationality. FY 2018 data is not publicly available yet.
FY 2018 data are preliminary and subject to change. Any changes
would not be statistically significant.
Question 6. The Government of the People's Republic of China does
not grant United States diplomats and other officials, journalists, and
other citizens[`] access to Tibet on a basis that is reciprocal to the
access that the Government of the United States grants Chinese
diplomats and other officials, journalists, and citizens. Have you
already or do you plan to identify who are the Chinese officials both
at the local level in Tibet and at the central level in Beijing, who
are responsible for blocking access to Tibet for American citizens?
Answer. The Chinese Government does not disclose the names of
officials who are involved in issuing travel permits to American
citizens to access the Tibetan Autonomous Region (TAR).
The Department will fully implement the Reciprocal Access to Tibet
Act, if it is signed into law.
Letter Sent by Senator Tim Kaine to Mike Pompeo, U.S. Secretary of
State, Regarding China's Retaliation Against the Families of Radio Free
Asia Journalists
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
U.S. Department of State's Response to Senator Tim Kaine's Letter
Regarding China's Retaliation Against the Families of Radio Free Asia
Journalists
United States Department of State,
Washington, DC 20520
Hon. Tim Kaine,
U.S. Senate, Washington, DC 20510
Dear Senator Kaine, Thank you for your letter of July 26 on the
worsening human rights crisis in China's Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous
Region (Xinjiang), and its impact on six U.S.-based journalists with
Radio Free Asia's (RFA) Uyghur Service and their family members. We
regret the delay in responding. The Department of State shares your
deep concerns about the growing crackdown on and mass detention of
Uighurs, ethnic Kazakhs, and members of other Muslim minority groups in
China.
China's harsh repression of ethnic and religious minorities'
expressions of their cultural identity and religious practices
throughout Xinjiang has the potential to incite radicalization and
recruitment to violence. Secretary Pompeo highlighted the
Administration's concerns at the State Department's Ministerial to
Advance Religious Freedom in July, and raised the issue directly with
the Chinese government at the Diplomatic and Security Dialogue in
November.
The Department is particularly alarmed by reports of the mass
detention of at least 800,000 to possibly more than two million
Uighurs, ethnic Kazkahs, and other members of Muslim minorities for
indefinite periods in internment camps for so-called ``patriotic re-
education.'' Former detainees have said publicly that they were
regularly subjected to beatings, stress positions, sleep deprivation,
and other forms of abuse and were aware of deaths in the camps. U.S.
officials have consistently called on China to immediately release all
those arbitrarily detained.
In April, Spokesperson Nauert met with those RFA journalists, who
shared reports of Uighurs and other Muslims in Xinjiang, including
their families, who have been harassed and arbitrarily detained.
Spokesperson Nauert publicly called on China to release all those
unlawfully detained and to respect filndamental freedoms. Department
officials continue to meet regularly with these journalists and other
U.S. citizens and lawful permanent residents whose family members have
disappeared or been similarly detained in Xinjiang, and press for
information on their cases with Chinese officials.
The Department will continue to raise its grave concerns to the
Chinese government about its repression of Muslims in Xinjiang, and to
urge China to provide information about the locations and medical
conditions of those detained and immediately release them and to lift
the martial law-like restrictions in the region.
We hope this information is helpful to you. Please let us know if
we can be of further assistance.
Sincerely,
Mary Elizabeth Taylor,
Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Legislative Affairs
[all]