- CFPB'S ROLE IN EMPOWERING PREDATORY LENDERS: EXAMINING THE PROPOSED REPEAL OF THE. PAYDAY LENDING RULE
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
CFPB'S ROLE IN
EMPOWERING PREDATORY LENDERS:
EXAMINING THE PROPOSED REPEAL OF THE
PAYDAY LENDING RULE
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC AND CONSUMER POLICY
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
MAY 16, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-25
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available on: http://www.govinfo.gov
http://www.oversight.house.gov
http://www.docs.house.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-641 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM
ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland, Chairman
Carolyn B. Maloney, New York
Jim Jordan, Ohio, Ranking Minority
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Member
Columbia
Justin Amash, Michigan
Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Jim Cooper, Tennessee
Thomas Massie, Kentucky
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Mark Meadows, North Carolina
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Harley Rouda, California
James Comer, Kentucky
Katie Hill, California
Michael Cloud, Texas
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida
Bob Gibbs, Ohio
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland
Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Peter Welch, Vermont
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Jackie Speier, California
Chip Roy, Texas
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Carol D. Miller, West Virginia
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Mark E. Green, Tennessee
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Kelly Armstrong, North Dakota
Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
W. Gregory Steube, Florida
Ro Khanna, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
David Rapallo, Staff Director
Richard Trumka, Subcommittee Staff Director
William Cunningham, Chief Counsel and Senior Policy Advisor
Joshua Zucker, Assistant Clerk
Christopher Hixon, Minority Staff Director
Contact Number: 202-225-5051
------
Subcommittee on Economic and Consumer Policy
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois, Chairman
Mark DeSaulnier, California,
Michael Cloud, Texas, Ranking
Katie Hill, California
Minority Member
Ro Khanna, California
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Chip Roy, Texas
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
Carol D. Miller, West Virginia
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
C
O
N
T
E
N
T
S
----------
Page
Hearing held on May 16, 2019.....................................
1
Witness
Thomas Pahl, Policy Associate Director for Research, Markets and
Regulations, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
Oral Statement...............................................
4
* The prepared statement for Mr. Pahl is available at the U.S.
House of Representatives Repository:
https://docs.house.gov.
INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
----------
The documents entered into the record during this hearing are
listed below, and available at: https://docs.house.gov.
* Emails Show Pro-Payday Loan Study Was Edited By The Payday
Loan Industry, submitted by Rep. Krishnamoorthi
* How a Payday Lending Industry Insider Tilted Academic
Research in Its Favor, submitted by Rep. Krishnamoorthi
* How Predatory Payday Lenders Plot to Right Government
Regulation, submitted by Rep. Krishnamoorthi
* Millions of People Post Comments on Federal Regulations. Many
are Fake, submitted by Rep. Krishnamoorthi
* Payday Lenders Drum Up Customer Support to Ease Regulations,
submitted by Rep. Krishnamoorthi
* Payday Lenders Get Thousands of Borrowers to Complain to
Government About Rules Meant to Protect Them, submitted by Rep.
Krishnamoorthi
* Payday Loan Group Paid KSU for Favorable Research, Records
Show, submitted by Rep. Krishnamoorthi
CFPB'S ROLE IN
EMPOWERING PREDATORY LENDERS:
EXAMINING THE PROPOSED REPEAL OF THE.
PAYDAY LENDING RULE
----------
Thursday, May 16, 2019
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Economic and Consumer Policy,
Committee on Oversight and Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:07 p.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Raja
Krishnamoorthi (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Krishnamoorthi, Pressley, Tlaib,
Connolly, and Cloud.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Good afternoon. The Subcommittee on
Economic and Consumer Policy will come to order. Without
objection, the chair is authorized to declare a recess of the
committee at any time.
This hearing is being convened to examine CFPB's role in
empowering predatory lenders and examine the proposed repeal of
the Payday Lending Rule.
I now recognize myself to give an opening statement.
In the wake of the financial crisis, the CFPB was
established to stop predatory financial activity central to the
collapse. For years, the CFPB has stood up to financial
predators, holding companies accountable for wrongdoing and
returning $12 billion of ill-gotten money to consumers.
When the CFPB saw predatory payday and auto title lenders
targeting the poorest Americans with high-interest debt traps,
it began studying the issue. Five years of careful research
uncovered an industry preying on desperation. Many lenders
advertised short-term loans, but they know the truth; their
products lock in the average consumers for 11 months. In fact,
most consumers pay more in fees than they borrowed in the first
place. Furthermore, interest rates approach 400 percent.
But you don't have to take my word for how predatory these
loans are. Please watch this video on the CFPB's own website.
[Video shown.]
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Well, I think we'll see it eventually
after it ends the buffering here. Why don't you pause the
video, please.
Most types of lenders make money when loans are repaid, but
payday and auto title lenders succeed when their borrowers
fail. Ninety percent of fees come from people who take out
seven or more loans just to repay the first.
CFPB's five years of research produced substantial evidence
that action was needed. It issued the 2017 rule, also known as
the Payday Lending Rule, to stop the debt traps, by simply
requiring payday, title, and other high-cost installment
lenders to determine up front whether people could afford to
repay.
Indeed, Americans overwhelmingly support this commonsense
rule. Nationwide, 73 percent of Americans support requiring
payday lenders to check a borrower's ability to repay before
lending money, including 74 percent of Democrats, 72 percent of
Republicans, and 77 percent of Independents.
Today, we are going to discuss the CFPB's proposed repeal
of this wildly popular rule. Why are we so focused on it?
Listen to the plight of Billy A, one of the many borrowers
central to the story. Billy A is from Springfield, Illinois.
She is disabled and on a fixed income. She took out a title
loan to help when her grandchild was born. After a year, she
had paid $1,500 on a $1,000 payday loan, and still owed $800 on
top of that. She couldn't pay basic living expenses, turning to
a food bank, and eventually living in her car. One month she
took out a payday loan to cover her title loan to avoid
repossession.
The lender never asked about other debts or if she could
repay, but it got her bank information so it could pull from
her account every month. When there is no money, it charges her
$25 more. Billy describes her situation as, quote: ``being like
a hamster on one of those wheels. I just keep running and
running and never get anywhere. It's scary to tell my story,
but someone's got to tell people what the payday lending
industry is doing to us. They are profiting off the backs of
poor people. It's predatory, plain and simple, and it's got to
stop,'' close quote.
Billy is just one of 12 million Americans who use these
types of loans each year, and her story is not unique. The
CFPB's 2017 Payday Lending Rule was developed over the course
of a half a decade to protect people like Billy, but the CFPB's
current leadership has decided to abandon it, based on no new
research. In this hearing we will ask the question why?
Today, Mr. Pahl is here from the CFPB to discuss payday
lending. We in this room may not be payday borrowers, but we
need to stand up for them. If we do not, what protections will
CFPB come for next?
The chair now recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Cloud of
Texas, for five minutes for an opening statement.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you, Chairman.
We are here today to discuss the CFPB's Payday Lending
Rule, which if allowed to come into effect later this year,
could do major disservice to the very people the CFPB is
charged with serving. Since the passage of Dodd-Frank and other
post-crisis financial regulatory legislation, it has become
increasingly difficult for many Americans to access the
financial system.
It is too often the case that Congress can make snap knee-
jerk reactions to problems and passes legislation that has far-
reaching and unintended consequences. Before these laws were
implemented, 76 percent of bank accounts qualified for free
checking. After Dodd-Frank, this number fell to just 39
percent. Congress has made it more expensive to participate in
the financial system, and Americans who lack financial
resources are the ones who paid the price most dearly and
continue to struggle today.
From 2009 to 2012, the average minimum balance required to
have fees waived on a bank account rose from $186 to $723. Even
at $15 an hour wage, that's more than a full week's salary for
many people. If you're someone getting established in life and
living paycheck to paycheck, you can't afford that, and
Congress has shut you out of the financial system many
Americans take for granted every day.
Because of these regulatory burdens that Congress put in
place, low-income and credit-impaired Americans were forced to
look elsewhere for financial services. For up to 12 million
Americans, that meant turning to payday loans. These Americans
are generally considered to be unbanked or underbanked. They
lack a credit history and so can't obtain credit through
traditional channels like credit cards or they have an adverse
credit history that makes banks unwilling to lend to them. They
tend to be younger, hourly wage workers toward the beginning of
their career, with 56 percent of payday loan customers making
between $25,000 and $75,000 per year.
The CFPB could have tried to make payday loans safer for
the people who use them through requirements like increased
disclosure and more enforcement against lenders who take
advantage of consumers or engage in fraud. Instead, the CFPB
sought to kill the industry and remove one of the few remaining
sources of credit for a significant number of Americans.
The CFPB's own analysis of the rule impacts project up to
80 percent decline in the number of loans being issued to the
rule. Payday lenders commissioned their own study of the rule
and an impact, as estimated, could be 90 percent of a decline.
The CFPB did this while ignoring the impact its rule will
have on unbanked and underbanked consumers who use these loans.
Research has shown that when access to small-dollar consumer
credit, like payday loans is restricted, people turn to illegal
and unregulated lenders like loan sharks to make ends meet.
Studies also show that restricting access to small-dollar
consumer credit results in consumers bouncing checks and filing
for bankruptcy at much higher rates than when credit like
payday loans is available.
The CFPB also ignored the role that states were already
playing in regulating these credit markets. All 50 states
regulate small-dollar consumer credit like payday loans, and
states have long been the primary regulators of consumer credit
and lending. There is no unregulated Wild West crying out for
Federal intervention, particularly when the Federal
intervention ignored the evidence before them.
Before regulating, the Bureau should have considered
whether the proposed rule would harm consumers. They are
required to do (this) under the law, and that did not
adequately happen in this case. Professor Ronald Mann of
Columbia Law School, whose work the CFPB used to build the
foundation for the Payday Lending Rule, disputed how the Bureau
used his own research. He even went so far to write a letter to
the CFPB, calling his use of research on consumer credit,
quote, ``inaccurate and misleading,'' unquote.
Professor Mann further alleged that the CFPB was engaging
in, quote, ``a distortion of evidence to suit policies that the
Bureau has preselected for implementation,'' unquote. The
Bureau finalized the rule anyway, saying simply that they
disagreed with how Professor Mann was interpreting his own
research.
I am glad that under the CFPB's new leadership, the agency
appears to be serious about having rigorous, research-based
regulatory process, and that the agency is willing to look back
at its prior actions and identify any mistakes when necessary
and consequently how to correct them.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Mr. Cloud.
Today we are joined by Thomas Pahl, the policy associate
director for Research, Markets and Regulations at the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau, the CFPB.
If the witness would please rise, I will begin by swearing
you in.
Do you swear or affirm that the testimony you are about to
give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you God?
Thank you.
Let the record show that the witness answered in the
affirmative. Thank you, and please be seated.
We will begin with questions. And before that, we will
start with an opening statement. How is that?
Mr. Pahl.
STATEMENT OF THOMAS PAHL, POLICY ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR OF THE
RESEARCH, MARKETS AND REGULATIONS DIVISION, CONSUMER FINANCIAL
PROTECTION BUREAU
Mr. Pahl. Thank you.
Chairman Krishnamoorthi, Ranking Member Cloud, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify here today. I am Thomas Pahl. I am the
policy associate director for the Division of Research, Markets
and Regulations at the CFPB. I have worked at the FTC and CFPB
for more than 25 years doing consumer protection work,
primarily as a career staff attorney.
I am pleased to discuss the Bureau's activities concerning
payday lenders and what the CFPB is doing to make a final
determination whether there is a sufficient factual and legal
basis for the 2017 rule.
Our goal is to protect borrowers from harm, while not
unduly restricting the ability of borrowers to decide what
credit is best for them. A large portion of American consumers
live paycheck to paycheck, sometimes facing a financial
shortfall due to an emergency expense or a pressing bill and a
lack of liquid savings. These consumers are the primary
potential customers for small-dollar lenders.
Rulemaking is just one of the four tools the CFPB uses to
prevent harm to these consumers. To get a complete picture of
what the Bureau is doing to protect these consumers requires an
understanding of the Bureau's use of all of its tools.
First, the CFPB's consumer education activities are focused
on helping consumers help themselves, protect their own
interests, choose the financial products and services that best
fit their needs. This education is vital to preventing consumer
harm and building a high level of financial well-being.
The Bureau's efforts include its new Start Small, Save Up
initiative, which consumers are encouraged to build a basic
savings cushion and develop a savings habit. Having such
emergency savings is critical to helping people address the
broader issues in their financial lives around attaining and
retaining good credit, managing their debt, and saving
habitually. The Bureau is firmly committed to doing the work
needed to move the needle on emergency savings.
Second, the CFPB's supervision program examines lenders and
other firms to ensure that they comply with a variety of
existing Federal statutes and regulations. The Dodd-Frank Act
provides the Bureau with express authority to engage in
supervision of payday lenders. The Bureau uses supervision
effectively and efficiently to increase compliance with the law
and prevent consumer harm, including by keeping payday lenders
on the straight and narrow.
Third, the Bureau's enforcement program targets bad actors.
Over the past year, the Bureau has initiated five new
enforcement actions involving payday lenders and obtained final
judgments on two other previously filed payday lending cases.
These cases are a testament to the agency's commitment to use
its enforcement tool to take decisive action to deter
wrongdoers so that all lenders can compete with each other on a
level playing field. In its supervisory activities and its law
enforcement, the Bureau often cooperates and coordinates with
other Federal and state agencies.
Let me now turn to the small-dollar rulemaking. In November
2017, the Bureau published a rule to regulate small-dollar
lenders. That rule addressed two discrete topics. First, the
rule contains mandatory underwriting provisions. Second, the
rule contains provisions with respect to attempts to withdraw
payments from consumers' checking or other accounts.
The Bureau has not proposed to rescind or delay the rule's
payment provisions. However, with respect to the mandatory
underwriting provisions, the Bureau has doubts as to whether
the appropriate standards for unfairness and abusiveness under
the Dodd-Frank Act were applied. The Bureau also has doubts
whether, despite the abundance of evidence in the record on
many issues, the evidence was sufficiently robust and reliable
to support the necessary factual findings to support the
conclusion that a lack of mandatory underwriting was unfair and
abusive.
The Bureau, therefore, decided in February 2019 to issue a
notice of proposed rulemaking to reconsider the mandatory
underwriting provisions of the rule, especially important in
light of the large and lasting effects that the mandatory
underwriting provisions would have on the market and on
consumers' ability to choose small-dollar loans to address
financial shortfalls.
The Bureau also preliminarily concluded at the same time
that delaying the compliance date for the mandatory
underwriting provisions was necessary for an orderly rulemaking
process to proceed. The CFPB, therefore, also issued a notice
of proposed rulemaking to delay the compliance date.
The comment periods on both notices of proposed rulemakings
have now closed. The Bureau received 145 comments on the delay
proposal, and as of May 13, the agency had received more than
150,000 comments, and counting, on the reconsideration
proposal.
Because the Bureau is in the midst of rulemaking
proceedings, I'm sure you'll understand that I can neither
offer any final views nor comment on the Bureau's internal
deliberations. I can assure the subcommittee, however, that the
Bureau will approach comments with an open mind and will
carefully review them before reaching any conclusions. We also
are committed to a fair and transparent rulemaking process.
Thank you very much. I look forward to answering any
questions that you may have.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Mr. Pahl.
It looks like the video is now working, so we're going to
play your own website video for one minute.
Could you please roll the video?
[Video shown.]
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Well, that was a nice video from the
CFPB. Thank you.
I am going to recognize myself for five minutes for
questions.
Mr. Pahl, thank you so much for being here. I'd like your
help in establishing the timeline behind the Payday Lending
Rule. As you know, the final payday rule was issued on October
5, 2017, and then CFPB leadership changed on November 27, 2017.
Within a few days, on December 4, less than a week later,
Director Mulvaney told the press that the CFPB was considering
repealing the payday rule. And just one month later, in January
2018, the CFPB formally announced that it was reconsidering the
payday rule.
Isn't that your understanding as well, Mr. Pahl?
Mr. Pahl. Thank you. I returned to the Bureau in April
2018, so those events preceded my return to the agency, but
what you have described is consistent with what my
understanding is of the course of events.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Very good. And two days after that
announcement, that formal announcement, on January 18 of 2018,
the CFPB voluntarily dismissed a lawsuit called CFPB v. Golden
Valley Lending. This was a lawsuit against a payday lender that
had charged 950 percent interest. Unfortunately, this was the
beginning of a pattern in the litigation that the CFPB had
previously initiated but now was beginning to dismiss.
Four days later, on January 22, Business Wire reported that
CFPB ended its investigation into payday lender World
Acceptance Corporation. Are you aware of this particular
decision to drop that investigation as well?
Mr. Pahl. These events preceded my time returning to the
Bureau. I have a general understanding that there were some
payday lending investigations that were closed or matters that
were closed, but, as I say, it predates my time. And also, I
would note that I run the Division of Research, Markets and
Regulations. All of the law enforcement activity is handled by
a different division at the agency.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. I understand.
Mr. Pahl. And so it was not part of my responsibility to be
involved in those decisions----
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. I understand.
Mr. Pahl [continuing]. Even once I arrived.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. And, without objection, I enter into
the record a New York Times report stating that on April 5,
2018--so this is nearing or after the time that you joined the
Bureau--the deputy director of the CFPB met with payday lender
group Consumer Financial Services of America to discuss
repealing the payday rule.
Are you aware that four days later, on April 9, that same
group of payday lenders sued CFPB to block the payday rule from
going into effect? This was on April 9, 2018, Consumer
Financial Services Association versus CFPB.
Mr. Pahl. I actually started later that same month. These
two events also preceded my return to the Bureau. I do know
that the CFSA suit was filed on the date you mentioned, and it
is my understanding that there was a meeting between Acting
Deputy Director or actually now Deputy Director Brian Johnson
and CFSA.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Very good. Interestingly, court records
in that case show that instead of defending the lawsuit against
it, CFPB joined with the payday lenders suing it and actually
stopped the litigation and sued to stop the CFPB rule from
going into effect. In fact, according to campaign finance
records, the CFPB's industry partner in that case, Consumer
Financial Services Association, made significant campaign
contributions to Director Mulvaney while he was still in
Congress.
Now, Mr. Pahl, are you aware that on February 1, 2019--so
it's this year--CFPB settled with payday lender NDG Financial?
Mr. Pahl. Yes, I am aware of the settlement with NDG
Financial. But, again, that was a matter handled by a different
part of the agency than the part of the agency that I oversee.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. I understand. And do you know how much
they settled that case for?
I'll tell you. It was zero dollars and zero cents. CFPB
settled it for zero dollars, despite the fact that NDG had been
alleged to charge illegally high interest rates and tried to
collect on debts not owed.
So if you just stay with me, that's the fourth piece of
litigation now that the CFPB has either dropped or settled for
zero dollars and zero cents.
Will you commit to providing us, within two weeks, the
names of the CFPB personnel that were involved in each of the
four enforcement actions that I mentioned?
Mr. Pahl. Yes, I think we can do that. And--yes. One thing
I would note--I do want to offer one response to the CFSA
litigation versus the Bureau. I mean, we and CFSA are adverse
parties in that litigation and our positions in that litigation
are set forth in the briefs. But I do want to avoid----
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. I understand.
Mr. Pahl [continuing]. The misimpression that we are
somehow in alliance with CFSA. We are adverse parties and we
are pursuing our own interests in that litigation.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. I understand. But both of you joined
hands to stop the litigation and stop the rule from going into
effect.
I want to move on to my last question here. Without
objection, I enter into the record a February 27 New York Post
article from this year. And in it, it says: Payday industry
representative Hilary Miller confirmed to the New York Post
that he, and I quote, ``represented individual lenders in
discussions with CFPB last year in the months before the agency
scrapped the 2017 rule.'' That directly contradicts a statement
from CFPB spokeswoman two days earlier on February 25 that, and
I quote, ``the Bureau did not discuss its proposal to rescind
the rule with industry officials before making the
announcement.''
Will you commit to me, Mr. Pahl, information about the
personnel from CFPB who were involved in those particular
meetings with industry representatives before the CFPB scrapped
the rule?
Mr. Pahl. Let me see how I can answer it this way. The CFPB
spokeswoman's statement was accurate. Between the time the
final rule was issued and the time that the notice of proposed
rulemaking went out, no one in the Division of Research,
Markets and Regulations that worked on the rule discussed the
proposal with anybody in industry or any trade association. So
the meetings--my understanding of the meetings you're defining,
I don't think they exist.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. So you are saying that Hilary Miller is
lying about what exactly happened?
Mr. Pahl. Mr. Miller, my understanding, has revised his
statement to clarify that the period of time that he was
referring to was prior to the time that the rule was issued in
2017, not post the time the rule was issued in 2017.
So what Hilary Miller has said with this modification and
what the Bureau is saying are consistent. We did not talk to
Hilary Miller from the time the final rule was issued until the
proposal came out.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. So you did not discuss with anybody in
industry between the time the final rule was issued in October
2017 and when the rescinding of the rule happened?
Mr. Pahl. We have many contacts with stakeholders that
occur while we are doing rule development, including deciding
whether we want to reconsider a rule and on what grounds. As
part of that, we would have spoken with members of industry,
consumer advocates, academics, all sorts of other people. But
we never took our proposal and went to a payday lender or a
payday trade association and said, what do you think about
this, or do you have different ideas for proposals? We did,
however, receive information and have meetings. You
anticipate----
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. So on those meetings--I understand what
you're saying. You've met--you admit that the agency did meet
with folks from the payday lending industry after October 5,
2017, with regard to this rule.
Will you commit to providing us the details of every single
meeting that the CFPB had with industry representatives or
officials?
Mr. Pahl. I believe--I believe that actually we have--yes.
Frankly, I think we----
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Very good. We will expect that in two
weeks. So thank you so much for that vital information. Thank
you so much.
Okay. Mr. Cloud, I recognize you now for five minutes for
questions.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Pahl, again, for being here. For me, the
thing that I'm concerned with is good governance. You've
mentioned that the prior rule was made on what was not well-
researched information. And so a number of think tanks have
criticized the Bureau's research in this regard. The research
also failed to take into account state-level regulation.
Professor Mann, as was mentioned, even had questions about his
own research and how it was used.
Can you walk us through the role that this evidentiary
concerns played into your decision or the Bureau's decision to
reconsider the 2017 rule?
Mr. Pahl. Sure. One of the factual findings that needs to
be made in order to support either a finding of unfairness or
some of the theories of abusiveness under the Dodd-Frank Act is
essentially that consumers couldn't reasonably avoid the harm
from taking out loans that had not been underwritten.
What Professor Mann's study looked at is it really compared
what consumers thought was going to happen in terms of how long
they would be in a payday lending sequence versus what their
actual experience had been. Professor Mann, looking at his own
study, said that consumers made a realistic assessment of how
long that they would be in those sequences and that they
generally did a good job of predicting that they were likely to
roll over and have more loans. The notion is that if consumers
are aware of the risks of a product and they have reasonable
opportunity to take steps to avoid those risks, then you don't
have a basis for unfairness or abusiveness under some theories.
That's what Professor Mann's original conclusion was.
What the Bureau did in the 2017 rule is took some of the
data from Professor Mann's study and did its own analysis of
it; and the Bureau decided, based upon its own analysis of
Professor Mann's study, that it wasn't predictive. Consumers
did not have an expectation as to what their experience was
going to be with a payday loan. And the Bureau based its 2017
final rule essentially on that one piece of research or relied
very heavily on that one piece of research.
One of the things that we have done in reconsidering the
rule--and we are still--we just got tons of comments on this,
of course, so it's being analyzed. But we went back and took a
look at really how strong a basis is the Bureau's analysis of
some data from the Mann study to support what the Bureau did,
and decided that essentially it wasn't--we have questions about
whether it really was strong support for two main reasons.
One is that it didn't address vehicle title loan customers.
So one of the main products that's covered by the rule, the
study didn't even purport to address those products.
The other is, even within payday loans, the Mann study
involved one lender in five states. Obviously, there are
numerous payday lenders throughout the United states. Consumers
have the ability to get payday loans in 33 states, and in each
of those states, there are different disclosure regimes,
requirements that could affect consumers' experience.
So, essentially, what we decided in going forward with
reconsidering it is that because the Mann study, even if you
took what the CFPB had concluded in 2017 as accurate, even if
you took it as accurate, the limited scope of the study--that
it didn't deal with vehicle title loans, it only dealt with one
payday lender, it only dealt with five states--that was a very
thin basis on which to impose requirements which would have a
draconian effect on the ability of vehicle title lenders and,
to a lesser extent, payday lenders to operate.
Mr. Cloud. So as limited as Mr. Mann's study is, your
understanding is that his understanding of the data was that
customers by and large knew what they were getting into and
they were able to predict when they would have--when they would
be able to pay back their loan, but somehow the Bureau flipped
the equation on that?
Mr. Pahl. The Bureau did its own--yes. The Bureau did its
own analysis and reached a conclusion. Professor Mann had
reached a different conclusion. And so really what you have is
two sets of experts looking at one set of data reaching very
different conclusions about it. And that is the primary piece
of evidence on a key factual finding that needs to be found in
order to justify a finding of unfairness or abusiveness.
Mr. Cloud. Do you have any insight into how that was
reinterpreted?
Mr. Pahl. How----
Mr. Cloud. How the Bureau at that time--I realize this was
before he was able to reinterpret that data--to come to a
different conclusion.
Mr. Pahl. Yes. I was either not at the Bureau or not
working the project at that time. But my understanding is what
the Bureau's economist, the economic staff working that did, is
they got data from Professor Mann about his study. They did
their own analysis to see whether there was a correlation
between consumers' expectations and their actual experience.
The results they got, they reached out to Professor Mann
and said, hey, this is what we found. And they engaged with him
on that. So, really, it is two sets of experts talking about
data and trying to decide whether they really think that it
shows or does not show that consumers anticipate what their
experience is going to be with payday loans.
And essentially, we have decided to reconsider the rule, in
part, because the research that was done, you know, nothing
wrong with it in and of itself, but it is not a very strong
basis for addressing all vehicle title lenders nationwide, all
payday lenders nationwide. And for that reason, we have
questions about it, and that's why we put it out for public
comment, to see if there are other sources of information on
this point before the Bureau makes final determinations.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Mr. Pahl.
I now recognize Congresswoman Pressley for five minutes.
Ms. Pressley. Mr. Pahl, thank you for joining us. I was
fortunate enough to discuss this issue before the House
Financial Services Committee just last month and to express my
concerns regarding the perpetual debt trap that these products
leave and create for some of our most vulnerable residents and
consumers.
I want to ask you about CFPB's stated justifications for
the proposed rule. They seem to share a similar focus. The
proposed rule states, and I quote: ``A more robust and reliable
evidentiary record is needed to support a rule that would have
such dramatic impacts on the viability of payday lenders.''
Mr. Pahl, other than the industry just not liking it, by
what measure are the five years of research and outreach
leading up to this rule not robust or reliable evidentiary
record?
Mr. Pahl. Thank you. I think the best example is reflected
in the exchange that I just had with the members. Essentially,
on one key determination as a matter of law that needs to be
established, there was one study in the record. There's great
debate/controversy as to the strength of that, as well as how
limited in scope that study is. And it is looking, you know,
not at overall the quantum of evidence that came in, but the
evidence on some specific issues on which we need a factual
predicate that was--our preliminary conclusion is that was
weak, so we went out and asked the public, you know, is this
all there is or is there other evidence on this specific point?
You know, it's not that we didn't get a lot of comments. We
got 1.4 million comments last time. It's not that there aren't
a number of studies that we considered as part of our analysis.
But on the particular point that we have to establish as a
matter of law to justify the provisions in the rule, the
research on that particular point we thought was weak enough
that it justified going out and seeking public comment on that
particular issue.
Ms. Pressley. In the interest of time. So CFPB also says
that the 2017 rule is welfare-decreasing for lenders, and,
quote, ``reversing the restriction should, therefore, be
welfare-enhancing for lenders,'' unquote.
Mr. Pahl, what is the name of your agency?
Mr. Pahl. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau or the
Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection.
Ms. Pressley. Consumer, right. So why should the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau care about enhancing the welfare of
predatory lenders? Are these lenders new consumers?
Mr. Pahl. Lenders are not consumers. I think, though, that
the language that you're quoting from or paraphrasing is
incomplete. Immediately following those statements in the
notice of proposed rulemaking, there is an indication by the
agency that those estimates are based upon assuming that
consumers don't adequately understand what their risks are for
taking out payday loans and being able to avoid them.
So essentially what happens is that that conclusion as to
the welfare effects also is contingent upon the state of the
record with regard to whether consumers anticipate loans or
not, anticipate their experience.
Ms. Pressley. Okay. But then let me just go on then. So
then following the concern for lenders' welfare, then the CFPB
states that the primary impact of the proposed rule would be,
and I quote, ``a substantial increase in the volume of loans
and a corresponding increase than the revenue lenders realize
from these loans,'' unquote.
Now, many would argue that the primary impact is to hurt
consumers, but I guess you're right, that the flip side of that
is to line lenders' pockets. So yes or no, is that an important
consideration for the CFPB?
Mr. Pahl. When we do rulemakings, we look at the costs and
the benefits of the rules that we put into place. The effects
on industry, the effects on consumers are both things that we
consider as part of our 1022 analysis, which is required by the
Dodd-Frank Act.
Ms. Pressley. I have to reclaim my time just in the
interest of time.
So the proposed rule does not leave this to speculation.
However, Mr. Pahl, CFPB's own cost-benefit analysis includes a
projection of the additional amount that the predatory lenders
will be able to extract from borrowers if the 2017 rule is
repealed. So that additional revenue is around $8 billion per
year. Is that correct?
Mr. Pahl. That is correct, yes.
Ms. Pressley. Okay. So while borrowers are struggling to
make ends meet, the agency tasked with their protection is busy
gifting predatory lenders $8 billion a year. Is that correct?
Mr. Pahl. I wouldn't describe it as gifting. We are----
Ms. Pressley. I'm sorry, in the interest of time. This
confusion around the CFPB's mission even extends to court
filings. When the payday lenders sued CFPB to block the rule,
your agency joined hands with the industry suing it and asked
the court to stop CFPB's rule from taking effect.
In that joint motion, CFPB stated that, quote, ``the
balance of equities heavily favors a stay, particularly in
light of the irreparable injury that the payday lenders face,''
unquote.
And I yield.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Ms. Pressley.
Now I recognize Congresswoman Tlaib for five minutes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you, Chairman.
CFPB did an incredibly thorough job in developing a Payday
Lending Rule. It studied the markets for five years. It held
multiple field hearings, conducted supervisory examinations and
multiple enforcement investigations, reviewed over a million
comments. It published five research reports and reviewed the
loan-level data of tens of millions of consumers, our
residents. The mountain of evidence was gathered in support of
the 2017 Payday Lending Rule, which now you seek to repeal.
To justify repealing the rule backed by such evidence, I
would have expected you to have done at least that much work.
In gathering support for the repeal, you didn't hold any field
hearings or publish any research reports, did you?
Mr. Pahl. That is correct. We did not do any new research.
We evaluated the strength of the research.
Ms. Tlaib. You know, you can just say no. You didn't do
either of those things, correct?
Mr. Pahl. That is correct. Yes, we did not do either of
those things.
Ms. Tlaib. It only took a few days in this tenure of
Director Mulvaney----
Mr. Pahl. Mulvaney.
Ms. Tlaib [continuing]. Mulvaney, sorry, to announce CFPB
was considering repealing the rule without any evidence
supporting this change. I thought maybe there would be new
studies, but the proposed rule states that no new studies
influence the CFPB's views.
The proposed rule points to no new facts and no new
evidence. Is it true that CFPB based its analysis on
reinterpretation of the same evidence that was available in
2017?
Mr. Pahl. We reviewed the same evidence and found that
there was a sufficient basis for believing it was lacking on
fundamental legal prerequisites to having a rule.
Ms. Tlaib. As an objective observer, it is hard to see any
gaps in the evidence, but if you think there are gaps, how can
you justify not conducting the research to fill them?
Mr. Pahl. Well, in the short run, we asked for public
comment. Public comment can provide that, can provide more
studies, more information that could speak to the issue that--
the issues that we think need more evidence.
The other reason is that none of the sort of research that
would be required had been started under the prior
administration. And so were we to do such research, it would
probably take--and I'm just making a rough guess here--a year
and a half, two years to do it. Delaying the entire proceeding
for that kind of substantial period of time, the agency
expressed concerns about whether that was really in the
interest of consumers, industry, everybody else.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes. The CFPB is supposed to be research-driven.
Mr. Pahl. We are research-driven, yes.
Ms. Tlaib. Well, when was the initial decision made to
reconsider the payday rule?
Mr. Pahl. Acting Director Mulvaney in January 2018----
Ms. Tlaib. Who was involved in the initial decision to
reconsider the rule?
Mr. Pahl. That precedes my time at the Bureau. My
understanding, it was the usual process, in which case people
throughout the agency would have----
Ms. Tlaib. It was Mulvaney, I believe. But will you commit
to providing us CFPB's decision memo within two weeks?
Mr. Pahl. No, I will not. That involves the deliberative
process of the agency.
Ms. Tlaib. You can't give me the memo of how you all
decided, how you made that decision?
Mr. Pahl. I cannot give you the memo with our
recommendations that were made to the Director that formed the
basis of his decision because we need to have frank and candid
conversations about the evidence and the law to make decisions.
Ms. Tlaib. Prior to issuing the proposed rule, who did you
meet or communicate with from the industry?
Mr. Pahl. I had one meeting with the board of FSCA in May
2018. I also met between October 2018 and February 2019 with
the American Bankers Association, the Consumer Bankers
Association, and the Online Lenders Alliance, to hear some of
their concerns about the issues that we were not--we had not
suggested that we would reconsider.
Ms. Tlaib. Will you commit to providing us with a calendar
schedule, meeting notes, and communications regarding the
proposed repeal within two weeks?
Mr. Pahl. I certainly can provide mine, yes.
Ms. Tlaib. Okay. Will you commit to helping us get the same
information for the Director's and the Deputy Director?
Mr. Pahl. I will have to take that back to the agency. A
lot of those--those are decisions for them to make in
consultation with our general counsel.
Ms. Tlaib. Sir, how many people worked on the 2017 rule for
the CFPB?
Mr. Pahl. I don't know. It was worked on over the course of
roughly six years, so I don't know how many people at various
times or total.
Ms. Tlaib. How many people worked on the proposed rule?
Mr. Pahl. On the current proposals?
Ms. Tlaib. Current, yes.
Mr. Pahl. Within my shop, it would be, I'd say roughly 10.
Ms. Tlaib. Okay. Will you commit to telling us within two
weeks who worked on each rule?
Mr. Pahl. Yes, we can do that.
Ms. Tlaib. All right. Thank you.
I yield the rest of my time.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Congresswoman Tlaib.
I now recognize--we're going to a second round. Good news.
I now recognize Ranking Member Cloud for five minutes.
Mr. Cloud. Thanks again, Mr. Chairman.
We mentioned that it was determined that the data was
inconclusive and that right now you're in a listening session,
so to speak, of public comment. Would it be fair to state the
CFPB's position is that there's not enough evidence at this
point to make a decision on this rule and that you're
investigating it?
Mr. Pahl. That's fair. I mean, we decided that there were
weaknesses in the evidence on particular points. That's why we
went out for public comment. We will consider the comments, and
then ultimately, the Director of the agency will make a
decision as to whether she thinks that what we've got is
sufficient or not. But at this point in time, we are looking
for more information through the public comment process, which
just concluded.
Mr. Cloud. Do you have a ballpark of how long that process
will take?
Mr. Pahl. We don't. We're moving as quickly as possible.
You know, given that we have, at a minimum, 150,000 comments,
it's going to take a while to go through the comments, because
we do, in fact, read them all so we can consider them. We'll
move as quickly as we can because we know that resolution of
this matter and the outstanding issues, would be in everyone's
interest to provide more certainty, and so we're committed to
moving as quickly as we can.
Mr. Cloud. Now, one of the issues with this study, as I
understand, was that it didn't really take into account what
states are doing to regulate. Could you speak to how many
states do regulate these types of loans?
Mr. Pahl. Sure. It depends on which type of loan that you
are talking about. With regard to payday loans, my
understanding is that they are either prohibited or effectively
prohibited in 17 states and 33 states allow them. With vehicle
title loans, my understanding is that 17 states allow them.
I would offer the disclaimer that those estimates may be
like a year or two old, and so there may have been some changes
at the state level. But that gives you a rough idea of how many
states permit and prohibit these types of products.
Mr. Cloud. So all 50 states, I guess, at some level
regulate or prohibit, depending on the state?
Mr. Pahl. Many states do. I don't know if it's all 50, and
it will depend upon which of the two products as well.
Mr. Cloud. Right. Okay. Could you speak to--I know they
vary, but what would be a mean of the regulatory burden that
already exists, I guess?
Mr. Pahl. Sure. I mean, it depends. Since much of the
regulation of payday lending, there's some at the Federal
level, traditionally it's been a matter of state law. Some of
the regulations find their forum in usury caps that are
applied. Some states require various disclosures. Some states
limit how many loans you can take out. Some states limit the
amount of loans you can take out. Some of them limit how
frequently you can roll them over. Still, other states say if
you get to a certain point in paying loans back and have
problems, essentially you get an opportunity to go off the
repayment track, rehabilitate yourself before you try to repay.
I believe there are 16 states who have those restrictions. And
some states mix and match each of them.
So what your costs are, what kind of state regulations
you're subject to is highly dependent upon state law and state
legislators' opinions/views on what their constituents need to
protect themselves.
Mr. Cloud. Okay. And you mentioned you're not the
enforcement arm, but could you speak to what enforcement there
is there for those who do fall predatory in their practices?
Mr. Pahl. Sure. Yes. You know, there are a number of
different provisions that we can use as part of our law
enforcement activities with regard to payday lenders. The
primary tool is the Dodd-Frank Act, which prohibits unfair,
deceptive, and abusive acts or practices. We frequently use
that if payday lenders are making misrepresentations about,
let's say, what the terms of the loan is; or if they're engaged
in certain actions in collecting on loans, we will take action
for violations of the Dodd-Frank Act against payday lenders.
Some payday lender activity is subject to the Truth in
Lending Act and Regulation Z. We have brought cases against
them for those violations. They are subject to the Gramm-Leach-
Bliley Act in Regulation P. We have brought cases based upon
that. They are subject to EFTA, the Electronic Funds Transfer
Act, in its implementing Regulation E. The Bureau has brought
cases under that statute and regulation as well.
So there are many different restrictions that apply both at
the Federal and the state level to payday lenders and their
activities. And also, what will be added to the mix if, as our
proposal goes forward, is the payments provisions in the 2017
rule will also kick in.
So payday lenders, you know, are not getting off scot-free.
There are many, many restrictions on what they do at the
Federal and state level. What we have simply concluded
preliminarily is that the evidence in the record is not
sufficient to justify one particular intervention, that is the
imposition of mandatory underwriting requirements.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Mr. Cloud.
I now recognize my friend Congressman Connolly for five
minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome, Mr.
Pahl.
Mr. Pahl, how important do you think independent academic
research is to rulemaking?
Mr. Pahl. It's very important.
Mr. Connolly. Why is that?
Mr. Pahl. We try to figure out where consumers have
problems that warrant regulatory responses and figure out what
the proper responses to them are. Having the views of
researchers of all types is incredibly important as we try to
figure out the best possible decisions to make for consumers.
Mr. Connolly. And when you do that, you want it to be as
objective and untainted by industry influence as possible.
Would that be a fair statement?
Mr. Pahl. When we look at research, our researchers, almost
every piece of research we looked at is paid for by somebody.
Industry pays for some. Consumer groups pay for some. Academic
institutions pay for some. What we try to do is we look at all
of the research, regardless of who funded it. We look at the
underlying data to try to see how strong it is, how relevant it
is to the issues that we have to decide.
So we don't go into looking at research from the
perspective of we shouldn't consider those that are research
funded by industry or we shouldn't consider it if it's funded
by consumer advocates. We consider all of it.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. But surely you rank them in terms of
objectivity and consider the source. For example, The
Washington Post and The Atlanta Journal talked about a story
where the payday lending industry directly tried to influence
the rulemaking process through the use of an academic research
paper. Consumer Credit Research Foundation, a payday lending
industry group led by Hilary Miller, paid a Kennesaw State
University professor named Jennifer Priestley $30,000 to
ghostwrite a, quote, ``academic,'' unquote, study clearly
designed to influence policy.
Emails show that Mr. Miller provided line edits and drafted
the paper's abstract. That is to say the industry lobbyist and
advocate, not the academic professor. He instructed the
professor, however, not to use the term ``cycle of debt.''
In another, she responded, and I quote: I'm here to serve
you, the special interest. I just want to make sure that what
I'm doing analytically is reflecting your thinking, she said.
Professor Priestley offered Mr. Miller authorship credit,
but he wisely declined, stating in an email, and I quote, ``We
want them to believe that the results are honest,'' unquote.
Now, is that the kind of research you'd look at just like
any other academic research prior to rulemaking?
Mr. Pahl. I think what we would do is we would take a look
at what the data itself was.
Mr. Connolly. Let's not talk theoretically. Are you
familiar with this case?
Mr. Pahl. With the----
Mr. Connolly. The case I'm describing that was published
and written up in The Washington Post and The Atlanta Journal.
Mr. Pahl. I have read that article at some point in time,
yes.
Mr. Connolly. Did it bother you?
Mr. Pahl. It bothered me in the sense that I never like the
idea that people are trying to spin information in a way to
achieve a result that information on the merits may not
warrant. But from the point of view----
Mr. Connolly. Does it bother you at all that somebody flat
out would make an assertion that's not true? For example, the
cover of Professor Priestley's ostensibly independent report
falsely stated that the payday industry, and I quote, ``did not
exercise any control over the study or over the editorial
content of the paper.''
We know from emails that's flat out untrue. So she
submitted a paper to your organization that was factually
untrue and clearly misleading, at best.
Mr. Pahl. If someone submits something to us that is
factually untrue, certainly that troubles me. What I think we
would do as part of our rulemaking, however, is try to look at
the actual data and analysis itself to see whether there were
reasons why it may be useful to us or not. It may not be useful
to us on the merits. But certainly, the idea that someone is
making misstatements, misrepresentations about the research
they provide us would concern us.
Mr. Connolly. Well, I'm glad it concerns you. Maybe that's
your Minnesota nice coming out. But for me, I'm bothered by
that answer, because when we know that the industry is paying
for it, when we know the industry is directly interfering with
content and editing it, when we know that the author of that
report is not telling the truth in asserting industry had no
influence over this paper when, in fact, we know from emails
the contrary is true, I'd throw that paper out. I don't care
what data they've got. It's so tainted and it's so corrupt, you
risk compromising public confidence in your rulemaking process
even looking at something like that.
Mr. Pahl. I'd like to offer one response just to be very
specific and clear. Our reconsideration proposal that was put
together on my watch does not in any way rely on that
particular research. So whatever its merits or demerits, it is
not part of our current proceeding and what we're looking at.
Mr. Connolly. Yes. Thank you. My time is up, but I'd feel
better if you told me, when something comes to us that tainted,
we put it aside. We don't allow it to corrupt the rest of the
process. And I do think, Mr. Pahl, you've got to take into
account, you know, public confidence in the process. And that's
not--it may be intangible, but it's not inconsequential.
For all of government to work, we've got to make sure we're
doing what we can to reassure the public that the process is an
open, objective, fair one. And when we know that industry is
paying for a paper posing as an academic research paper
directly to influence your rulemaking on their self-interest,
that taints and corrupts the process. And I'd feel a lot better
if you told me, we throw that in the trash bin when we get it.
My time is up. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
Without objection, I enter into the record a Washington
Post report entitled, ``How a payday lending industry insider
tilted academic research in its favor''; an Atlanta Journal-
Constitution article entitled, ``Payday loan group paid KSU for
favorable research, records show''; and third, a Huffington
Post article entitled, ``Emails show pro-payday loan study was
edited by the payday loan industry.''
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. With that, I now recognize
Congresswoman Tlaib for five minutes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much.
I do want to followup on my good colleague, Congressman
Connolly, about corruption in this process. The comment period
for the proposed payday lending payday rule repeal ended
yesterday. So I want to ask you about CFPB's process for
filtering the comments it has received.
Reports show that CFPB received duplicates, fake comments
opposing the original 2017 payday rule at alarming rate. Out of
1.4 million comments, CFPB received it only deemed around about
200,000 to be so-called unique. Even this, quote, unique batch
was plagued with fake duplicative comments.
According to a Wall Street Journal survey, 40 percent of
the respondents it contacted claimed they had not submitted the
comments made in their name. In one instance, a woman who took
out $323 payday loan and ended up owing more than $8,000 had a
fraudulent pro-payday--get this--comment submitted in her name
which stated she said, quote, her only good option for
borrowing money, so I hope these rules don't happen.
You would agree this seems a highly unlikely comment from
someone who paid--who had a loan ballooned nearly 25 times
over, correct?
Mr. Pahl. Yes. Knowing only those facts about that
hypothetical consumer, yes.
Ms. Tlaib. Unfortunately, this story is not atypical.
CFPB's own research supports that 80 percent of the payday loan
borrowers' debts were rolled over or reborrowed within 30 days,
ultimately costing borrowers much more than they anticipated.
Even more troubling is that the industry may be playing a
significant role in submitting fake and even coerced comments.
Reports show that lenders may have been asking borrowers to
submit pro-industry comments while they are applying for their
loans, Mr. Pahl.
Mr. Pahl, would you agree that payday lenders asking for
vulnerable borrowers to submit comments while applying for a
loan is, at best, suggestive and, at worst, coercive?
Mr. Pahl. I think it's real hard for me to speak to why
consumers send in the comments they do. As you noted, we got
1.4 million comments last time. 1.4 million comments, there's
probably a story behind each of them. What we try to do is try
to read as many of them as we can to understand what the public
thinks, recognizing that the problems you've identified, I
think, are a big challenge to our agency and other agencies.
Ms. Tlaib. But, Mr. Pahl, I do hope you take this very
seriously, because they're asking our residents to submit
comments while applying for a loan.
So CFPB spokesperson, former Director--I want to get this
right now--Mulvaney was, quote, concerned about any inauthentic
data that comes to the Bureau and stated that, quote, we intend
to look into this matter further.
Mr. Pahl, would you agree that any role industry played in
submitting fake or coerced comments is worthy of additional
scrutiny that could justify excluding such comments from
consideration?
Mr. Pahl. One of the things I've seen this week is
complaints from some groups that consumer advocates are sending
problematic comments to us. I've also heard complaints that
industry is sending problematic comments to us. I think we will
do our best to try to figure out which are legitimate comments.
Ms. Tlaib. So what has the CFPB done to protect the
integrity of the rulemaking process so far?
Mr. Pahl. Well, this particular rulemaking process, the
comment period ended yesterday. So we are just starting to look
at the comments. One of the things that we have done in the
past is try to figure out which are, in fact, duplicates.
But one thing, I think looking at numbers of comments in
some ways misses the point. To go back to some of the earlier
discussion, we're really looking at the quality of information
that goes to the most relevant issues in the record, and so it
really isn't about numbers. I know that that's what many people
view the public comment process as.
Ms. Tlaib. I agree, it has to be both. Is it a Federal
crime to intentionally make--it is a Federal crime to
intentionally make false or fraudulent statements to a
government agency. However, The Wall Street Journal reports
that payday lending industry hired a firm called IssueHound to
create websites to gather rule comments. An alarming number of
fake comments can be traced back to the IssueHound platform
used by payday groups.
Mr. Pahl, our democracy and our voice of the American
people are undermined when abuses of this nature go unchecked.
Can you agree today to ensure fake comments are filtered and
that when industry players abuses the comment process, they
will be held accountable?
Mr. Pahl. I think we will do our best not to consider
comments that are inappropriate, and I think anyone who submits
commits that are problematic, we deserve--it warrants taking a
look to see what remedies may be appropriate for that.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you. I do look forward to the Bureau
making meaningful and swift action to ensure this process is
not corrupted.
Thank you so much, and I yield the rest of my time,
Chairman.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Congresswoman Tlaib.
Without objection, I'd like to enter the following four
documents into the record. First, a Wall Street Journal report
entitled ``Millions of People Post Comments on Federal
Regulations. Many Are Fake''; two, a Cleveland Plain Dealer
article entitled ``Payday lenders get thousands of borrowers to
complain to government about rules meant to protect them'';
third, a Vice article entitled ``How Predatory Lenders Plot to
Fight Government Regulation''; and fourth, a Wall Street
Journal article entitled, ``Payday Lenders Mobilize in Support
of Rules Repeal.''
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. I now recognize myself for five
minutes.
Mr. Pahl, you were hired in April 2018, correct?
Mr. Pahl. That is correct, yes.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. And what did you do before this
position?
Mr. Pahl. Immediately prior to that, I was the acting
director of the Bureau of Consumer Protection at the Federal
Trade Commission.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Okay. And in your conversations leading
up to your hire in April 2018 in this current position, did you
talk to Director Mulvaney about the Payday Lending Rule?
Mr. Pahl. No, I did not.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Did you talk to anybody else at the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau about this rule?
Mr. Pahl. As part of the interviewing process, I was told
that the Bureau was moving forward to reconsidering it. So I
knew that from part of the interviewing process, but I was not
asked for my--I was not--what--the conversation didn't go
beyond that.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. And what did you say in response to
their telling you that the Payday Lending Rule was being
reconsidered?
Mr. Pahl. I think I said that I have experience as both one
who is engaged in the rulemaking process, someone who's done
litigation, and if that were part of the job, that I would have
the ability to do that.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. And have you written anything on this
particular issue of payday loans or auto title loans in the
past?
Mr. Pahl. Not on either of those topics, no.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Have you written anything on the issue
of high-cost installment loans?
Mr. Pahl. Nothing that I can recall.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Did you talk to anybody at the White
House before being hired in this current job about the Payday
Lending Rule?
Mr. Pahl. I have not, did not.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. How many supervisor examinations have
been conducted of payday or title loan lenders during the
tenures of Directors Mulvaney and Kraninger?
Mr. Pahl. I don't know the answer to that because that's
not the shop at the Bureau that I'm responsible for.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Okay. Could you commit to assist us in
getting that type of information?
Mr. Pahl. I can take that back to the agency and we can see
what could be provided.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. What is the current litigation pending
against any payday or title loan lender?
Mr. Pahl. Sorry, I don't understand your question.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Okay. Let me back up. Is there any
litigation currently pending against any auto title lender or
payday lender?
Mr. Pahl. I don't know the answer to that. I would have to
check, because again, that's not the part of the organization
that I'm responsible for.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Sure. Can you please provide that--or
go back to the agency and provide that information to us?
Mr. Pahl. If there are cases that we have filed or
announced, we can give you that information, certainly.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Sure. Unfair, deceptive, and abusive
practices are what Dodd-Frank covers. Is there any level of
interest rate above which a payday loan would be considered
unfair or abusive?
Mr. Pahl. The Dodd-Frank Act explicitly prohibits the
agency from imposing usury requirements, so basically doing any
kind of regulation based upon the price of a loan. And so for
that reason, the price of a loan is not something that we can
use essentially as a basis for our actions.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Is there any interest rate above which
you would think a payday loan is unconscionable?
Mr. Pahl. I think unconscionability is a matter of state
law traditionally. And so, to me, to figure out whether there
is such a rate would depend upon what state you were and with
the judgment of that state.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. So you don't believe that there's any
threshold that would necessarily apply across the board? So,
for instance, would an interest rate of 500 percent be
unconscionable to you?
Mr. Pahl. It is not part of the Bureau's work. And also, if
it's a 500 percent rate, I also would want to know what's
included and how it's calculated.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Okay. Tell me how you could justify a
500 percent rate on a payday loan.
Mr. Pahl. It's not whether I could or could not justify it.
It's just something that is not within the ambit of my agency's
responsibility or authority. And so therefore, you know, my
personal opinions as to pulling a number, you know, as to
what's too high or too low for an interest rate alone is not
part of my job, part of my position, part of my agency's work.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. So, Mr. Pahl, I have another question
for you. Do you believe that the lion's share of deregulation
is likely to commence once President Trump's appointees assume
their leadership roles throughout the Federal Government,
including the CFPB?
Mr. Pahl. I'm sorry, could you repeat the question?
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Do you believe that the lion's share of
deregulation is likely to commence once President Trump's
appointees assume their leadership roles throughout the Federal
Government, including the CFPB?
Mr. Pahl. That's a question that goes way beyond my
expertise.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Well, that's what you wrote back on--
let's see here. You wrote in The Hill, in an article, on
February 2, 2017, an article titled, ``The tortoise, not the
hare, will win the deregulation race.''
Mr. Pahl. Right.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. So I think it's within your expertise,
if it was back then.
Mr. Pahl. My point was simply that I was making a general
statement in that article that it takes a long time to make
regulatory changes, pro or con. I thought you were asking me
whether--about other specific agencies and other specific
regulatory regimes and who benefits from them.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. And you're one of those senior
appointees at CFPB, correct?
Mr. Pahl. I am, yes.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you. Thank you.
Well, I'd like to thank our witness for his testimony
today. Without objection, all members will have five
legislative days within which to submit additional written
questions for the witness to the chair which will be forwarded
to the witness for his response. I ask our witness to please
respond as promptly as you are able, and we will followup as
well on our request to you for the information that was posed
in this hearing.
Mr. Pahl. Chairman, there is one point I'd like to make,
with your indulgence. You know, I received some requests for
information from members of this panel. I want to clarify that
I'm not authorized to provide documents on the agency's behalf.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Are you asserting executive privilege
over that too?
Mr. Pahl. I would be asserting executive privilege as--
depends on what the documents are as to----
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. We're going to followup with the
request. You've already answered those questions during the
hearing, and then you can put on paper what you--what
objections you have. But I think you already answered on the
record with regard to those documents. So if you want to go
back and ask those questions of the agency as to what you're
going to be able to provide, I appreciate it.
Thank you very much. This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:37 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[all]