- OVERSIGHT OF FEDERAL INFRASTRUCTURE PERMITTING AND FAST-41
[Senate Hearing 116-44]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-44
OVERSIGHT OF FEDERAL INFRASTRUCTURE PERMITTING AND FAST-41
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
PERMANENT SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON
HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
----------
MAY 2, 2019
----------
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-306 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin, Chairman
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
KAMALA D. HARRIS, California
RICK SCOTT, Florida
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri
Gabrielle D'Adamo Singer, Staff Director
David M. Weinberg, Minority Staff Director
Laura W. Kilbride, Chief Clerk
Thomas Spino, Hearing Clerk
PERMANENT SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio Chairman
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
KAMALA D. HARRIS, California
JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
Andrew Dockham, Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Amanda Neely, Deputy Chief Counsel
John Kilvington, Minority Staff Director
Kate Kielceski, Chief Clerk
C O N T E N T S
------
Opening statements:
Page
Senator Portman..............................................
1
Senator Carper...............................................
4
Senator Lankford.............................................
22
Prepared statements:
Senator Portman..............................................
35
Senator Carper...............................................
40
WITNESSES
Thursday, May 2, 2019
Alexander Herrgott, Executive Director, Federal Permitting
Improvement Steering Council...................................
7
Laura Abram, Director, Project Execution and Public Affairs,
First Solar....................................................
9
Michael Knisley, Executive Secretary-Treasurer, Ohio State
Building and Construction Trades Council.......................
11
Joseph M. Johnson, Ph.D., Executive Director, Federal Regulatory
Process Review and Analysis, Environment, Technology, and
Regulatory Affairs, U.S. Chamber of Commerce...................
13
Raul E. Garcia, Senior Legislative Counsel, Policy and
Legislation Department, Earthjustice...........................
15
Alphabetical List of Witnesses
Abram, Laura:
Testimony....................................................
9
Prepared statement...........................................
48
Garcia, Raul E.:
Testimony....................................................
15
Prepared statement...........................................
63
Herrgott, Alexander:
Testimony....................................................
7
Prepared statement...........................................
43
Johnson, Joseph M.:
Testimony....................................................
13
Prepared statement...........................................
58
Knisley, Michael:
Testimony....................................................
11
Prepared statement...........................................
54
APPENDIX
Responses to post-hearing questions for the Record:
Mr. Herrgott.................................................
71
OVERSIGHT OF FEDERAL INFRASTRUCTURE PERMITTING AND FAST-41
----------
THURSDAY, MAY 2, 2019
U.S. Senate, Permanent Subcommittee on
Investigations,
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m., in
room SD-342, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Rob Portman,
Chairman of the Subcommittee, presiding.
Present: Senators Portman, Lankford, Romney, Hawley,
Carper, Hassan, and Rosen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PORTMAN\1\
Senator Portman. The hearing will come to order. Thank you
all for being here.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Portman appears in the
Appendix on page 35.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our schedule is a little crazy today. We have votes
scheduled for 10:30, and there are enough votes that probably
we will be taking about an hour break. Our hope is to get
through all of your testimony before we run off to vote, and
then if you are willing and patient, we would like you to stay
here, and then we will come back and have the opportunity for
Q&A.
I know Senator Carper has some opening comments; I have
some opening comments. We will go through those quickly, get
you all sworn in, and then have the opportunity to run to vote
and come back.
First of all, thank you for being here and thanks to my
colleagues for being here. I know a couple others are planning
to join. This is a very important issue, particularly in light
of what is going on this week. We had the President and members
of the House leadership meeting about infrastructure. Everybody
is looking for more money for infrastructure, right?
Infrastructure is what really this hearing is about. It is
about permitting of infrastructure, broadly defined. It is
about construction projects that play a critical role in all of
our day-to-day lives. It is about ports and waterways we use
for international commerce. It is about water resource projects
to stop flooding from storm surges. It is about energy
construction to make sure we have the power we need from solar
power plants that we will hear about today to pipelines to
nuclear power plant construction. It is about coastal
restoration that supports the environment. It is also about
broadband Internet throughout the country, which allows
Americans to advance their education and rise in the workforce.
It is about ensuring we can move forward with these projects in
sensible ways.
Delays and lack of investment in these infrastructure and
construction projects have a number of damaging consequences.
First, it means fewer jobs, and we will hear from Mr. Knisley
and others about that today. It means a weaker economy and a
reduced standing in the world. It means we are not making
progress on major projects and capital is going elsewhere,
including to other countries. It is hurting our economy and our
ability to create good-paying jobs. One of the reasons we are
having so much trouble is this outdated process we have for
granting permits for large projects, construction projects, and
infrastructure projects.
Everyone is desperate to find dollars for infrastructure
right now, right? This is a way, frankly, for us to ensure that
we are smarter in stretching the dollars we have further by not
having those dollars be wasted on the delays and the dollars
will stay here in this country.
Right now, the World Bank ranks the United States 26th in
the world for dealing with construction permits for being able
to green-light a project. Twenty-sixth in the world. That puts
us behind Lithuania and Tonga. It is also better than it used
to be. We were 39th in the world when Fixing America's Surface
Transportation Act (FAST-41), the legislation we are talking
about today, was implemented. We have made some progress.
Similarly, there was the 2017 Infrastructure Report Card,
the most recent one from the American Society of Civil
Engineers. They gave the United States a ``cumulative GPA'' of
D+ ranging ``from a B for Rail to D for roads.'' One reason we
are so behind is that it takes so long and it is so costly to
be able to permit a project here in the United States. We can
do better than this. The rest of the world is doing better,
other developed countries, and many of the developing
countries. Otherwise, capital goes elsewhere.
Let me be clear: We can fix this permitting process without
changing the underlying environmental and safety standards, and
that is something we will talk about today. Protecting the
environment and protecting people who use our infrastructure is
critical. But we need strong standards. The process that we use
to meet those standards has simply become too complicated and
outdated.
I first got involved with this about 10 years ago when
American Municipal Power (AMP)--some of you know that group--
came to me. AMP was working on a hydropower project on the Ohio
River. They told me the agencies reviewing their permit
applications were not talking to each other, and they told me
as soon as they finished one permit, there was another permit
that came up seriatim rather than having anyone be accountable.
They said there were mistakes, delays, redundancies. It took
them 10 years to get the permit to put a small hydropower plant
on the Ohio River. Frankly, I think they wished they had never
even started on this project because it just became too costly.
Capital is not that patient. Ten years is just too long,
and no one wants to invest in a project that is not going to be
ready for at least a decade.
I reached out to colleagues, including Senator McCaskill
from Missouri. We did what legislators are supposed to do: we
worked on a bipartisan basis with a whole array of stakeholders
to put together a new process for permitting. We worked with
environmental groups like the Natural Resources Defense Council
(NRDC), business groups like National Association of
Manufacturers, labor groups like the The American Federation of
Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)
Building Trades Council, and we introduced this bipartisan bill
as part of this effort called the ``Federal Permitting
Improvement Act.'' It is now part of the highway bill, so it
became part of the FAST bill, therefore, FAST-41, which is
Section 41 of FAST.
Large projects apply to get help from the Council in
navigating the permitting process. The agencies involved in
that project have to designate a lead agency so a project
sponsor can have a single point of contact. One agency is
accountable. It is very important to have accountability, we
learned. The agency is responsible for coming up with a
Coordinated Project Plan (CPP) that they submit to this Federal
Permitting Improvement Steering Council (FPISC) that we will
hear from today. The plan sets out each permit, all the studies
needed, and a timeline for completion. Then, as the process
moves along, the Council's Executive Director, who is here with
us today, resolves conflicts that might arise between the
agencies.
The law also gives accountability in another way. It gives
the public more accountability because it requires that
agencies post a project's plan on the online Permitting
Dashboard so the public can see, so the transparency is there,
how that permitting process is going.
By the way, FAST-41 does not guarantee a project is going
to get approved. It may or may not get approved. It just helps
them get the project moving along. It gives them an answer one
way or the other.
It also reduces the statute of limitations for lawsuits.
The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) statute of
limitations for most projects is 6 years. That means that for 6
years after permits are granted, many projects really do not
get started--they are waiting because of these lawsuits that
might pop up.
For covered projects, under this bill it is a 2-year
statute of limitations. That was a compromise. We had initially
asked for 150 days and then 180 days. But some groups wanted to
be sure it was 2 years. That is still a lot longer than the 150
days for traditional transportation projects. Both the FAST-41
2-year limitation and the MAP-21 150-day statute of limitations
were carefully crafted, bipartisan agreements signed into law
in the Obama Administration. During the Obama Administration,
we limited certain transportation projects under our
transportation bill in a bipartisan way to 150 days, and ours
is 2 years.
Finally, good news. FAST-41 is working. Over the past few
years, the Council has saved projects more than $1 billion in
avoided delays. There are now 40 major projects on the
Permitting Dashboard, and new sponsors are interested in
participating and applying to do so. The Council has helped
electricity transmission and pipeline projects, as well as
several major environmental restoration projects and renewable
energy projects. For instance, today we are going to hear from
Laura Abram from First Solar about how the Council assisted the
Desert Quartzite Project move forward with a 450-megawatt solar
power development in California.
I am also looking forward to hearing from Mike Knisley, the
executive secretary and treasurer of the Ohio Building Trades.
The union has been incredibly supportive of FAST-41, and we are
grateful for your support, Michael.
I would also like to say that, after a few years of delays,
FAST-41 is going full steam ahead. We had difficulty getting an
Executive Director in place. We now have one, Alex Herrgott. We
will hear from Alex today. I am really glad he is there. After
a 21-month gap in an appointed Executive Director, it is good
to have an enthusiastic and energetic leader in that job. We
will hear from him today.
We wanted to make sure it would work, so we put a 7-year
sunset on the legislation. Now that it is working, Senator
McCaskill and I introduced a bill last Congress to remove that
sunset and give the Council's Executive Director the ability to
give advice to other projects when asked. It also would set a
2-year goal for agencies to finish the permitting process for
these projects. Two years. It is not a hard and fast deadline;
sometimes projects are going to take longer. It is a goal. But
setting that goal will help inject additional accountability,
common-sense accountability into this process. Even with its
slow start, after just 3 years, FAST-41 is now yielding real
results. These results mean certainty for project sponsors,
which means more certainty for investors and more certainty for
projects that they are going to get built. It means more jobs
for the people who build these projects. It means better roads,
ports, and energy transmission--all of which spur more economic
growth. It means being able to move forward faster with much-
needed environmental restoration projects, like the coastline
restoration projects in Louisiana and the renewable energy
projects we talked about earlier.
Finally, again, it enables us to stretch that dollar
further to be able to do more in terms of infrastructure.
Thank you all for being here today. I am looking forward to
hearing from the witnesses how they are improving the process
and what we can do better going forward. I would ask Senator
Carper for his comments.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR CARPER\1\
Senator Carper. Thanks. Thanks so much, Mr. Chairman, for
pulling this together. To our witnesses, thank you for joining
us today. I apologize also for the votes. When the Chairman and
I are running the show in the Senate, we will make sure that
these hearings are scheduled and the votes are scheduled in
ways that are more accommodating to what we are trying to get
done here.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Carper appears in the
Appenidx on page 40.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Forty-eight hours ago almost to the minute, another meeting
was convening in the White House, and the President welcomed 10
of us, House and Senate Members, Democrats, all Democrats, to
talk about a path forward on infrastructure, broadly--roads,
highways, bridges, transit, water projects, deployment of
broadband--and also to talk about how much it should be, how
vast it should be. We talked about everything except how to pay
for $2 trillion worth of infrastructure. That will come soon, I
am hopeful.
But in the last decade, we have passed some 35 short-term
fixes for transportation before we were able to finally pass
the FAST Act, which was, I think, the first long-term bill we
passed in about a decade.
However, the FAST Act expires, as you may know, in
September of next year, and we have a responsibility to avoid
another series of short-term fixes. They waste money; they
create uncertainty. They are debilitating and force us to put
off needed investments. We need to avoid that.
Numerous studies, as the Chairman knows, tell us that we
are falling behind other developed countries when it comes to
making these kinds of investments in our infrastructure, writ
large. With respect to our roads and highway infrastructure,
which the Environment and Public Works (EPW) Committee on which
I serve as Ranking Member examined in a hearing last month, the
challenge we have before us is clear.
Listen to this. We have an $800 billion backlog of
investments that we need to make just in our roads, highways,
and bridges. An $800 billion backlog. Many of our highways were
built more than a half-century ago, our bridges, too, and as a
result they are reaching the end of their useful life. More
than 47,000 of our bridges are structurally deficient, most of
them in Delaware and Ohio. There are 235,000 bridges in need of
repair, replacement, or major rehabilitation.
The consequences of underinvestment are great, as you know.
Last year, every American--listen to this. Every American lost
97 hours due to traffic congestion on average--97 hours. It is
not just like going along at 5, 10, or 20 miles an hour.
Sitting still. I have been there and you have, too. But if you
add up the cost of all that sitting there and doing nothing, it
comes up to about $87 billion that is estimated nationwide in
lost productivity. But all of the time that we spent in our
cars, trucks, or vans in traffic also contributes, as we know,
to air pollution and increases the cost of goods.
Underinvestment in roads and highways also has had an
impact on safety. In 2017, more than 37,000 people died in
motor vehicle crashes. That is more than the population of
Dover, Delaware. Pedestrian deaths are now at a 25-year high.
Think about that. Pedestrian deaths are not going down; they
are going up. They are at a 25-year high.
Given all that we need to do to improve and rebuild our
highways and other infrastructure, I have thought a lot about
how we can build projects smarter and more cost effectively. As
our Chairman said, our Committee Members, including at least
one other recovering Governor here on my left side, I have also
thought a lot about--in fact, two recovering Governors. I have
thought a lot about how well the rules and the permitting
processes that we have in place actually work and how we might
make them work better. Over the years I have supported
reasonable changes designed to improve Federal coordination and
efficiency.
We have also made a number of changes to permitting and
project approval procedures in the last three highway bills.
Before we entertain a whole lot of new ideas, I think it is
important for us to first determine whether the provisions that
we have enacted--some 60 in all in the last three
transportation bills--are being fully implemented and staffed--
Alex and people like
Alex--and actually paid for. We are trying to make sure that we
do all of that and follow up. It is not enough just to
authorize something. It is important that we have the right
people running the programs, implementing the programs, and
paying for them.
I have tried to make it clear in the past, but it bears
repeating: I am not going to be supporting further weakening of
environmental protections in the name of accelerating project
delivery. It is critical that the lion's share of provisions we
have already enacted in this area be implemented and funded so
that we can better understand what their impact is before we
consider adopting a whole lot more. To be able to do that, we
need effective oversight like we are considering here today,
and this is an important hearing.
I believe that all of our witnesses and our stakeholders my
staff and I have spoken to in preparation for this hearing
agree that the provisions in FAST-41 do show promise. The
permitting dashboard, that the Chairman has alluded, in the law
calls for offers needed transparency into the permitting
process and should help us hold permitting agencies accountable
for meeting deadlines. In addition, the Federal Permitting
Improvement Steering Council offers project sponsors and other
interested parties a place to turn with questions. The Council
also creates a venue where the challenges that inevitably arise
as a major project progresses can be discussed and resolved.
That said, it seems that the Council and the implementation
of FAST-41 have been held back at least in part due to a lack
of funding and a lack of leadership. We hope that is behind us
now. The Council recently saw a significant increase in its
budget, but in past years it was barely given enough to get by.
In addition, until about 4 months ago, the Council lacked a
permanent director, but that was before President Trump
appointed our friend, Alex. The Council had been operating with
an acting director since the end of the Obama Administration
more than 2 years ago now.
As a result, we may not have enough information to know
whether FAST-41 is working as intended, especially with respect
to some of the most controversial provisions.
Having said that, I look forward to learning more today
from all of you, and especially from Alex, and our other
witnesses, about the Council's work, as well as the other
issues that Congress should consider as we work in the coming
months to put together a major, bipartisan infrastructure bill.
Welcome, everyone. Thank you.
Senator Portman. Thank you, Senator Carper.
We will now call on our panel of witnesses for this
morning's hearing. First, Alexander Herrgott, who, as
referenced earlier, is Executive Director of the Federal
Permitting Improvement Council.
Second, Laura Abram. Ms. Abram is director of Project
Execution West and Public Affairs of First Solar, Inc.
Next, Michael Knisley. Michael is Executive Secretary-
Treasurer of the Ohio State Building Trades Council.
Next, Joseph Johnson, who is executive director for Federal
Regulatory Process Review and Analysis at the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce.
Mr. Raul Garcia, senior legislative counsel at
Earthjustice.
I appreciate you all being here today and look forward to
your testimony. Our rules require us to swear in the witnesses.
At this time I would ask you to stand and raise your right
hand, please. Do you swear that the testimony you will give
before this Subcommittee will be the truth, the whole truth,
and nothing but the truth, so help you, God?
Mr. Herrgott. I do.
Ms. Abram. I do.
Mr. Knisley. I do.
Mr. Johnson. I do.
Mr. Garcia. I do.
Senator Portman. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
all answered in the affirmative. We will be using a timing
system today. I know you are aware of that. All your written
testimony will be printed in the record in its entirety. We ask
you to try to keep your oral testimony, though, to 5 minutes.
Mr. Herrgott, we will hear from you first.
TESTIMONY OF ALEX HERRGOTT,\1\ EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, FEDERAL
PERMITTING IMPROVEMENT STEERING COUNCIL
Mr. Herrgott. Alright. Chairman Portman, Ranking Member
Carper, and Members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today on how Title 41 of the Fixing
America's Surface Transportation Act is improving the Federal
permitting process. As you know, enacted by Congress in 2015,
FAST-41 established a coordinating framework designed to
improve the permitting process for a diverse portfolio of
proposed large-scale, complex infrastructure projects across
the Nation. A key component of the framework is the Federal
Permitting Improvement Steering Council, chaired by an
Executive Director appointed by the President. The Permitting
Council is an interagency body comprised of 14 Federal
agencies, the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ), and the
Office of Management and Budget (OMB). In the last 4 months
since I became the Executive Director, we have focused on
leveraging this interagency body to bring about a new era of
transparency, efficiency, and accountability. We are actively
reducing unnecessary red tape, costs, and delays for FAST-41
projects.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Herrgott appears in the Appendix
on page 43.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As you know, today the Federal infrastructure permitting
process can be very fragmented, unpredictable, and inefficient,
as you can see by the chart over on the left side of the room.
There are many Federal statutes that govern infrastructure
permitting, and they are executed by multiple Federal agencies.
In addition, there can be significant overlap in statutory
requirements and significant inconsistency in the application
of those requirements in the permitting process. FAST-41
provides an interagency mechanism to coordinate implementation
of multiple permitting statutes including by providing, very
importantly, a single unified schedule.
The permitting process can include compliance not only with
numerous Federal statutes, but also State and local laws and
ordinances, and may vary significantly depending on the unique
nature of infrastructure being proposed, such as its location
and potential impacts. For example, one FAST-41 project has 19
cooperating agencies (7 Federal, 3 State, 6 County, and 3 other
entities), of which 9 Federal permitting actions are tracked on
the Dashboard. Another FAST-41 project involves over 30 Federal
permitting actions and over 50 State and local permitting
actions, one of which could comprise authorization for 611
water crossings.
In recognition of these complex permitting challenges,
FAST-41 established a voluntary program for eligible large,
complex infrastructure projects for which the Permitting
Council provides a one-stop shop within the Federal Government
for coordinating process across all Federal agencies. FAST-41
does not modify any underlying Federal statutes, regulations,
or mandatory reviews. In other words, the Office of the
Executive Director (OED) serves as an impartial third party
that helps shepherd projects to deliver a definitive beginning
and a definitive end to the permitting process, something we
have long desired.
FAST-41 respects agencies' responsibilities as regulators
while also serving as a reliable Federal partner to all
stakeholders--State, local government officials, tribes, the
public, and all project proponents. FAST-41 project permitting
durations are, therefore, on average, 2.3 years shorter than
other Environmental Impact Statements (EISs) prior to the
commissioning of this Council.
This year, the Permitting Council has grounded its
activities on five key principles designed to keep FAST-41
projects on track and on schedule: first, demystifying the
permitting process at each agency; two, clarifying roles and
responsibilities among Federal agencies to avoid issues that
could derail a project; three, aligning agency roles and
permitting processes, where possible, in the following ways:
with joint and programmatic approaches, getting them to
actually talk to each other in the very beginning, improved
planning among agencies, and maximization of concurrent
permitting actions; four, requiring transparency and
accountability in meeting milestones throughout the process;
five, sharing lessons learned to facilitate successful adoption
and implementation of best practices to improve the permitting
process across all agencies.
These principles are carried out through four critical
Permitting Council activities that work together to reduce the
decisionmaking process without compromising our valued natural,
community, cultural, and historic resources. These four
activities include our fiscal year (FY) 2019 best practices,
which is on our website as of earlier this week. The Office of
the Executive Director also issues an annual report to Congress
which it transmitted on April 15 of this year. Three, the
Office of the Executive Director works in partnership with the
Council to provide in-person, hands-on facilitation of
interagency permitting, not just here at headquarters but also
out in the field. This allows my office to help agencies align
their permitting processes and develop a prudent, timely, and
realistic permitting schedule. Should conflicts arise, FAST-41
provides a formal dispute resolution process to ensure a final
decision is reached in a timely and efficient manner.
Finally, as Chair of the Permitting Council, my office is
actively working with the Permitting Council agencies to help
support agency field staff responsible for implementing FAST-41
provisions and managing the permitting process. The inherent
complexity of these projects combined with the decentralized
organizational structure of many agencies provides for
inconsistent interpretation of policies and guidance from the
headquarters offices. This is the heart of our problem.
To address this, my office is working with the agency staff
in the headquarters, regional, and field offices to identify
how we can best support consistent implementation of FAST-41
provisions, including on-location meetings with agency staff
and community stakeholders.
I look forward to continuing to work with you on
implementing FAST-41 through the promotion of reliable and
comprehensive permitting schedules and increased coordination
and collaboration.
Thank you again for the opportunity to participate, and I
look forward to answering any questions.
Senator Portman. Thank you. Ms. Abram.
Senator Carper. I think you just set a record for the most
words in 5 minutes. [Laughter.]
In my 18 years in the U.S. Senate, Alex.
Mr. Herrgott. Senator, as you recall, I get paid by the
word.
Senator Portman. Ms. Abram.
TESTIMONY OF LAURA ABRAM,\1\ DIRECTOR, PROJECT EXECUTION AND
PUBLIC AFFAIRS, FIRST SOLAR, INC.
Ms. Abram. Good morning, Chairman Portman, Ranking Member
Carper----
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Ms. Abram appears in the Appendix on
page 48.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Senator Carper. This does not count against your time, but
I have a member of my staff who just briefs me, and she talks
like a million miles an hour. I am always saying, ``Diane, I
cannot listen that fast.'' [Laughter.]
Ms. Abram. OK. Good morning, Chairman Portman, Ranking
Member Carper, and Members of the Committee on Homeland
Security and Governmental Affairs (HSGAC) Permanent
Subcommittee on Investigations (PSI). I am pleased to be here
today to discuss First Solar's experience with FAST-41, the
Permitting Council, and recommended solutions to ensure
successful and timely permitting of energy infrastructure
projects on Federal lands that will create jobs and economic
benefits and help our country reach its goal of American energy
dominance.
I am the director of Project Execution and Public Affairs
for First Solar, and I have worked on solar projects on Federal
lands for the past decade. My testimony today will present
information from my direct experience, with a focus on
permitting of the Desert Quartzite Solar Project.
To begin, I would like to provide you with a high-level
overview of First Solar. First Solar is an American solar
manufacturer and the largest U.S. provider of thin-film
photovoltaic (PV) panels. The company has extensive experience
and a proven track record developing, constructing, and
operating the world's largest solar power plants.
First Solar's world-class 600 megawatt manufacturing
facility in Perrysburg, Ohio, employs about 1,250 full-time
associates. Last year, I am excited to say that First Solar
broke ground on a new 1.2-gigawatt manufacturing facility in
Ohio which will directly employ over 500 full-time associates.
We have shipped over 20 gigawatts worldwide, have 6,000
megawatts in the United States, and 2,500 megawatts in
operation or development on Federal land.
The messages I hope to leave with you today are these:
Number one, photovoltaic solar is one of the lowest-cost
energy resources today and is an important part of America's
energy mix.
Number two, Federal lands are ideal for responsible solar
development, yet we face challenges to utilizing Federal lands,
including rents that are not competitive with private lands.
Number three, FAST-41 and the Permitting Council have
played an important role in addressing timely permitting of
infrastructure projects and should expand its role to further
improve interagency collaboration and streamlining of the
environmental review and approval process.
FAST-41 and the Permitting Council have supported First
Solar in expediting permitting on two projects, including the
100 megawatt Aiya Solar Project, located on tribal land in
Nevada, and the 450-megawatt Desert Quartzite Solar Project,
located in Riverside County, California.
The Desert Quartzite Project has been in active development
for approximately 5 years, and permitting is expected to be
complete in October 2019. The project has faced many permitting
challenges that have caused up to 2 years in delays; however,
FAST-41 and the Permitting Council have provided First Solar
with support in helping to navigate the various issues and to
assist in keeping the project on schedule. Although First Solar
did not have many interagency issues, the Permitting Council
did play a key role in supporting us in coordinating across
local, State, and Federal levels within the Bureau of Land
Management (BLM). First Solar has also received support from
the Department of Interior (DOI), which has been responsive to
concerns and continues to help facilitate resolution of issues
on Desert Quartzite and other solar issues we are working on.
Based on our direct experience, First Solar recommends that
FAST-41 and the Permitting Council play an active role in the
permitting process from the beginning and assist not only to
keep the project on schedule, but to serve as a central point
of contact for project proponents to help navigate the complex
issues and intergovernmental challenges that can cause project
delays. In fact, Desert Quartzite is currently on pause, and
close collaboration between FAST-41, BLM, and DOI can help
address issues and get the project back on schedule.
In conclusion, responsible construction of solar
infrastructure on Federal lands can and should be a bipartisan
priority. Many of the challenges can be addressed by FAST-41
and the Permitting Council, but it is important to understand
that streamlining alone will not ensure successful development
of energy infrastructure projects. It is important to implement
more flexible approaches to land availability, ensure rents are
competitive with private land markets, and provide adequate
staffing.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify here
today. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
Senator Portman. Thank you, Ms. Abram.
Mr. Knisley.
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KNISLEY,\1\ SECRETARY-TREASURER, OHIO
STATE BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION TRADES COUNCIL
Mr. Knisley. Good morning, Senator Portman and Members of
the committee. Thank you for your leadership on this issue and
for inviting me to testify during this hearing on Title 41 of
the Fixing America's Surface Transportation Act. As secretary-
treasurer of the Ohio State Building and Construction Trades
Council, and on behalf of the 100,000 union construction
workers in Ohio that I proudly represent, I am pleased to have
the opportunity to appear before this Committee to testify on
the outcomes of FAST-41 and its benefits to the Ohio
construction industry and those regions in our State which
depend on much-needed infrastructure projects for economic
survival.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Knisley appears in the Appendix
on page 54.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On behalf of the working Ohioans and signatory contractors
of the Ohio State Building and Construction Trades, I want to
express our gratitude to Senator Portman and Senator Carper and
the Members of this Subcommittee for your efforts to modernize
the permitting process for major U.S. infrastructure projects.
The Committee's commitment to reforming the permitting process
through FAST-41 expedites the groundbreaking of major U.S.
infrastructure projects, putting tens of thousands of Ohio
Building Tradespeople safely and responsibly to work in a
timely manner.
Ohio labor leaders, contractors, and project owners
strongly support and are grateful for the permitting reforms
implemented by FAST-41. To echo Sean McGarvey, president of
North America's Building Trades Unions, who testified before
the Committee in June 2018, the ``permitting process for
Federal infrastructure projects must be continually modernized
to ensure efficiency, safety, accountability, and
transparency.''
FAST-41 works for Ohio and the wider Midwestern region our
tradespeople serve insofar as it provides increased
predictability of project timetables, facilitates coordination
between agencies and solves interagency conflicts, sets
reasonable deadlines in the permitting process, and reduces
drawn-out litigation timeframes. As an organization driven by
clear standards and safe, efficient processes, we applaud this.
On behalf of the members and contractors of the Ohio State
Building and Construction Trades, we commend the forward-
looking approach that this Committee, as well as the current
and previous Administrations, have taken to reform the Federal
project permitting system while maintaining responsible
regulations that protect workers, our communities, and our
environment. FAST-41 demonstrates that our government can come
together in a bipartisan way to reform a broken permitting
process without compromising the underlying regulations that
keep American workers and their communities safe and healthy.
In Ohio, we see firsthand how crucial such balanced reform
measures are--not only for our economic growth and stability,
but for the very social fabric of our communities. Particularly
in southern Ohio's Appalachian communities, where local
economies depend on a major project moving forward, it is very
emotional for community members to endure the uncertainty of a
broken permitting process.
A project like the American Municipal Power's R.C. Byrd
Hydropower development would bring thousands of middle-class
construction jobs to the southern Ohio region and spur much-
needed economic growth. Before that project was included as a
Federal Permitting Improvement Steering Council project, it was
held captive by a 10-year licensing process. Redundancies and
interagency disputes cost project owner AMP millions of
dollars. The dollar figure does not account for the lost
opportunity cost caused by a delayed project groundbreaking.
When our workers are bringing home a steady paycheck from major
projects, their entire communities feel the economic benefits
of those earnings. But when communities wait for years and
years for a major project to break ground, local businesses and
the organizations funded by the tax revenues from these
developments also suffer. A stagnant Federal permitting process
prolongs economic stagnation in our communities.
It is my professional opinion that had FAST-41 been in
place when the R.C. Byrd Hydropower development was proposed in
2007, this project would be well underway. Hundreds of union
construction workers from depressed areas of Ohio would be on
the job daily, and those union construction wages would flow
back into Appalachia's depressed local economies.
I have attended numerous community debates and agency
hearings across the State of Ohio for projects similar to the
R.C. Byrd Hydropower development. Let me tell you, it is
emotional for a community to endure the planning necessary to
break ground on a major infrastructure project. Differing
factions in a community debate their economic and environmental
concerns. Conflict among permitting agencies exacerbates that
conflict, fueling misinformation over major projects and
pitting neighbor against neighbor through years of uncertainty.
This is how real Ohioans experience a dysfunctional permitting
process. We see value in stabilizing the public sentiment for
development projects, labor, contractors, and owners. When
there is delay, and uncertainty, it is felt by our members in
the community.
All of you here in Washington have the power to relieve
some of that conflict for hard-working people and their local
governments. I urge the Federal Government to continue the
progress that FAST-41 has started. I urge this body to make
permanent the reforms of FAST-41, to strengthen its provisions,
and to expand its application to more projects.
The Nexus Pipeline is an example of the real benefits FAST-
41 reforms have brought to Ohio. The Enbridge gas transmission
pipeline improves regional access to clean-burning fuels and
was among the initial Fast-41 projects. Ohio Building
Tradespeople across numerous communities and local union
jurisdictions built the pipeline, which spans from northern
Ohio to the western Toledo region. When I spoke with the owners
of the pipeline, they felt strongly that FAST-41 brought strong
value to the project due to the streamlined permitting
processes and Federal interagency collaboration. In contrast to
the decade-long R.C. Byrd permitting process, the Nexus
Enbridge permitting took only 3 years. Since ground was broken
on the pipeline, the project has created more than 6,800
middle-class construction jobs with $650 million in wages plus
benefits, the majority of which have been in Ohio. One Ohio
school district expects to net $25 million in property taxes
over the next 5 years as a direct result of that project being
moved in a timely manner.
The owners of this project and the Ohio Building Trades
applaud this Committee and the sponsors of FAST-41 for removing
the barriers to the project's success. One of the few
bottlenecks in the Nexus Pipeline's development was the
slowdown caused by a lack of quorum at the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC) in the final permitting. As a
result of the unfilled positions in FERC, 4 to 8 months of
delay were added to the pipeline.
The owners have asked me to convey to you their desire to
see continued modernization and streamlining through a
permanent FAST-41 program. We ask the Committee to reinforce
interagency collaboration, and we implore our agencies to
strive every day to work more efficiently. The one thing that
owners need is certainty in the permitting process. If owners
know the timelines, they can work with that information. It is
the uncertainty that gives them pause in proceeding with major
projects because there is a lot at stake for the owners,
contractors, and working people.
I am going to stop right there and thank you for allowing
me to voice the Ohio State Building and Construction Trade
Council's support for FAST-41. We know there is room for
progress, and we applaud this bipartisan proposal to strengthen
and expand the FAST-41 policies permanently.
Senator Portman. Thank you, Mr. Knisley.
Dr. Johnson.
TESTIMONY OF JOSEPH M. JOHNSON, PH.D.,\1\ EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
ECONOMIC POLICY DIVISION, U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Mr. Johnson. Good morning, Chairman Portman and Ranking
Member Carper. Thank you for the opportunity to discuss this
important issue today. The Chamber applauds your interest and
continued efforts to promote and support common-sense Federal
permitting reform.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Johnson appears in the Appendix
on page 58.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
My statement today details the Chamber's support for the
Federal permit streamlining provisions of FAST-41 and important
next steps that are needed to help us modernize America's
infrastructure.
FAST-41 established a straightforward process to speed up
permit decisions without risking the necessary health and
environmental protections afforded by the underlying statutes.
It included designation of a lead agency, timetables for
projects, coordination between agencies, dispute resolution
mechanisms, and judicial review reforms. Importantly, it
created the Federal Permitting Improvement Steering Council,
the multiagency body that is responsible for leading the
process and doing the hard work of ensuring that the process
works as intended by the statute.
The Chamber has long stressed the need to streamline the
Federal permitting process and was a supporter of FAST-41 from
the very beginning because the benefits of permitting reform
are overwhelming.
First, as a general principle, government should operate in
an open, transparent, accountable manner, and FAST-41 finally
delivers this with the environmental review and permitting
process where these attributes had historically been lacking.
The Council has worked hard to make certain that agencies
set a permitting timetable and stick to it. This effort also
helps to ensure a more fair permitting process. Permit
applicants deserve to get a decision in a timely manner, not to
face an open-ended process fraught with uncertainty. Reducing
uncertainty and expediting the permit review process are at the
heart of why FAST-41 produces real, measurable benefits.
Reducing uncertainty spurs investment, which helps more
projects get access to capital and obtain it at a lower cost.
Both uncertainty and slow progress reduce expected return on
investment, taking many potentially profitable projects off the
table due solely to the uncertainty created by the permitting
process.
FAST-41 goes a long way to curing this by significantly
reducing uncertainty and speeding up the permitting process.
Under FAST-41, project sponsors are better able to line up
investment on the front end because they know that there will
be a clear project timeline, and that even if unexpected delays
do crop up, which they inevitably do on such large, complex
projects, the Council will work hard to ensure that they are
minimized and keep the process on schedule. The end result is
that more projects get funded and at lower capital cost, and
that helps grow the economy and create jobs.
Getting more projects funded and moving forward is good for
the economy, but it is also crucial for renewing our aging
infrastructure. FAST-41 is a necessary element in modernizing
America's infrastructure. To that end, the Chamber strongly
supports the Federal Permitting Reform and Jobs Act. This bill
takes necessary steps to strengthen FAST-41 that are needed for
infrastructure renewal.
First, it eliminates the 7-year sunset in FAST-41, ensuring
that FAST-41 can continue to smooth and expedite permitting for
major infrastructure modernization projects into the future.
Second, it expands the range of eligible projects,
including to more transportation infrastructure projects, which
is also critical for modernizing our infrastructure.
Finally, it sets a 2-year goal for permitting covered
projects by requiring agencies to submit a plan to the Council
that adheres to that timetable.
The Chamber firmly believes there is no good reason why any
Federal permit should ever take longer than 2 years to get a
decision on.
The Chamber has produced a four-point plan to modernize
America's infrastructure, of which enhancing the usage and
effectiveness of FAST-41 is a key component. We believe that
the additional steps in the Federal Permitting Reform and Jobs
Act are necessary to achieve that goal and should be included
in any highway or infrastructure package considered in this
Congress. Modernizing America's infrastructure is a truly
bipartisan issue, and we urge you to take action on it this
year.
We look forward to working with this Committee to ensure
that we have the necessary permitting reforms in place to
modernize America's infrastructure. Thank you, and I look
forward to your questions.
Senator Portman. Thank you, Dr. Johnson.
Mr. Garcia.
TESTIMONY OF RAUL E. GARCIA,\1\ SENIOR LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL,
EARTHJUSTICE
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Chairman Portman, Ranking Member
Carper, and Members of the Committee for inviting me to testify
today. My name is Raul Garcia, senior legislative counsel at
Earthjustice.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Garcia appears in the Appendix on
page 63.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEPA is a tool that gives communities a voice in the
development of our national infrastructure. All stakeholders,
including industry, labor unions, and, most importantly, front-
line American communities, can use NEPA to advance their
priorities. NEPA stands for the common-sense principle that we
all learn as children: Look both ways before you cross the
street. That is what NEPA is. It allows us to examine the
impacts of our actions to see the best way to build a project
and not get run over.
Moreover, contrary to what you have heard here today, NEPA
is not the source of delay in infrastructure development.
Countless studies by the Government Accountability Office (GAO)
and the Congressional Research Service (CRS) all say that the
primary causes of infrastructure delays are lack of funding and
changes in project design.
You have already heard today about some of the good things
that FAST-41 brings to the table. The existence of the
Permitting Council itself will increase coordination between
agencies, project sponsors, and, when implemented properly,
front-line communities. The Dashboard creates more
transparency. We would encourage further investment into this
tool so that the public knows the status of those projects in
their communities.
Nonetheless, the conversation here today and the ones
happening within the Council itself are incomplete. The text of
FAST-41 does, in fact, curtail environmental and public input
protections. For example, provisions in FAST-41 arbitrarily
shorten the public comment period for NEPA reviews. This is
particularly problematic because we are dealing with the most
complex projects in our country. Other provisions attack
alternatives offered by the public as well as public access to
the courts.
To put things in perspective, though, we have to talk about
the everyday person who has to take care of their family, who
has to hold down one or more jobs, read the most complex
environmental review documents in the country, and then come up
with comments, all within 45 to 60 days. Oh, and if they cannot
get that done, FAST-41 eliminates their right to stop any
potentially illegal project in court, projects that can have
significant impacts on the very families that they care for.
Make no mistake. These provisions are an attack on
communities, their health, safety, and their voice. They should
be stripped away or allowed to sunset.
Turning to the implementation of FAST-41, it is at best
inadequate, delayed, and incomplete. The Council went almost 2
years without a Chair when the President did not even need
Senate confirmation in order to appoint somebody. Throughout
this Administration, it has lacked funding and staff. In fact,
instead of providing a Chair and resources for the Council, the
Administration increased delays by creating a duplicate council
within the Department of Commerce that subtracted importance
and resources from the FAST-41 Council. Most importantly,
although front-line communities will inevitably bear the
impacts of FAST-41 projects, the Council is systematically
excluding their voices from the process.
Last Tuesday, the Council held its only stakeholder hearing
so far. In panel after panel, we heard how the Council worked
for projects sponsors, but there was almost no discussion of
how community stakeholders could reach the Council. After
attending, I can certainly understand why a project sponsor
would want to partake in FAST-41, but never heard about how
local communities could do the same.
Overall, there is a particular lack of engagement with
communities of color and low-income neighborhoods. Crucially,
most projects with negative impacts are usually built within
these communities. It is alarming to see that their input is
excluded by the Council.
On Tuesday, not one panel--not one--mentioned communities
of color or low-income in their prepared remarks. To the best
of my knowledge, not a single member of these communities spoke
on the panels. The Council should be a tool for everyone to get
information and guidance to navigate the permitting process.
Profit-driven project sponsors should not be the only ones with
access to this entity.
To be clear, profits for project sponsors should never come
at the expense of the health and safety of the communities our
infrastructure needs to serve. Under its current form, we have
to ask ourselves: Who does the implementation of FAST-41
actually benefit?
Taking all these factors into consideration, I have two
asks from Earthjustice. Congress should strip the provisions
that limit public input, judicial review, and alternative
analysis from FAST-41. FAST-41 should be adequately and
equitably implemented and its impact studied before Congress
considers making it permanent.
Thank you very much for your attention, and I look forward
to your questions.
Senator Portman. Thank you.
We are going to literally make a run for the vote. We will
be back as soon as we can, and I think it will be about 45 to
50 minutes. I appreciate Senator Hawley being here. I think we
have three votes. OK, so less time than that. I thought we had
four. We will see you shortly, and I appreciate Senator Hawley
being here, and I hope you will be able to come back to ask
questions as well. I will prioritize you over me.
Thank you all.
[Recess.]
Thank you all for your patience. I appreciate it. I thank
Senator Carper for rushing back as well. We have some other
colleagues who have told me they are going to try to get here
for questions, and if they cannot get here, they would like to
submit some questions for the record, which is, I hope,
something you all will respond to.
On FAST-41, the key is that we have a process that works,
and I expressed my frustration, as some of you know, during
that 21-month hiatus when we did not have an Executive
Director. I am glad, again, we have somebody in place now. I am
really impressed with the report and the fact that we are able
to say that we have saved about $1 billion in avoided costs for
FAST-41 projects. That is the kind of----
Senator Carper. Real money.
Senator Portman. Real money--results that we are looking
for. We still have a process in place to make sure that more
people know about this, that projects can apply. We need to get
information out. We had a good stakeholders' meeting--Alex,
when was that? The day before yesterday--the General Services
Administration (GSA), and there were about 250 people there,
including a lot of agency representatives. It was open to
everybody. In other words, there were people there from
environmental groups. Raul, I do not know if you were there or
not. You were there? There were people there from business
groups, there were people there from labor groups who were kind
of just doing a check-in. I was delighted to go and just talk
about what the intention was initially, what our legislative
intent was, how this had been bipartisan from the start, and
how we spent a couple years putting together what we thought
was a fair way to try to streamline these major projects.
I guess what I would first do is I would just like to ask
you, Mr. Herrgott, since you are the Executive Director now in
place, what progress have you made in the last year in helping
projects move forward in the permitting process? How would you
describe it?
Mr. Herrgott. Thank you, Senator Portman. Just to be very
clear, the world that existed prior to the Council was a
legacy, paper-based, opaque process. It existed in the Dark
Ages. In many cases, when a project was ready for a major
environmental impact statement, the notice of intent is
published in the Federal Register. It could be buried within
10,000 pages. What the Council primarily does, and what I
believe it does in its truest form, is increases engagement at
all levels, because this Dashboard right next to us is the
single point of contact that lists in real time, immediately,
all facets and all dependencies within that project throughout
the entire 2-, 3-, 4-year process so that the entire world can
see.
All you need to do is Google the project name, and the
Permitting Dashboard will be called up, and then you can see
anything that would potentially impact your community, as
opposed to where we were before where you might have a NEPA
public meeting that is at 11 o'clock on a Wednesday that was
very difficult to get to and it was very difficult to discern
what was actually going to happen to your community, to your
State, to your county, or to your private property. Now we have
an unprecedented level of transparency and accountability at
all levels, not just on State/county officials but also on the
Federal Government that makes it much easier to make informed
decisions, because at the very base of NEPA it is to use all
relevant information to bring it to the surface so that we can
make informed decisions as policymakers while engaging all
facets of the community. What that has done for us is ensure
that these projects are inoculated from criticism that we did
not engage fully at all levels. Because what we have seen, and
what is borne out in facts and not theoretical criticisms, is
that the projects that are on this Dashboard are of a nature in
which I do not believe, at their conclusion, there will ever be
any doubt that they fulfilled the entire spirit and the intent
of what was intended, not only by NEPA but by the spirit of
FAST-41. In no way are any of these projects curtailing any
engagement at any level. In fact, it is the way we always
should have been doing business, and I am proud to ensure that
we continue to bring all folks in as ensuring that folks that
come to the Council, that elect to be part of this Dashboard,
are getting the kind of service from their government that they
deserve.
Senator Carper. Could I just say something?
Senator Portman. Yes.
Senator Carper. I will say this to Senator Lankford. I was
kidding Alex earlier when he gave his opening statement. I said
he crammed more words into a 5-minute statement than----
Senator Lankford. He gets paid by the word.
Senator Carper. That is what he said. I just want to say,
Alex, that was great.
Senator Portman. How many projects are currently on the
Dashboard?
Mr. Herrgott. Thank you. We have 18 completed projects. We
have 17 active. We have about two planned. On the phone during
your break, we were talking to two potential project sponsors
that are looking to join the Council. Part of the reason we had
the stakeholder engagement on Tuesday was to ensure that those
that are actually putting capital at risk--mayors, Governors,
and stakeholders--know that this service exists. At the end of
the day, those are our customers.
Senator Portman. How can the public access this Dashboard?
Mr. Herrgott. All they need to do is go to
permits.performance.gov and email us, [email protected]
Senator Portman. Performance.gov.
Mr. Herrgott. Permits.performance.gov. When we say the one-
stop shop, the user interface, as I always said, if an eighth
grader cannot understand it, then it is too complicated. That
is a systemic problem with most environmental documents.
However, when you go to the Dashboard, anybody can readily
understand whether a project is affecting them.
Senator Portman. Which goes to the transparency, but also
accessibility and inclusion.
Senator Lankford is here, and I want to get to his
questions, so I am going to stop here and come back and ask
questions of everybody. Again, thank you for your patience.
Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. If Senator Lankford is ready to ask
questions, I would be happy to yield to him.
Senator Lankford. Clearly you are the senior Member, so
feel free to ask your questions--I am going to stick around--
because I want to hear your questions, anyway.
Senator Carper. Alright. Great.
Alex, a first question for you. In Delaware, we have many
people who spell their last name H-E-R-R-G-O-T. We pronounce
their name ``ergo,'' like Monsieur Herrgott. How do you
pronounce your name?
Mr. Herrgott.``Her-got.''
Senator Carper. Why? [Laughter.]
Mr. Herrgott. I often say the second ``T'' is silent, but I
guess that is what my father always called me.
Senator Carper. OK.
Mr. Herrgott. But a Jesuit priest in my upbringing used to
call me ``Mister Got'' as that is the definition in German.
Senator Carper. Fair enough. Everybody, thank you again for
coming today and for your testimonies and for your patience
with us. Mr. Herrgott, you mentioned to our staff this week, I
think both Senator Portman's staff and mine, that the lack of
resources and other constraints have limited the Council's
ability to focus on more than maybe 10 or so projects that it
has seen through the permitting process to date. Could you just
take a minute and elaborate and talk a bit about the resources
you believe that you and the Council need to ramp up the work
you are actually able to do? There is a lot out there, as you
know.
Mr. Herrgott. Sure, and I think it is important to set the
record straight. Much of the $1 billion in additional avoidance
costs happened prior to me actually being appointed to the
Council. In fact, although it has been----
Senator Carper. Sure you want to give credit to somebody
else?
Mr. Herrgott. My team behind me--in fact, I have many
detailees from other agencies----
Senator Carper. Would the team and the detailees raise your
hands? Alright, good.
Mr. Herrgott. It is important to recognize that I have not
cornered the market on good ideas, and that in order to solve
many of these problems, you have to look through a
practitioner's mind-set. These are the individuals out in the
field that have actually done EISs, who have actually solved
problems. That is why operationalizing the FAST-41, the
virtues, and realigning everyone's definition of success is
very much a behavioral and cultural issue out within the
agencies, and you can do no better than having extremely
skilled senior-level executives within the agencies out in the
field touting what we actually are able to accomplish.
But to be very clear, the Council has been working for 2 to
2\1/2\ years, as was intended. Just because I was appointed
does not mean that all of a sudden we started at a new
beginning. In fact, what we are doing now is broadening our
marketing to ensure that the entire world knows that this
service is being offered. We have close to $175 billion----
Senator Carper. Let me interrupt. I want to come back to my
question.
Mr. Herrgott. Yes.
Senator Carper. I was not there, but my staff tells me that
you mentioned to them that a lack of resources and other
constraints have limited the Council's ability to focus on more
than 10 or so projects that it has seen to date. I just wanted
you to talk about the resources that have been provided and
their adequacy or maybe inadequacy. Just focus on that, please.
Mr. Herrgott. Sure. In recognition of----
Senator Carper. Just do it slowly.
Mr. Herrgott. In recognition of the imperative of the
Council, in this year's appropriations bill Congress awarded us
with $6 million, which more than quadruples our current funding
level. With that, we have been able to acquire reimbursable
agreements where we are actually paying agencies to bring on
these detailees behind you. We expect, as the Council continues
to grow, that we are going to have more than the nine projects
that we have acquired voluntarily over the last year and a half
and that we fully expect to be up at 15, 20, or 25 additional
projects over the next year, year and a half. The $6 million,
the resource constraints we had previously had now have been
augmented so that we can address the challenges in the future.
Senator Carper. Alright. Thank you.
Mr. Garcia, thanks again for being here today and for your
help. You have talked in the past--and here today as well--
about some of the provisions in FAST-41 that concern you and, I
know, others and that you think the Congress ought to
reconsider. You seem to agree, though, with most of this panel,
however, that Mr. Herrgott's Council plays a positive role in
the permitting process. What do you think that you and your
organization would need to see to be able to say that the
Council should be maybe extended or even made permanent?
Mr. Garcia. Yes, I think that we have to decouple the
provisions of Title 41. There are some that are extremely well
thought out and are going to have very good impacts when
implemented properly, and then others that do attack
environmental protections, and that means attacking public
health protections. But in terms of the Council itself, we
think it is generally a great idea. We encourage conversations
to happen early and often. I think that our ask is to make sure
that these conversations are not just happening between project
sponsors and agencies, but that communities on the ground are
being met at their level. That means going out into the
community and actually asking communities on the ground what is
needed, what infrastructure actually makes sense in their own
towns and their own back yards.
Senator Carper. Thank you. This is an issue we want to
explore with you further as we go along.
The Federal Permitting Improvement Steering Council has
been working with temporary leadership and a limited budget,
Alex, until you were named the Executive Director a couple of
months ago. Would you take another minute or so and just talk
about the steps you have taken since you started in your
current role to ramp up the Council's activities? You mentioned
some of the human beings that are sitting right there behind
you. Going forward, this is really a key question. How do you
measure success? I love to ask that question: Well, how do you
measure success? But just talk about that.
Mr. Herrgott. That is a very good point, and I think what
some of the project sponsors and others have mentioned is in
the absence of the Council, in the absence of having a reliable
Federal partner, much of which is not seen are the projects
that would have not otherwise happened, go/no-go decisions, in
particular, since many of these projects are based on the
possibility of raising additional tax revenue or going to the
debt and equity markets. In the absence of having the
predictability provided by this Council, we would never have
these projects. That is somewhat of a subjective positive, that
is not necessarily encapsulated in the $1 billion in savings,
and that is very important that we point out.
I spent about 3 weeks traveling to about 40 cities in 25
days--cities that I did not even know existed--on outreach out
in the West, ensuring that I was going to field offices and
engaging directly with the public, with tribes, and with low-
income and disparate populations to ensure that they understood
that we existed and that we were a transparency tool, to help
explain that this is an unprecedented level of accountability
that the government has not traditionally had. I think as we
continue to gear up and we continue now that we have
demonstrable results at headquarters, as we push this out to
the field, since many of these project managers are at field
offices, those are the ones that have the fiduciary and
regulatory responsibility to sign on the dotted line. Those are
the ones that we need to get to to ensure that they are
engaging at the very front end of the process with these
coordinated project plans, which require full community
engagement. The project sponsor, and all of the relevant
Federal agencies on day one actually sit across from each
other, not just passing emails back and forth but sit across
from each other and establish their roles and responsibilities
to solve problems. At the end of the day, I always say we are
not trying to force yeses, we are just trying to force
decisions. That is where I think, as we continue to gear up and
build on the successes of the past, that our incubation of this
methodology and the existence and the recognition that we exist
and we are here to serve you is going to be essential to our
continued success.
Senator Carper. Maybe that could be part of our guidelines
here. We are not trying to force yeses; we are trying to
enforce decisions. That is good. Thank you. Thank you all.
Senator Portman. Senator Lankford.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR LANKFORD
Senator Lankford. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
I would say the number one thing I hear from most folks
that deal with the Federal Government, whether that is a
constituent calling me about an issue with VA or Social
Security or their Federal retirement, or that is a business
owner who is in the process of expansion, is: ``I just need an
answer.''
Mr. Herrgott. Yes.
Senator Lankford. Almost every constituent call that we get
on all of our casework is not about ``I need preference for one
way or the other.'' It is just, ``I cannot get an answer.'' To
talk about a process that has been created, that is being
tested and evaluated, that hopefully we are learning from to
try to develop a process to where the Federal Government gets
to an answer is one of the things that my constituents in
Oklahoma are screaming for. I am grateful to see that there is
an ongoing experiment to see how this is working.
Let me run a couple of questions past you, Alex. One is:
What have you seen so far in going through this process
multiple times that we need to revisit that is a barrier to
collaboration, a barrier to getting to decisions, whatever that
decision is, that if this is reauthorized we need to address in
the next reauthorization?
Mr. Herrgott. Thank you for that. As was mentioned earlier,
the Council does sunset in 2022, 7 years after it was enabled
by the FAST Act. We have already seen from project sponsors
that have a 3-to 4-year horizon on delivering their projects,
they are already concerned about whether or not the Council
will be in existence 2 to 3 years from now. It is already
having a cooling effect on the excitement of projects that are
a year out.
The other challenge is in our ability to coordinate at all
levels of government. As you might imagine, there are more than
30 Corps offices across the country, 50 different forest
supervisors, all of which have a responsibility. It is going to
be a challenge for us as we continue to enable and empower
these chief environmental review and permitting officers
(CERPOs), which are the certified environmental specialists
that are one under the Deputy Cabinet Secretary which are a
member of our Council, to ensure that they are able to drive
the milestones and drive the timelines throughout their agency.
I think in the past not many folks within the agencies
understood what the Council was about. We are not an accusatory
entity. We are a facilitator. Our power is in the power to
convene. I think that now that we have the resources to fully
enable the vision that we have, that as we continue to make our
way as we take this to the field, it is going to be extremely
important, because that is what the project sponsors are asking
for. That is what they have determined gives us value for them
to join.
Senator Lankford. I am trying to read between the lines
here. One of the things you are saying that may be a problem is
we get another year or two down the road, the Council is not
going to be as effective because more people are not going to
use them because they do not know if they are going to outlive
the Council. Action from Congress to decide----
Mr. Herrgott. Yes.
Senator Lankford [continuing]. If this is going to continue
needs to be sooner rather than later.
Mr. Herrgott. Yes.
Senator Lankford. Which is a challenge for us to be able to
get to decisions as well one way or the other, which also
bleeds over into everything else. I think that is what Senator
Carper was alluding to as well. That is one of the things that
we need often, is a nudge to be able to get to that decision
faster.
Is this an area that should be expanded to other programs?
Are folks coming to the Council saying, ``Why don't you do this
for this?'' Is that coming up or not?
Mr. Herrgott. It is, and we do have a process. We will be
having a Council meeting, which, as I mentioned, is the Deputy
Secretaries of all the Cabinet members. We will be sitting down
in a meeting where we could potentially add new sectors. We
have the ability to do that. However, I must point out that
FAST-41 is not just about highways and bridges. We are
broadband, we are hydroelectric, we are transmission lines. The
full breadth of the projects that we have brought in, I do not
think, has fully maximized or optimized what we currently are
able to do. I think that we could do far more now that we have
the resources.
The question is not do we need to add new sectors, but what
we need to do is convince project sponsors that we exist and
that the water is warm and that they should join the Dashboard.
Senator Lankford. Ms. Abram sitting next to you can
definitely testify that it is not just about highways and
bridges.
Mr. Herrgott. Yes.
Senator Lankford. It is solar power as well and electricity
generation. Let me ask you an unfair question, but it is PSI so
we get to ask unfair questions. Which agencies are not working
with you well?
Mr. Herrgott. I think all agencies have their challenges. I
think the largest agency----
Senator Lankford. Which agencies are not working with you
well?
Mr. Herrgott. They are all working with us well within the
constraints of what I think they can do. However, I will point
out that agencies like the Department of Interior and others
that have a diffuse network of responsibilities and legal
responsibilities spread across five different agencies within
the overarching Interior Department, that is where much of the
coordination and what we have seen has the greatest room for
improvement.
Senator Lankford. OK. What areas of concurrent permitting
are working? What areas of concurrent permitting are not?
Mr. Herrgott. That is a good question. I would have to
think about that one. I think that what is happening is in many
cases--to give you an example, Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
has jurisdiction over trout. The Department of Commerce, the
National Marine Fisheries, has jurisdiction over salmon. The
fact that we would have two biological opinions paid for by
taxpayers for two different analyses done by the same Ph.D.
biologists on the same project at the same time sequentially by
missing a spawning period, the fact that that has happened up
until about 6 months ago. Now we are forcing a recognition of
the importance of staging resources in a constrained
environment within agencies to do things rationally and
prudently to ensure that we are giving the best rate of return
on the permitting dollar, and that is really what is not
necessarily seen from the outside. We are finally getting
agencies to look at their competencies and align them together
so that we can make sure that the administrative record is as
strong as possible while recognizing that all environmental
statutes were met.
Senator Lankford. Absolutely it is not a question on trying
to be able to hit all those. Some of those concurrent things,
though, build on one another. While we are trying to be able to
work through concurrent permitting on that, that sounds great
in theory. I guess my question is: Are you finding an area in
practice where you really need this complete before this can be
done, they really cannot be concurrent----
Mr. Herrgott. Let me just take the Army Corps 404 process,
which you know all too well. Even though on the Dashboard it
used to show--or you would get a call saying, ``My 404 permit
has not been issued.'' Now on the Dashboard, when you click on
the 404, it will show that there is a responsibility and a
requirement from the Environment Protection Agency (EPA), also
from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and then also from a
separate side of the Corps, on the 408, which is the
engineering side. Before, you would just be blaming the Corps
for not getting your 404. Now all the dependencies are out
there for the world to see, and so that concurrence is now
facilitated in a way where we can actually trouble-shoot where
the problem is. Instead of having agencies pointing fingers at
each other, we can actually fix the problem. That did not exist
up until a year or two ago.
Senator Lankford. That is a huge asset. I would tell you,
one of the frustrations that I get from tribes consistently on
any major project that they do, especially from the tribes, is
that they are required to do a NEPA evaluation at the
beginning. Great. They do it. Then it drags on through the
process so long, it expires. They do another one, and then it
drags on forever again. Then at the very end, they come back
and say, ``We need you to do that one more time.''
Mr. Herrgott. That is a good point, and I----
Senator Lankford. They have never minded doing it. They
hate doing it three times.
Mr. Herrgott. Well, and I will point out that although we
have talked about NEPA and the environmental impact statements,
there are up to 50 other Federal permits and authorizations
that could be required after your record of decision.
Typically, agencies--it is a lead agency. Their job is done
after the record of decision, and then you are walked off a
cliff of uncertainty where you have to hire consultants and
others to try and figure out where your disparate permits are
in different stages and/or call your legislative members.
That is not what we do. We have everything on the front end
so that you can figure out where all those issues are on the
back end so we can bring them to the front end and ensure an
end-to-end solution. That is at the heart of what we are doing.
Senator Lankford. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Senator Portman. Thank you. Really good questions. I
mentioned earlier I got involved in this initially with a
hydroelectric project on the Ohio River. Yes, we have moving
water on the Ohio River, and it is great for hydro. It was a
lock and distributor and manufacturer. And, 10 years to get
through this process. At that point they wished they had never
even entered into it. Incredible costs and delays. This is for
a small municipality who was trying to figure out away to get
in this case, cleaner energy.
Ms. Abram, I thought that the question that was asked about
the sunset was really important, and I want to ask you--I do
not know what your answer is going to be. If you were to think
about another project today, knowing that the current sunset
expires in 2022, would you submit that project if it was a
complicated project, say one of your big ones in Nevada or
California, to the Council? Or would you be concerned that 2022
is coming too quickly and that it might be a waste of time for
you to engage with the Council?
Ms. Abram. Thank you for your question. Yes, first of all,
I would want to submit that for FAST-41 because I do think
there is tremendous potential, and I think we are just getting
started. If I were to submit a project and I knew it was going
to sunset and I would be in the middle and could not take
advantage of that, that would be problematic.
I think it is really important to continue this. As I said,
I think we are just getting going. I think it can bring
tremendous benefit, particularly in just helping to facilitate
even within the Department of Interior. I mentioned that in my
comments between Federal, local, and State levels, just to work
through issues. Keeping to schedule is one thing, but problems
come up. Working through those and being able to do those
quickly and efficiently and getting the help really just to
facilitate that, I think getting engaged there--and it is, as
you said, not to oversee or--it is really just to help everyone
work better together and faster, and that is something I would
like to see more of. I would like to see you let more companies
besides us know about this. People have asked me questions, and
they are very interested.
Senator Portman. With regard to the sunset, maybe to you
and the other members, what would it mean for a project sponsor
being interested in using FAST-41 if there was not a 7-year
sunset and instead there was permanence? What would that mean
to a project sponsor like you? What would it mean to your
building trades guys, Michael. Go ahead.
Ms. Abram. Yes, for me what it would mean is that I would
have more certainty that I would be able to get a project
hopefully through the permitting process faster. I also want to
emphasize that it is not to short-cut the important
environmental review and also community engagement. I want to
make that point because, for myself personally, for First Solar
and the work I have done over this decade, I am really proud of
our engagement. We engage early and often with communities,
with environmental groups, and with tribes to really understand
what the concerns are and to be able to--I have changed project
footprints and reduced them and moved them to be able to
account for that.
I just wanted to make that point, but to have the ability--
--
Senator Portman. FAST-41--sorry to interrupt, but FAST-41,
our intent was to provide a more transparent way for precisely
that kind of outreach, and the previous system for these major
projects was much more opaque. Now you have the ability, as you
can see on that Dashboard--well, you cannot see it because the
writing is too small, but you could see if you got up close
that, you have the ability now to access online through
electronic means the progress and to have your input be
recorded.
Ms. Abram. That is right. I think that that helps a lot.
The NEPA process itself requires that kind of engagement and
output, and the FAST-41 just makes it easier, I think, to
access it for folks. It is also important for project sponsors
like First Solar to be actively engaged and to listen, and it
makes our projects better.
Senator Portman. Yes. Mr. Knisley, can you explain why it
is important for building trades folks you work with to have
some certainty in the permitting process?
Mr. Knisley. Absolutely. Chairman Portman, when I look at
the sunset provision, if this would happen, on a simpler note
it looks like you just gave up, this Committee, the government,
that you have put forth all these efforts and you have seen it
has made efficiencies, transparencies, and taken project
timelines. We look at the Byrd project, 10 years. When I first
saw that--the information was given to me by AMP--I was
astounded. Then you go to the Nexus Pipeline Project, less than
3 years with that.
To our members, they look at this, too, this would be
devastating. It would be devastating to the communities. It
would send a strong message, because in Ohio we have a lot of
multinational corporations. I look at my hometown in Lima,
Ohio, with Husky Energy from Canada. It sends the wrong message
even to international corporations. You know that investment
dollars are very fluid, and they can go anywhere. They look at
what is the best place we want to do our business.
I cannot emphasize enough that we need to keep this going,
remove the sunset provision, and allow this to keep working. It
has already shown you have a new Director. I just met Alex
today, and he looks like a fine young man who is going to make
strides with this thing. Just keep the process going. Do not
give up on it.
Senator Portman. Do you think he talks fast enough?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Knisley. Maybe. I do not know where Alex is from. In
the Midwest, we are little slower. You could see by my
comments. I went into overtime with that.
Senator Portman. You did fine, Mike.
Mr. Knisley. If I could, because in my comments I talked
about the local communities, how devastating this is. I come
from a small town, Lima, Ohio, about the same size as Senator
Carper's town of Dover. In fact, I have an older brother that
works for Christiana Care up in Wilmington, and his family is
down in the Dover area. These towns, they just hook their
wagons onto what the government is doing. When a press release
comes out and it says--and I will use Shadyside, Ohio, the $10
billion ethane cracker project, they look at this thing. This
community is devastated not because of policies on coal, just
cheap natural gas. They were a one-trick pony. If you did not
mine it, if you did not haul it, if you did not work in the
building trades, if you did not work at the power plants, there
was no diversification like we have in Lima, Ohio, even
Columbus where we reside now. They hang on every word that
comes out of the government, every word that comes out of the
press.
I remember in Lima, Ohio, in 2005 we had an ethanol plant
coming in, and it was called the ``Indiana bat,'' and it lived
in one tree----
Senator Carper. Indiana what?
Mr. Knisley. Indiana bat, a bat that flies around. It lived
in one tree on this site of land that they needed for this.
Because of environmental regulations and different groups, that
ethanol plant that was well over a $150 million investment to
the Lima community almost stopped dead in its tracks. The
community, I watched it just hang on this thing, on every word:
Is it going to go? Is it not going to go? I know maybe I am a
little bit emotional, but because I travel around the State of
Ohio and we have areas that are doing very well, and then in
southeastern Ohio, I am watching the population just leave.
They hang on every word here. They watch what the government is
doing. Can we do it better? Could we just get this thing going?
I implore you, do not sunset this. Let the kid do his job,
and just keep making it better.
Mr. Herrgott. If I may point out, on the Nexus project
alone, we saved 6 months and $300 million, and I think
oftentimes what individuals forget, that is either borne by the
taxpayer or by the ratepayer. It is not done in a vacuum. Those
are real savings. Those avoidance costs bear out in the cost of
electricity.
Senator Portman. Yes. I want to quickly get back to the
discussion about covered projects because you talked about some
energy projects that are important, and you talked about the
need to expand what the Council does.
Here is what the legislation language says and what we
intended: Authorization of Environmental Review by a Federal
Agency: Construction of infrastructure for renewable or
conventional
energy production, electricity transmission, surface
transportation--which is huge--aviation, ports and waterways,
water resource projects--and there are a number of them; we
talked about the flooding earlier, mitigating flooding--
broadband, huge potential there in the rural areas of Ohio and
around the country. Pipelines we have talked about.
Manufacturing, and there really are not any manufacturing
projects right now as far as I know, Alex, on the Dashboard.
And any other sector as determined by a majority vote of the
Council.
There is potential to do more. If we can show continued
progress and if we can get rid of this arbitrary deadline,
which is going to lead major projects to be hesitant to join,
because in 2022 they might think this thing is going away, I
think we can have even a bigger impact on more jobs. Yes, doing
it safely, following the rules, and being sure that we were
taking care of the environmental concerns, the safety concerns,
but getting the United States in a position where we are global
leader rather than one of the countries that is toward the back
of the line in terms of providing a green light for good
projects. Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. Thank you.
On Tuesday, Tuesday of this week, about 25 hours ago, I was
sitting in the White House with the President and a bunch of my
colleagues, and we were talking about infrastructure, and we
were talking about what should it cover, how broad. The
President, he is one person who goes in a lot of different
directions, and some people say he has a little bit of a short
attention span. Maybe we all do. One of the areas we went off
into was the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), the
follow-on to The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA),
NAFTA 2.0. He mentioned that it had good environmental
protections and labor provisions, which were appealing to both
Democrats and Republicans, but we said it is not enough just to
have the language, the boilerplate language in the agreement,
but the enforceability was really important. We came back to it
again and again. I think he got the point. That probably is a
point that is germane here as well.
The other thing I would say, I was a naval flight officer
(NFO), went to Ohio State, Navy The Reserve Officers' Training
Corps (ROTC) midshipman, and went off right at the height of
the Vietnam War, graduated, ended up three tours in Southeast
Asia, and when the war was winding down, came back to the
United States and moved to Delaware. I used to think Delaware
was a little town just north of Columbus. Later on I found out
that it was a whole State and they might need a treasurer,
Congressman, Governor, and Senator. I showed up and volunteered
there.
I went to business school at Delaware, and one of the
courses I took in my last year in business school was we had to
pick a product to manufacture, not literally, physically, but
to come up with on a paper a way to manufacture a product. I
chose solar panels in 1975. I think I was ahead of my time. I
have been hugely interested in cost-effective energy but also
energy that is good for our environment. I applaud the work
that you are doing. You introduced in your testimony some
interesting thoughts and approaches to these issues that we are
considering, so thank you for that.
Ms. Abram, as we prepared for this hearing, I think you
indicated to our staffs that staff turnover and the lack of
resources at the agencies, your company he works with have
played a role in delaying the permitting process for your solar
projects. You mentioned that a little bit earlier, but could
you take a minute or two and talk about how staffing and
resource constraints have held you back in the past and made
the permitting process longer or maybe more burdensome? What
can the Council do to help in this area?
Ms. Abram. Yes, thank you for your question. It is really
very important to have staffing and resources at the local
level, in particular where you have people that are doing the
archaeology or you have biologists reviewing things. As well as
we may do on keeping on schedule, if we do not have the budget
to staff adequately--we used to have these ``RECO,'' we call
them--renewable energy offices, but just have energy offices
that can be focused on renewables and make sure--or other types
of energy, whatever it may be, but make sure they are focused
and that they are staffed well so that they can expedite
quickly. We can say, ``Hey, we are falling behind,'' or, ``We
need to focus on this or that.'' But if we do not have the
resources to do that, we will not be able to get there.
In terms of turnover, what we saw with the Desert Quartzite
Project is we were 2 years into the project, we were ready to
get our draft out, and then there were changes at the local
office. There was a while where I was not sure who was on point
or to be responsible. Changes happen. I understand that.
However, when those changes occurred, there was also a change
in how they were approaching the draft, and people had
different opinions. At that time, too, there was something
called the ``Desert Renewable Energy Conservation Plan,'' which
looked at where solar should go, but it also had conservation
management actions.
We were expressly exempt from that, and we felt that the
draft we did complied with what we needed to. However, the BLM
that came in disagreed with that. It took 2 years to work
through that before we could come out with--they came out with
a third alternative. We had an alternative, but they came out
with a third one that was more----
Senator Carper. A third what?
Ms. Abram. A third project alternative. As part of the NEPA
process, you have to have different alternatives to consider.
That was why the delay was caused. I think if we had someone
like Alex more involved or, someone that helped to facilitate
some of those discussions, perhaps that could have been short-
cut.
Senator Carper. OK, thanks. Anyone else on the panel, Dr.
Johnson or anyone else want to comment on this same issue? If
you do not want to, that is quite all right, but if you do,
speak now or forever hold your peace.
[No response.]
OK. Mr. Garcia, Mr. Herrgott seems to be interested in
having the public and some of the communities you have spoken
about participate in this Council's activities. What advice
would you give to him and to us as we try to bring low-income
communities to the table and others into the process and give
them a say as decisions are made on some of these major
projects?
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Senator. We have to meet them where
they are. We have to get to know them in their language. It was
not until recently that the Citizens Guide for NEPA was
translated into Spanish, for example. If we are going to have a
project that is----
Senator Carper. Would that be from Greek? No, I am just
kidding.
Mr. Garcia. Right. That document only exists right now in
English and Spanish, so how many other languages are being
excluded from that publicly available document that should be
available for everybody in the country to understand and
partake in this process.
It also means being culturally sensitive, right? The idea
of having a hearing in the middle of a work day sometimes
simply does not work for people who have to go to work and they
have to have that job. Making sure that that happens also after
hours, that the agency is able to talk and that there are
avenues for the public to call them up. Just like any project
sponsors can call up two of the staffers in the Council, making
sure that the public can call up the Council. That requires,
for example, in terms of resources, having staff there to take
those calls and having staff that is culturally competent to
answer those calls and be able to speak in the language of the
communities on the ground themselves.
That also lends certainty and it lends buy-in for a project
to have support and build consensus so that it is not an
antagonistic relationship. We heard from the panel. The goal is
not to curtail environmental and human health protections. Then
let us strip that out. Let us strip that out. Let us let the
Council do its work. Let us fund it. Let us see what it
actually does full-fledged and funded, and then let us see what
the actual impacts on the ground are going to be. Then we are
happy to have that conversation.
Senator Carper. Good. Thank you. That was very helpful.
Let me just say to you, to Michael, do people ever
mispronounce your last name?
Mr. Knisley. ``Nice-lee.''
Senator Carper. Knisley. Do they mispronounce it nicely?
Mr. Knisley. For the last 58 years they have, Senator. But
I am OK with that. [Laughter.]
Senator Carper. Alex? Monsieur Herrgott?
Mr. Herrgott. Actually, we would like to point out----
Senator Carper. Go ahead.
Mr. Herrgott. First of all, we have an open door to figure
out how to get this right, to ensure that all affected
individuals are adequately consulted.
I will also point out part of the statute and a more
accurate reading is that these extensions of comment periods
are extended on a routine basis, and even in the statute, there
is an ``or.'' There is not a mandatory restriction on the
comment period. It says, ``For good cause, at any point a lead
agency, in concurrence with other agencies, may extend the
comment period.'' However, I will point out the fact pattern
with the projects that have been on the Council is that this
has not been an issue; and should it become an issue, we would
be more than willing to change it. It is not an attempt to
attack alternatives or to restrict a process. We believe that
with this transparency that we are night and day from where we
were 3 years ago on engaging the public. However, we are trying
to bring all vested interests along in this process. This is
not an opportunity to strong-arm to deliver projects.
Keep in mind that more than half of these projects on the
Dashboard are renewable energy, and that is something where we
are agnostic. We are politically agnostic, and we are just
trying to ensure that the process--not the policy because we do
not make policy--the process is robust. In doing so, we have to
bring everyone along, which is why the door is always open to
take criticism and to change the process and to advocate for
what makes the most sense for everybody.
Senator Carper. Our colleagues and our staffs have heard me
say many times, ``Find out what works, do more of that.'' The
other thing is I would just urge you and maybe Mr. Garcia to
exchange contact information, if you have not done that
already, so that this dialogue can continue. I think that might
be real productive for everybody. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, it was a good hearing. I want to thank our
staffs for pulling these folks together. Now that I have
learned how to pronounce their names, the next time I see they
will be more familiar. Thank you very much.
Senator Portman. I have a couple more questions regarding
some of the issues that were raised. I think Senator Carper may
have to leave us. Do you have any closing comments you would
like to make?
Senator Carper. Believe it or not, we have a Bible study
that meets once a week at this time. It is Democrats and
Republicans. We meet with the Senate Chaplain, Barry Black, a
retired Navy admiral who is now the Senate Chaplain. Usually
seven or eight of us show up, like we need the most help. But
we are going to pray for wisdom, and so maybe some of the
wisdom has been imparted to us by all of you. This is something
I will take with me and pray on it. Thank you very much, all of
you.
Senator Portman. Thank you for including us in your prayers
this afternoon.
Senator Carper. I will also say to Alex, my wife has said
to me for years, ``Talk slower. Talk slower.'' I try to talk
slower now, and I have gotten elected 14 times now that I talk
slower. But you answered the questions great.
Mr. Herrgott. I will try.
Senator Portman. One of the issues that has been raised
today is the statute of limitations, and we mentioned earlier,
when I was talking about some of the projects that came to me,
that got me started on this whole exercise, was people saying,
``We go through the NEPA process. It takes forever. We finally
get our permits.'' By the way, for some environmental projects
or energy projects, prior to the Council, for major projects,
and continuing for those that are not part of this process, it
is permit after permit, so it is seriatim. In other words, it
is not concurrent. I remember one person coming to me from Ohio
had an energy project and said there are now 35 different
Federal permits that we can count that we have to go through.
As was said by Senator Lankford, sometimes you get to the end
of the process, and now it is time to go back through the
process again because you had a change in leadership or you
have just expired your existing permit.
Obviously, there is a need for this. I do not know how
anybody could argue that that system is not absurd. But they
also said the statute of limitations issue, if you have a 6-
year statute of limitations in bringing a lawsuit, in many
cases the project does not get going when you get the permit
because you have to worry about a lawsuit.
Dr. Johnson, you have not had the opportunity to answer a
question today, so maybe I will ask you this. It may not be
your expertise, and maybe others can chime in. But have you
heard that, that because of the statute of limitations, which
we went from 6 years down to 2 years in the statute, so that is
what it is for these projects. We initially wanted 180 days. I
mentioned that under the bipartisan MAP-21, it is 180 days,
which is for a sort of traditional transportation project that
was done in the Obama Administration. But here we went down to
2 years because working with some of the environmental groups,
including NRDC, they wanted a longer period. But it is not 6
years, which is a big improvement.
Can you speak to that, Dr. Johnson, why that is important?
Mr. Johnson. Absolutely. Thank you, Senator. It is not my
area of expertise, as you mentioned, but I will give an opinion
on it nevertheless. We have heard a lot about the statute of
limitations, and certainly as you said, it was one of the
biggest complaints that we heard from project sponsors and just
individuals involved when we first started looking into this
issue.
My fellow panelist earlier mentioned that GAO found that
access to capital or lack of funding was the primary impediment
to getting projects done. What he failed to say was that one of
the primary reasons that people could not get their projects
sponsored was because of the permitting process, and the
incessant drag-on of the potential for lawsuits was a part of
that. We were looking at projects that were delayed 10 years,
and when you think of it, 6-year statute of limitations, that
is a substantial part of that potential delay, and adding to
that the sequential nature that you have noted about how
permits sometimes keep dragging on in the approval process. You
really run into a problem where you cannot get a permit in a
reasonable amount of time that allows you to also attract
funding. No one wants to fund a project--whether it is a civic
project or whether it is an energy project or whether it is an
environmental renewal project, no one wants to fund a project
that they are not going to see any kind of payback on for an
undefined and potentially very long period of time.
The statute of limitations plays specifically to that issue
and shortens the amount of time. It gives certainty. Having a
deadline that is not too far off in the future is certainly
important. Frankly, yes, I think we would like to see the
matching statute of limitations of 180 days to the MAP-21
process. But 2 years is better than 6 years.
Senator Portman. Do you have any examples of that?
Mr. Herrgott. I would just like to point out that NEPA and
the associated regulations were written in a time before the
Internet, and the access to the information was inhibited by
the access to understanding where these complicated
environmental documents were. The recognition in 2012 when I
was helping at that time as a staffer to craft that language
and then again in 2015 while working on the Environment and
Public Works Committee, in concert with Senator Boxer, who was
the Ranking Member at that time, was that there needed to be
some sort of reasonability, and that at some point you should
not have to wait 6 years for the clock to expire to put a
shovel in the ground, and that at some point there has to be an
end to the process to give certainty. Two years was what was
agreed upon by the trial bar, the environmental community, and
all those parties engaged. To date, we have seen that there has
been no issue in which that has prevented any additional
challenge, whether it be in the courts or otherwise, for
appropriate risk.
Senator Portman. Mr. Garcia, do you want to comment on
that? Because earlier you talked about the statute of
limitations.
Mr. Garcia. Yes, absolutely. This is my area of expertise,
and I can tell you that actually having a limitation on the
ability to sue can actually backfire and cause more delays,
because instead of plaintiffs waiting to see whether they
actually have a claim or not against a project, they would sue
trying to get their foot in the door in court before the
statute of limitations runs out. That could actually backfire
on a practical level.
But on a more pragmatic level, we are talking about
challenges to potentially illegal projects. Those are projects
that could harm the community and that are done in violation of
the law. I think we should all agree that illegal projects
should not move forward, and that is what the judicial review
process is meant to address.
I also have to say that when we talk about certainty, we
have to provide certainty not just for project sponsors. We
need to provide certainty for the communities on the ground. I
would say the communities on the ground would really care about
certainty that a pipeline being built was properly analyzed and
that it is not going to leak or explode in their back yards.
When we talk about certainty, I think that we also have to
include the public here. I understand the challenges that
project sponsors have, and I can say that if working with the
community--and I think the solar projects are a good example--
that if you work with the community, you actually reduce the
risk of any litigation because you are building consensus.
Again, regarding legal challenges, there is no other way to
stop an illegal project than to go to court. If we take that
away, we are essentially taking away the right of communities
on the ground to do that.
Senator Portman. Just to be clear, nobody is taking it
away. The question is why you apparently do not support the
bipartisan agreement in the Obama Administration with Senator
Boxer and others for 150 days for MAP-21. We are just talking
about 2 years, after going through the whole process where
every consideration you just talked about is essentially worked
out in advance. I mean, that is the idea. That is why you have
to go through the NEPA process. But, I would hope you would
support us for 2 years because that was the compromise we made
with the environmental community at the outset, not 150 days,
which is what we had in our legislation, our bipartisan
legislation, but 2 years, which is certainly plenty of time,
and no one should be filing a preemptive lawsuit to ensure that
they cannot do something in 2 years. That is after the whole
permitting process is finished.
Anyway, thank you all, every one of you, for your testimony
today. I really appreciate it. I think this is an opportunity
for us to review where we are, but also talk about how to
ensure we can get rid of the sunset, because if we do not, I
fear that very soon you are going to see a lot of major
projects just saying, ``Why would I enter into this thing when
I know that it is going to end in 2022?'' The way Congress
operates, it is hard to give them much certainty unless we show
there is a bipartisan interest in extending it. One reason I
wanted to have this hearing was the opportunity to talk about
that.
I want to thank my colleagues who showed up. Some of them
told me that they wanted to ask questions, so some may submit
some questions for the record to each of the five of you.
I want to really thank the witnesses for being here. I
thought it was very helpful. I am encouraged. I am encouraged
by the progress. As I said when I spoke to the group on
Tuesday, I am encouraged that it is starting to work precisely
the way we had talked about in terms of more input, more
transparency, but getting to a decision yes or no, and I think
we can make many more strides. I talked about the broad range
of projects that are eligible. And, the Council can add even
more with a majority vote, but the broad range that are not
currently making application to become part of that Dashboard,
so I think there is a great opportunity. I am glad that you,
Mr. Herrgott, are out there doing the awareness raising as
well, just to let people know what is available here. I am glad
that you are doing the outreach, too, because I agree with what
Mr. Garcia said, you are going to avoid a lot of problems by
doing the outreach early on and ensuring that you do not have
lawsuits filed or have other permitting problems.
There is a lot more we can do to make the process more
efficient and more effective. I look to this report from the
World Bank. The United States is still ranked 26th in the world
in dealing with construction projects. That is a lot of
countries that are developing countries that are ahead of us,
and most developed countries, because they have figured out it
makes more sense for them to figure out a cost-effective,
efficient way to get to a decision because that way they will
get more capital into infrastructure and construction permits
and construction projects.
There is more to do. There remains unnecessary red tape.
There remains bureaucracy. There remains duplication. There
remain delays. Some of them lead to the projects never being
started in the first place, so we do not even know the impact
of that. Others lead to more costs in those projects, which is
leading to taxpayer costs, project costs, fewer jobs, and we
are just looking for a way to green-light projects in a
responsible way and one that I think the Council has already
made a lot of progress toward.
The Subcommittee is going to continue to be interested in
this, seek ways to support the efforts of the Council. You have
to let us know how we can be helpful.
The hearing record will remain open for 15 days, so if you
have any additional input, we are happy to get it from you.
With that, thank you for your patience today.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:36 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]