- UNDERSTANDING THE CYBERSECURITY OF AMERICA'S AVIATION SECTOR
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
UNDERSTANDING THE CYBERSECURITY OF AMERICA'S AVIATION SECTOR
=======================================================================
JOINT HEARING
before the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY AND
INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION
and the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND
PROTECTIVE SECURITY
of the
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
SEPTEMBER 6, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-75
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
34-446 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Rogers, Alabama
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania
William R. Keating, Massachusetts
John Katko, New York
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Will Hurd, Texas
Filemon Vela, Texas
Martha McSally, Arizona
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York
J. Luis Correa, California
Mike Gallagher, Wisconsin
Val Butler Demings, Florida
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California
Thomas A. Garrett, Jr., Virginia
Brian K. Fitzpatrick, Pennsylvania
Ron Estes, Kansas
Don Bacon, Nebraska
Debbie Lesko, Arizona
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Katy Flynn, Deputy General Counsel
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION
John Ratcliffe, Texas, Chairman
John Katko, New York
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Gallagher, Wisconsin
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Brian K. Fitzpatrick, Pennsylvania
Val Butler Demings, Florida
Don Bacon, Nebraska
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex
(ex officio)
officio)
Kristen M. Duncan, Subcommittee Staff Director
------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND PROTECTIVE SECURITY
John Katko, New York, Chairman
Mike Rogers, Alabama
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Brian K. Fitzpatrick, Pennsylvania
William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Ron Estes, Kansas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Debbie Lesko, Arizona
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex
(ex officio)
officio)
Kyle D. Klein, Subcommittee Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Statements
The Honorable John Ratcliffe, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Protection:
Oral Statement.................................................
1
Prepared Statement.............................................
3
The Honorable Cedric L. Richmond, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection:
Prepared Statement.............................................
10
The Honorable John Katko, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Transportation
and Protective Security:
Oral Statement.................................................
6
Prepared Statement.............................................
8
The Honorable Bonnie Watson Coleman, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New Jersey, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Transportation and Protective Security:
Oral Statement.................................................
4
Prepared Statement.............................................
5
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................
9
Witnesses
Mr. Christopher Porter, Chief Intelligence Strategist, FireEye:
Oral Statement.................................................
11
Prepared Statement.............................................
13
Mr. Jeffrey L. Troy, Executive Director, Aviation Information
Sharing and Analysis Center:
Oral Statement.................................................
15
Prepared Statement.............................................
17
Mr. Michael A. Stephens, Executive Vice President, IT and General
Counsel, Tampa International Airport:
Oral Statement.................................................
18
Prepared Statement.............................................
20
Appendix
Question From Honorable James R. Langevin for Jeffrey L. Troy....
39
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Michael A.
Stephens.......................................................
39
UNDERSTANDING THE CYBERSECURITY OF AMERICA'S AVIATION SECTOR
----------
Thursday, September 6, 2018
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Protection,
Subcommittee on Transportation and Protective Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m.,
in room HVC-210, Capitol Visitor Center, Hon. John Ratcliffe
[Chairman of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection
subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Ratcliffe, Katko, Donovan,
Gallagher, Fitzpatrick, Bacon, Lesko, Watson Coleman, Keating,
Langevin, Payne, and Demings.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Good morning. The Committee on Homeland
Security, Subcommittees on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Protection and Transportation and Protective Security will come
to order.
The subcommittees are meeting today to receive testimony
regarding the cybersecurity posture of this Nation's aviation
sector. I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
I am grateful to be holding this hearing this morning with
my good friend and Chairman of the Transportation and
Protective Security Subcommittee, John Katko. I want to thank
him for convening this hearing with me today to examine a topic
that I think fits hand-in-glove with the security of our
Nation.
I have always said that cybersecurity is National security.
There is no better example of that than in the aviation
industry. When we think of threats to the industry, traditional
avenues of attack are what first come to mind. These threats,
like hijackings and bombings, will continue to pose a major
security concern moving forward.
However, as devices, aircraft, and systems become more
interconnected, cybersecurity will increasingly play a larger
role in aviation security. That is because nation-states, cyber
criminals, and hacktivists all possess an incentive to
manipulate systems within this sector. Whether it be looking to
gain a competitive advantage, or financially motivated actions,
or simply a political statement, the space will always be
crowded by malicious actors seeking to do us harm.
That is why we need to understand all avenues of attack, to
prioritize their severity and to mitigate those vulnerabilities
as quickly as we can.
Innovation has brought increased efficiencies to daily
life, but it has also tied together networks like we have never
seen before. Therefore, this is not a single-minded task. We
cannot be narrow in our focus. We have to explore the entire
aviation ecosystem as a whole.
If we have a single weak link anywhere along the chain,
then the entire chain can fail, like earlier this year, when we
saw a ransomware attack which targeted the city of Atlanta and
forced Hartsfield-Jacksonville Atlanta International Airport to
turn off its WiFi services for hours. That is one of many
examples I could give to illustrate the cross-cutting nature of
the sector.
All of these pose inherent logistical, financial, and
security concerns. It therefore becomes incumbent upon the
Department of Homeland Security, Congress, and the private
sector to work together to find ways to create resilient
systems, to create redundancies, to share threat information,
and to build safety and trust into systems that have become
integral to American travel.
Trust is instrumental in the continued health of the
aviation industry. Customers and travelers need to have faith
in the systems they are using, whether it be from the
information on arrival and departure boards to security on the
airplanes themselves. Losing the trust of the everyday American
would be disastrous for the sector, and gaining it back would
be an uphill battle.
Fortunately, safety has always been an overriding concern
of the aviation industry. The industry has typically and
generally risen above all others in this case. Safety has been
culturally built into this sector over time. The lessons
learned from 9/11 have matured both private-sector and Federal
Government entities to the point they are at today.
However, we still need to clearly delineate roles of
entities like NPPD, TSA, and the FAA, which we have come to
rely upon for our security concerns. We have to build
partnerships both within the private sector and within the
Government, partnerships like the Aviation Cyber Initiative,
which brings together Government stakeholders from DHS, DOT,
and DOD to tackle cybersecurity problems across the aviation
sector. It provides auditing on a voluntary basis to further
the goal of a safer, more secure ecosystem.
DHS's National Protection and Programs Directorate recently
announced the creation of a National Risk Management Center in
its effort to enhance risk management integration across the
public and private sectors. I am very interested in the rollout
of the center and hope it will become another essential tool
for the public-private collaboration based on and focused on
cybersecurity.
By leveraging existing practices and partnerships already
in existence, the aviation industry can maximize security
benefits. A 2016 study found that 91 percent of airlines are
planning to invest more in cyber programs over the next 3
years, which is up from only 41 percent back in 2013. That is
good news.
Stakeholders remain poised to tackle the issues at hand and
ensure a safe cyber ecosystem within their sector. It is my
hope that organizations like DHS's NPPD are offering support
that is beneficial to this sector.
In our continued efforts to support the work and mission
space of NPPD, I want to remind my colleagues that late last
year, the House passed H.R. 3359, the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency Act, a bill that is essential to
solidifying and strengthening DHS's cybersecurity mission and
which would support NPPD's efforts to bolster aviation
cybersecurity.
I am excited to explore the issue of aviation cybersecurity
today. I have faith that all parties will rise to the occasion
and ensure that the American people can always have trust in
the cybersecurity within the aviation sector.
I want to thank the witnesses for their time and for being
here today. I very much look forward to their testimony.
[The statement of Chairman Ratcliffe follows:]
Statement of Chairman John Ratcliffe
September 6, 2018
I am glad to be holding this hearing with my good friend, and
Chairman of the Transportation and Protective Security Subcommittee,
John Katko. I want to thank him for convening this hearing with me
today to examine this topic that fits hand-in-glove with the security
of our Nation.
I have always said that cybersecurity is National security. There
is no better example of that than in the aviation industry.
When we think of threats broadly to the industry, traditional
avenues of attack are what first come to mind. These threats, such as
hijackings and bombings, will continue to pose a major security concern
moving forward. However, as devices, aircraft, and systems become more
interconnected, cybersecurity will increasingly play a larger role in
aviation security.
Because nation-states, cyber criminals, and ``hacktivists,'' all
possess an incentive to manipulate systems within the sector.
Whether it be looking to gain a competitive advantage, a
financially-motivated action, or simply a political statement, the
space will always be crowded by malicious actors seeking to do harm.
This is why we need to understand all avenues of attack, to
prioritize their severity, and mitigate those vulnerabilities as
quickly as we can.
Innovation has brought increased efficiencies to daily life,
however, it has also tied together networks like we have never seen
before. Therefore, this is not a single-minded task. We cannot be
narrow in our focus, as we must explore the entire aviation ecosystem
as a whole.
We cannot have a single weak link across the entire chain, or else
it could all fail.
For example: A ransomware attack which targeted the city of Atlanta
earlier this year forced Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International
Airport to turn off its Wi-Fi services for hours. This is one of many
examples illustrating the cross-cutting nature of the sector. All which
pose inherent logistical, financial, and security concerns.
Therefore, it becomes incumbent upon the Department of Homeland
Security, Congress, and the private sector to work together to find
ways to create resilient systems. To create redundancies. To share
threat information. And to build safety and trust into systems that
have become integral to American travel.
Trust is instrumental in the continued health of the aviation
industry. Customers and travelers need to have faith in the systems
they are using, whether that be arrival boards or the airplanes
themselves. Losing the trust of the everyday American would be
disastrous for the sector and gaining it back would be an uphill
battle, as we cannot explicitly see increased firewall protection, for
example.
Furthermore, safety really is key as well. The aviation industry
rises above all others in this case, as safety has been culturally
built into the sector over time. The lessons learned from 9/11 have
matured both private-sector and Federal Government entities to the
point that they are at today.
However, we need to clearly delineate rolls of such entities as
NPPD, TSA, and the FAA which we have come to rely on for our security
concerns.
We must build partnerships both within the private sector and
within Government. Partnerships such as the Aviation Cyber Initiative,
which brings together Government stakeholders from DHS, DOT, and DOD to
tackle cybersecurity problems across the aviation sector. It provides
auditing on a voluntary basis to further the goal of a safer, more
secure ecosystem. DHS's National Protection and Programs Directorate
recently announced the creation of a National Risk Management Center,
in its effort to enhance risk management integration across the public
and private sectors. I am very interested in the rollout of this Center
and hope that it will become another essential tool for public-private
collaboration focused on cybersecurity.
By leveraging existing practices and partnerships already in
existence, the aviation industry can maximize security benefits. A 2016
study by SITA found that 91 percent of airlines are planning to invest
in cyber programs over the next 3 years, up from only 41 percent in
2013. Stakeholders remain poised to tackle the issues at hand and
ensure a safe cyber ecosystem within their sector, and it is my hope
that organizations like DHS's NPPD are offering support that is
beneficial to this sector.
In our continued efforts to support the work and mission space of
NPPD, I want to remind my colleagues that late last year, the House
passed H.R. 3359, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
Act, a bill that is essential to solidifying and strengthening DHS's
cybersecurity mission and would also support NPPD's efforts to bolster
aviation cybersecurity.
I am excited to explore the issue of aviation cybersecurity today.
I have faith that all parties will rise to the occasion and ensure that
the American people can always have trust in the cybersecurity of the
aviation sector.
I want to thank the witnesses for their time and I look forward to
their testimony.
Mr. Ratcliffe. The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from
New Jersey, Ms. Watson Coleman, the Ranking Member of the
Transportation and Protective Security Subcommittee for any
opening statements she may have.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you very much, Chairman
Ratcliffe and Katko and my fellow Ranking Member, Mr. Richmond,
who will be here, for holding today's hearings.
Thank you, Mr. Porter and Mr. Troy and Mr. Stephens, as
being our witnesses here today.
I am very glad we are holding this hearing, because it
seems to me that the topic of aviation cybersecurity has not
received the attention it demands. Threats to the
transportation sector are constantly evolving and efforts to
secure transportation must be beyond simply reacting to the
most recent attempted attacks.
Next week, we will commemorate the 17th anniversary of the
September 11 attacks. One reason terrorists were able to carry
out such deadly attacks on that day is that they took us by
surprise. The U.S. aviation sector was vulnerable because
security efforts had not focused on the possibility of
terrorists hijacking a plane and using the plane itself as a
missile.
In the years since then, we have invested heavily in
aviation security by hardening cockpit doors, creating a TSA,
improving passenger and baggage screening, and refining
intelligence-sharing and vetting processes. These efforts have
unquestionably made air traffic more secure, but we cannot let
our guard down now. We must urge security agencies to think
creatively about potential new attack vectors, as terrorists
continue to search for vulnerabilities to target.
With that in mind, we must do more when it comes to the
cybersecurity or transportation systems. Seventeen years after
terrorists gained access to cockpits via physical means, we
cannot allow them access to cockpits via cyber means. I must
have a mouthful of marbles today.
Last fall, reports emerged that a research team led by DHS
Science and Technology Directorate was able to remotely hack
into the systems of a commercial passenger jet. As a matter of
fact, as a part of my briefing, I was informed of three
additional opportunities that were used to try to hack into
systems, even those involving the notorious Russia.
In the wrong hands, such a capability could result in mass
casualties. Even a much less drastic security breach could have
major consequences. The aviation sector relies on a vast
network of interconnected systems, including air traffic
control, airports, airline, operation systems, and reservation
and ticketing systems. A cyber attack against any one of these
could cause chaos and confusion, resulting in canceled flights,
diminished consumer confidence, and enormous cost to the
airlines and airports.
Despite the clear vulnerabilities and the consequences of a
cyber attack with the aviation sector, not much has been done
to improve cybersecurity. Although TSA requires the airports
and airlines to adopt and implement security programs covering
a wide range of measures to protect against attack, TSA does
not require these programs to include any cybersecurity
measures. Instead, TSA only shares a list of recommended best
practices for airports and airlines to implement at their
discretion.
It is clear that we need the investment on the part of the
Government and research and development on what to do when we
find these intrusions to take place, not just to identify them,
categorize them, ensure them, but how do we stop them, should
they become a threat?
When it comes to securing air travel, voluntary measures
are just not enough. That is why I am working with my
colleagues to develop legislation to require TSA to issue new
rules to airports and airlines requiring implementation of
baseline security measures, some of which may also apply to
surface transportation systems, as well.
Additionally, while this hearing is focused on the aviation
sector, I would be remiss if I didn't note that these issues
do, indeed, affect other modes of transportation, as well. Mass
transit passenger rail, freight rail, and pipeline systems all
rely on networks that must be secured against cyber attacks. It
is my hope that today's hearing will provide us with more
information on current cybersecurity efforts within the
aviation sector and what work remains to be done.
Again, I want to thank the witnesses for joining us. Thank
you, Chairmen, for bringing this hearing to us today. I yield
back the balance of my time.
[The statement of Ranking Member Watson Coleman follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bonnie Watson Coleman
September 6, 2018
Thank you to Chairmen Ratcliffe and Katko, and my fellow Ranking
Member Richmond, for holding today's hearing.
Thank you also to our witnesses for being here today to share your
expertise with us.
I am really glad we are holding this hearing because it seems to me
that the topic of aviation cybersecurity has not received the attention
it demands.
Threats to the transportation sector are constantly evolving, and
efforts to secure transportation must go beyond simply reacting to the
most recent attempted attacks.
Next week, we will commemorate the 17th anniversary of the
September 11 attacks.
One reason terrorists were able to carry out such deadly attacks on
September 11 is that they took us by surprise.
The U.S. aviation sector was vulnerable because security efforts
had not focused on the possibility of terrorists hijacking a plane and
using the plane itself as a missile.
In the years since then, we have invested heavily in aviation
security by hardening cockpit doors, creating the TSA, improving
passenger and baggage screening, and refining intelligence-sharing and
vetting processes.
These efforts have unquestionably made air travel more secure, but
we cannot let our guard down now.
We must urge security agencies to think creatively about potential
new attack vectors, as terrorists continue to search for
vulnerabilities to target.
With that in mind, we must do more when it comes to the
cybersecurity of transportation systems.
Seventeen years after terrorists gained access to cockpits via
physical means, we cannot allow them to gain access to cockpits via
cyber means.
Last fall, reports emerged that a research team led by the DHS
Science and Technology Directorate was able to remotely hack into the
systems of a commercial passenger jet.
In the wrong hands, such a capability could result in mass
casualties.
Even a much less drastic security breach could have major
consequences.
The aviation sector relies on a vast network of interconnected
systems, including air traffic control, airports, airline operations
systems, and reservation and ticketing systems.
A cyber attack against any one of these systems could cause chaos
and confusion, resulting in canceled flights and diminished consumer
confidence.
Such an attack would likely cost airports and airlines millions and
have lasting effects on the economy.
Despite the clear vulnerabilities and consequences of a cyber
attack within the aviation sector, not much has been done to improve
cybersecurity.
Although TSA requires airports and airlines to adopt and implement
security programs covering a wide range of measures to protect against
attack, TSA does not require those programs to include any
cybersecurity measures.
Instead, TSA only shares a list of recommended best practices for
airports and airlines to implement at their discretion.
When it comes to securing air travel, voluntary measures are not
enough.
That is why I am working with my colleagues to develop legislation
to require TSA to issue new rules for airports and airlines requiring
implementation of baseline cybersecurity measures.
Additionally, while this hearing is focused on the aviation sector,
I would be remiss if I did not note that these issues affect other
modes of transportation as well.
Mass transit, passenger rail, freight rail, and pipeline systems
all rely on networks that must be secured against cyber attacks.
It is my hope that today's hearing will provide us with more
information on current cybersecurity efforts within the aviation sector
and on what work remains to be done.
Again, I thank the witnesses for joining us, and I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentlelady. The Chair now
recognizes the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Transportation
Protective Security, the gentleman from New York, Mr. Katko,
for his opening statement.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Chairman Ratcliffe. I am pleased our
subcommittees could work together to hold this timely and
obviously very important hearing.
In the wake of the devastating attacks on September 11,
2001, Congress created the Transportation Security
Administration to protect and secure our Nation's
transportation systems. Seventeen years later, our aviation
sector remains a highly attractive target for malicious actors
who seek to inflict harm on the United States.
However, these threats have proliferated to include the
realm of cybersecurity, something that was much less of a
concern during the creation of TSA. The travel and tourism
industries contribute trillions of dollars to the U.S. and
global economy, and passenger volumes have steadily increased
year after year. The fact that our aviation system is vital to
the vibrancy and interconnectedness of our Nation is precisely
what makes it such a highly-valued target.
Make no mistake about it: We are absolutely a highly-valued
target by the bad guys, and they are constantly trying to probe
how to get into systems and how to attack our airlines.
Protecting America's transportation systems is a
collaborative effort between numerous Government and private-
sector entities who share the goal of protecting the free
movement of people and commerce. Therefore, as innovations in
technology change the way our aviation sector operates, our
collective security posture needs to adapt accordingly.
This hearing today will focus on cybersecurity in the
aviation domain, and I look forward to discussing how TSA--and
the Department of Homeland Security in general--interact with
various stakeholders as partners to bolster the cybersecurity
of the aviation ecosystem.
On any given day, the TSA and its partners in the aviation
community secure around 2.4 million travelers, 1.2 million
checked bags, and 8.4 million pounds of cargo. These security
operations incorporate a wide array of technologies and invoke
a considerable number of stakeholders, including airports,
airline groups, and air carriers, among many others.
As the aviation community increasingly relies on connected
systems for critical operations, we must acknowledge the
urgency and importance of protecting the aviation sector's
information technology systems and data against cyber threats.
The impact of cyber attacks can be far-reaching. In
addition to significant security consequences, cyber attacks on
the aviation sector can prompt considerable economic loss,
passenger frustration, and undermine the public's trust in the
aviation system.
As Chairman of the Subcommittee on Transportation and
Protective Security, I have been a very vocal advocate for
forward-leaning security policies and best practices to
safeguard our Nation's transportation systems, and I believe we
need to start thinking about cybersecurity as a critical
element of that overall security posture.
That is why I am pleased to hold the hearing this morning
with my colleagues from the Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Protection. Our discussions surrounding aviation
security should not ignore the vulnerabilities and risks posed
by broad and interconnected systems with multiple vectors of
attack.
As our systems in the air and on the ground become more
advanced and more interconnected, cybersecurity will continue
to be inextricably linked with aviation security.
TSA was created in the aftermath of 9/11 and charged with
the mission of preventing another large-scale act of terrorism
on American transportation system. While physical threats like
improvised explosive devices continue to pose a major security
concern, the reality is that U.S. networks and databases are
under daily cyber threat by nation-states, international crime
organizations, and individual hackers.
Now, we need to pause for a second and really think about
what this all means. Cyber threats can manifest themselves in
many different ways. They can paralyze our systems or shut down
the system. They could affect things such as SIDA access or
access controls to secure areas, allowing people to get into
secure areas who shouldn't be there. We know from recent
incidents in Dallas-Fort Worth and elsewhere, enough criminal
conduct goes on with people who have SIDA access. Imagine what
could happen with people who don't and can get into those
areas.
Airplane security, of course, is a big one. But let's not
forget what was reported last year in 2017 where a report
surfaced that Homeland Security was able to hack into a Boeing
757 that was sitting on the tarmac. Now, some people have
harpooned various aspects of that report, but the specter
remains that a plane could actually technically be weaponized
against us and be taken over by bad guys through cybersecurity
threats. That is something we need to talk about today and
something we need to talk about tomorrow and all the way
through.
As Ms. Watson Coleman alluded to, as well, same holds true
for the transportation sector and trains, taking over a train
and weaponizing a train. That is a new threat. It is a new
frontier.
Our military has recognized this threat to such an extent
that they have a Cyber Command. I am concerned that we may not
be having the same priorities bestowed upon TSA and Homeland
Security, and we have to understand the threat is real and it
is going to keep getting worse.
This hearing illustrates my commitment to bringing a
necessary focus to cybersecurity in the aviation sector, and I
look forward to learning about the Federal Government's role in
this space from our esteemed witnesses. I hope to understand
how the partnerships between the Department of Homeland
Security, TSA, and aviation stakeholders can be leveraged to
make cyber risk awareness a key part of aviation security.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back my time.
[The statement of Chairman Katko follows:]
Statement of Chairman John Katko
September 6, 2018
Thank you, Chairman Ratcliffe. I am pleased our subcommittees could
work together to hold this timely and important hearing. In the wake of
the devastating attacks on September 11, 2001, Congress created the
Transportation Security Administration to protect and secure our
Nation's transportation systems. Seventeen years later, our aviation
sector remains an attractive target for malicious actors who seek to
inflict harm on the United States. However, threats have proliferated
to include the realm of cybersecurity--something that was much less of
a concern during the creation of TSA. The travel and tourism industries
contribute trillions of dollars to the U.S. and global economy, and
passenger volumes have steadily increased year after year. The fact
that our aviation system is vital to the vibrancy and
interconnectedness of our Nation is precisely what makes it such a
highly-valued target.
Protecting America's transportation systems is a collaborative
effort between numerous Government and private-sector entities who
share the goal of protecting the free movement of people and commerce.
Therefore, as innovations in technology change the way our aviation
sector operates, our collective security posture needs to adapt
accordingly. This hearing today will focus on cybersecurity in the
aviation domain, and I look forward to discussing how TSA--and the
Department of Homeland Security in general--interact with various
stakeholders as partners to bolster the cybersecurity of the aviation
ecosystem.
On any given day, TSA and its partners in the aviation community
secure around 2.4 million travelers, 1.2 million checked bags, and 8.4
million pounds of cargo. These security operations incorporate a wide
array of technologies and involve a considerable number of
stakeholders, including airports, airline groups, and air carriers,
among many others. As the aviation community increasingly relies on
connected systems for critical operations, we must acknowledge the
urgency and importance of protecting the aviation sector's information
technology systems and data against cyber threats. The impact of cyber
attacks can be far-reaching. In addition to significant security
consequences, cyber attacks on the aviation sector can prompt
considerable economic losses, passenger frustration, and undermine the
public's trust in the aviation system.
As Chairman of the Subcommittee on Transportation and Protective
Security, I have been a vocal advocate for forward-leaning security
policies and best practices to safeguard our Nation's transportation
systems, and I believe we need to start thinking about cybersecurity as
a critical element of that overall security posture. That is why I'm
pleased to hold this joint hearing with my colleagues from the
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection. Our
discussions surrounding aviation security should not ignore the
vulnerabilities and risks posed by broad and interconnected systems
with multiple vectors of attack. As our systems in the air and on the
ground become more advanced and more interconnected, cybersecurity will
continue to be inextricably linked with aviation security.
TSA was created in the aftermath of 9/11 and charged with the
mission of preventing another large-scale act of terrorism on the
American transportation system. While physical threats like improvised
explosive devices continue to pose a major security concern, the
reality is that U.S. networks and databases are under daily cyber
threat by nation-states, international crime organizations, and
individual hackers. This hearing illustrates my commitment to bringing
a necessary focus to cybersecurity in the aviation sector, and I look
forward to learning about the Federal Government's role in this space
from our esteemed witnesses. I hope to understand how the partnerships
between the Department of Homeland Security, TSA, and aviation
stakeholders can be leveraged to make cyber risk awareness a key part
of aviation security.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentleman. Other Members of the
committee are reminded that opening statements may be submitted
for the record.
[The statements of Ranking Members Thompson and Richmond
follow:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
September 6, 2018
Next week, we will observe the anniversary of the terrorist attacks
of September 11, 2001.
Seventeen years ago, our adversaries exploited the cracks in our
aviation security apparatus to carry out the deadliest terrorist attack
in our Nation's history.
Since that time, we have focused on closing those gaps, making
improvements to the way we share threat intelligence, screen
passengers, and secure physical aviation infrastructure.
Although I recognize the progress we have made improving aviation
security, I am concerned that we are overlooking an important attack
vector: Cyber.
The aviation sector represents a wide array of critical assets,
including the systems and networks that support airports, air traffic
control, and aircraft, to name a few.
We rely on these diverse assets to support not only personal
travel, but also commercial shipping, disaster relief, and a host of
other activities essential to the health of our economy and National
security.
All these assets are subject to a unique set of cybersecurity risks
and vulnerabilities.
But we have done little to protect them against evolving cyber
threats.
When it comes to physical security at our airports and our
airplanes, we impose strict requirements designed to keep bad actors,
explosives, and other illicit materials out.
But there are no equivalent cybersecurity standards.
Although we encourage owners and operators of aviation assets to
take advantage of OHS cybersecurity programs and services, it is no
substitute for requiring cybersecurity measures as part of site
security plans.
And in many cases, aviation sector owners and operators struggle
with the same cyber challenges that plague other industries: A National
shortage of skilled cybersecurity personnel, a workforce with minimal
cybersecurity training and awareness, and resource constraints across
the board.
These gaps in our security framework represent ``low-hanging
fruit'' for our adversaries.
A relatively simple intrusion could upend airport operations,
costing airlines millions.
A more sophisticated breach of a cockpit could bring down a plane.
I am far from convinced that the Federal Government is investing
enough in research around aviation-related cyber vulnerabilities.
Right now, some of the most significant Federal research in this
area is being led by the OHS Science and Technology Directorate, which
operates on a shoestring budget that Republicans in Congress continue
to slash, year after year.
Nevertheless, last year, officials involved in this research
reportedly managed to carry out a remote hack of a commercial passenger
jet.
These findings underscore that this threat is real, and more
attention is needed.
I look forward to hearing from this panel of witnesses today, and I
hope they will give us a candid assessment of the cybersecurity posture
of our aviation sector.
I will be interested to hear what progress has been made on areas
like cyber threat information sharing, and how Congress can support
those efforts.
______
Statement of Ranking Member Cedric Richmond
September 6, 2018
Seventeen years ago, 19 terrorists weaponized 4 passenger airplanes
and launched the most devastating attack on U.S. soil since Pearl
Harbor. As we struggled to understand how such a horrific tragedy could
happen, the chairman of the 9/11 Commission issued a painful
indictment: ``This was a failure of policy, management, capability, and
above all, a failure of imagination.''
Since then, we have invested heavily in securing airplanes and
airports against the kinds of attacks perpetrated by the 9/11
terrorists. But the threat landscape has evolved, and our adversaries
have changed. Those who wish to do us harm have new tools at their
disposal--giving them the ability to target aviation systems without
stepping foot in an airport and without clear lines of attribution.
In March, the Department of Homeland Security and the FBI issued a
joint alert warning that Russian government cyber activity had been
targeting U.S. critical infrastructure, including the aviation sector.
And research conducted by the DHS's Science and Technology Directorate
have revealed troubling vulnerabilities in aircraft systems.
Although I am encouraged by Federal efforts to build awareness and
address cybersecurity vulnerabilities to aviation infrastructure, I am
concerned that we are, once again, playing catch up with our
adversaries.
As we speak, the Transportation Security Administration does not
require airport security plans to address cybersecurity
vulnerabilities. It is unclear how cybersecurity factors into safety
considerations involved in building aircraft. We must do better.
This hearing is an important step in our efforts to understand the
full scope of cyber vulnerabilities to aviation assets and to help
relevant Federal agencies work with stakeholders to manage and mitigate
cyber risks. Pursuant to the National Aviation Security Strategy, an
interagency task force--known as the Aviation Cyber Initiative--is
charged with reducing cybersecurity risks to the Nation's Aviation
Ecosystem.
The ACI is co-chaired by the Department of Homeland Security, the
Department of Defense, and the Department of Transportation, and its
charter is being updated to facilitate the tri-chair structure. I will
be interested in hearing from our witnesses today about ACI's outreach
to the stakeholder community and about the nature of aviation asset
owners' and operators' engagement with the ACI.
More generally, I will be interested to learn how effectively the
Federal Government shares cyber threat information across the aviation
sector, and how that information informs efforts to harden assets,
secure networks, and train aviation workers--from pilots and flight
attendants to airport employees.
Finally, I will be interested in learning about the other
challenges associated to improving the cybersecurity posture of the
aviation industry--from technology to resources.
Mr. Ratcliffe. We are pleased to have a very distinguished
panel of witnesses before us today on this very important
topic. Mr. Christopher Porter is the chief intelligence
strategist for FireEye, as well as a senior fellow at the
Atlantic Council. Previously, he had a distinguished 9-year
career in the Central Intelligence Agency, working on
cybersecurity issues.
Welcome, Mr. Porter.
Mr. Jeffrey Troy is the executive director of the Aviation
Information-Sharing and Analysis Center and currently works as
a senior IT manager at General Electric. Prior to this, Mr.
Troy served for 25 years in the FBI, including his final stint
as deputy assistant director of the cyber division.
We are grateful to have you here testifying today, Mr.
Troy.
Finally, Mr. Michael Stephens is the executive vice
president for IT and general counsel at the Tampa International
Airport, where he has primary responsibility for all legal
information technology, governance, regulatory, and compliance
matters.
Welcome, Mr. Stephens. We are excited to hear your
testimony, as well.
I would now ask the witnesses to please stand, if able, and
raise your right hand so that I can swear you in to testify. Do
each of you swear or affirm that the testimony which you will
give today will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, so help you God? Let the record reflect that each of
the witnesses has answered in the affirmative, and you may be
seated.
The witnesses' full written statements will appear in the
record. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Porter for 5 minutes for
his opening statement.
STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER PORTER, CHIEF INTELLIGENCE STRATEGIST,
FIRE EYE
Mr. Porteir. Thank you, Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member
Richmond, Chairman Katko, and Ranking Member Coleman, for
convening this joint hearing today. We appreciate the
opportunity to share FireEye's perspective on threats to the
aviation sector and provide an overview of how we are helping
to secure American aviation.
As was mentioned, my name is Christopher Porter. I am the
chief intelligence strategist at FireEye. Our strategic
intelligence products that inform my testimony today reach over
4,000 customers in 67 countries. Prior to joining FireEye, I
worked at CIA for almost 9 years. That includes not only work
with the agency, but also a short stint as the briefer at the
White House for cyber threat intelligence issues, several years
in counterterrorism operations, and war zone service, as well.
I want to share with you today FireEye's perspective, which
is mostly informed responding to breaches in the aviation
sector, but also the intelligence that we have collected on
what might be coming next to try to get ahead of the problem.
I am sure it will come as no surprise to the Members of
these two subcommittees that the aviation sector is one of the
most targeted for cyber attack that our company sees. Safe,
reliable air transport is vital for everything from National
defense to global commerce to personal freedom.
Malicious actors seeking to undermine America's strength in
aviation through cyber attacks and through theft of data
include foreign governments, terrorists, organized crime, and
non-state actors acting on their own.
I want to start by discussing the most common cyber threat
that the aviation industry faces, which is cyber espionage.
Foreign governments routinely seek to steal industrial secrets
from American manufacturers, researchers, designers, operators
of military aircraft, and cutting-edge civilian planes. It is
about who you would expect: China, Russia, more recently Iran
have all targeted the United States or, in some cases, our
close allies, who we share technology with overseas, to try and
steal aviation secrets via computer network operations.
All three countries also routinely target ticketing and
traveler data, shipping schedules and manifests, and partner
industries, such as railways and hotels, mostly for domestic
security reasons.
There are two aspects of cyber espionage, though, that I
want to focus on. The first is that because it is a pervasive
threat, the best defense against cyber espionage is rapid,
detailed information sharing with context. Our company pushes
alerts to customers in real time when possible. The technical
alerts are in real time. We try to provide context within 24 to
48 hours.
Industry groups share information between peers, because as
we have all learned, a threat to one is usually a threat to
all. The U.S. Government also shares its threat information,
although it is generally Classified and only available to
cleared vendors. There is room for improvement at the speed of
dissemination of intelligence, mostly from collector to
agencies like DHS that then share it.
Most importantly, the timeliness of information within
industry and between the private sector and the U.S. Government
must improve, so it is not just the Government that has work to
do.
The thing to know about cyber espionage, though, is that
because it is routine, any one individual activity should not
be viewed as destabilizing, you know, to the whole Nation.
Media reporting on cyber incidents is naturally going to focus
on the worst-case scenario of what could happen. Sometimes that
is justified. Oftentimes it is not.
The public should not be needlessly alarmed or lose their
confidence in what is, you know, generally a very safe industry
because of individual cyber espionage incidents. Every major
cyber power, including the United States, has an interest in
knowing about the potential defense technology developments of
both its friends and potential threats, and the U.S. aviation
sector isn't the only one that is being targeted in this way.
So while espionage on its own does not pose an urgent
threat to life, I am concerned that continued theft or trade
secrets could pose a long-term threat to American economic
health. Aviation is one of our Nation's leading export
industries. China in particular is harnessing all aspects of
national power to displace the United States as a military and
economic power.
Chinese theft of intellectual property for commercial
purposes has almost entirely dropped off since the September
2015 agreement between President Xi of China and President
Obama. You know, diplomacy does work as a cybersecurity means.
However, that depends a lot on what industry you are in.
For the aviation security, research and development is so
closely tied to National defense that it really never stopped
being targeted. So, you know, unfortunately, the matter before
these committees is not defended by those diplomatic efforts.
They continue.
Cyber criminals, likewise, pose an economic threat to the
aviation sector and its customers. For years, we have seen
airlines and third-party ticket sellers exploited so that
illicit tickets could be resold for profit in underground fora.
In the last 2 years, our devices have detected a sharp increase
in the use of ransomware to temporarily disable airline
ticketing and support operations. That is often untargeted, not
specifically aimed at airports, but as we have seen, it could
be, as well.
Air travel is a time-sensitive business. Cyber criminals
know they can extort payment from airline that are unable to
move passengers until their systems are decrypted.
Finally, in addition to threats to the aviation sector's
proprietary information customer records and systems that
support flight operations, there are cyber threats that are
intended to use aviation's prominent place in our lives as a
means of creating psychological damage when it is effected.
Airports in Europe, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, to a
limited extent here at home have had their websites defaced or
disrupted in order to draw attention to political causes. The
primary victim in those situations are members of the public
who may wrongly fear that a loved one is at risk or grow in
their distrust of flying, even though the affected systems are
public relations-focused or don't support flight operations.
So it is important that officials and airline
representatives communicating with the public during such
events differentiate between systems that are affected, where
if you take them down it just causes inconvenience or
reputational damage, versus systems that if they are targeted
or damaged, you know, directly support flight operations and
could affect passenger safety.
So thank you again for the opportunity to participate in
today's discussion. I thank you for your leadership improving
cybersecurity in the aviation sector. I look forward to working
with you to strengthen our partnership, and I am happy to
answer any questions from the committee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Porter follows:]
Prepared Statement of Christopher Porter
September 6, 2018
Thank you Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, Chairman
Katko, and Ranking Member Coleman for convening this joint hearing
today. We appreciate the opportunity to share FireEye's perspective on
threats to the aviation sector and provide an overview of how the
private sector is helping to secure the sector.
My name is Christopher Porter, and I'm the chief intelligence
strategist for cybersecurity company FireEye and a nonresident senior
fellow at the Atlantic Council. At FireEye I manage our ``Intelligence
for Executives'' program for senior corporate and government clients
across the globe. Our strategic intelligence products reach more than
4,000 customers in 67 countries.
Prior to joining FireEye in 2016, I served for nearly 9 years at
the Central Intelligence Agency, including an assignment as the cyber
threat intelligence briefer to White House National Security Council
staff, several years in counterterrorism operations, and warzone
service.
In addition to the 300-plus security professionals responding to
computer intrusions, FireEye has over 200 cyber-threat analysts on
staff in 18 countries, speaking 30 different languages, to help us
predict threats and better understand the adversary--often by
considering the political and cultural environment of the threat
actors. We have an enormous catalog of threat intelligence, and it
continues to grow everyday alongside the continually increasing attacks
on organizations around the world.
FireEye is supporting the aviation sector here at home. We're
protecting the Transportation Security Administration with both email
and web inspection, managed by the Department of Homeland Security's
Enterprise Security Operations Center. As TSA continues to stand up its
intelligence capabilities, we are providing support through their
subscription to our intelligence reporting.
The Federal Aviation Administration also makes great use of our
intelligence reporting and they're using our malware analysis tool to
help prevent and detect future cyber attacks.
I want to share with you today FireEye's perspective responding to
breaches in the aviation sector and from the intelligence we have
collected on what might be coming next.
I am sure it will come as no surprise to you that the aviation
sector is one of the most targeted for cyber attack. Safe, reliable air
transport is vital for everything from National defense to global
commerce to personal freedom. Malicious actors seeking to undermine
America's strength in aviation through cyber attacks and theft include
foreign governments, terrorists, organized crime, and other non-state
actors.
I want to start by discussing the most common cyber threat facing
the aviation industry: Cyber espionage. Foreign governments routinely
seek to steal industrial secrets from manufacturers, researchers,
designers, and operators of both military aircraft and cutting-edge
civilian planes. China, Russia, and more recently Iran have all
targeted the United States or its close allies for theft of aviation
secrets via computer network operations.
All three countries also routinely target ticketing and traveler
data, shipping schedules and manifests, and partner industries such as
railways and hotels as they gather counterintelligence data on
suspicious travelers and intelligence on VIPs they wish to track.
There are two aspects of cyber espionage targeting the aviation
sector overall that I want to emphasize: First, that because of its
pervasive nature, the best defense against cyber espionage is rapid,
detailed information sharing with context. Our company pushes alerts to
customers in real time, and industry groups share information between
peers because, as we have learned, a threat to one is often a threat to
all. The U.S. Government also shares threat information, although it is
generally Classified and available only to cleared vendors; there is
room for improvement in Government information sharing with uncleared
industry partners. Most importantly, the timeliness of information
within industry and between the private sector and U.S. Government must
improve. In my line of work, if we can't provide context and additional
information in 24-48 hours of an attack, we have not met customer
expectations.
The second thing to know about cyber espionage though is that,
because it is routine, it should not be viewed as destabilizing. Media
reporting on cyber incidents is often focused on the worst-case
scenario in ways that are sometimes unjustified and needlessly alarm
the public or inflame opinion against a foreign adversary. Every major
cyber power, including the United States, has an interest in knowing
about the potential defense technology developments of both its friends
and potential threats, and the U.S. aviation sector is not unique in
being targeted in this way.
When cyber espionage operators get a foothold on a system, they can
often use that access for stealing information or to launch a disabling
or destructive attack using the same technology. But they rarely choose
to do so, and in the United States there are significant redundancies
in place to ensure safety. A crashed IT system does not mean a crashed
plane, and it's important for the public to keep that in mind.
So while cyber espionage on its own does not pose an urgent threat
to life, I am concerned that continued theft of trade secrets poses a
long-term threat to American economic health. Aviation is one of our
Nation's leading export industries, and China in particular is
harnessing all aspects of National power to displace the United States
as a military and economic power in Asia and world-wide. Chinese theft
of U.S. intellectual property for commercial purposes has almost
entirely dropped off since a September 2015 agreement between President
Xi of China and President Obama, but because aviation research and
development is so closely tied to National defense this particular
sector of the American economy never stopped being targeted.
Chinese hackers pursue fewer targets in the United States than they
did before the Xi-Obama Agreement, but they have just as many hackers
who are more skilled and better resourced than ever, meaning that
industries that do continue to be threatened face a greater threat than
ever before that technologies the United States spends billions
developing will be stolen and adopted by economic competitors and
military rivals in China.
Cyber criminals likewise pose an economic threat to the aviation
sector and its customers. For years we have seen airlines and third-
party ticket sellers exploited so that illicit tickets could be resold
for profit in underground fora. Because airlines are trusted by their
customers with a wide variety of sensitive personal data, they are also
frequently targeted by cyber criminals looking to gather data to enable
other types of fraud. In the last 2 years, our devices have detected a
sharp increase in the use of ransomware to temporarily disable airline
ticketing and support operations--air travel is a time-sensitive
business, and cyber criminals know that they can extort quick payment
from airlines that are unable to move passengers until their systems
are decrypted.
Finally, in addition to threats to the aviation sector's
proprietary information, customer records, and systems that support
flight operations, there are cyber threats intended to use aviation's
prominent place in our lives as a means of creating psychological
damage or political pressure. Airports in Europe, the Middle East,
Southeast Asia, and here at home have had their websites defaced or
disrupted, mostly by non-state actors seeking to draw attention to a
particular political cause.
The primary victim in these situations are members of the public
who may wrongly fear that a loved one is at risk or grow in their
distrust of flying, even though the affected systems may be public
relations-focused and support no flight operations at all. The fear
these operations cause is particularly pronounced when those outages
are caused by groups affiliated with terrorists.
In other cases, these virtual sit-ins that affect a company's
website have, in limited cases, delayed takeoffs for airlines that also
relied on those computers to make or distribute flight plans, though
even these attacks did not have a direct effect on flight safety.
It is important that officials and airlines representatives
communicating with the public during such events differentiate between
taking down systems that cause inconvenience from those that directly
support flight operations and passenger safety.
conclusion
Thank you again for the opportunity to participate in today's
discussion. Thank you for your leadership improving cybersecurity in
the aviation sector. I look forward to working with you to strengthen
the partnership between the public and private sectors and to share
best practices to thwart future cyber attacks. I'm happy to answer any
questions from the committee.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Porter.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Troy for his opening
statement.
STATEMENT OF JEFFREY L. TROY, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, AVIATION
INFORMATION-SHARING AND ANALYSIS CENTER
Mr. Troy. Good morning. My name is Jeffrey Troy. I am the
executive director of the Aviation Information-Sharing and
Analysis Center. The Aviation ISAC is a global, member-driven,
nonprofit company. Our member companies are headquartered on
five continents and represent a cross-section of the many
businesses that make up the aviation ecosystem.
They include the makers of aircrafts, their engines,
airlines, airports, satellite communication providers and
aviation services, as well as their supply chains. The mission
of the Aviation ISAC is to increase the cyber resiliency of the
aviation sector across the world.
Safety comes first in every aspect of the aviation
industry. Cybersecurity is no exception. Each segment of our
industry has numerous automated computer-based processes which
contribute to the overall safety and efficiency of aviation.
Each member of the Aviation ISAC has a chief information
security officer or someone comparable who assumes the
responsibility of protecting the computer networks and products
that are performing the operations of the business and
protecting them from cyber attack.
The Aviation ISAC works with each CISO to understand their
company's risk profile. We use this information to drive
industry programs and to reduce cyber risk. The Aviation ISAC
builds communities of experts within each of the specialties
supporting the CISO. These include cyber threat analysts,
compliance experts, network security architectures, and product
security specialists.
Each community leverages the combined capabilities of
members to expedite the development of solutions and
intelligence to either reduce or eliminate risk. We facilitate
automated and in-person intelligence exchange training, best
practices, and tabletop exercises. We proactively hunt for
treats, stolen network access, indicators of compromise, and we
engage with security researchers.
Our focus is on finding information that can be used by the
aviation industry to reduce cyber risk and increase operational
resilience. Every business and every industry, including
aviation, can only succeed when the needs and the concerns of
the customers are met. This includes addressing misperceptions.
Flying is the safest mode of transportation. However, there
have been times over the past few years when persons
incorrectly allege they were able to impact the safety of
flight by hacking a system on a plane.
The Aviation ISAC has addressed these issues head on.
Working with industry and coordinating with Government
partners, we play a leading role in investigating alleged
vulnerabilities and conducting extensive testing to ferret out
any vulnerabilities, validated or invalidated.
The Aviation ISAC recognizes the value of the work of
cybersecurity researchers in finding these vulnerabilities,
even if the vulnerabilities are minor, contained, and do not
pose a risk to flight safety. The aviation industry will
continue to investigate vulnerability claims and take swift
action when required. As of today, none of the vulnerabilities
that have been investigated by the Aviation ISAC or its members
have impacted the safety of flight.
The Aviation ISAC is also pleased to have a strong and
productive relationship with our Government partners. Indeed,
liaison with Government was part of the founding idea of the
Aviation ISAC. We collaborate in many forms and on a wide scope
of aviation, cybersecurity-related projects.
For example, in a recent engagement with a threat
researcher who sensationalized the claim of being able to hack
a plane, we kept both our industry members and Government
partners well-apprised of our work to include the sharing of
technical details. We engaged with the Department of Homeland
Security, Transportation Security Administration, the Federal
Aviation Administration, and the European Aviation Safety
Agency.
The aviation industry, like all industries with all
extensive digital integration, has not declared victory, but
rather is constantly engaged in the battle. As I said earlier,
in aviation, security and safety comes first. Digital
enhancements to processes are adopted at a deliberate pace to
ensure that there is no impact to safety. Security around the
digital processes begins in the design stages and runs through
the build, deploy, operate, and continuously monitor phases.
Air framers and their suppliers extensively test new
technologies and design layered safety and security controls,
both digital and physical, to ensure the highest level of
safety in flight.
We do not know what we do not know. Many vulnerabilities in
computer systems were discovered years after the systems were
designed and deployed. New technologies are being added to
existing platforms. As such, as our industry is constantly red-
teaming our systems and seeking to uncover issues before they
become impactful.
We believe safety and security are significantly enhanced
when companies and Government agencies communicate on cyber
threats and vulnerabilities. On behalf of all of our members, I
thank you for the opportunity to come before you today and
answer questions about cybersecurity and cyber resilience in
the aviation industry.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Troy follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jeffrey L. Troy
September 6, 2018
Good morning. My name is Jeffrey Troy. I am the executive director
of the Aviation Information-Sharing and Analysis Center. The Aviation
ISAC is a global, member-driven, non-profit corporation. Our member
companies are headquartered on 5 continents and represent a cross-
section of the many businesses making up the aviation industry
ecosystem. They include the makers of aircraft, engines, airlines,
airports, air traffic control, ground traffic control, satellite
communication providers, and aviation services as well as their supply
chains. The mission of the Aviation ISAC is to increase the cyber
resiliency in aviation world-wide.
Safety comes first in every aspect of the aviation industry, and
cybersecurity is no exception.
Each segment of our industry has numerous automated, computer-based
processes, which contribute to the overall safety and efficiency of
aviation. Each member of the Aviation ISAC has a chief information
security officer (CISO) or someone comparable who assumes the
responsibility of protecting computer networks and products performing
the operations of the business from cyber attacks. The Aviation ISAC
works with each CISO to understand their company's risk profile. We use
this information to drive industry cooperation and collaboration on
projects and programs to reduce cyber risk.
The Aviation ISAC builds communities of experts within each of the
specialties supporting the CISO. These include cyber threat analysts,
compliance experts, network security architects, and product security
specialists. Each community leverages the combined experience and
intelligence capabilities of the members to expedite the development of
solutions and intelligence to reduce or eliminate risk.
We facilitate automated and in-person intelligence exchange,
training, best practices, and table-top exercises. We proactively hunt
for threats, stolen network access, indicators of compromise, and
engage with threat researchers. Our focus is on finding information
that can be used by the aviation industry to reduce cyber risk and
increase operational resilience.
Every business and every industry, including aviation, can only
succeed when the needs and concerns of their customers are met. This
includes addressing misperceptions. Flying is the safest mode of
transportation. However, there have been times over the past few years
when persons incorrectly alleged they were able to impact flight safety
by hacking a system on a plane.
The Aviation ISAC has addressed these issues head-on. Working with
industry and coordinating with Government partners, we play a leading
role in investigating alleged vulnerabilities, and conducting extensive
testing to ferret out any vulnerabilities validated or invalidated. The
Aviation ISAC recognizes the value of the work of cybersecurity
researchers in finding cyber vulnerabilities, even if those
vulnerabilities are minor, contained, and do not pose a risk to safety.
The aviation industry will continue to investigate vulnerability claims
and take swift action when required. As of today, none of the
vulnerabilities that have been investigated by the Aviation ISAC or its
members have impacted the safety of flight.
The Aviation ISAC also is pleased to have a strong and productive
relationship with our Government partners. Indeed, liaison with
Government was a founding idea behind the creation of the ISAC. We
collaborate in many forums and on a wide scope of aviation,
cybersecurity-related projects. For example, in a recent engagement
with a threat researcher who sensationalized a claim of being able to
``hack a plane,'' we kept both our industry members and Government
partners well-apprised of our work to include the sharing of technical
details. We engaged with the Department of Homeland Security,
Transportation Security Administration, the Federal Aviation
Administration, and the European Aviation Safety Agency.
The aviation industry, like all industries with extensive digital
integration, has not declared victory, but rather is constantly engaged
in the battle.
As I said earlier, in aviation, safety comes first. Digital
enhancements to processes are adopted at a deliberate pace to ensure no
impact to safety. Security around the digital processes begins in the
design stages and runs through the build, deploy, operate, and
continuously monitor phases. Airframers and their suppliers extensively
test new technologies and design layered safety and security controls,
both digital and physical, to ensure the highest level of assurance in
flight safety.
We do not know what we do not know. Many vulnerabilities in
computer systems were discovered years after the systems were designed
and deployed. And new technologies are being added to existing
platforms. As such, our industry is constantly red-teaming their
systems and seeking to uncover issues before they become impactful.
We believe safety and security are significantly enhanced when
companies and Government agencies communicate on cyber threats and
vulnerabilities. On behalf of all our members, I thank you for the
opportunity to come before you today and answer your questions about
cybersecurity and cyber resilience in the aviation industry.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Troy.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Stephens for 5 minutes for his
opening statement.
STATEMENT OF MICHAEL A. STEPHENS, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, IT
AND GENERAL COUNSEL, TAMPA INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT
Mr. Stephens. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Ratcliffe,
Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Richmond, Ranking Member Watson
Coleman, and Members of the subcommittee, good morning. My name
is Michael Stephens. I am the executive vice president and
general counsel for information technology for Tampa
International Airport. We thank you for the opportunity to
participate in today's hearing on the critically important
topic of understanding and mitigating cybersecurity threats to
our Nation's airlines, airports, and our critical aviation
infrastructure.
More than 2.5 million passengers travel safely in and out
of America's airports each and every day. The largest 5 U.S.
airports alone move more passengers through them on an annual
basis than the entire population of the United States. Our
airports facilitated the shipment of more than 40 billion
pounds of cargo. In total, the aviation sector contributes
approximately 5.1 percent to our National GDP.
Aviation is essential, not only to our economic prosperity,
but to our National security interests, as well. In order to
meet the increasing demand of the needs of international
commerce and the traveling public, virtually all of the
essential airport operations and functions, as well as aviation
safety, security, access control, navigations, communications,
industrial systems controls, and emergency response systems
must rely heavily on a multitude of technology applications and
platforms.
For that reason, it is my opinion, like the other witnesses
here, that cybersecurity risks without question represent the
most preeminent and persistent threat to the continuous safe,
secure, and efficient operations of U.S. airports in the global
aviation system.
Airports and airlines defend against hundreds of thousands
of malicious intrusion attempts each and every day. In short,
computers, kiosks, and keyboards have become the newest tools
of criminals and the new weapons of war. It is of paramount
importance that we exercise increased urgency and vigilance to
mitigate cybersecurity threats to our Nation's critical
aviation infrastructure.
While there is no silver bullet or perfect defense against
cybersecurity threats within the aviation industry, there are
some critical areas that I believe present great opportunities
for airports, along with our airline partners and aviation
stakeholders to achieve greater preparedness, responsiveness,
and resilience.
First, the adoption of a standard. Although airports and
airlines and other aviation stakeholders have engaged in
building and achieving the levels of cybersecurity capability,
maturity, and resilience, there are currently no minimum
standards or frameworks being used across the sector. In fact,
according to a survey of U.S. airports by the Airport
Cooperative Research Program and its guidebook on best
practices for airport cybersecurity, only 9 out of 24, or 34
percent, of airport respondents indicated that they had
implemented a National cybersecurity standard or framework.
I believe significant considerations should be given by
airports and airlines to mandate within their respective
organizations the adoption and implementation of established
cybersecurity standards and frameworks.
A second opportunity is what the witnesses who are joining
me here today have talked about, and that is the increased
sharing of information and threat intelligence, because it is a
critical component for airports to assess our vulnerabilities
and to enhance our preparedness and more effectively respond
and recover in the event of a critical cyber incident.
It is essential to have strength in information sharing,
and consideration should be given to more proactive and broader
disclosure within the sector by airports and airlines of
cybersecurity incidents that meet an agreed-upon threshold,
irrespective of whether or not the incident resulted in a data
breach or a system compromise.
Finally, the human factor. The human factor remains the
most highly-exploited vector for penetrating cybersecurity
defenses. Cybersecurity threat awareness and information
security training programs for all airports, airline, and
aviation sector employees is perhaps the most effective and
cost-efficient way of increasing airport and airline
cybersecurity readiness.
Airports and airlines should be given strong consideration
to adopting uniform standards which establish baseline training
requirements for airport, airline, and other key aviation
sectors' employees on a defined and reoccurring basis.
As the adoption of current and future technologies
increases to support the aviation sector, the threat of
disruptive cyber attacks on airports, airlines, and critical
aviation information sector systems undoubtedly will increase,
as well. Evolution toward a more effective cyber risk
management mitigation strategy by airports, key aviation sector
stakeholders, through the adoption and implementation of
baseline cybersecurity frameworks and standards is absolutely
essential to the Nation's security and long-term prosperity.
Again, I thank you for the opportunity to testify before
you all today, and I look forward to answering any questions
that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stephens follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael A. Stephens
September 6, 2018
Chairman Ratcliffe, Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Richmond,
Ranking Member Coleman, and Members of the subcommittees, thank you for
the opportunity to participate in this hearing on the critically
important topic of understanding and mitigating cybersecurity threats
to our Nation's airlines, airports, and National aviation system.
According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), more than
2.5 million passengers fly in and out of America's airports each and
every day. The most recent available statistics show U.S. airports
facilitated the shipment of more than 40 billion pounds of cargo. In
total, our Nation's airports along with our airline partners and all
other aspects of the aviation industry contribute more than 5.1 percent
to our National GDP. By any standard, airports, particularly our
commercial airports are incredibly complex, connected critical
infrastructure ecosystems that are essential not only to our Nation's
economic prosperity, but to our National security as well.
The size and scope of operations, as well as the passenger volume
in our Nation's airports is vast. The FAA classifies the Nation's 30
largest airports by passenger volume, as large hub airports. Tampa
International is in that category. Out of those 30 airports designated
as large hubs, the top 4 or 5 have more passengers flowing through them
on an annual basis than the entire population of the United States.
As with most industries, to meet the increasing demand and needs of
international commerce and the traveling public, airports along with
our airline partners, have increasingly relied on technology out of
operational necessity and to enhance passenger safety, security, and
convenience. The ubiquitous use of technology has made airports,
airlines, and global aviation more efficient and has undergirded and
facilitated the tremendous growth of global mobility, commerce, and
connectivity. However, as a result of our increasingly interconnected
and technologically-dependent world, airports and airlines, like other
industries, face significant challenges from a looming cyber threat
environment.
In today's modern and technologically-advanced airports, there are
virtually no areas or functions that do not rely at some level on a
digital network, data transfer, computer application, or interface with
the internet. Virtually all functions that are essential to airport
operations, as well as aviation safety and security, such as access
controls, navigation, airfield lighting, communications, industrial
system controls, and emergency response systems rely heavily on a
multitude of technology applications and platforms. Moreover, airport
information systems contain or process tremendous amounts of sensitive
data such as passenger manifests, security plans, and data containing
financial and personally identifiable information (PII).
The operational importance of these systems coupled with the fact
that they are often interconnected through networks and remote access
points makes airports, immensely appealing targets and potentially
vulnerable to malicious cyber threats, such as criminal organizations
and state-sponsored actors.
Given the rapidly-growing reliance on technology as well as the
implementation of future technologies such as Next Generation Air
Transportation System (NextGen) and remote air traffic control towers,
it is my opinion that cybersecurity risks without question represent
the preeminent and persistent threat to the continuous, safe, secure,
and efficient operations of U.S. airports and the global aviation
system.
One of the clearest examples of this threat to aviation safety and
security was confirmed by the FBI and the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS), Computer Emergency Readiness Team (CERT) earlier this
year when they officially acknowledged that hackers attempted to
penetrate the U.S. civilian aviation, energy, and other critical
infrastructure sector networks. CERT released a report on March 15
detailing what were believed to be State-sponsored cyber efforts that
targeted ``U.S. Government entities as well as organizations in the
energy, nuclear, commercial facilities, water, aviation, and critical
manufacturing sectors.'' The attempted attack was determined by
intelligence assessments to be a sophisticated and coordinated assault
that could have resulted, if successful, in significant potential
disruptions to our critical infrastructure.
Imagine if you will, the potential dire consequences of a
successful coordinated cyber attack on any one or more of our large hub
airports. The potential resulting disruption, chaos, and economic harm
could be enormous. Consider the consequences of a single non-cyber-
related disruption that occurred at Atlanta International Airport in
December 2017. In that instance, a power failure at Hartsfield-Jackson
disrupted operations at the world's busiest airport, which resulted in
the cancellation of more than 1,150 flights and stranded thousands of
passengers in terminals and on planes for hours. The power failure at
the airport, which moves more than 100 million passengers a year and
serves as a major hub for domestic and international flights, led to
additional disruptions across the country and affected flights in
Chicago, Los Angeles, and abroad.
The full economic impact resulting from this incident is still
being fully assessed but conservatively the estimated losses in
productivity as well as direct costs could be well in excess of $40
million. The power disruption in that instance was determined to have
been caused by fire in a critical airport electrical node. However, had
the incident been the result of a cyber attack, the consequences of
disruption, psychological impact, and costs could have been far
greater.
In short, computers, keyboards, and kiosks have become the newest
tools of criminals and the new weapons of war, and it is of paramount
importance that we exercise increased urgency and vigilance to
anticipate, identify, and mitigate cyber threats to our Nation's
airlines, airports, and aviation system critical infrastructure. Given
the nature of these existing and growing threats, proactively
implementing standards, protocols, and counter measures to protect
ourselves against potential catastrophic system disruption must be one
of our highest priorities.
While there is no perfect defense against cybersecurity threats
within the aviation industry or any industry for that matter, there are
critical activities that we must undertake to mitigate as many risks as
possible. For the purposes of this hearing, I have distilled my remarks
down to three critical areas that I believe present the best
opportunity for airports along with our airline partners and aviation
sector stakeholders to achieve greater preparedness, responsiveness,
and resilience.
mandatory minimum standards
Under the Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA),
which defines a comprehensive framework to protect Government
information, operations, and assets against natural or man-made
threats, Federal agencies are required to adopt and implement a
baseline National standard for cybersecurity preparedness. In 2013,
President Obama issued Executive Order (EO) 13636, Improving Critical
Infrastructure Cybersecurity, which called for the development of a
voluntary risk-based cybersecurity framework that is ``prioritized,
flexible, repeatable, performance-based, and cost-effective.''
Subsequent Executive Orders and Presidential Directives have also been
issued to address and respond to the ever-changing cybersecurity threat
landscape and strengthen the requirements by Federal agencies for
ensuring and maintaining a baseline level of preparedness.
Although, airports, airlines, and other aviation stakeholders have
engaged in building and achieving various levels of cybersecurity
capability, maturity, and resilience, there are currently no
significant requirements for adherence to minimum standards for
preparedness. According to a survey of airports in the United States,
by the Airport Cooperative Research Program (ACRP) as published in 2015
in its Guidebook on Best Practices for Airport Cybersecurity, only 9
out of 24 (34 percent) of airport respondents indicated that they had
implemented a National cybersecurity standard or framework.
I believe that we are at a point in the growing threat environment
where voluntary compliance is no longer adequate. I believe that strong
consideration should be given by Congress and by regulatory agencies
such as the FAA and Transportation Security Administration (TSA) which
have primary responsibility for oversight and regulation of aviation
operational safety and security respectively, to mandate the adoption
and implementation of uniform minimum cyber security standards and
frameworks. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure for Cybersecurity
provides robust and comprehensive guidance for establishing minimum
standards for the aviation sector.
Such a baseline cybersecurity framework would not replace an
existing cybersecurity program that an organization already has in
place. The framework would be used to augment, enhance, and strengthen
any existing program and align it with best practices for greater
coordination and effectiveness throughout the aviation industry. For
airports, airlines, and key stakeholders that do not have a baseline
cybersecurity program, such a requirement would ensure a minimum level
of readiness and facilitate the development of greater preparedness and
program maturity.
cybersecurity information sharing & communication
While one of the stated objectives of EO 13636 focused on
increasing information sharing between Government and the private
sector, it has not been as effective as it could be due to the
voluntary nature of the program. The sharing of information and threat
intelligence is a critical component to assessing airport and aviation
sector vulnerabilities, enhancing our preparedness, as well as giving
airports and our airline partners the ability to more effectively
respond and recover in the event of a cybersecurity incident.
Often information-sharing practices within the aviation sector have
been reactive versus proactive. A voluntary information-sharing program
may have arguable utility when reacting to and recovering from a cyber
incident, but often possesses minimized utility effectiveness in
preventing an incident when not shared in a timely manner.
To strengthen information sharing, consideration should be given to
requiring mandatory disclosure of cyber incidents that meet an agreed-
upon threshold irrespective of whether or not the incident resulted in
a data breach or system compromise. Information-sharing standards
should ideally address whom the information should be shared with and
its confidentiality within the industry in line the protections
currently afforded to airport System Security Information (SSI).
Recent laws such as the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act
(CISA) and the corresponding programs such as the DHS Cyber Information
Sharing and Collaboration Program (CISCP), if coupled with the
implementation of mandatory minimum standards within the aviation
sector, may help to accelerate the progress of information sharing and
collaboration. However, mandating a minimum common standard and
enhancing opportunities to share critical cybersecurity threat
intelligence in a timely manner, will ultimately result in greater
industry-wide capability to combat cybersecurity risks.
information security awareness and workforce training
Notwithstanding the most effective program standards, technological
cybersecurity defenses and threat intelligence information-sharing
efforts, the human factor remains the most highly exploited vector for
penetrating cybersecurity defenses within the aviation sector.
Cybersecurity threat awareness and information security training
programs for all airport, airlines, and aviation industry employees is
perhaps one of the most effective and cost-efficient ways of increasing
airports and airlines cybersecurity readiness. The NIST ``Framework for
Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity'' (NIST 2014)
specifically indicates that cybersecurity awareness and training is a
critical and indispensable component to an entity's overall
cybersecurity program.
Numerous resources are available for cybersecurity training at the
Federal, department, and State level. According to the survey of
airports in the United States, by the Airport Cooperative Research
Program (ACRP) as published in 2015, 20 of 27 (74 percent) of the
responding airports indicated that they engage in some form of employee
information security awareness training. However, due to the multitude
of differences within airport governance and organizational structures,
the scope, depth, and quality of training may vary significantly from
airport to airport. Numerous additional factors may also adversely
impact the quality and scope of training such as availability of
budgets, subject-matter expertise and adequate buy-in from senior
management. Adopting and requiring a uniform standard which establishes
a minimum training requirement for airport, airlines, and other
aviation-sector employees on a defined and reoccurring basis should be
given strong consideration by Congress and appropriate aviation sector
regulatory agencies such as the FAA and TSA.
conclusion
Our Nation's airports, airlines, and other critical aviation
infrastructure are heavily reliant on information technology and
complex data networks to support the growing demands of our economic
and strategic interests. As the adoption of current and future
technologies increases to support the aviation sector both here and
abroad, the threat of disruptive cyber attacks on airports, airlines,
and critical aviation information systems and data will undoubtedly
increase as well. Evolution toward a more effective, non-voluntary
cyber risk mitigation strategy against this pernicious and imminent
threat must be undertaken proactively and with a renewed sense of
urgency. The need for increased assistance and improved regulatory
oversight, as well as the urgent adoption and implementation of a
baseline cybersecurity protection framework and standard for
information sharing and workforce training, is absolutely essential to
the Nation's security and long-term economic prosperity.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify before you today. I
look forward to answering any questions you may have.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Stephens. We will now move
into the questioning portion of our hearing. I will recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Porter, I want to start with you. FireEye has been very
vocal about APT33 and its links to the Iranian government.
APT33 has targeted, among other things, Middle Eastern carriers
and airports and utilities. So I want your perspective on how
Iran is using cybersecurity as a geopolitical tool. More
specifically, how does--if you can get into how breaching the
airlines and airports of its neighboring countries furthers the
geopolitical goals of the Iranian regime?
Mr. Porter. Sure, thank you, Mr. Chairman. The perspective
that I have on what Iran and all the other major antagonists of
the United States and its allies, they basically are all
engaged in the same class of activity, which is, for the most
part, they are looking at domestic security, so, you know,
looking at traveler movements and that sort of thing.
So for them, it is probably viewed mostly as a domestic
security issue, looking at what is going on in the region. It
is, however, also an opportunity for them to look at what the
United States is doing with its partners, intelligence
gathering in support of military operations or in support of
their own technological and economic development.
So I think for them they would view it as it naturally
being in their backyard to look at this from a security
perspective, not necessarily--as I mentioned in my opening
remarks, not necessarily an attack.
The thing to keep in mind, Mr. Chairman, is that any
foothold that any adversary gets into a system that is used for
cyber espionage, which is widespread and everyone does it, that
can easily be turned into an attack. That same foothold can be
used and turned, depending on the willingness of the aggressor
as an attack vector. By attack, I mean disabling the computer
system, not necessarily causing kinetic action against an
airplane.
But the primary restraint is not technological. It is going
to be the willingness of the actor to do that.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Perfect. I want to ask you a little more
broad question, as--you know, innovation in technology widens
the attack surface. I am wondering how FireEye is spending its
time these days, in terms of what is the most frequent, most
likely venue of attack with respect to the aviation sector?
Mr. Porter. Sure. Thank you for that question, Mr.
Chairman. If I were looking at it from an adversary's
perspective, I think the real weakness of the aviation sector
isn't going to be something like the airplanes themselves,
which have a lot of resilience, and the class of actors that
could bake in a destructive capability against an airplane by
cyber means also have other means of disabling airplanes.
So what I am primarily concerned about is reputational
damage. Could you go out and make people think that airplanes
are unsafe? Could you hack websites and then create the
perception that it is no longer safe in a region? That could
cause massive economic damage that a CISO sitting at an airport
or an airline or a manufacturer would have a hard time
defending themselves against, because they are not really the
direct target. It is the system of interconnected computers,
some of which may not even be under their physical control. It
could be a third-party system that is compromised and used to
draw attention to what--you know, alleged safety deficiencies.
I would also say, secondarily, I am concerned that some
actors are that capable of causing kinetic loss of airplanes
through traditional, conventional means might claim that
downing an airplane was the result of a hacker, in other words,
there is no actual cyber threat, but the feasibility of it
could be used to explain a loss by other means. So I think you
could see that coming, as well.
That is why it is important to keep the public, I think,
just the right amount of scared, you know, enough to want to
invest in defense and resilience, especially, but not
necessarily assuming that every case of cyber espionage is
leading to an attack. Because that is another way of
interpreting my remarks, is that if cyber espionage is
pervasive and there is no attacks happening, that will imply
that the willingness to do so isn't there at this time. People
should keep that in mind, as well.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I want to move to you, Mr. Troy. The
transportation sector--and of course, within that, the aviation
industry has two sector-specific agencies that they have to
work with in the Department of Transportation and the
Department of Homeland Security. As I referenced in my opening
statement, TSA, NPPD, FAA, they all have equities in this
space.
I want your perspective from the ISAC perspective, I guess,
with regard to what I mentioned in terms of how well those
entities are sort-of playing with one another in that space and
whether or not there needs to be greater clarity with respect
to the roles or issues that we need to be aware of in
addressing.
Mr. Troy. So the Aviation ISAC, we have a lot of
touchpoints with each of those agencies. When the Government
set up each of the 16 critical infrastructure sectors, they
created the Government coordinating committees and on the
industrial side the sector coordinating committees for each of
the sectors.
So the Aviation ISAC is a part of the aviation sector
coordinating committee. Through that, we meet regularly with
each of those different agencies and work on the highest-
priority projects for protecting the sector.
Separately, we have a person that is on the floor of the
NCICC inside of NPPD. We have a person who is daily at the
ADIAC, the Air Domain Intelligence Analysis Cell, which is run
by the TSA, and we have routine engagement with the FAA.
So I would characterize each agency as very much
understanding what their different roles are and through those
and other forms that they are protecting--working well in terms
of efforts to protect the sector.
I would like to also recognize that NPD's movement toward
this risk management center I think is a very good move to see,
because I think risk management frameworks, which were
mentioned also by Mr. Stephens, are a critical part of the
process in terms of maturing the cybersecurity capability of
each of the segments inside the industry.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you. My time has expired.
I recognize the gentlelady from New Jersey, Mrs. Watson
Coleman.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
to each of you for the information you have shared with us
today.
Mr. Stephens, I want to start with you. You represent an
airport. Are airports currently required to include any
cybersecurity measures in their plans?
Mr. Stephens. Congresswoman Watson Coleman, thank you for
that question. At this time, there is no absolute requirement
to do so. The governing regulations 14--excuse me, 49 CFR part
1540, which is administered primarily by the TSA, has primarily
been focused on physical security, access to the sterile air
site areas, making sure SIDA badges are checked, all of those
types of things.
But as all of you have pointed out correctly, the
cybersecurity element has penetrated the domain of the physical
security element, and yet that similar type of posture hasn't
been moved over to address the baseline standard on the
cybersecurity side for airports.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you. So if you are not aware,
though, pretty sure that you in general, and Mr. Porter and Mr.
Troy, aren't aware of any required standards, either?
Mr. Troy. No, I am not.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you. Mr. Stephens, you indicated
three things that I thought were really important--the adoption
of standards, the increased sharing of information and threat
analysis, and the human factor of baseline training.
Mr. Stephens. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. What do you believe is the role of the
DHS and the TSA in each of those things? Is this a matter of
additional resources or prioritization?
Mr. Stephens. Well, again, that is a great question.
Resources are always an issue, but I think that prioritization
is one of the critical areas that we have to focus on. Again,
there are fantastic standards out there. DHS and the Federal
Government implementing the NIST standard is an excellent
standard out there, except that there hasn't been broad and
widespread use of those standards in the aviation sector,
particularly with respect to airports.
DHS, for example, offers cybersecurity and WiFi testing. We
have used and taken advantage of it at Tampa International. It
has been a great tool. So there are tools out there. I think
there has to be a more aggressive posture with airports and the
airline industry in actually leveraging and using those tools.
Yes, that may be a function of resources. I know DHS is
tasked heavily just trying to implement the requirements of the
statute on the Federal side, so there is an issue there. But
then second, the training element is important. I do believe
that there may be some room for at least having airports adopt
a baseline standard.
Again, as we like to say in our industry, you have seen one
airport, you have seen one airport, because they are governed
very differently, their structures are set up very differently.
But having the notion of a baseline cybersecurity standard I
think goes a long way.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. So, gentlemen, I am very concerned
about land transportation, train stations, freight, you know,
all those things, buses. Do you believe that what we could
develop to be more proactive and represent greater protection
on cybersecurity threats in the aviation industry can also be
applied to ground transportation systems?
Mr. Stephens. You know, I would like to maybe start on
that, because before I became the general counsel and CIO for
the aviation authority, I was with surface transportation, our
equivalent of DC Metro. The exact same risks are out there,
when you look at things like automated train control, when you
look at signalization, when you look at signalization and
priority at all of our crossing points.
So the exact same risks exist. I think the difference to a
certain extent--and this may be anecdotal--there is a more
pervasive feeling from the--you know, the traveling public when
you think about catastrophic attacks or disruptions in
airports. I mean, if you look at Atlanta, what happened with a
fire incident that was not related to cybersecurity, you are
talking about passengers being stranded on airplanes and in
terminals for hours, $40 million worth of direct value lost.
But the exact same threats exist on the surface transportation
side, absolutely.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you. Mr. Troy, Mr. Porter, you
might have a comment on that?
Mr. Troy. I would agree with that statement that there are
systems that are--have common functions in terms of helping to
move the industry. As we move toward smart cities and more and
more of the controls, again, are automated, they run that risk
that those industrial security control tools, which are common
across the industries, could be under attack.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you.
Mr. Porter. Yes. Leaving aside discussion of the attack
surface, the shared technology I think, the same sort of
adversaries that would be interested in disrupting one would be
interested in disrupting the other. We do see that they use the
same infrastructure to attack both. So information sharing
would help both.
Particularly for--I think for military logistics, for
example, you have got a long train--no pun intended--between
the United States and wherever soldiers are deploying and for
their equipment. It is going to go over a variety of methods,
individual mom-and-pop trucking companies, trains, you know,
air freight, and it may eventually end up in a naval port
loading onto a Navy ship.
So if you can disrupt any one of those, even if it is
civilian-owned and -controlled, you can, you know, disrupt a
deployment ability. So certainly I would agree that it is
valuable to pursue.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, gentlemen. I yield back,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentlelady. The Chair recognizes
the gentleman from New York, Chairman Katko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate all of
your testimony here today. I just want to circle back for a
moment back to my opening statement, and some of the things I
noted in there about how systems could be paralyzed and the
concern with SIDA access, as well as airplane and rail security
itself.
Mr. Porter, you kind-of alluded to that. You didn't think
it is as likely to have an attack on--a cyber attack on a rail
or airplane that could basically weaponize it. Is that
accurately portraying what you said?
Mr. Porter. You know, I don't want to get too much into
specifics and mislead you about my expertise. I can't--I would
defer, I think, to the DHS study on the feasibility. I just
think it is much more likely that the reputational damage
scenarios are much more likely to occur.
However, I did note in your opening remarks and I certainly
would agree, Mr. Chairman, that the sort of nightmare scenarios
where a plane or something like that is weaponized probably
involves someone getting physical access. I think that opens up
a whole different world of opportunities for cyber attack.
So to minimize the chance of that happening, certainly
physical controls are going to be, arguably, from my
perspective, one of the most important ways of addressing that
particular concern. As others on the panel have pointed out,
you never know what you don't know, and a dedicated adversary
could, of course, research a very specific vulnerability, but
even then it might require physical access. I think that is a
great thing for us to focus on defensively.
Mr. Katko. Yes, and that kind-of gets to my point. These
threats are real. I mean, we are talking about things kind-of
at the 30,000-foot level, but let's face it. I mean, the
threats we have, since I have been a Congressman, I have had my
stuff hacked. Somebody tried to open up accounts for me in my
name on the West Coast, bank accounts. That was a direct result
of my Government records being hacked.
So I don't think there is many people in this room who
haven't had some sort of a cyber attack perpetrated upon them.
So to think of the vulnerabilities that are at these airports
and the ones I spoke about, to name a few, and the access
controls is a huge issue for me, too. Then to hear what Mr.
Stephens said, which was shocking to me, was that on a survey
of the 24 airports, whatever it was, less than a third said
they have implemented any sort of cybersecurity strategy, that
is in line with what you are thinking. That is frightening to
me. That is absolutely ridiculous that we countenance that.
So to all of you, I want to hear what you think we should
be doing to address that.
Mr. Stephens. Mr. Chairman, I think one of the first areas
is a greater insistence and urgency that maybe just falls very
short of the notion of wholesale regulation, but to make sure
that airports when we do our security checks, when TSA comes to
check under their governing provisions and when FAA checks for
airfield security, that there is some consideration of checking
to see if an airport at least has a basic cybersecurity
protocol in place to identify, react, respond----
Mr. Katko. May I interrupt? I am sorry to interrupt you,
but I am short on time and I did want to make sure I get to
this. Do I understand you correctly, when they come and do
airport assessments, they don't assess the cyber
vulnerabilities of the airports?
Mr. Stephens. They don't assess the cyber vulnerabilities
of the airports. That is correct.
Mr. Katko. What do you think about that?
Mr. Stephens. Well, you know, I think we can do a better
job, as I said, across the sector. Right now, airports,
airlines, and all other aviation sector components have a
vested interest in doing it. We want to protect the traveling
public. So we go above and beyond.
I would say that we are not the only ones across the
industry. We do a good job. But if we are talking about
partnering and making sure that there are clear command,
controls, and communications between Government and the
oversight agencies, as well as the airports in the sector, key
components, then there needs to be a more urgent need to adopt
some of those standards.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Stephens. Mr. Troy, Mr. Porter,
you want to add anything to that?
Mr. Troy. I really--Mr. Stephens, I think I agree with his
statements and he is well-positioned with his background, I
think, to make those best observations.
Mr. Katko. OK. Mr. Porter.
Mr. Porter. Yes, I would agree and also--and deferring to
Mr. Stephens. I think from other sectors, having those
standards certainly does have an impact and raise its bar. It
did in the finance sector. I think there is reason to think
that it would in aviation, as well.
You know, for me, I want to make sure that any standards
that are put in place not only focus on security, but
resilience. Can the airport operate without internet access for
a short period of time? Can people still, you know, do some
basic level of operation? There will be some disruption no
matter what, but I think that is an area that across all
sectors, you know, we are falling beyond on as the opportunity
to make sure that operations aren't totally disrupted when the
internet or internet-connected device is brought down.
As long as we are held hostage by our technological and
economic success, that is going to be a vulnerability, a
strategic vulnerability for us as a Nation.
Mr. Katko. OK. Mr. Chairman, just 1 quick second and a
follow-up with Mr. Stephens. You are at Tampa Airport, correct?
That is where you have your cyber systems that you oversee,
correct?
Mr. Stephens. Yes, sir.
Mr. Katko. All right. Why in God's name wouldn't the other
airports be doing the same thing?
Mr. Stephens. Well, Chairman, I don't want to go as far as
to say other airports aren't. I am sure that they are. But as I
said in my written remarks, because of the governing structures
in airports, so, for example, the largest airport, busiest
airport in the world, Hartsfield-Jackson, that was referenced
earlier, it is a subset of the city of Tampa, just like water
and sewage--excuse me, of city of Atlanta, just like water and
sewage.
Tampa International is an independent aviation authority,
so we have more agility in implementing certain things. Another
one, Chicago O'Hare, a subset of the city of Chicago. So when
you look at it from that standpoint, airports are definitely
doing things. I think they recognize the value for all the
reasons that the other witnesses have mentioned. It is just
that there is not necessarily a level of consistency.
As I pointed out, when that survey was conducted, only 34
percent had a baseline standard, and we have to do better as an
industry.
Mr. Katko. Thank you very much. Appreciate all your
testimony.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentleman. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Demings, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Demings. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Good morning
to each of you. Thank you so much for being here with us today.
Mr. Stephens, I welcome you from my home State of Florida.
As we all know, September 11 was one of the darkest days in
American history. On that very dreadful day, I was assigned as
a police commander to the Orlando International Airport. There
is no doubt since that time we have really come a long way in
terms of ensuring the safety of the traveling public.
But it does appear--and I am more convinced now than ever
just listening to your testimony this morning--that the area of
cybersecurity still appears to be or continues to be somewhat
of a mystery. We still have much work to do.
I remember a long time ago as a law enforcement officer, we
were told that you cannot fight today's battles with
yesterday's weapons. As we have talked about, you know, some
physical things that we have certainly kept up with to ensure
the safety of our airports, cybersecurity just does not appear
that we are quite there yet. But I am sure we will get there.
Mr. Troy, you were quoted recently in Bloomberg commenting
on DHS and the FBI reports that Russian hackers attacked some
aviation sector companies during assaults on U.S. critical
infrastructure in 2017. In your view, have reports about State-
sponsored attacks on aviation systems had a measurable impact
on the way aviation sector executives view cybersecurity?
Mr. Troy. Yes, we have seen that the information that we
have been able to share with the Government partners and
amongst our member companies has absolutely driven them to up
their game with respect to their cybersecurity programs and in
some instances actually reprioritize certain projects they were
working on.
Ms. Demings. I have also heard each of you talk about the
importance of information sharing, and I know that there have
been or continues to be some issues, especially between the
public and private sector. You know, I have heard some say that
the private sector is more willing to share information, but
then the public sector are not so much.
So I would just like to hear from each of you--or perhaps
Mr. Stephens or Mr. Troy--about what role do you think that DHS
or the TSA can play in improving the information sharing or
being more proactive in that area?
Mr. Stephens. So, Congresswoman Demings, I would start by
saying that some of the information sharing that happens now,
while it is good, sometimes it is not as fresh as we would like
the information. Sometimes it is post facto. So I think they
certainly can be more proactive.
There are certainly DHS resources that allow for
information sharing--AIS, which is the automated indicator
sharing system. But, again, those tools are out there, but how
broadly disseminated they are to airports and to key aviation
sector members is going to demonstrate the adoption of them and
what their utility is going to be.
We actively look out there to see what tools are available.
The resources that are out there from DHS we actively try to
get everything that we can, where we can, but I think there has
to be more proactive real-time sharing of information.
Finally, I would say one of the things that we are doing,
for example, at Tampa International, in fact, today it is
happening, our regional security director with TSA and our
planning and development folks are meeting to look at how we
can create our own threat fusion center where we have the
airport operations center, CBP, TSA, other tenant agencies all
collocated in one place.
In many airports, based on the structure, they are just
simply not. Someone may be in discrete locations on the airport
or maybe not even at the airport altogether. So I think more
creative efforts to look at how we can break down those
barriers to enhance information sharing is going to be critical
to success.
Ms. Demings. Mr. Troy, anything to add to that?
Mr. Troy. Yes, so as I mentioned earlier, I really like
seeing DHS move into this risk management center. That really
shows a strategic shift, which we think is critically
important.
The sharing of information is only valuable when you are
sharing information that is of value. That is one of the
concerns that we have. We just don't want noise where the lots
of indicators and the information moving across everybody and
saying, wow, look, we are all sharing, this is great.
What we are looking for is kind-of a process that we use in
the Aviation ISAC called risk registers, where we are actually
looking to see what is really the biggest risks that you are
worried about and where is there information that can help
reduce those risks and close up those particular gaps.
So as Mr. Stephens mentioned, for example, there is many
airports--and I agree with the statement, there are many
airports that really don't have a cybersecurity plan yet. It is
difficult to understand how you can help someone who is not
sure what their plan is.
So this process of helping people get their plans into
place and then being able to use that information to develop
the requirements for the types of information that can help
them.
Ms. Demings. Thank you. Mr. Porter, very quickly, anything
to add?
Mr. Porter. Sure. Nothing specifically on current
information-sharing programs. I think it is just worth the
subcommittee's considering and keeping in mind that the front
line in the fight is going to be the private sector. I think if
that were the guiding principle for, you know, Executive branch
information sharing, it would be very different.
I think oftentimes it is viewed as an addendum to core
responsibilities and not actually a core responsibility. But
the fight is in overwhelmingly the private sector, private
individuals, private companies, privately-owned infrastructure.
Ms. Demings. Thank you so much. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentlelady. Chair recognizes
gentleman from New York, Mr. Donovan, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Being from New York,
Mr. Stephens, I welcome you, too, because all my voters
actually move down to you.
Mr. Porter, you made a great distinction between a tax that
may inconvenience our travelers, whether it is the ticketing
system going down, versus the things that might be dangerous or
harmful to passengers. We had seen examples of someone with a
laptop taking over one of these autonomous vehicles, driverless
vehicles. Is that possible with an aircraft?
Mr. Porter. That is not research that our company pursues
independently. So I would have to defer to the aircraft
manufacturers and the DHS report. I find the concern certainly
credible enough that when our customers ask, we say that it is
a credible threat, but we--you know, we generally refer that to
specialists at the manufacturers or at DHS and others who have
done the studies.
Mr. Donovan. I see. Mr. Troy, Mr. Stephens, do you have a
comment on that?
Mr. Troy. So our members have not seen a credible report
that has come in to them regarding the ability to hack a plane
in a way that affects systems critical to flight. In my
statement, I also said we don't know what we don't know. So the
continuous monitoring, the continuous red-teaming, and the
continuous process of safety integration of new systems
constantly goes on in our industry to prevent that type of an
attack from occurring.
Mr. Stephens. Congressman, I would agree with my fellow
witnesses from an aircraft perspective, but what I would offer
is the perspective--I used to be a former air traffic
controller in the U.S. Air Force. What I would offer is the
perspective of industrial controls for our NAVAIDs. I think
that there are vulnerabilities potentially there, if you look
at some of the studies, particularly as the FAA looks to moving
toward next gen, right?
There is the ability potentially to spoof, you know, global
positioning information systems. So there lies and exists a
potential threat, whether we are talking about specifically on
the aircraft, but certainly as the aircraft is approaching the
surface where it needs to be able to land. We need to make sure
that the same type of cybersecurity protections are in place
for all of our NAVAIDs and all of our airport safety devices.
So that--from my perspective, that is why I think there is
a particular more credible threat.
Mr. Donovan. Yes. You must be reading my notes. My next
question was about the air traffic control system and someone
compromising that while we have aircraft in the air, aircraft
landing, aircraft trying to take off, and the dangers that
would pose.
One issue if this happens when everything--every aircraft
is on the ground, but I forget how many aircraft were in the
air that fateful day that Ms. Demings spoke about that we had
to put down on the ground, and if that system was compromised,
how dangerous that would be.
This may piggyback on my first question and may be out of
your realm, but in many of the things that we speak about on
Homeland Security Committee, we talk about component parts. The
compromising component parts is something that is put together
elsewhere, whether our aircraft is built outside the United
States or whether built here, but we have component parts
coming in from outside, and if a compromised component part is
built into the making of that aircraft, how dangerous that
could be.
Are there measures in place to assure us that component
parts would not jeopardize the aircraft after--while it is
being made?
Mr. Troy. Yes, so our industry, again, is incredibly
focused on safety. Even in the example of the information
coming in through an air traffic control system, that is a
single point of information coming in to the cockpit. The
systems are not designed to rely on one piece of information or
one source of information.
They are built in redundant ways in order to make sure that
if a system did fail, there are ways to validate whether or not
that system has failed and then other systems are in place to
be able to leverage in those instances. That same process is
also used with respect to the supply chain, so equipment is
tested extensively, as it is put into each of the products.
You know, the products in the industry are much more than
just the plane. I mean, there is many other products there.
With the plane, again, the very high risk with anything that
could impact critical flights, so there is going to be more of
a--I would say more of a prioritization and more emphasis on
those processes and that equipment.
Mr. Donovan. I thank you all. Mr. Chairman, I yield the
remainder of my time back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentleman. Chair now recognizes
the gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr. Langevin, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to welcome
our witnesses this morning. Thank you for your testimony. I
think it is a very important hearing on an important topic.
So I was encouraged by the line of questioning and the
answers on the--that Ms. Demings had raised about information
sharing. When we passed the CISA law in 2015, it was with the
hope that we are going to bring down those legal barriers that
existed, that were supposedly preventing robust threat
indicator, sharing information from happening.
Unfortunately, now, 2 or 3 years later, we haven't--I think
CISA has really yet lived up to what our hopes and expectations
would be on info sharing. To date, there is only about 200 or
so companies that are downloading information from DHS, that
the Government is offering, and it is only about 6 or 7
companies that are actually sharing threat information back
with the--to DHS.
So I find that troubling. Obviously, in an ideal world, we
have robust information sharing of threat indicators, we had
perfect situational awareness, we are going to go a long way
toward better protecting our networks.
Mr. Troy, let me ask you. Again, I was encouraged by your
testimony affirming the value of companies and Government
agencies sharing information about cyber threats. So how active
are the Aviation ISAC and your sector's members in DHS's
automated indicator sharing program? Is the airline industry
sharing cyber incident data with DHS?
Mr. Troy. So we have shared information with DHS numerous
times over the past years that we are aware of that the
Government actually turned it into an intelligence information
report and the Government then shared that information amongst
the Government. So we are proactively sharing with them, as I
mentioned, information that we think is of value.
The Aviation ISAC itself is not involved in the automated
indicator sharing program. However, we have some members who I
believe are involved in that program with DHS. As, again, I
mentioned, our focus is really trying to stay away from noise
and be focused on key information that is critical.
Mr. Langevin. Why do you think it is that more in the
airline industry aren't more proactively engaged with DHS in
the AIS system? What do you see as--I understand that, you
know, you talked about not just sharing noise, but context. But
what other things could we be doing to incentivize or ensure
that more information sharing is actually going to happen from
the airline industry?
Mr. Troy. Well, I think that the information that is of
most value is getting shared. When information comes in, the
way the Aviation ISAC works is that each member owns their
data, so we ask them if they are willing to share this
information beyond membership. We frequently get that thumbs-up
from our members and are able to share that information with
the Government.
The Aviation ISAC also has a person who reports daily to
the NCICC and has access to our information, is able to have
those conversations going on with respect to that information.
So I think that, you know, the key pieces are in place there
with respect to the sharing of information.
We are working with the DHS on what we think are some
barriers to the sharing of information, and it has to do,
really, with the classification of information by the
Government. I, as was mentioned in my bio, I am former deputy
assistant director of the cyber division of the FBI, so I am
very familiar with the classifications of information and the
challenges of that, particularly in the cyber area.
I am constantly challenging the Government to take a look
at information that it believes is--needs to be classified as
cybersecurity information. A lot of the information that is
obtained by the Government is in many, many places on the
internet. Whether or not a source is at risk I think is a
challenging question that we continue to push to see if more
information could be shared.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. Mr. Stephens, let me talk to you
about cyber incident reporting. You suggest in your testimony
that the Government consider requiring disclosure of cyber
incidents whether or not the incident resulted in a data breach
or a system compromise. I couldn't agree more, actually.
So I discussed this issue more than once with respect to
the transportation sector, and it is unfortunate to see the
problem still remain. How would you hope that Tampa
International Airport's ability to respond to cyber threats
would improve if cyber reporting were mandatory across the
sector?
You know, it is interesting how, you know, in perimeter
security, if a gate were opened and a vehicle drives on to the
tarmac, even if nothing happened and the vehicle turns around
and mistakenly, you know, had gone onto the tarmac and turned
around and left the perimeter, that incident would be reported.
But if some--but if there were to be a cyber intrusion, even if
the--in digital terms the perpetrator even made its way up to
the plane or even put somebody on the plane, but nothing bad
happened, I understand that that incident wouldn't have to
technically be reported in terms of cyber terms.
Mr. Stephens. If it were a cyber incident, there is no
mandate or requirement that I am aware of that that information
would have to be reported. But what I would say, based on that
comment that I made earlier about having a threshold, as the
other witnesses have spoken, we don't want threat intelligence
that just creates noise that is not actionable.
But say, for instance, something happens at Orlando
International and there is a particular profile of a threat in
the cyber space that happens there, there is a lot of utility
for other airports within the State or within the region or the
country to be able to have real-time access to that
information. So sharing that information becomes extremely
valuable from that perspective.
The other thing that I would say, again, with respect to no
requirement on the Federal side that I am aware of,
interestingly enough, most of the States have some data breach
reporting requirement through their AG's office. In the State
of Florida, there are certain triggers that require you to
report data breach, for example.
So I think that there at least needs to be some strong
consideration given to how do we do this in a way where
airports and airlines and key stakeholders are more encouraged
and more inclined to share that information in real time, or as
close to real time as possible?
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. My time has expired. I will yield
back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentleman. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Gallagher, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Troy, you spoke
briefly in response to a question about the challenges of
sharing information between the Federal Government and a
variety of entities. Then, Mr. Porter, in your written
testimony, you mentioned that the best defense against cyber
espionage is the rapid sharing of information to all concerned
parties.
It seems that whenever we have hearings related to cyber,
we all tend to land on or agree upon the idea that we need to
do something to share information better, but because of the
challenges you mentioned, we still haven't quite gotten there.
So beyond urging the Federal Government to be more
discriminating with how it classifies information, and I share
your sentiment. As a former human intelligence officer, I share
the sentiments you express. Are there--for the whole panel, are
there other steps you think we could take to enhance that
sharing, which I think we all agree is critical?
Mr. Troy. Well, that is really what the Aviation ISAC has
been set up for. We are very active out there in promoting our
mission and trying to continue to develop increased membership.
As I mentioned, we pass information out to the Government, and
we also attend daily Government meetings, both through DHS and
TSA, to share with them critical information when we have that.
I think the continued promotion of information sharing by
the Government and the continued successes that we are seeing
from the membership that we have at this point in time is
driving more people to end up sharing more information and
trying to get through, I think, some of the times that
difficult decision of, do I want to let people know that I have
been mugged in the park, so to speak?
There still is a hesitancy for people to share information
about attacks. I personally believe that part of that is
because of the potential for lawsuits that can come out of the
sharing of information. That is an unfortunate consequence,
because when you are trying to do the right thing, to share
information with other people, to have a lawsuit follow on as
to whether or not due diligence was in place in the protection
of your system is a real challenge.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you. Mr. Porter. No offense to your
fellow panelists, but your tie is by far the best of the three.
Mr. Porter. Oh, thanks, yes. So I guess when I think about
information sharing, you are right. It is an easy plan to just
say we should do more of it. But as some of the other panelists
have noted, what the individual members of the aviation sector
need is not more information. It is more relevant information.
The primary value that the Government is going to add is
context. They don't--obviously, some of that may be very
Classified and they can't share all of it. But much of the
information is already going to be shared by private sector,
cybersecurity companies like mine anyway.
What the Government can do is give you extra context, extra
specificity, perhaps based on secret information. That is also
what they are most reluctant to share, and rightly so. That
information obviously could endanger sources if shared.
I guess my perspective is that that also describes
counterterrorism reporting prior to 9/11. We don't want to wait
until after a major incident to say that it is worth the risk.
So we should be honest and say that it would be a risk to share
that kind of context-heavy information. It would be a very real
risk. But that it--at this point that it is worth it, because
there is greater risk in not doing so.
I think as I mentioned earlier in my comments, the fact
that the fight is primarily in the private sector, not in
Government-owned networks, means that it is not going to ensure
as a lasting solution for our country to focus all of our
National defense resources just defending National defense
networks. You are going to have push outward or it is not going
to work. That will be a failure of then action that it will be
difficult to assign blame, but there will still be victims for
it.
So I think beforehand we should be proactive in saying we
as a country understand the risk. It is a risk. We are going to
do it anyway. So----
Mr. Gallagher. Mr. Stephens, do you have anything to add?
Mr. Stephens. Just simply this. I agree with Mr. Troy and
Mr. Porter. I think the thing that the Government could do to
facilitate that so there could be more real-time and ready
accessibility to threat intelligence, actionable, relevant
threat intelligence is perhaps creating a scheme where at
certain critical infrastructure entities, such as airports,
security clearances are granted to look at particular pieces of
information.
Right now, there may be threat intelligence out there that
may be very good for airports to know. But again, the
classifications become a problem sometimes. Getting access in
the real-time manner becomes the main obstruction.
Mr. Gallagher. It is very helpful. I am out of time, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentleman. The Chair recognizes
the gentlelady from Arizona, Ms. Lesko, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for all
testifying today. I think, Mr. Troy, if I heard you correctly,
you brought up that red teams are used. So, first, I want to
confirm that my understanding of red teams are like the good
guys that try to hack in to check for vulnerabilities. Is that
accurate?
Mr. Troy. That is correct.
Ms. Lesko. OK. I guess I am trying to get an idea of what
have you--your industry used red teams for? Have they tried to
hack into the air traffic control system? Have they tried to
hack into planes? How do you balance--I assume it is difficult
to balance actually hacking in, because you might bring a whole
system down. You probably don't want to do that. So how do you
really test if something can be hacked into or not without
bringing the system down?
Mr. Troy. So the FAA runs the air traffic control system,
and we have not tried to hack it. Let me make sure about that.
Our members use red teams on a regular basis. They give them
full access. They allow them basically the ability to try and
take down the systems, but not actual in-flight system. I mean,
that obviously would be an issue.
Do they do tests in flight? Yes, they do tests in flight.
Test flights, where they are doing work. But they conduct those
systems--they use in-house employees, as well as they contract
with specialists in the industry who hopefully come in with a
different mindset, and used to the culture of the company that
built it so that they can challenge their thinking and their
systems, and they conduct those red team exercises.
But they are given full access to be able to actually find
those vulnerabilities.
Ms. Lesko. Thank you. Mr. Chair and Mr. Stephens, you
brought up an issue about the air traffic control system and
possible vulnerabilities. It seems--can you expand a little bit
more? Because we are modernizing the air traffic control
systems, which right now, if--I think I went on a tour and they
pass like tapes or something like that to each other, which,
you know, isn't very modernized. But I assume that one of the
risks of modernizing is that then it is more hackable. Am I
correct?
Mr. Stephens. Yes, ma'am. That is the potentiality. Right
now, as I referenced in my remarks, we are moving from a radar-
based system, which is the current technology, even when I was
a young air traffic controller, now to more a satellite-based
technology with next gen. There are still system
vulnerabilities with that.
In fact, the DOD has pointed out its concerns with next gen
technology with respect to tracking military aircraft. So until
we plug those vulnerabilities and fully understand, as the
other panelists have said, we don't know what we don't know,
there may be other things out there with the implementation of
these systems that create problems for us.
I think from an industrial control system standpoint,
things like NAVAIDs and airfield lighting and those types of
things that are standard bread-and-butter operational types of
structures, on every airfield, particularly at every commercial
airport, those are the things that present some risk, whether
it is broad-scale risk--as the witnesses have pointed out,
there are redundant systems in place. But again, it only takes
that one critical incident to really shock the psyche of the
American traveling public. That is what we are trying to avoid.
Ms. Lesko. Thank you. Mr. Chair, I yield back my time.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentlelady. I want to thank all
the witnesses for their testimony and thank all of the Members
for their thoughtful questions today.
The Members of the subcommittees may have some additional
questions for each of you. If so, we will ask you all to
respond in writing. Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the
hearing record will be held open for a period of 10 days.
Without objection, the subcommittees stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:32 a.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
Question From Honorable James R. Langevin for Jeffrey L. Troy
Question. What is it that motivates the Aviation ISAC's members to
share threat and incident data, and how might more sharing be
encouraged--even with the industry's regulators?
Answer. Great question! The answer is complicated and varies for
each member.
The members are motivated to share because they recognize the cyber
threat is universal and that the entire infrastructure is a target, not
just one company. Our member companies take their security
responsibilities very seriously and they view threat sharing as one of
the ways in which they can work to better manage risk.
Trust is the most important element inducing members to share. We
have a non-disclosure agreement (NDA) binding on all members. This
agreement prohibits members from sharing information received from the
A-ISAC or one of its members about cyber attacks on their networks or
products.
However, an NDA is only a form. The real sharing only occurs when
the members trust each other.
We have built trust through extensive leadership and community
building. Our board member companies led the way in sharing without an
expectation of return. They also took the risk of initiating the
sharing early, when the trust was non-existent. They took the risk and
led the way.
We built and maintain our trusted community by hosting in-person
meetings. We do this at the executive and analyst levels. The CISOs
have roundtable meetings in their regions. The analysts meet more
frequently, 4 times per year, in person. We also facilitate daily
exchange of information via our portal and slack channels. In addition,
we have bi-weekly calls with the analysts. Frequent communication
builds trust.
We are looking to increase sharing by creating more transparency in
what is shared and how we develop that information. Celebrating the
wins that come from sharing will drive more sharing.
This is not a perfect system. There is information that is not
being shared. As I stated in the hearing, the threat of lawsuits
inhibits sharing. A cyber attack can be equated to someone being mugged
in the park. The victim is walking in what should be safe space. An
attacker takes money and personal information by stealing the victim's
wallet. The victim goes and tells the police, and now the police have
the description of an attacker. The police may increase patrols in the
park and warn others to be more aware. This may even lead reports from
more victims.
Now take that scenario into the cyber world. A company network is
attacked. Financial harm and proprietary information is stolen--but the
attack is not always reported. Victim companies are concerned about
being sued and the threat of more regulation which will bring cost, yet
likely not increase the cybersecurity of the company. What would happen
if victims in the park were worried they would be sued because they did
not have strong personal security in place while walking in the park?
We must find a way to incentivize sharing by reducing the risk of
lawsuits and over regulation. We need a way to harness market drivers
that will enable affordable increases in security.
Nonetheless, the Department of Homeland Security, Federal Aviation
Administration and the Transportation Security Administration are all
working well with the A-ISAC. We have a person on the floor of the DHS
NCCIC each day. This increases the sharing. Each successful share is
driving more information sharing.
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Michael A. Stephens
Question 1a. You suggest that the Government consider requiring
disclosure of cyber incidents ``whether or not the incident resulted in
a data breach or system compromise.'' What definition of ``incident''
would you deem appropriate for operators?
Question 1b. How can we ensure that it is not over-inclusive in the
way today's definition is vastly under-inclusive?
Answer. There are certain of cyber incidents that I believe rise to
a level of criticality in airports that could impact one or multiple
airports within the aviation system or that have an adverse impact on
aviation security, aviation safety, life safety, or critical airport
operations and airport performance. This category is potentially very
broad and may include things such as disruptions to flight information
display systems, baggage handling systems, as well as other systems
that are essential to airport operations. These are the types of
incidents that I believe should be disclosed with certain parameters
that need to be developed, irrespective of whether the attempt resulted
in a data breach or system compromise.
These types of incidents are to be distinguished from systems that
while if disrupted through a cyber threat, the result may be passenger
inconvenience or delay but operations, safety, or security would not be
materially impacted.
The best way in my opinion to ensure that we are not over-inclusive
is to allow airports in conjunction with, but not limited to,
organizations such as the Airport Cooperative Research Program (ACRP)
and Aviation-ISAC to propose or adopt general guidelines for reporting
utilizing industry best practices.
Question 2a. Your testimony sheds light on how airports run on a
variety of systems and networks--the airlines' ticketing and flight
operations systems, the airport's ground support systems, the FAA's air
traffic management systems, and dozens of vendor and support systems.
How does this interconnectedness impact the cybersecurity risks of
airports, and who is responsible for addressing the resulting overall
risk posture or assigning priorities to those risks?
Question 2b. What might the TSA or FAA do differently to better
oversee those cyber risks?
Answer. In my opinion, the interconnected nature as well as the
prevalence of common-use technology amongst airport operators, tenants,
vendors, and organizations such as TSA, FAA, and CBP, significantly
impacts the overall cybersecurity risks of airports due to the sharing
of information and the reliance of data from a multitude of
interconnected systems.
Currently unless otherwise agreed upon, most of these stakeholders
and entities are responsible for addressing their own overall cyber
risks. However, virtually all airports play a significant role in
mitigating risks presented by passengers, vendors, airline partners,
and other key stakeholders through their own cybersecurity and threat
prevention programs. The problem in my opinion is that some of these
programs depending on the airport's resources are less robust and
effective than others.
TSA and FAA can perhaps offer airports and aviation stakeholders
with more proactive assistance in developing and implementing
cybersecurity standards as well as proactively sharing key threat
intelligence based recommendations that will allow airports to better
mitigate risks from cyber threats.
Question 3. You suggest that the Government consider imposing
minimum standards of security to the aviation sector. Is there an
approach that TSA and the FAA might use to develop such standards that
would encourage industry participation and buy-in?
Answer. It is my opinion that standards currently exist that can be
easily adopted by airports and key aviation sector stakeholders to
enhance their cybersecurity preparedness and resiliency. As discussed
during the hearing, the NIST standard as well as the COBIT 5 standard
offer excellent opportunities for airports to build robust threat
mitigation and cybersecurity programs.
It is important to note that airports are very different with
respect to their organization and operations and therefore a one-size-
fits-all approach would be highly inadvisable and I believe
ineffective. I believe that the TSA and the FAA can begin to more
actively encourage airports to adopt and implement a standard of the
airport or stakeholders' choice as a component of their System Security
Plan. Airports stakeholders should be given the flexibility to adopt
standards and mitigation measures that best fit their unique structures
and risks.