- EXAMINING THE 477 PROGRAM: REDUCING RED TAPE WHILE PROMOTING EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES IN INDIAN COUNTRY
[Senate Hearing 116-147]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-147
EXAMINING THE 477 PROGRAM: REDUCING RED TAPE WHILE PROMOTING EMPLOYMENT
AND TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES IN INDIAN COUNTRY
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON INDIAN AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
NOVEMBER 6, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Indian Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
___________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-744 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON INDIAN AFFAIRS
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota, Chairman
TOM UDALL, New Mexico, Vice Chairman
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska
JON TESTER, Montana,
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
STEVE DAINES, Montana
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
T. Michael Andrews, Majority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Jennifer Romero, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hearing held on November 6, 2019.................................
1
Statement of Senator Cortez Masto................................
41
Statement of Senator Hoeven......................................
1
Statement of Senator Lankford....................................
4
Statement of Senator Murkowski...................................
3
Statement of Senator Udall.......................................
2
Witnesses
Andersen, Hon. Ralph, President/CEO, Bristol Bay Native
Association....................................................
15
Prepared statement...........................................
17
Bighorn, Spike, Acting Deputy Bureau Director, Office of Indian
Services, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior.
5
Prepared statement...........................................
7
Hoskin, Jr., Hon. Chuck, Principal Chief, Cherokee Nation........
11
Prepared statement...........................................
13
Zientek, Margaret, Co-Chair, P.L. 102-477 Tribal Work Group......
19
Prepared statement...........................................
20
Appendix
Response to written questions submitted to Spike Bighorn by:
Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto..................................
47
Hon. John Hoeven.............................................
46
Hon. Tina Smith..............................................
47
Hon. Tom Udall...............................................
46
Response to written questions submitted by Hon. Tom Udall to:
Hon. Chuck Hoskin Jr.........................................
45
Margaret Zientek.............................................
45
EXAMINING THE 477 PROGRAM: REDUCING RED TAPE WHILE PROMOTING
EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING
OPPORTUNITIES IN INDIAN COUNTRY
----------
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Indian Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:30 p.m. in room
628, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. John Hoeven,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN HOEVEN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NORTH DAKOTA
The Chairman. Good afternoon. I will call this oversight
hearing entitled Examining the 477 Program: Reducing Red Tape
While Promoting Employment and Training Opportunities in Indian
Country to order.
Today, we will hear from the Department of the Interior,
tribal leaders and the co-chair of the 477 Work Group on the
Administration's implementation of the Indian Employment
Training and Related Services Act of 2017. Signed by President
George H.W. Bush in 1992, Public Law 102-477 enabled tribes to
coordinate and integrate employment and training programs
administered by the Departments of Labor, Education, and Health
and Human Services. This consolidation initiative was referred
to simply as the 477 Program.
The 477 Program began as a demonstration project aimed at
creating employment opportunities in Indian Country by
utilizing the principles of tribal self-determination and
reducing unnecessary Federal bureaucracy. The lead agency to
coordinate the 477 program is the Bureau of Indian Affairs
within the Department of the Interior. At BIA and the Division
of Workforce Development and Indian Services is specifically
charged with coordinating the 477 Program.
Under the 477 Program, participating tribes and tribal
organizations are able to integrate employment training and
related services from Federal agencies into a single plan. The
existing arrangement allows non-Interior tribal funding that is
intended to be used for employment-related services to be sent
to the Department of Interior so tribes are able to receive all
employment services funding in one transaction. This
consolidation of Federal programs allows tribes to shape plans
that will address the unique needs of their communities and
reduces Federal bureaucracy.
Under the 477 Program, tribes that participate in the
program are required to submit a single plan, budget, financial
report, and receive a single audit for all programs included in
their 477 plan. This eliminates the need for tribes to have to
individually comply with the data and financial reporting
requirements of each individual program at each Federal agency.
Reducing these unnecessary layers of bureaucracy has lessened
the administrative burden on tribes and in turn has created
more effective tribal programs. According to the Department of
the Interior, paperwork has been reduced by 90 percent from
what was required of a tribe before the 477 Program.
Despite the program's success, Federal departments are
hesitant to integrate 477 programs. While many issues were
resolved through the 477 Work Group, disagreements related to
funding transfers and reporting requirements have remained. Due
to these unresolved issues, tribes came to Congress to amend
the law, and Congress passed the Indian Employment Training and
Related Services Act of 2017.
In 2017, Congress amended Public Law 102-477 to make the
477 Program permanent, expanded it from four Federal agencies
to 12, allowed tribal organizations to participate and improve
program eligibility, funding transfers, and reporting
requirements. In addition the 2017 Act reaffirmed the
Department of the Interior as the lead department in carrying
out the program, and charged the Secretary of Interior in
conjunction with the heads of the 11 other Federal agencies to
enter into a memorandum of agreement providing for the
implementation of the statute.
After the law was amended, the BIA issued an
interdepartmental memorandum of agreement with 11 Federal
agencies in 2018. On December 20th, 2018, the Assistant
Secretary of Indian Affairs sent out a dear tribal leader
letter to inform the tribes of the recent memorandum of
agreement, MOA. After the release of the dear tribal leader
letter, tribes began voicing concerns that the memorandum of
agreement was not in compliance with the amended law.
There is still a great deal of uncertainty about how this
memorandum of agreement complies with the law that Congress
passed. Hopefully, today's oversight hearing can resolve the
issues between the law that was passed and the agreement that w
assigned.
We will now turn to Vice Chairman Udall for your opening
remarks.
STATEMENT OF HON. TOM UDALL,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NEW MEXICO
Senator Udall. Chairman Hoeven, thank you for scheduling
today's hearing. The 477 Program is an important part of this
Committee's work to support trial self-determination and
economic development, two priorities I know we both share.
In the Senate, I worked with you and Senator Murkowski to
get the 477 amendments enacted in 2017. And as Vice Chairman, I
have championed a number of other economic and workforce
development bills as well, including S. 294, the Native
American Business Incubators Program Act, S. 1161, the Native
Educator Support and Training Act, S. 1853, the BADGES for
Native Communities Act, and in the near future I will introduce
the IHS Health Professions Tax Fairness Act. These bills will
help create more job opportunities in Indian Country and get
more Native youth ready to take on existing professional job
opportunities in their own communities, all the while helping
tackle the shortage of teachers, health care workers, and
police officers that many tribes are facing.
I look forward to moving each of them through the Senate,
and I hope today's hearing on 477 serves as a reminder of
Congress' role supporting economic and workforce development in
Indian Country.
Since its enactment in 1992, 477 has successfully allowed
over 270 tribes to design workforce and economic development
programs that suit their local needs. The program breaks down
Federal silos and gives tribes the tools to take a holistic
approach to community development.
In my home State of New Mexico, the Pueblos of Ohkay
Owingeh, Taos, and Laguna have used the 477 Program to get
Native language teachers certified, send tribal members to
school, and to teach Native youth about entrepreneurship. With
this track record of success, it is no wonder why many in
Indian Country believe the 477 Program is a model for
streamlining more Federal programs that stretch across
different departments.
So I am concerned by reports that the Administration is not
implementing the 2017 amendments to the 477 Program as Congress
intended, and that it is not acting in good faith with
participating tribes. I look forward to hearing more about
these reports from today's witnesses, and to securing
commitments from the Administration that it will make sure the
477 Program interdepartmental memorandum of agreement fully
complies with the law.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you very much to our
panel for joining us today.
The Chairman. Thank you, Vice Chairman Udall. At this
point, I will turn to Senator Murkowski for any opening
statement she might have, and also for the purposes of an
introduction.
STATEMENT OF HON. LISA MURKOWSKI,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for this hearing. I think this is an important oversight. I
think we recognize very well that the design of the 477
Program, where you create these efficiencies within your
departments, within your agencies, to focus on very specific
initiatives, that workforce development, employment
opportunities, this is all good.
We all know that in far too many of our tribes, far too
many areas in the lower 48, and up in Alaska, you don't have
the big infrastructure that is developed that would allow you
to take on a lot of unnecessary or costly administrative
overhead. So when we can build efficiencies into our programs,
this should be a model for us all. I think that is what 477
really was designed to do.
So when it doesn't do what it is designed to do, we need to
ask the questions why. So the efforts, as you point out, in
2017, to address this, to put it back on track, I think was
something that we all wanted to get behind. So the fact that we
are sitting here now two years later, knowing that we still
have areas that are not working as we intended.
So I appreciate the input that we will receive from each of
you today focused on this. Again, this is too important from
the perspective of insuring that our employment and training
services that are delivered by our tribes are done in the most
efficient and the most effective way ever.
We are honored here this afternoon to have a gentleman who
is not only a leader in his community in Dillingham, a regional
leader, as the president and CEO of Bristol Bay Native
Association, but to be able to call Ralph Andersen my friend is
a great privilege. He has traveled a long way, he is not a
stranger to this Committee, because he is, as I mentioned, a
leader and an advocate for so many of Alaska's Native peoples,
not just those within his region.
So we are thankful that you are here with us today, Ralph,
and for the input that you will provide to the Committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Murkowski.
Now I will turn to the good Senator from Oklahoma, Senator
Lankford, for an opening statement and purposes of an
introduction.
STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES LANKFORD,
U.S. SENATOR FROM OKLAHOMA
Senator Lankford. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. I have
the honor of being able to recognize two Oklahomans that are
sitting on the panel today, so we are dominating the table at
this point. I noticed you put the Oklahomans every other here
to be able to break everything up.
[Laughter.]
Senator Lankford. I appreciate you both coming, to be able
to be a part of this.
Let me start by recognizing Principal Chief Chuck Hoskin,
Jr. He leads 380,000 people in the Cherokee Nation, and we are
grateful for you to be able to be here today, and for your
leadership. Chief Hoskin is a husband and dad of two children,
but also a leader. He is a graduate of the University of
Oklahoma, and of the Oklahoma Law School. He was on the Council
of the Cherokee Nation for six years, and I think you were
Deputy Speaker there for a while, and then Secretary of State.
His leadership continues here. They have just recently opened a
remarkable outpatient clinic that is in Tahlequah, that I would
encourage, any time you are in Oklahoma, for any member of this
Committee, to be able to see what a tribal clinic could look
like. It is a remarkable facility, in partnership with the
Federal Government and with the Cherokee Nation.
So we are grateful that you are here to bring your
testimony as well today.
Margaret Zientek is with the Sisseton-Potawatomi Nation,
and is the Assistant Director, Citizen of the Potawatomi Nation
Employment and Training Program that is based on Shawnee,
Oklahoma. Thanks for your leadership on this issue of 477. You
know there are not a lot of folks that follow this around the
Country. For you to be able to dig in and be a part of this
conversation is exceptionally helpful. Thanks for the way that
you have implemented this.
I would encourage you, if anyone on this Committee is in
Oklahoma as well, to stop bay the Iron Horse Industrial Park,
and to be able to see what job development looks like rapidly
there, as they have developed a very unique international trade
zone in the middle of Oklahoma. They have just landed their
first business, it is a Canadian business that has come to
Shawnee, Oklahoma that the Chairman can understand as well. I
was there at the groundbreaking for the Iron Horse Industrial
Park and all the jobs that were coming there. The Canadian
business that was there, I turned to the Canadian business
leader and I said, hey, this is a really great day. And he
responded, oh, yeah, you betcha.
[Laughter.]
Senator Lankford. And I just smiled and thought, of course
you did, as the Canadian business leader had come to respond to
me that way.
So I appreciate all that you are doing to be able to
advance jobs and opportunity for all Oklahomans as well. It is
great to see both of you here.
The Chairman. Well, the good Senator is right about that. I
do speak fluent Canadian. So if I can be of assistance, you
just let me know.
Are there any other opening statements? Okay, then we will
proceed. Again, I want to thank all of our witnesses for being
here. I am going to introduce the only one who hasn't been
introduced, and let him proceed, and that is Mr. Spike Bighorn,
Acting Deputy Bureau Director, Office of Indian Services,
Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior here in
Washington. Please proceed, Mr. Bighorn.
STATEMENT OF SPIKE BIGHORN, ACTING DEPUTY BUREAU
DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF INDIAN SERVICES, BUREAU OF
INDIAN AFFAIRS, DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
Mr. Bighorn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good afternoon Chairman Hoeven, Vice-Chairman Udall, and
members of the Committee. My name is Spike Bighorn, and I am
the Acting Deputy Bureau Director for the Office of Indian
Services, Bureau of Indian Affairs at the Department of the
Interior. Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony
today regarding the 477 Program.
Interior understands the importance of the 477 Program and
its goal of reducing unemployment through workforce development
and job training in tribal communities. This critical program
builds capacity in Indian Country and Alaska Native villages by
authorizing tribal governments and tribal organizations to
integrate eligible employment, training, and related services
programs that support workforce development and thereby, reduce
the high unemployment rates in tribal communities and with
native population centers.
In 2017, amendments to the initial authorizing Act made the
477 Program permanent, and expanded it to include eligible
programs from 12 Federal departments, to which I will refer
today as Federal partners. Pursuant to Section 11 of the 2017
amendments, Congress directed the Federal partners to negotiate
and execute a Memorandum of Agreement to implement those
amendments.
In 2018, the Federal partners signed the Interagency MOA,
which is intended to facilitate coordination of and
collaboration among the Federal partners in the implementation
of the 477 Program. The MOA defines concrete procedures for
Interior to consult with the other Federal partners in its
review of a 477 plan, and sets forth how this consultation will
be completed within the 90-day statutory deadline.
In accordance with the MOA, Interior is working with the
477 tribal working group, made up of tribes with existing 477
plans, and our Federal partners, to update the 477 Program
statistical and financial reporting forms and improve
mechanisms for comprehensive Federal oversight and monitoring
of the 477 Program.
Interior remains committed to ensuring that tribes and
tribal organizations are provided the services set forth in the
477 Program. Equally as important is being a reliable partner
to the other Federal agencies in the implementation of the 477
Program.
The Division of Workforce Development within my office at
the Bureau of Indian Affairs is the lead agency for the 477
Program, tasked with the role of administering the program
among tribes, tribal organizations, and the other Federal
partners. The BIA is responsible for working with tribes to
ensure that plans submitted by a tribe under the 477 Program
are completed in a timely manner. BIA coordinates the review
and approval of plans, including waiver requests, with the
Federal partners.
While the BIA retains exclusive authority to approve or
deny tribal 477 plans, Interior is committed to consulting with
other Federal agencies and partners through the review,
approval, and oversight processes.
As the lead agency, the BIA also manages the distribution
and monitoring of funds provided to tribes through the 477
Program. Approved tribal plans are implemented on a three-year
cycle, providing tribes with budget and program planning
stability. Once a tribe receives these funds, they are
consolidated into a single budget, allowing the tribes to
exercise self-determination through flexible administration of
those funds across activities from the approved plan.
Currently, there are 67 tribally approved plans located in
18 States. On an annual basis, approximately $175 million is
consolidated by tribes as a result of their approved 477 plans.
Over 270 tribes and tribal organizations are represented by the
67 separate 477 plans. Interior anticipates this number will
rise with the increased number of programs now eligible for
integration.
On September 20th, 2019, Interior co-hosted the first
annual meeting of tribes and Federal partners with the Tribal
477 Work Group Co-Chairs, Margaret Zientek and Holly Morales. I
am pleased to report that 10 of the 12 Federal partners
attended this meeting, with approximately 25 tribal partners
participating either in person or via teleconference.
The meeting provided a meaningful exchange between the
tribes and the Federal partners on important issues related to
the 477 Program. Interior looks forward to co-hosting the
second annual meeting next summer at the National 477
Conference.
The 477 Program empowers each tribe to tailor their plan to
the unique needs of their tribe, and create and implement
program services that are in alignment with tribal self-
determination priorities. Examples of the 477 Program success
can be seen across Indian Country in Alaska and the Lower 48
State.
The 477 Program allows participants to better their lives,
continue education and training necessary for work, and start
businesses that will in turn better their communities. This
investment in Indian Country is making a positive impact on the
employment rates in areas serviced by 477 Programs.
The 477 Program lifts up tribal communities and Interior is
committed to effective oversight and the administrative role it
plays in the 477 Program. I look forward to continuing to work
with tribes, tribal organizations, and our Federal partners to
deliver this necessary program and expand the number of
participating programs consistent with the law.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bighorn follows:]
Prepared Statement of Spike Bighorn, Acting Deputy Bureau Director,
Office of Indian Services, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the
Interior
Good afternoon Chairman Hoeven, Vice-Chairman Udall, and Members of
the Committee. My name is Spike Bighorn and I am the Acting Deputy
Bureau Director, Office of Indian Services, Bureau of Indian Affairs at
the Department of the Interior (Interior).
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony regarding Public
Law 102-477, the Indian Employment, Training, and Related Services
Demonstration Act of 1992 (477 Program). Interior understands the
importance of the 477 Program and its goal of reducing unemployment
through workforce development and job training in tribal communities by
reducing and streamlining certain administrative requirements. From her
private sector experience, the Assistant Secretary--Indian Affairs
places a high value on workforce development. Assistant Secretary
Sweeney also recognizes the need for flexibility in administering
programs to best address specific tribal needs and priorities.
The Assistant Secretary has made it a top priority to advance
Native American workforce development and tribal self-determination.
The 477 Program is a critical program that builds capacity in
Indian Country and Alaska Native villages by authorizing tribal
governments and tribal organizations to integrate eligible employment,
training, and related services programs that support workforce
development and, thereby, reduce the high unemployment rates in tribal
communities and with native population centers.
Background of the 477 Program
In passing Public Law 102-477 in 1992 (1992 Act), Congress intended
to reduce unemployment in tribal communities by creating employment
opportunities consistent with the principle of tribal self-
determination. The 1992 Act was also intended to increase the
effectiveness of employment and training programs by reducing and
streamlining administrative requirements through the consolidation of
budgeting, reporting, and auditing systems. However, the 1992 Act was
only a demonstration project and only applied to programs from the
Departments of Interior, Labor, Education, and Health and Human
Services.
In 2000, Congress amended the 477 Program to allow tribes and
tribal organizations more flexibility in using their funds for
employment creation and to provide clarity on waiver requests in tribal
plans. In 2017, Congress again amended the 477 Program in the Indian
Employment, Training and Related Services Consolidation Act of 2017
(P.L.115-93) (2017 amendments). Congress made clear that the purpose of
the 477 Program is to facilitate the ability of federally recognized
tribes and tribal organizations to integrate the eligible employment,
training, and related services they provide from different federal
sources, and is aimed at reducing administrative, reporting, and
accounting costs.
Most notably in the 2017 amendments, Congress made the
demonstration project permanent, and expanded the 477 Program to
include eligible programs from the Departments of Agriculture,
Commerce, Energy, Homeland Security, Housing and Urban Development,
Transportation, Veterans Affairs, and Justice. Today, there are twelve
federal Departments that are authorized to participate in the 477
Program (federal partners).
Interagency Memorandum of Agreement
Pursuant to Section 11 of the 2017 amendments, Congress directed
the federal partners to negotiate and execute a Memorandum of Agreement
(MOA) to implement those amendments.
The federal partners worked diligently to complete the final draft
prior to the statutory deadline.
In December 2018, the Secretary of the Interior and the heads of
the other agencies named in the law signed an Interagency MOA. The MOA
is intended to facilitate coordination and collaboration of the federal
partners in implementing the 477 Program. The MOA defines concrete
procedures for Interior to consult with the other federal partners in
its review of a 477 plan and sets forth how this consultation will be
completed within the 90-day statutory deadline. The 90-day deadline for
reviewing and approving plans ensures that tribes receive a timely
decision on their 477 plans.
In accordance with the MOA, Interior is working with the 477 tribal
working group, made up of Tribes with existing 477 plans, and our other
federal partners to update the 477 Program statistical and financial
reporting forms and improve mechanisms for comprehensive federal
oversight and monitoring of the 477 Program.
Interior remains committed to ensuring that tribes and tribal
organizations are provided the services set out in the 477 Program.
Equally as important is being a reliable partner to the other federal
agencies in the implementation of the 477 Program.
477 Program Intent and Implementation
Interior, through the Division of Workforce Development at the
Office of Indian Services within the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), is
the lead agency for the 477 Program, tasked with the role of
administering the 477 Program among tribes, tribal organizations, and
the eleven other federal partners. The BIA is responsible for working
with tribes to ensure that plans submitted by a Tribe under the 477
Program are completed. BIA coordinates the review and approval of
plans, including waiver requests, with the federal partners. If a
program or waiver is denied, BIA works collaboratively with the tribe
and the affected agency (one of the federal partners authorized to
participate in the 477 Program) to overcome obstacles to such an
approval. BIA also coordinates the dispute-resolution process between
tribes and affected agencies to resolve disputes related to denied
waivers. While the BIA retains exclusive statutory authority to approve
or deny tribal 477 plans, Interior is committed to consulting with our
other federal partners throughout the review, approval, and oversight
processes.
As the lead agency, the BIA also manages the distribution,
monitoring, and auditing of funds provided to tribes through the 477
Program. Once a plan is approved, and subject to the availability of
funds, the affected agencies transfer funds to the BIA, which is
responsible for distributing these funds to the tribe. Approved tribal
plans are implemented on a three-year cycle, providing tribes with
budget and program planning stability.
Once a tribe receives these funds, they are consolidated into a
single budget, allowing the tribe to exercise self-determination
through flexible administration of those funds across activities from
the approved plan. The tribes then report on outcomes for the program
services and activities in the approved plan. The integrated funding
and unified reporting system further serves to reduce the
administrative burden on tribes and the federal government.
For each of the 67 tribes and tribal organizations with active 477
plans, the BIA conducts on-site monitoring at least once every three
years and, in coordination with affected agencies, provides technical
assistance related to audit findings or program activities. BIA will
notify affected agencies of the on-site monitoring activities. Affected
federal partners are invited to participate and notify the BIA of any
issues or concerns so that they can be addressed during the on-site
review. BIA also conducts annual 477 Program trainings at regional and
national conferences for participating and non-participating tribes.
Tribal 477 plans can include programs administered by the federal
partners that are implemented for the purpose of job training, welfare
to work and tribal work experience, creating or enhancing employment
opportunities, skill development, assisting tribal youth and adults to
succeed in the workforce, encouraging self-sufficiency, familiarizing
individual participants with the world of work, and facilitating the
creation of job opportunities, economic development, or related
services.
Participation in the program is voluntary for tribes and tribal
organizations and the program is intended to demonstrate how tribes and
tribal organizations can integrate employment, training, and related
services to improve the effectiveness of services, reduce joblessness,
and serve tribally-determined goals. The 477 Program is another step in
implementing the policy of self-determination because tribes operating
under an approved tribal plan are further able to implement programs
designed to address tribal needs, guided by tribal priorities.
Currently, there are 67 tribally approved plans (see Appendix A)
located in 18 states: Alaska, Arizona, Idaho, Massachusetts, Michigan,
Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, New York, North
Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Dakota, Washington, Wisconsin, and
Wyoming. On an annual basis, approximately $125 million is consolidated
by tribes as a result of their approved 477 plans. Over 270 tribes and
tribal organizations are represented by the 67 separate 477 plans.
Interior anticipates this number will rise with the increased number of
programs now eligible to be integrated into the 477 Program.
The benefits of consolidating programs across twelve federal
agencies greatly increases the flexibility with which tribes can
provide critical workforce development services to their tribal
members. The successes already achieved by the sixty-seven tribal
entities with existing 477 plans demonstrate how this program benefits
tribes and supports tribal sovereignty and self-determination.
As mandated by the 2017 amendments to the 477 Program, Interior co-
hosted the first annual meeting of tribes and federal partners with the
Tribal 477 Workgroup Co-Chairs, Margaret Zientek and Holly Morales, on
September 20, 2019.
I am pleased to report that 11 of the 12 federal partners attended
the meeting, with approximately 25 tribal partners participating either
in person or by teleconference. A major topic of discussion focused on
the tribal comments related to the Interagency MOA.
The meeting provided a meaningful exchange between the tribes and
the federal partners on important issues related to the 477 Program as
the first round of 477 proposals from the tribes under the new law are
being submitted and reviewed. I look forward to co-hosting the second
annual meeting next summer at the National 477 Conference.
477 Program Success
The 477 Program empowers each tribe to tailor their plan to the
unique needs of their tribe, incorporate culturally relevant
components, and create and implement program services that are in
alignment with tribal self-determination priorities.
Programs are designed to allow participants to engage in employment
and training activities along with related services like child care and
cash assistance to allow them to successfully complete work activities.
This alignment of services produces higher rates of success and
employment attainment than if programs were operated individually.
Programs administered through an approved 477 plan allow tribes to
spend more time on delivering services rather than administrative
activities.
The 477 Program also supports American Indians and Alaska Natives
in becoming entrepreneurs and addressing community needs. Let me give
you some examples. An unemployed Bristol Bay Native Association
participant recently filled out a single application for multiple
services from the Bristol Bay Native Association. She received child-
care services while in training to become a licensed child-care
provider. She earned a child-care certification and the Bristol Bay 477
Program supported necessary home improvements. At the completion of
these streamlined services, this participant was able to come off
public assistance and is now a self-employed business owner in a rural
community, providing critical child-care services to other members of
her community.
The Citizen Potawatomi Nation, Oklahoma, leveraged $100,000 to a
micro-loan program to support small business development and encourage
entrepreneurial and job creation activities. As borrowers repay their
loans, that amount is reinvested in the loan program, allowing the
Tribe to provide additional loans to more entrepreneurs. The initial
investment has turned over five times and produced multiple
entrepreneurs. It has significantly increased employment in the Tribe's
service area.
A young man from the Tohono O'odham Nation of Arizona applied for
welfare assistance when he was unable to find work. He applied for 477
services and was sent to HVAC School. Once he earned his certification,
he returned to his community working for a local school district. He
now owns his own HVAC business and hires 477 participants.
Two Osage Nation Members applied for 477 services as they worked to
obtain Certification in Law Enforcement Training and related equipment.
These two individuals are now full-time police officers for their
Tribe, with college degrees and law enforcement certificates.
The Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead
Reservation, Montana, train 477 Program participants who received funds
under Temporary Assistance for Needy Families and Workforce Investment
Opportunities Act programs to become program specialists. The Tribe
then hires them as 477 Program staff and places them in local
businesses in and around their service area.
The Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation, Washington,
have seen significant improvements among high federal dependency
populations, despite high unemployment rates. Unemployment in the area
is around 50 percent, however, the 477 Program continues to increase
the number of clients served, providing both employment training and
education related support and opportunities. From 2016-17 to 2017-18,
despite a rise in the number of clients seeking services, the percent
of adult clients exiting the program achieving positive employment
outcomes increased from 26 percent to 32 percent. Cash Assistance
clients exiting the program achieving positive employment outcomes also
increased over the same period, while the percentage of clients exiting
the Cash Assistance program with positive outcomes increased from 11
percent to 15 percent.
The success stories demonstrate how the 477 Program goes beyond any
single individual program. The integrated assistance provided to
individual program participants not only improves their likelihood of
success and achieving future employment, but also increases the
economic opportunities available locally to the whole community. A new
child-care center is just one example, however, it means more options
for parents to find affordable solutions for their own children while
seeking employment, attending job training, or creating their own
business.
The 477 lifts up tribal communities; it is not a hand out, but a
hand up. Interior is committed to the effective oversight and the
administrative role it plays in the 477 Program. I look forward to
continuing to work with tribes, tribal organizations, and our federal
partners to deliver this necessary program and expand the number of
participating programs consistent with the law.
appendix a
Aleutian Pribilof Island Association, Alaska
Arapaho Tribe of the Wind River Reservation, Wyoming
Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of the Fort Peck Indian
Reservation, Montana
Association of Village Council Presidents, Alaska
Blackfeet Tribe of the Blackfeet Indian Reservation of
Montana
Bristol Bay Native Association, Alaska
Central Council of the Tlingit & Haida Indian Tribes, Alaska
Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma
Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe of the Cheyenne River
Reservation, South Dakota
Chickaloon Native Village, Alaska
Chilkat Indian Village, Alaska
The Chickasaw Nation, Oklahoma
The Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma
Chugachmiut, Alaska
Citizen Potawatomi Nation, Oklahoma
Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation, Washington
Confederated Tribes of the Grand Ronde Community of Oregon
Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead
Reservation, Montana
Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians of Oregon
Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Reservation, Oregon
Cook Inlet Tribal Council, Alaska
Copper River Native Association, Alaska
Eastern Shoshone Tribe of the Wind River Reservation,
Wyoming
Fort Belknap Indian Community of the Fort Belknap Indian
Reservation of Montana
Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians, Michigan
Ho-Chunk Nation of Wisconsin
Kaw Nation, Oklahoma
Kawerak, Inc., Alaska
Knik Tribe, Alaska
Kodiak Area Native Association, Alaska
Lummi Tribe of the Lummi Reservation, Washington
Makah Indian Tribe of the Makah Indian Reservation,
Washington
Maniilaq Association, Alaska
Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe, Massachusetts
Menominee Indian Tribe of Wisconsin
Metlakatla Indian Community, Annette Island Reserve, Alaska
Mille Lacs Band of Chippewa Indians, Minnesota
The Muscogee (Creek) Nation, Oklahoma
Nez Perce Tribe, Idaho
Ohkay Owingeh, New Mexico
Orutsaramiut Native Council, Alaska
The Osage Nation, Oklahoma
Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma
Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe, Washington
Pueblo of Laguna, New Mexico
Pueblo of Taos, New Mexico
Red Lake Band of Chippewa Indians, Minnesota
Reno-Sparks Indian Colony, Nevada
Rosebud Sioux Tribe of the Rosebud Indian Reservation, South
Dakota
Saint Regis Mohawk Tribe, New York
Seneca Nation of Indians, New York
Shoshone-Bannock Tribes of the Fort Hall Reservation, Idaho
Shoshone-Paiute Tribes of the Duck Valley Reservation,
Nevada
Sun'aq Tribe of Kodiak, Alaska
Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate of the Lake Traverse Reservation,
South Dakota
Spirit Lake Tribe, North Dakota
Spokane Tribe of the Spokane Reservation, Washington
Standing Rock Sioux Tribe of North & South Dakota
Stockbridge Munsee Community, Wisconsin
Tanana Chiefs Conference, Alaska
Three Affiliated Tribes of the Fort Berthold Reservation,
North Dakota
Tohono O'odham Nation of Arizona
Tulalip Tribes of Washington
White Earth Band of Chippewa Indians, Minnesota
Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska
Yakutat Tlingit Tribe, Alaska
Zuni Tribe of the Zuni Reservation, New Mexico
The Chairman. Thank you, Director Bighorn.
Chairman Hoskin, please.
STATEMENT OF HON. CHUCK HOSKIN, JR., PRINCIPAL CHIEF, CHEROKEE
NATION
Mr. Hoskin. Thank you, Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman
Udall, and members of the Committee.
As Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation, I am honored to
testify on the 477 Program. The Cherokee Nation has
participated in the program since 2002. In fiscal year 2019, we
operated six grants, totaling $20 million, and served over
3,500 Cherokee citizens. This fiscal year, we have increased
our plan to nine grants, totaling $58.6 million.
The flexibility to tailor economic development and job
creation activities under the 477 Program is consistent with
the Federal policy of tribal self-determination.
The program is also efficient. It is innovative and it is a
cost-saving measure that allows us to combine a number of
services into a single plan. Our staff operates one budget,
there is one report. And this is significant: our citizens only
visit one counselor to receive all of the services that they
need. These administrative savings ensure we can spend dollars
on direct services rather than wasting time on redundant
reporting or shuffling our citizens between case workers.
For example, suppose a young mother comes to the Cherokee
Nation asking for help, but she has barriers to employment, no
driver's license, no high school diploma, no training, no
childcare. Before the 477 Program began, we would have had to
create separate files for adult education, for childcare, for
training. Thanks to this program, we develop one plan and we
integrate all of the services and one counselor can help this
young mother get a GED, access childcare assistance, receive
her driver's license, utilize assistance for training and gain
work experience. We also use the program to create jobs for our
citizens.
So we work with our health department to provide training
for medical coding, for dental assistant education. We work
with our Cherokee Nation businesses for culinary training for
our citizens. We work with our child development centers to
train our people in early childhood education.
We have also recently used our funds for a new Wayfinders
Program, the large, wonderful facility that Senator Lankford
mentioned. We have elders who need an extra income working in
this facility to help their fellow citizens find their way
through this wonderful, new 469,000 square foot health care
facility.
Soon, we will start using our funds to combat the opioid
crisis. Opioid-impacted Cherokee citizens will receive
employment assistance for jobs, and those jobs will in turn
help other individuals struggling with addiction.
I believe the 477 Program should be a model for other
Federal programs. It is my hope that its success can be
replicated.
We also build on our 477 Program using our own resources.
In October, the Council of the Cherokee Nation approved one of
my key initiatives, the Career Readiness Act. We are doubling
the amount of our own resources that we put into career
training. So this demonstrates another benefit. It enables us,
the 477 Program, to expand our own capacity, use our own
resources to strengthen these important workforce efforts.
Even though we have achieved enormous success under 477, we
are experiencing challenges, and they are related to the
memorandum of Agreement released by the Secretary of Interior
in December of 2018. The MOA undermines the success of the
program, it violates the spirit of the law, it imposes more
stringent requirements than the Congress intended.
In July of 2019, the Cherokee Nation requested and received
approval for three additional programs, but one program was
denied. The Disability Employment Initiative Grant was denied,
because the MOA prohibits the inclusion of competitive grants
and grants not exclusive to Indian tribes.
However, Section 5 of the law clearly states that programs
may be integrated into the 477 plan, ``based solely,'' and this
is significant, ``or in part on their status as Indians under
Federal law.'' The law also does not exclude grants for which
other entities are eligible or which are awarded on a
competitive basis. This misunderstanding threatens the
livelihood of tribal citizens across Indian Country. We have to
remember that young mother that I mentioned, who comes into our
offices at her lowest point and leaves self-sufficient. And we
have to remember countless others that are in the same or
similar situation. We can't leave them behind.
So as the Committee works toward the goal of strengthening
this program, I urge you to remove the administrative barriers
imposed by the MOA. This will affect our citizens, and we
should not turn our back on those in need.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify. I will be happy to
answer any questions that you have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hoskin follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Chuck Hoskin, Jr., Principal Chief, Cherokee
Nation
Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman Udall, and members of the Committee:
As Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation, I am honored to join you
all today and I appreciate the opportunity to testify on Public Law
102-477, known as the ``477 Program.'' The Cherokee Nation is the
largest federally recognized tribal government in the United States,
with more than 380,000 tribal citizens and spanning 7,000 square miles
in northeastern Oklahoma.
Background
The 477 Program was first established as a demonstration project in
1992 by Public Law 102-477. The law was intended to support economic
development efforts and employment opportunities in Indian Country.
During the 25 years the program existed as a demonstration project, it
served more than 250 tribes. Two years ago, the law was amended,
expanded, and made permanent by the Indian Employment, Training and
Related Services Consolidation Act of 2017.
Since its inception, P.L. 102-477 as amended has seen tremendous
growth as tribes recognize the opportunities it presents for us to
address our unique circumstances in a manner best suited to our
individual tribal needs. The policy of tribal self-determination
underlies the policy of P.L. 102-477 as amended. This law recognizes
the unique circumstances of each sovereign tribe and the ability of
tribal governments to determine its best course of action. The purpose
of the 477 program is to ensure Indian tribal governments can integrate
the employment, training, and related services they provide in order to
improve the effectiveness of those services, reduce joblessness in
Indian communities, and serve tribally-determined goals consistent with
the policy of self-determination.
The 477 Program authorizes tribal governments to consolidate and
integrate federal programs across multiple agencies under one plan, one
reporting system, and one budget, called a 477 plan, to create
innovative employment and economic development programs tailored to
their communities. Eligible programs include employment, job training,
welfare to work and tribal work experience, economic development, skill
development, self-sufficiency, job creation programs, and related
services.
Originally, tribes were only authorized to consolidate thirteen
programs from the Department of Health and Human Services, Department
of the Interior, and Department of Labor. The 2017 amendment expanded
tribal authority to consolidate programs from a larger range of federal
agencies, including the Department of Agriculture, the Department of
Commerce, the Department of Education, the Department of Energy, the
Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of Homeland
Security, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the
Department of the Interior, the Department of Justice, the Department
of Labor, the Department of Transportation, and the Department of
Veterans Affairs. Congress granted the Department of the Interior final
authority to approve 477 plans.
In addition to expanding which programs were eligible for
integration, the 2017 amendments also clarified language to ensure
federal agencies could not impede program integration across agencies
and more clearly articulated congressional intent. To facilitate the
implementation of the Act, Congress required each of the involved
federal agencies to enter into an interdepartmental Memorandum of
Agreement. On December 20, 2018, the Secretary of the Interior released
the thirteen-page Memorandum of Agreement.
Cherokee Nation's 477 Plan
Since 2002, the Cherokee Nation has used the 477 Program to provide
seamless provision of employment and training services to our tribal
citizens. The program allows us to combine services without excess
burden, resulting in large administrative savings. These savings ensure
we can spend our dollars on direct services, rather than waste time on
redundant reporting or shuffling our citizens between case workers.
Currently, we operate nine different grants under our 477 plan,
totaling over $58.6 million. In the last fiscal year alone, while our
funding was at $20 million, we served over 3,509 Cherokee Nation
citizens.
For example, suppose a young mother comes to the Cherokee Nation
asking for help and needing a job, but she has barriers to employment.
She has no driver's license, no GED or high school diploma, no
training, and no childcare. Before the 477 Program began, Cherokee
Nation would have separate files for adult education, childcare, and
training. Thanks to the 477 Program, we can develop one Individual
Employment Plan that integrates all of our services. One counselor can
help the young mother attain her GED, access childcare assistance,
receive a driver's license, utilize financial assistance for training,
and gain work experience, on the job training, a referral, or placement
for employment. Our programs are integrated, rather than siloed into
different offices, applications, and counselors.
The 477 Program should be a model for other federal programs. It is
efficient, cost saving, and seamlessly integrated. At Cherokee Nation,
we have field offices with limited staff and finite resources. The 477
Program ensures that staff can provide services from any program we
offer, and instead of tracking expenses and staff time by program,
staff spend time working with our citizens. I hope that the success of
the 477 Program is replicated beyond employment and training.
Thanks to the flexibility of the program, Cherokee Nation is also
at the forefront of economic development innovation. Up to 25 percent
of the program's funds can be used for economic development activities,
and Cherokee Nation designs and implements customized training
activities to address employer needs as they arise. We also utilize On-
the-Job Training (OJT) to assist a new or expanding businesses with
employee training. In the past, Cherokee Nation has worked with Health
Services to provide training in medical coding and dental assistant
education; worked with the hospitality arm of Cherokee Nation
Businesses to provide culinary training; and worked with our Child
Development Centers to provide early childhood education training.
Currently, we use funds for our Way Finders program at our new
outpatient health facility, which gives our elders an employment
opportunity and provides a service to those who use our facility.
We were also recently approved for a National Health Emergency
grant to focus on helping those impacted by the Opioid Crisis. Affected
individuals gain employment assistance through Cherokee Nation. These
jobs are not just any jobs, however-they are jobs in health care and
opioid addiction treatment. We are training opioid-impacted Cherokee
Nation citizens to meet the needs of other opioid-impacted Cherokee
Nation citizens. We are creating our own innovative solutions to
problems that other governments still struggle to address, thanks in
large part to the 477 Program.
The Cherokee Nation continues to build upon the success of the 477
Program. In mid-October, I introduced, and the Council of the Cherokee
Nation unanimously approved, the Career Readiness Act. The Career
Readiness Act doubles Cherokee Nation's investment in training
programs, such as construction, health, IT, and linemen training,
increasing funding from $1 million to $2 million per year. The 477
Program is an asset not only because it creates opportunities to
streamline our services and spur economic development, but also because
it allows us to expand our own capacity and use our resources to
strengthen other workforce and economic development efforts.
Challenges Associated with the 477 Program
In spite of the successes of the 477 Program, Cherokee Nation has a
number of concerns following the release of the interdepartmental
Memorandum of Agreement on December 20, 2018. Although the intent of
Congress was clear in the 2017 amendments, and the Memorandum of
Agreement was required by Congress only to facilitate the
implementation of the act, the memorandum is in conflict with the
spirit of the law and imposes more stringent requirements for the 477
program integration than were intended by Congress.
On July 3, 2019, Cherokee Nation submitted a request to integrate
four additional programs into our existing 477 plan. One was the Native
American Career and Technical Education Program from the Department of
Education, which was approved. Two Dislocated Worker Grants (DWG) were
approved for transfer because, according to the Department of Labor,
``these grants are generally not competitive.'' Our fourth request, the
Disability Employment Initiative (DEI), was denied based on the
Department of Labor's ``interpretation of the statute as amended and
Memorandum of Agreement signed in December 2018 by 12 Federal
agencies.'' Our denial from the Department of Labor further states:
Based on our interpretation of the statute, as amended,
Section 5(a)(1)(B) of the Indian Employment, Training and
Related Services Consolidation Act of 2017 [25USC3404(a)(1)(B)]
allows integration of programs that are formula-funded, or
based solely or in part on status as Indians under Federal law,
or a non-competitive process. However, the MOA Section 111.A.4
states that ``a competitive grant program may be integrated in
a 477 plan only when eligibility to compete for the grant
program is exclusive to Indian tribes.''
The Department of Labor's, and the Memorandum of Agreement's,
interpretation of Section 5(a)(1)(B) of the Indian Employment, Training
and Related Services Consolidation Act of 2017 is wholly incorrect.
Section 5(a)(1)(B) of the Indian Employment, Training and Related
Services Consolidation Act of 2017 states:
The programs that may be integrated to a plan approved under
section 8 shall only be programs under which an Indian tribe or
members of an Indian tribe (i) are eligible to receive funds
(I) under a statutory or administrative formula making funds
available to an Indian tribe; or (II) based solely or in part
on their status as Indians under Federal law; or (ii) have
secured funds as a result of a noncompetitive process or a
specific designation.
First, Indian tribes or Indian tribal members must be among the
entities eligible for funding, but the statute does not require that
only Indian tribes or Indian tribal members can be eligible for the
grant. Second, the funds must be available in part, but not solely,
based on their status as Indians under Federal law. Third, if neither
of these criteria are met, then the grant may be integrated into a 477
plan if funds were secured as part of a noncompetitive process.
Finally, Section 5(a)(2) further goes on to state that block grants,
not exclusively formula-funded grants as stated by the Department of
Labor, are also eligible for integration, regardless of whether the
block grant ``is for the benefit of the Indian tribe because of the
status of the Indian tribe or the status of the beneficiaries the grant
serves.'' It is clear, then, that both the Department of Labor and the
interdepartmental Memorandum of Agreement misinterpret and unduly limit
the scope of the federal law intended by Congress to foster and
strengthen economic development in Indian Country.
The interdepartmental Memorandum of Agreement created unintended
consequences that undermine the years of success the Cherokee Nation
has had thanks to the 477 Program. The 477 Program has transformed the
way we serve our tribal citizens, and the 2017 amendments to the law
posed great promise and opportunity to further expand and integrate our
programs. Although the Memorandum of Agreement is a barrier to our
efforts, we remain steadfast in our commitment to integrating our
programs and creating economic opportunity for our citizens.
Conclusion
At the heart of this problem is the impact this Memorandum of
Agreement has on the lives of the people we serve. The
misinterpretation of statutes and the imposition of more stringent
requirements by federal agencies threaten the livelihoods of people and
tribes across Indian Country. We must remember the young mother who
comes to the Cherokee Nation for help at her lowest point, with no
driver's license, no childcare, and no job training, but leaves self-
sufficient, with a way to support herself and her young child. We must
remember the countless others just like her, and we must make sure we
can meet the needs of those who need it the most.
As you work towards a solution that strengthens the 477 Program and
removes the additional requirements imposed by the Memorandum of
Agreement, I ask you to remember these stories and these concerns. The
decisions that are made in this body acutely impact our tribal citizens
and our communities, and we must ensure we do not turn our backs on our
most vulnerable in their time of need. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify, and I will be happy to answer any questions that you might
have. Wado.
The Chairman. Thank you, Principal Chief.
President Andersen.
STATEMENT OF HON. RALPH ANDERSEN, PRESIDENT/CEO, BRISTOL BAY
NATIVE ASSOCIATION
Mr. Andersen. Good afternoon, Chairman Hoeven, Vice
Chairman Udall, Senator Murkowski and distinguished Committee
members. I am honored to be here today to testify in regard to
the implementation of P.L. 102-477.
My name is Ralph Andersen, and I am a tribal member of the
village of Clark's Point in Bristol Bay, Alaska. I am the
President and CEO of the Bristol Bay Native Association based
in Dillingham.
I have worked at BBNA for 21 years, since 1998, and have
held my current position for 14 years, since 2005. BBNA is a
nonprofit tribal consortium representing 31 federally
recognized tribes in the Bristol Bay Region in southwest
Alaska. Our geographic area is about the size of the State of
Ohio.
BBNA operates a variety of BIA services in our 477 Plan
through a self-governance compact that has been in effect since
1995. BBNA took advantage of P.L. 102-477 not long after we
compacted BIA programs. That was before my time at BBNA.
BBNA is a strong proponent of the principles behind self-
governance compacting in the 477 Program: consolidated funding
streams, local control and flexibility, and reducing the
administrative burden. Traditional grants, even non-competitive
recurring grants, can be very difficult to operate from a
remote, rural service provider like us tries to apply
nationally designed programs in local conditions, and dealing
with several funding agencies with differing rules. Traditional
grants also tend to run up overhead costs and divert too much
of an organization's energy to grant management as opposed to
providing services. Self-governance compacting in the 477
Program goes a long way toward resolving these matters.
BBNA was already operating the programs that we rolled into
our 477 Plan. In our experience, the increased efficiency of
having a 477 Plan was great, but qualified, success. Very early
on, we were able to combine services into a one-stop shop with
a consolidated application process and program forms. We
provide services without making multiple referrals or requiring
multiple applications.
The 477 Plan really did streamline service delivery. it
also has administrative advantages. At the front end, the money
is consolidated and added to our compact by the BIA, so we have
fewer agencies to deal with. The reporting requirements are
reduced; 477 requires one annual report as opposed to the
quarterly reports which are typically required of traditional
grants, and still required by DHHS.
Not everything has worked smoothly. The 477 Program is not
as flexible as self-governance compacting. The separate program
regulations and policies remain in effect. Back in 2008, both
DOI and the HHS decided to no longer use 638 contracts and
compacts as a funding mechanism for distributing 477 funds.
They eventually changed their minds.
For years, there was disagreement between the tribes and
the funding agencies, particularly HHS, about whether our 477
plans had to be audited to the requirements of the plan or back
to the separate program regulations or requirements of the
different agencies. This was finally settled in favor of the
tribes, essentially forced on the agencies by Congress.
In more recent years, HHS would of course not allow BBNA to
include TANF, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, that
program, to our 477 plan, even though we were already operating
a program and it was clearly eligible. It was finally included
during our last plan submittal in 2017, but we weren't
authorized to receive the funding through our plan until 2018.
As for reporting, the law now provides for annual reports
to DOI to be shared with the Federal partners, but HHS won't
honor the single reporting provision in the law. They want
quarterly reports only to them, which we do, in order to
maintain compliance and not jeopardize our program.
Because of this and similar problems experienced by other
tribes, plus the desire to expand the program and make it
permanent, that led tribes nationally to request the
legislation that became P.L. 115-93.
As this Committee well knows, tribes nationally are
extremely disappointed with the implementation of the 2017 law
to date. The law was intended to expand 477 to other agencies
and programs, make it more flexible and user-friendly for
tribes, and to make 477 permanent.
We are very displeased with what the Federal agencies have
done with the MOA. One simply stunning decision was that DOI
relinquished its approval role to the different agencies. The
law is clear that DOI has the exclusive authority to approve
plans. This is an appalling abdication of responsibility. Its
approval is a key role of the law, DOI's approval.
The MOA also appears to give the agencies almost unfettered
ability to extend the plan review process by declaring a plan
incomplete, and continually asking for more information.
BBNA has not had to review its plan under the new rules of
the MOA, and have taken a wait and see approach to adding
programs to see how other tribes fare. We are concerned that
expanding our plan to include additional programs would be an
adversarial, bureaucratic nightmare. We fear that HHS and
perhaps other agencies will attempt to roll back the gains we
have already made.
We urge DOI to reopen the MOA and start over, and make it
consistent and in compliance with the law. We urge this
Committee to take such steps as it can to ensure that that
happens. Next time, the interests of the tribes should be at
the table.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Andersen follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Ralph Andersen, President/CEO, Bristol Bay
Native Association
Good afternoon, Chairman Hoeven, Vice-Chairman Udall, Senator
Murkowski, and distinguished Committee members. I am honored to be here
today to testify in regard to the implementation of P.L. 102-477.
My name is Ralph Andersen, and I am the President and Chief
Executive Officer of the Bristol Bay Native Association (BBNA), based
in Dillingham, Alaska. I am a tribal member of the village of Clarks
Point, where I grew up. Clarks Point is a very a small community of
about 60 people, 15 miles from Dillingham across the Nushagak Bay. I
left my home and family when I was 13 years old to attend high school
at a BIA boarding school in Oregon. After college, and after spending
20 years in Barrow, Alaska, I came back home to Bristol Bay in 1998
when I was 43 years old and began working for BBNA as its Natural
Resources Program Manager. I became the President & CEO in 2005.
BBNA is a non-profit tribal consortium representing 31 federally
recognized tribes within the Bristol Bay Region, a geographic area in
southwest Alaska the size of the State of Ohio. Our regional population
is about 7,000 people, of whom roughly 70 percent are Alaska Native.
BBNA operates a variety of service programs for our member tribes,
including the full range of Bureau of Indian Affairs programs. We
provide BIA services, and our 477 Plan, through a self-governance
compact that has been in effect since 1995. BBNA took advantage of PL
102-477 not long after we compacted BIA programs--before my time at
BBNA.
Successes of PL 102-477
Our organization is a strong proponent of the ideas behind self-
governance compacting and the 477 Program--consolidation of funding
streams, local control and flexibility, and reducing the administrative
burden. Traditional grants, even non-competitive recurring grants, can
seem like straight jackets when a remote rural service provider tries
to apply nationally designed programs in local conditions, when the
dollar amounts may be small, and several funding agencies with
differing rules may be providing funds for similar services.
Traditional grants tend to run up overhead costs and divert too much of
an organization's energy to grant management as opposed to providing
services.
BBNA was already operating the service programs we rolled into our
477 Plan. In our experience the increased efficiency of having a 477
Plan was a great, but qualified, success. Very early on we were able to
combine services into a ``one-stop shop'' with a consolidated
application process, and forms. We can provide services designed to
remove barriers to employment, provide training, and assist with job
placement without making multiple referrals or requiring multiple
applications even though the particular services may come from
different funding sources.
The 477 Plan really did streamline service delivery. It also had
advantages administratively. At the front end, the money is
consolidated and added to our compact by the BIA, so we have fewer
agencies to deal with. The reporting requirements are reduced except
for DHHS; 477 requires one annual report as opposed to the quarterly
reports which are typically required of grants and is still required by
DHHS.
Today, BBNA's 477 programs serve more than 500 clients annually,
about half with short-term cash assistance and half with employment,
training and education services designed to bring people into the
workplace or improve the earning capacity of those already employed.
Problem Areas
Not everything has worked smoothly. The 477 Program is not as
flexible as Self-Governance Compacting; the separate program
regulations and policies remain in effect. Back in 2008 both DOI and
the DHSS decided to no longer use PL 93-638 contracts and compacts as
the funding mechanism for distributing 477 funds. They eventually
changed their minds.
For years there was a disagreement between the Tribes and the
funding agencies, particularly DHHS, about whether our 477 Plans had to
be audited to the requirements of the Plan, or back to the separate
program regulations and requirements of the different agencies. The
Tribes eventually won those battles, through an appropriations rider
and through negotiations essentially forced on the agencies by
Congress.
In more recent years DHHS would not allow BBNA to include the
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) in our 477 Plan, even
though we were already operating the program and it was clearly
eligible for inclusion. It was finally included during our last plan
submittal in 2017, but we weren't authorized to receive the funding
through our 477 Plan until 2018.
As for reporting, 477 now provides for annual reports to DOI that
are shared with the federal partners, but DHHS won't honor the single
reporting provision in the law. They want quarterly reports only to
them.
It was because of these and similar problems experienced by other
tribes across Indian County, plus the desire to expand the program and
make it permanent, that led Tribes nationally to request the
legislation that became P.L. 115-93, the Indian Employment, Training
and Related Services Consolidation Act of 2017.
Problems with Implementing the 2017 Act
As this Committee well knows, Tribes nationally are extremely
disappointed in the implementation of the 2017 law to date. The law was
intended to expand 477 to other agencies and programs, make it more
flexible and user-friendly to tribes, and make the law permanent. While
the law is now permanent, the federal agencies appear to have used the
MOA required by Congress as a means of undercutting the purpose and
intent of the law.
BBNA has not had to renew its Plan under the new rules, and we have
taken a ``wait and see'' approach to adding programs, to see how other
Tribes fare. We would like to add programs we already operate including
LIHEAP, Prisoner Reentry (a DOJ program), and some Vocational
Rehabilitation services.
We are very displeased with what the federal agencies have done in
the MOA. One simply stunning decision that is that the BIA relinquished
its approval role to the different agencies. The law is clear that the
BIA has the exclusive authority to approve 477 Plans; yet the MOA gives
the decision whether to include programs, and on what terms, to the
various agencies. That is the same thing as approving the Plan. This an
appalling abdication of responsibility by BIA--its approval role is a
key structural component of the law!
Otherwise, the MOA appears to limit the scope of 477 by limiting
the kinds of programs included and by limiting the inclusion of
competitive grant programs to those that are exclusively for tribes. It
appears to give the agencies almost unfettered ability to extend the
plan review process indefinitely by declaring a plan ``incomplete'' and
asking for more information. This is not what Congress intended.
BBNA is concerned that expanding our 477 Plan to include additional
programs will be an adversarial, bureaucratic nightmare. Worse, we fear
DHHS and perhaps other agencies will attempt to roll back the gains we
have already made with our existing plan.
We urge the BIA to reopen the MOA and start over to make it
consistent with the law, and that this Committee take such steps as it
can to ensure that happens. Next time, the interests of the Tribes
should be at the table.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify.
The Chairman. Thank you, President Andersen.
Ms. Zientek.
STATEMENT OF MARGARET ZIENTEK, CO-CHAIR, P.L. 102-477 TRIBAL
WORK GROUP
Ms. Zientek. Thank you for the opportunity to speak.
[Greeting in native tongue.] My name is Margaret Zientek,
also known as White Head Woman by my tribe, Citizen Potawatomi
Nation.
I am here today to represent all the tribes that could not
be here in person. You heard there are 67 plans or tribal
organizations representing 252 tribes. There is an additional
10 who are in the process of being written or approved. There
is an additional 74 that have expressed interest and are
seeking technical assistance, representing over 120 tribes or
tribal organizations.
477 is critical in the development of effective and
efficient tribal services. The amendment, 115-93, made it
permanent and modified and expanded 12 additional agencies. It
is unfortunate these agencies are throwing roadblocks in the
way, such as the MOA.
It is critical for the flexibility, for the tribes to be
able to do what needs to be done, to meet the unique local
needs. At the same time, it does reduce administrative
redundancy by merging programs, financial reporting
requirements, at least with the exception of one agency, and
still meet GPRA.
In the last three years, ending with 2018, Citizen
Potawatomi Nation is happy to report that we have served over
5,000 people through our 477 Program, plus an additional 4,000
with child development services, our youth. The success of 477
is nearly three decades old, and we serve in the highest
unemployment areas in the Country.
Through the MOA, we have concerns. Those concerns are many,
but I will hit the highlights. The MOA was written entirely
without tribal input and is simply inconsistent with the law.
We submitted a redline for your review.
The MOA unlawfully allows other agencies to make decisions
that Congress specifically allocated to the Secretary of the
Interior, ``shall have exclusive authority to approve or
disapprove a plan.'' The MOA unlawfully restricts the purposes
of the agency programs eligible for integration into 477 plans.
The law is clear, tribes may consolidate Federal programs
implemented for a variety of reasons or purposes, such as
economic development, encouraging self-sufficiency, and to
insert the word primary purpose of employment training is just
wrong.
You heard Senator Lankford refer to our Iron Horse project.
The initial funding for feasibility studies was made possible
because of 477.
Additionally, the MOA gives agencies, it redefines
competitive. Basically it says they must be the sole recipient.
That is not what the law says. It gives authority to delay 477
plan review through multiple extensions. There is only one 90-
day bite at the apple, if you will. And it does not allow for
extension for waiver requests.
The MOA allows agencies to deny waiver request for unlawful
reasons. The law is very clear, effective agencies may only
deny waiver requests if they provide written notice the waiver
is inconsistent with the purposes of 477, or the provision of
law from which the program included in the plan derives its
authority.
The MOA has already been used to deny additional programs
into 477. The first was just a request for guidance or
technical assistance, vocational rehabilitation program said,
you can't do it.
Number two, disability employment initiative. You heard
from my friend here at the Cherokees, Department of Labor
deemed it as not eligible because it is made available to other
entities.
The Child and Welfare Services under Title IV-B, subparts 1
and 2, Department of HHS took the position, not primary purpose
of employment training, therefore it cannot be included.
Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program, again, HHS, not
eligible because it is not primary purpose of employment and
training. Ninety percent of the people that we serve at Citizen
Potawatomi Nation with LIHEAP, at a point in time survey, 90
percent of those same LIHEAP clients were eligible or were
receiving 477 services. It seems stupid that we would be
spending money, administrative costs, to separate and run that
program separately.
In summary, I thank you for the bipartisan support that you
have given us. I thank you, and I also thank the Division of
Workforce Development, Terrence Parks and his staff. Very
knowledgeable and work with us. It is unfortunate that people
above him at the Department of Interior do not use that
knowledge and help us.
Thank you again for your time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Zientek follows:]
Prepared Statement of Margaret Zientek, Co-Chair, P.L. 102-477 Tribal
Work Group
My name is Margaret Zientek, and I appear today as Co-Chair of the
477 Tribal Work Group. I serve as the Assistant Director for the
Citizen Potawatomi Nation Employment & Training Program, of which I am
an enrolled citizen. I was also a tribal representative on the Pub. L.
102-477 Administrative Flexibility Workgroup (AFWG), leading up to
Congress' passage of the Indian Employment, Training, and Related
Services Consolidation Act, Pub. L. No. 115-93 (``amended 477''), which
made the P.L 102-477 demonstration project permanent, expanded it to a
total of 12 federal agencies, and strengthened tribal rights while
streamlining the agency approval process.
Thank you for this opportunity to present written testimony
concerning the flawed implementation of amended 477 since December 2017
As Co-Chair for the 477 Tribal Work Group, I speak today on behalf
of over 69 477 programs representing and serving over 252 Tribes across
the United States. For the Committee's information, the Work Group
knows of an additional 10 new plans currently being written, and
another 74 tribes and consortia representing over 120 tribes have
sought technical assistance in exploring 477. The Citizen Potawatomi
Nation has operated a 477 program for almost two decades, and I have
served in my national capacity for almost two decades. I have seen how
much good this program can, and does, do for Tribes across the Nation.
I believe in its potential, and am dismayed that the Memorandum of
Agreement entered into by the twelve federal agencies has allowed
certain actors within some of those agencies to turn the work of this
Committee and Congress as a whole on its head by codifying the same
harmful behaviors amended 477 was intended to curtail.
The 477 Initiative established by Pub. L. 102-477 has been
essential for the development of effective and efficient tribal
services to increase employment and training in Indian country. The
program, now permanent after decades as the model of a successful
demonstration project, provides a critical foundation for maximizing
the effectiveness of diverse tribal employment, training and related
service programs that would otherwise be available to Tribes only by
dealing with a panoply of federal agencies issuing multiple contracts
or grants.
The law allows for the consolidation of funding streams from the
Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, Education, Energy, Health and
Human Services, Homeland Security, Housing and Urban Development,
Interior, Justice, Labor, Transportation, and Veterans Affairs. Thanks
to the 477 Initiative, these programs are consolidated into a single
tribal plan. By this means, the 477 program provides critical
flexibility for Tribes and tribal organizations to tailor the
consolidated activities into a single new program that best meets the
unique local needs of their respective communities.
At the same time, it eliminates administrative redundancy by
merging program and financial reporting requirements, all while still
adhering to the Government Performance Results Act's stringent
accountability standards. Tribes, alone, decide which programs or
combination of programs to combine into a 477 plan. This structure
affords maximum local flexibility and full accountability, which
accounts for the fact that the 477 Initiative has to date received the
highest OMB PART rating of any program in Indian Country.
The Citizen Potawatomi Nation's 477 Program: The Citizen Potawatomi
Nation (CPN) has participated in the 477 Initiative since 1996. We have
been able to achieve enormous administrative savings and provide
extended services to our participants as a direct result of the Act's
provisions. In 2016, 2017, and 2018, CPN's 477 program has served over
5,000 people seeking employment, training, and social services, as well
as more than 4,000 families that received child development services.
We see the success in our community, and in tribal communities across
the country.
For almost three decades, P.L. 102-477 has offered success to some
of the areas with highest unemployment in the country. Because of 477,
Tribes and tribal organizations have produced outcomes far beyond those
of their neighboring States because they have been able to consolidate
the resources of diverse programs in ways that make the most sense at
the local level. They have moved tribal members from cash assistance to
unsubsidized employment. And they have accounted for 477 program
activities according to the plan approved by the Department of the
Interior.
Amended 477 addressed specific tribal concerns, but the
implementation of the law has undermined Congress' intent to address
those concerns. In April 2014, I testified before this Committee and
asked that Congress make specific changes to the proposed legislation
that eventually became amended 477 to address Tribes' concerns. Tribes
asked that the legislation include a mechanism to identify eligible
employment, training and related social service programs from other
federal agencies on which Tribes and tribal organizations might draw to
supplement their efforts and to add to their plans. To do this, Tribes
asked that the scope of the original demonstration program be expanded
in two ways: (1) to cover a wider range of departmental and agency
funds, including competitive funds, formula funds, block grants, and
designated funds; and (2) by specifying a wider range of funding types,
including funds for job training; welfare to work and tribal work
experience; creating or enhancing employment opportunities; higher
education; skill development; assisting Indian youth and adults to
succeed in the workforce; encouraging self-sufficiency; familiarizing
individual participants with the world of work; facilitating the
creation of job opportunities; and any services related to these
activities.
Tribes asked that the 477 Act also be amended to address timely
approval of 477 plans, regulation waivers and dispute resolution, so
that there are clear rules and clear forums for resolution of
disagreements about the 477 Act. This Committee, and Congress as a
whole, listened to those concerns and amended the legislation to
address them. We sincerely thank you for those efforts.
However, as pointed out in the letter sent by amended 477's
cosponsors in July of this year, the implementation of the amended law
has done the exact opposite. Congress:
sought to stop agencies from introducing problems into the PL
477 program that reduced its effectiveness. Among other things,
agencies had been requiring additional criteria for program
eligibility not found in the law and additional reporting
prohibited under the law. We made clear through the language of
the bill that these things are unlawful-laying out clear
program eligibility criteria, mandating that only the
Department of the Interior has authority to determine program
eligibility, and stating that a Tribe need only submit one
annual report for a PL 477 plan.
And as the Cosponsors explained, amended 477 has thus far been
implemented in such a way--through the Memorandum of Agreement entered
into by all twelve agencies--that re-introduces the specific problems
that reduced the program's effectiveness in the first place.
We share the Cosponsors Concern.
The MOA was written entirely without tribal input, and is simply
inconsistent with the amended 477 law. Under amended 477, Congress
required the 12 impacted agencies to enter into an interdepartmental
memorandum of agreement (MOA), with the Secretary of the Interior
serving as lead agency, by December 18, 2018. \1\ On December 20, 2018,
the Secretary of the Interior released the executed MOA with a Dear
Tribal Leader Letter. This MOA, which was negotiated behind closed
doors and without any meaningful tribal input, does not faithfully
implement the law. The P.L. 102-477 Tribal Work Group has produced a
detailed redline of the MOA explaining the legally-problematic sections
and providing language that would bring the MOA into compliance with
the law. That redline is attached as a supplement to this testimony. In
brief though:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 25 U.S.C.  3410(a)(3).
The MOA unlawfully allows other agencies that to make
decisions that Congress specifically allocated to the Secretary
of the Interior. The law is clear that ``The Secretary [of the
Interior] shall have exclusive authority to approve or
disapprove a plan submitted by an Indian tribe.'' \2\ The law
spells out the specific areas in which the other agencies have
authority to provide input, \3\ but the MOA unlawfully
transfers critical decisionmaking authority from Interior,
where expertise regarding the 477 program resides, to the other
agencies. Interior then will rubber-stamp those decisions, and
as we have seen with the denials already published, that is
exactly what has happened. Ending this practice was one of the
underlying reasons the new law was needed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ 25 U.S.C.  3410(a)(3). U.S.C.  3407(a)
\3\ See 25 U.S.C.  3406(a)(1), (b)-(i)
The MOA unlawfully restricts the purposes of the agency
programs eligible for integration into a 477 plan: the law is
clear that tribes may consolidate federal programs implemented
for a variety of purposes, such as ``economic development'' and
``encouraging self-sufficiency.'' \4\ The MOA unlawfully
restricts eligible programs to those where ``job training'' or
``employment'' is the ``primary'' purpose of the program and
where the federal statute authorizing the program clearly
states employment and training is its purpose. This provision
deeply undermines the amended law.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ U.S.C.  3404(a)(1)(A).
The MOA unlawfully limits eligibility for programs funded
through competitive funding and block grants: the law allows
tribes to consolidate competitive funds into a plan so long as
the funds are from a source that fits into one of the allowable
categories of funding. \5\ The MOA unlawfully restricts this
eligibility to programs where Federally-recognized tribes and
their members are the sole eligible recipients or the program's
authorizing legislation has a PL 477 designation. This
restriction is found nowhere in the law. Additionally, the MOA
does not list block grant funds as an eligible type of funds.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ U.S.C.  3404(a)(1)(B), (a)(2).
The MOA unlawfully gives agencies the authority to delay 477
plan reviews through multiple extensions: the law allows
Interior to ask for written consent from a tribe for an
extension of up to 90 days on its statutory time limit to
review that tribe's submitted plan, \6\ and it does not allow
extensions for waiver requests. \7\ The MOA provides for
multiple extensions throughout the plan and waiver review
process, allowing agencies to delay and extract additional
concessions from tribes. Ending this type of behavior was an
important consideration in the amendment process. And multiple
extensions lessens the effects of amended PL 477's mandate that
a PL 477 plan \8\ or waiver request \9\ is deemed approved if
not acted on within the statutory timeframe for approval.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ U.S.C. 3407(c).
\7\ See 25 U.S.C.  3406.
\8\ U.S.C.  3407(b)(5).
\9\ U.S.C.  3406(e)(3).
The MOA Allows Agencies to Deny Waiver Requests For Unlawful
Reasons: the law allows for tribes to request waivers of
applicable statutory, regulatory, or administrative
requirements. \10\ Affected agencies may only deny waiver
requests if they provide written notice that waiver is
inconsistent with the purposes of PL 477 or ``the provision of
law from which the program included in the plan derives its
authority that is specifically applicable to Indians.'' \11\
The MOA directs an agency to deny a waiver request if a tribe
refuses to approve a time extension--entirely the opposite of
the statutory language.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ U.S.C. 3406(b)-(i).
\11\ U.S.C.  3407(d), (e).
The MOA includes numerous other issues which undermine the intent
of Congress to provide for a smooth, efficient, and streamlined plan
and waiver review process led by the Department of the Interior.
The MOA has already been used as the basis for unlawful denials of
the inclusion of programs into Tribes' 477 plans. The work group is
concerned that individual agencies may communicating denials or de-
facto denials directly to Tribes, rather than through the Division of
Workforce development in BIA, so there may be more than the following
examples. However, what we do know is that affected agencies have
denied the inclusion of at least four programs into 477 plans based on
eligibility criteria unlawfully added though the MOA, rather than in
statute, and that due to the restrictions placed on DOI in the MOA, BIA
has had to rubber-stamp these denials rather than applying its own
expertise as to the includability of the programs:
Vocational Rehabilitation Program: The Department of
Education took the position the program is not eligible because
it receives competitive funding made available to entities
other than federally recognized tribes, relying on the MOA's
provision unlawfully creating this eligibility criterion.
Disability Employment Initiative: The Department of Labor
took the position the program is not eligible because it
receives competitive funding made available to entities other
than federally recognized tribes, relying on the MOA's
provision unlawfully creating this eligibility criterion
Child and Family Service Title IV-B, Subparts 1 and 2: The
Department of Health and Human Services took the position the
program is not eligible because it is not an employment or job
training program, relying on the MOA's provision unlawfully
creating the eligibility criterion that requires the primary
purpose in the program's authorizing statute to be employment
or training, despite amended 477's broader purpose requirement.
Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP): The
Department of Health and Human Services took the position the
program is not eligible because it is not an employment or job
training program, relying on the MOA's provision unlawfully
creating the eligibility criterion that requires the primary
purpose in the program's authorizing statute to be employment
or training.
Summary and Conclusion. The Pub. L. 102-477 program has been one of
the most successful Indian programs in the history of the government-
to-government relationship, and is one of the purest examples of the
potential implicit in the self-determination policy. The Tribal Work
group has been honored to work closely with Congress to make
improvements to the program and to help it reach that potential. We are
deeply grateful for this Committee's unwavering bipartisan support for
the Program.
Federal agency implementation of the amended 477 program has served
to undermine both Congress' and Tribes' efforts, and I appreciate the
opportunity to speak to those issues today.
Attachment
Indian Employment, Training and Related Services Consolidation Act of
2017
interagency memorandum of agreement
BETWEEN THE PARTIES
1. Department of Agriculture
2. Department of Commerce
3. Department of Education
4. Department of Energy
5. Department of Health and Human Services
6. Department of Homeland Security
7. Department of Housing and Urban Development
8. Department of the Interior
9. Department of Justice
10. Department of Labor
11. Department of Transportation
12. Department of Veterans Affairs
Whereas, pursuant to the Indian Employment, Training, and Related
Services Demonstration Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-477 (October 23,
1992) (``the 1992 Act''), Congress authorized a temporary demonstration
project (477 Initiative) that allowed Federally recognized Indian
tribes to integrate employment and training-related, formula-funded
Federal grants into a single plan (477 plan) with a single budget and a
single reporting system to improve the effectiveness of those services,
reduce joblessness in Indian communities, and serve tribally determined
goals consistent with the policy of self-determination, while reducing
administrative, reporting, and accounting costs.
Whereas, pursuant to the Indian Employment, Training, and Related
Services Consolidation Act of 2017, Pub. L. No. 115-93 (December 18,
2017), Congress amended the 1992 Act to make the demonstration project
permanent, to reduce administrative, reporting, and accounting costs in
the 477 Initiative, and to otherwise expand and improve the Pub. L.
102-477 Program.
Whereas, pursuant to Section 11 of Pub. L. No. 115-93, Congress
directed the above named agencies to negotiate and execute a memorandum
of agreement (MOA) to implement Pub. L. No. 115-93. The purpose of this
MOA is to set forth the basic functions and relationships of the
Parties as authorized under Pub. L. No. 115-93.
Whereas, this MOA is intended to facilitate coordination and
collaboration of the Parties in implementing the Act. The Department of
the Interior is the lead agency under the Act and has authority to
approve or disapprove a plan which the Secretary is authorized to
exercise to ensure compliance with the Act. This MOA is not intended to
confer any right upon any Indian tribe, private person, or
organization.
Now, therefore, the Parties agree as follows:
I. Definitions
A.
``The Act'' refers to the Indian Employment, Training, and
Related Services Demonstration Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-477
(October 23, 1992), as amended.
B.
``The Secretary'' refers to the Secretary of the Department of
the Interior. Certain actions identified in the Act and throughout this
agreement lie with the authority of the Secretary but may be carried
out in practice by the Assistant Secretary--Indian Affairs through
offices, including the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) within the
Department of the Interior (``Interior'').
C.
``Parties'' refers to all agencies named by Congress to
negotiate and execute an MOA.
D.
``Affected agency'' is an agency that has a program that has
been identified by an Indian tribe to be considered in its 477 plan.
E.
``Indian tribe'' refers to the term as defined in 25 U.S.C. 
3402(2) of the Act, which includes tribal organizations.
II. Effect of MOA on Authorities of Parties
A.
Nothing in this MOA alters the statutory authorities or any
other authorities of the Parties. This MOA is intended to facilitate
coordination and collaboration of the Parties in implementing the Act.
III. Policy
The Act authorizes an Indian tribe to integrate in a 477 plan
existing funds that a tribe would otherwise receive under the authority
of an individual program. The statutory purpose and authority of the
underlying programs being consolidated in an Indian tribe's 477 plan
must align with the criteria set forth in 25 U.S.C.  3404.
A. Programs Affected
1.
25 U.S.C  3404(a) provides that only programs for which
implementing one or more of the following purposes is an
authorized use of Federal funding support provided under that
program may be integrated into an Indian tribe's 477 plan:
a. job training;
b. welfare to work and tribal work experience;
c. creating or enhancing employment opportunities;
d. skill development
e. assisting Indian youth and adults to succeed in the
workforce;
f. encouraging self-sufficiency;
g. familiarizing individual participants with the world of
work;
h. facilitating the creation of job opportunities;
i. economic development; or
j. any services related to the activities described above.
2.
A list of programs historically considered for 477 plan
inclusion prior to the passage of Pub. L. No. 115-93 is
included as an appendix to this MOA. This list, which is from
the Federal agencies participating in the 477 demonstration
initiative, is provided for information and is not all-
inclusive. Indian tribes can propose to include Federal
programs not listed in the appendix. At the time of the signing
of this MOA, not all Parties have identified programs that meet
the eligibility requirements of 25 U.S.C.  3404.
3.
As required by 25 U.S.C.  3407, the BIA has exclusive
authority to approve or disapprove a plan submitted by an
Indian tribe, including making any decisions that would
necessarily lead to the full or partial disapproval of a plan.
Such decisions include, but are not limited to, decisions
relating to whether an organization is an Indian tribe as
defined by 25 U.S.C.  3402, or whether a program is eligible
for inclusion in a 477 plan. However, under 25 U.S.C.  3406(h)
the head of the affected agency has final authority to resolve
disputes related to waiver requests.
4.
BIA and the affected agencies further understand that under
25 U.S.C.  3404(a)(1)(B), and (a)(2), 477 plans may include
only those programs in which an Indian tribe or members of an
Indian tribe are eligible to receive funds:
a.
under a statutory or administrative formula making funds
available to an Indian tribe;
b.
based solely or in part on their status as Indians under
Federal law;
c.
as a result of a noncompetitive process or a specific
designation; or
d.
by block grant funds provided to an Indian tribe,
regardless of whether the block grant is for the benefit of the
Indian tribe because of the status of the Indian tribe or the
status of the beneficiaries the grant services.
5.
Competitive grant programs do not base eligibility on a
statutory or administrative formula and do not award funds as a
result of a noncompetitive process or designation. Thus, in
accordance with 25 U.S.C.  3404(a)(1)(B)(i)(II), unless
provided as part of block grant funding, a competitive grant
program may be integrated in a 477 plan only when eligibility
for the funding under that grant program is based solely or in
part on status as an Indian tribe or Indian as defined at 25
U.S.C.  3402. Competitive grant programs for which an Indian
tribe is eligible for funding based solely on other factors,
such as an Indian tribe's status as a non-profit organization,
are not eligible for inclusion in a 477 plan.
6.
Competitive grants may also be included after an award is
made by the affected agency pursuant to its competitive process
if there is a specific 477 designation in the grant program's
authorizing legislation that the program is eligible for
consolidation under the Act.
B.
Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (ISDEAA)
(25 U.S.C.  5301 et seq.)
1.
Neither P.L. 102-477 nor P.L. 115-93 affect the
applicability of ISDEAA to program funds approved to be
included in a 477 plan. As has been the practice, and as is
authorized by 25 U.S.C.  3412(b), BIA shall permit Federal
funds that the relevant agency has transferred to BIA to be
transferred to eligible Indian tribes pursuant to existing
contracts, compacts, or funding agreements awarded pursuant to
ISDEAA. However, including a program not otherwise eligible for
ISDEAA in a 477 plan, and transferring funds pursuant to an
existing contract, compact, or funding agreement, does not make
the program eligible for contracting under ISDEAA and does not
make the provisions of P.L. 93-638 applicable. Conversely, if
an underlying program is eligible for ISDEAA, including the
program in a 477 plan does not eliminate the applicability of
any provision of ISDEAA.
C. Requirements for Incorporating Programs into a 477 Plan
1.
Each affected agency must take into account its individual
statutes, regulations, and policies when consulting with the
BIA regarding an Indian tribe's proposed plan.
2.
Consolidation of programs approved by affected agencies for
inclusion in a 477 plan will take effect upon approval of the
plan.
IV. Roles and Responsibilities of Parties
A. Federal Points of Contact
1.
The Secretary of the Interior, the Attorney General, and
the Secretaries of the other affected agencies shall each
appoint a liaison to be the point of contact to address any
concerns related to implementation of the Act and to attend
meetings of the Parties. BIA shall circulate the contact list
to the Parties and provide updates as necessary.
B. Plan Review
1.
Generally, 90 days after receipt of a plan, the Secretary
will approve or deny the plan. If a plan includes a waiver
request, the Department of the Interior and the affected
agencies will follow the process for review described in
Section V.
2.
Upon receipt of an Indian tribe's 477 proposed plan, BIA's
Division of Workforce Development (DWD) will transmit to the
Indian tribe a formal acknowledgement of receipt of the
proposal. The 90-day statutory timeframe for approving or
denying the plan begins on the date of the Secretary's receipt.
3.
Within 2 days of receipt of a tribe's 477 proposed plan DWD
will conduct an initial review to determine if the plan appears
to be complete, ensuring inclusion of the minimum required
documents (e.g., tribal resolution, budget, and narrative scope
of work, waiver requests). If the plan appears to be complete,
DWD will forward it to the affected agencies within 2 days of
receipt of the plan.
4.
If a plan is determined to be incomplete, DWD will work
with the tribe for up to 15 days in order for the tribe to
submit the necessary additional documents to make the plan
complete. Once the proposed plan is complete, DWD will forward
it to the affected agencies.
5.
For the first year of implementation, BIA shall forward
what appears to be a complete plan to all Parties, and after
the first year to just the affected agencies.
a.
Interior and affected agencies shall develop a suggested
template for Indian tribes to use in submitting and specifying,
as an addendum to their proposed 477 plans, any specific
waivers the Indian tribe believes are necessary to implement
the proposed 477 plan including a citation or specific
reference to the particular statute, regulation, provision,
administrative requirement, or policy or procedures to be
waived.
6.
If after the affected agencies conduct their initial
review, the plan still does not include the required documents,
the affected agency shall inform DWD, and DWD will coordinate
with the Indian tribe to ensure the needed document(s) are
submitted in a timely manner. Once all required documents are
submitted, the plan is complete.
7.
Within 30 days of receipt of the complete plan from DWD,
DWD shall schedule a call with the affected agencies to discuss
the status of the plan review and identify any issues that need
to be resolved.
8.
The affected agencies shall have 60 days (from the time the
affected agencies received transmittal of the complete plan) to
review and provide comments back to DWD on the Indian tribe's
complete plan and on whether the affected agency requires any
additional information. Should DWD not receive feedback from an
affected agency within the 60-day timeframe, DWD staff will
contact the affected agency and request a status update on the
plan review. If additional information is required, DWD will
facilitate communication between the affected agency and the
Indian tribe to resolve the issue(s).
9.
At any time after receiving an Indian tribe's plan from
DWD, but not beyond the 90- day timeframe for the Secretary's
approval or denial of the plan, unless the Secretary has
received the express written consent of the Indian tribe for an
extension, the affected agency may provide comments to DWD and/
or the Indian tribe concerning programs it operates that are
proposed to be included in the Indian tribe's plan.
10.
If an affected agency is of the opinion that the Secretary
may not approve inclusion of a program in an Indian tribe's
plan because inclusion would not meet the requirements
described in 25 U.S.C.  3405 during or at the conclusion of
the 60-day review period, the affected agency shall communicate
to DWD its reason(s) for that opinion. At this point, DWD will
facilitate communication between the affected agency and the
Indian tribe in an attempt to resolve the reason(s) for the
affected agency's opinion prior to the expiration of the 90-day
timeframe.
11.
If the affected agency and Indian tribe are unable to
resolve the issue(s), the affected agency must transmit to DWD
a written opinion supporting its position that inclusion of the
program would not meet the requirements described in 25 U.S.C.
 3405. Once DWD receives the affected agency's written
opinion, it will review the opinion to determine whether
inclusion of the program would not meet the requirements
described in 25 U.S.C.  3405. DWD will then communicate its
determination in a written memorandum to the affected agency.
For the first year, Interior shall disseminate the memorandum
to all Parties for informational purposes and to ensure
consistency throughout the government.
12.
If the Secretary agrees with an affected agency that a
plan or portion of a plan is not approvable because it does not
meet the requirements described in 25 U.S.C.  3405, or if it
otherwise finds that a plan or portion of a plan is not
approvable because it does not meet the requirements described
in 25 U.S.C.  3405, the Secretary shall transmit to the Indian
tribe a denial letter containing a specific finding that
clearly demonstrates, or that is supported by a controlling
legal authority, that the plan does not meet the requirements
described in 25 U.S.C.  3405.
a.
When the Secretary denies a plan or denies inclusion of a
program or programs in a plan, the denial letter shall notify
the tribe that (1) it can have a hearing on the record with the
right to engage in full discovery relevant to any issue raised
in the matter before the affected agency's appropriate
administrative appeals body in accordance with 25 U.S.C. 
3407(d)(1)(C); or (2) it can bring a civil action in Federal
court in accordance with 25 U.S.C.  3407(d)(2). If a tribe
chooses a hearing before the Department of the Interior's
administrative appeals body, and the appeals body finds that
the tribe's plan does not meet the requirements described in 25
U.S.C.  3405, the tribe can appeal to Federal district court
on the objections raised in accordance with 25 U.S.C. 
3407(d)(1)(C).
13.
Pursuant to 25 U.S.C.  3407(b)(4), if a plan is denied
solely on the basis that a request for a waiver that is part of
the plan has not been approved (or is subject to dispute
resolution) under 25 U.S.C.  3406, the Secretary shall, upon a
request from a tribe, grant partial approval for those portions
of the plan not affected by the request for a waiver.
14.
An Indian tribe must receive approval or denial of its
plan before the expiration of the 90-day timeframe from the
Secretary's receipt of a proposal, unless the tribe gives the
Secretary express written consent before the expiration of the
90-day timeframe for an extension of time for up to an
additional 90 days. If a decision is not provided to the Indian
tribe, or the Indian tribe does not provide a written extension
of time to the Secretary before the expiration of the 90-day
timeframe, the Indian tribe's plan is considered to be
approved. However, at any time during the 90-day timeframe, DWD
may request one extension of time from the Indian tribe,
provided that the extension may not be for more than 90 days.
An Indian tribe's denial of a request to extend the 90-day
review timeframe may not be used as a reason to deny an Indian
tribe's proposed plan.
15.
In the event that a tribe submits a late plan (i.e., their
current plan is set to expire in less than 90 days), BIA may
extend the current approved plan up to 120 days and the tribe
may use the currently awarded funds and/or carryover funds to
continue operations. BIA will issue formal notification to the
tribe when granting an extension, copying all affected
agencies. BIA will not transfer any funds and the tribe will
not draw down any funds associated with the new plan until the
plan has been approved.
a.
To prevent such situations from arising, affected
agencies will keep track of plan dates and notify DWD of plan
expiration dates 180 days before a plan expires. DWD will
notify tribes of upcoming plan expiration dates at least 150
days before the plan expires and encourage them to submit a new
plan so that the parties have at least 90 days to review it.
V. Waivers
The Department of the Interior and each affected agency shall
cooperatively implement the waiver provisions during the plan review
process consistent with section 3406 of the Act.
A. Requesting Waivers
1.
In consultation with Interior, a participating Indian tribe
may request that the head of each affected agency waive any
statutory, regulatory, or administrative requirement, policy,
or procedure. Indian tribes should provide as much information
as possible about which statutory, regulatory, or
administrative requirement, policy, or procedure they need to
be waived and why the waiver is being requested.
2.
Affected agencies may also identify waivers of any
applicable statutory, regulatory, or administrative
requirement, policy, or procedure necessary to enable an Indian
tribe to efficiently implement a 477 plan.
3.
Procedures for forwarding the plan and accompanying waiver
requests are articulated in section IV.B.3-5. As necessary,
once the affected agency receives the Indian tribe's waiver
request, the Indian tribe and affected agency may work together
to ensure the waiver request is complete.
4.
For the first year of implementation of this Act, for
informational purposes and to ensure consistency throughout the
government, BIA will share all waiver requests with all Parties
at the same time that it is forwarding the waiver requests to
the affected agencies for consideration.
5.
Pursuant to 25 U.S.C.  3406(e)(1), the 90-day waiver clock
begins when an affected agency receives an Indian tribe's
waiver request.
6.
There is a 90-day deadline for the head of the affected
agency for which a waiver has been requested to decide whether
to grant or deny the request. Interior and all affected
agencies agree that the date on which the waiver request is
received by the affected agency will be the day from which the
90-day deadline to deny the waiver shall be calculated. The
affected agency will inform DWD and the Indian tribe the date
on which the 90-day timeline for approval begins. See 25 U.S.C.
3406(e)(1); (e)(3).
B. Granting or Denying Waivers
1.
Each affected agency shall waive any applicable statutory,
regulatory, or administrative requirement, regulation, policy,
or procedure promulgated by the agency that has been identified
but shall not grant a waiver if the waiver is inconsistent
with:
a. The purposes of the Act; or
b.
The provision of the law from which the program included
in the plan derives its authority that is specifically
applicable to Indians. See 25 U.S.C.  3406(d)(2).
2. After an affected agency's waiver determination, BIA shall
either:
a.
Include the waiver determination as part of the 477 plan
approval process; or
b. Proceed in accordance with V.C.6.
3.
Interior will quarterly disseminate to all Parties all
final waiver determinations.
C. Timeline for processing waivers
1.
The head of an affected agency shall make a waiver
determination no later than 90 days after the affected agency
receives a waiver request. See 25 U.S.C.  3406(e).
2.
If the head of an affected agency grants a waiver, that
affected agency shall provide written notice of the
determination to BIA, and BIA shall inform the Indian tribe.
For the first year, within two days after an affected agency's
initial waiver decision, the affected agency shall disseminate
such waiver determination to all other parties for
informational purposes and to ensure consistency throughout the
government.
3.
If the head of an affected agency denies the waiver, the
affected agency shall provide BIA a written notice of the
denial, and reasons for the denial, no later than 30 days after
making such determination, and BIA shall inform the tribe. See
25 U.S.C.  3406(f).
4.
If the head of the affected agency does not make a decision
within 90 days after receipt of the waiver request, the waiver
is considered granted. See 25 U.S.C.  3406(e)(3).
5.
If an affected agency denies a waiver, BIA may approve a
477 plan for the requesting Indian tribe for all programs
unaffected by the waiver denial. BIA may also approve a 477
plan for the program for which the waiver has been denied if
the affected agency notifies BIA that the plan is approvable in
the absence of the waiver.
6.
After consulting with the affected agency, BIA shall
provide notice to the tribe so it can revise the plan if
necessary. Such revisions may include, but are not limited to,
removing the related program from the 477 plan or including the
program with specific requirements/conditions in the 477 plan
to reflect the decision.
7.
When tribes elect interagency dispute resolution in
response to a waiver denial, the head of an affected agency
shall notify non-affected agencies of the dispute in question.
D. Interagency Dispute Resolution Process
1.
If an Indian tribe elects to participate in the interagency
dispute resolution process, the following process will be
followed:
a.
The Secretary shall initiate the process by contacting the
participating Indian tribe and requesting notification within 5
business days on whether the tribe desires to conduct either a
face-to-face meeting or conference call with the Secretary and
the head of the affected agency, or their designees, to resolve
the dispute.
b.
Upon receipt of the Indian tribe's notification, the
Secretary shall begin communication with both the tribe and the
head of the affected agency to ensure the conference call or
in-person meeting is conducted within 14 calendar days of the
tribe's notification.
c.
The Interagency dispute resolution session(s) will allow
equal and ample opportunity for the BIA, the Indian tribe, and
affected the affected agency to engage in discussion of the
waiver request and provide documentation supporting their
position.
d.
Should all agree, the Secretary may schedule additional
sessions up to and including the 30th day after the dispute
resolution process was initiated.
e.
Whether the additional sessions are face-to-face meetings
or conference calls is at the discretion of the participating
Indian tribe and the affected agency.
E. Final authority to resolve issue
1.
If the dispute is resolved, BIA shall distribute the
outcome of the final resolution to all affected agencies within
ten days.
2.
If the dispute resolution process fails to resolve the
dispute, the head of the affected agency shall have the final
authority to resolve the dispute. See section 3406(h) of the
Act.
3.
If the head of the affected agency determines that the
waiver must be denied, the affected agency will issue a written
statement to BIA.
4.
The Secretary shall provide the requesting Indian tribe
within 5 days after the dispute is resolved:
a. A written statement of the final decision on the waiver
request; and
b.
If the Secretary of the Interior has determined that a
program is not approvable to be included in a 477 plan without
an agency granting the waiver at issue, notice of the right to
file an appeal in accordance with IV.B.12.1. Once the waiver
request is resolved, the tribe may amend its 477 plan, as
necessary, to include the resolution.
5.
If the waiver request was approved, then the plan shall
include the affected program. The plan may explicitly state
which portions of statute, regulation, or requirements have
been waived.
6.
If the waiver request was denied, then BIA shall provide
notice to the tribe so it can revise the plan accordingly. Such
revisions may include, but are not limited to, removing the
related program from the 477 plan or including the program with
specific requirements/conditions in the 477 plan to reflect the
decision.
VI. Transfer and Award of Funds
A.
Affected agencies shall inform BIA and the Indian tribe of the
amount of Federal funds to be transferred by the affected agency to BIA
for the award to the tribe for its approved 477 plan.
B.
At the request of an Indian tribe, BIA shall award Federal
funds to an eligible Indian tribe pursuant to an existing contract,
compact, or funding agreement awarded pursuant to Title I or IV of the
ISDEAA, as amended, within 45 days of BIA's receipt of the funds. The
following language shall be included in contracts, compacts, or funding
agreements used to transfer Federal funds not eligible for contracting
under ISDEAA (funds to which Pub. L. 93-638 is not applicable):
In accordance with 25 U.S.C. sections 3411(b) and 3412(b), as
has been the practice, BIA permits Federal funds for [insert
title of grant program] that the relevant agency has
transferred to BIA to be transferred to eligible Indian tribes
pursuant to existing contracts, compacts, or funding agreements
awarded pursuant to ISDEAA. However, including a program not
otherwise eligible for ISDEAA in a 477 plan, and transferring
funds for that program to an Indian tribe pursuant to an
existing contract, compact, or funding agreement, does not make
the program eligible for contracting under ISDEAA and does not
make the provisions of Pub. L. 93-638 applicable to that
program.
C.
When a tribe elects to receive funds included in a 477 plan
outside of the ISDEAA, the funds must still be provided from BIA to the
tribe within 45 days of BIA's receipt of the funds.
D.
Affected agencies shall transfer funds to BIA no later than 30
days after the date the apportionment to the affected agency has been
approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) per 25 U.S.C. 
3412(a). If a program's funding is subject to a continuing resolution,
transfers will be based on the availability of the funds as outlined in
the continuing resolution.
E.
Some programs are subject to a Secretary's one percent
discretionary transfer. This may result in withholding some of the
funds or if funds have already been transferred, then the funds subject
to BIA's discretionary transfer would be returned to the affected
agency.
F.
In the event of an overpayment, BIA shall return the excess
funds to the affected agency within 60 days of being notified that an
overpayment was made. Overpayments may be the result of rescissions,
Secretary's discretion for programs subject to a transfer, or
miscalculations.
VII. Oversight
A. Reports
1.
BIA shall oversee an Indian tribe's administration of a
plan. BIA shall develop and use a single system and format for
comprehensive Federal oversight and monitoring to ensure that
tribes operate Federal programs according to their approved
plans.
2.
BIA shall, in consultation with the Parties, within 30 days
from the signing of this MOA:
a.
Develop a single OMB-approved statistical report format
applicable to the programs in approved plans, for Indian tribes
to report on activities described in their plans.
b.
Develop a single OMB-approved financial report format for
Indian tribes to report on plan expenditures.
3.
As per 25 U.S.C.  3410(b)(2) and (3), the report format,
together with records maintained by each participating Indian
tribe, shall contain information sufficient to determine
whether the Indian tribe: (1) has complied with the
requirements of the approved plan; (2) determine the number and
percentage of program participants in unsubsidized employment
during the second quarter after exit from the program; and (3)
provide assurances to each applicable Federal department or
agency that the Indian tribe has complied with all directly
applicable statutory and regulatory requirements that have not
been waived.
4.
The report format shall not require a participating Indian
tribe to report on the expenditure of funds expressed by fund
source or single agency code transferred to the Indian tribe
under an approved plan but instead shall require the Indian
tribe to submit a single report on the expenditure of
consolidated funds under such plan.
5.
Affected agencies will be given the opportunity to ask
follow-up questions about the reports.
6.
BIA shall distribute to affected agencies, or post online,
statistical and financial reports within 30 days of the end of
the reporting period.
7.
Affected agencies shall, within 30 days of notification
that program and expenditure reports have been posted or made
available, inform BIA of any issues (e.g., any indication that
program funds were not used for allowable purposes or other
errors in reporting).
VIII. Audits
A.
BIA shall safeguard Federal funds, in consultation with each
affected agency transferring funds for a plan, pursuant to the
requirements of the Single Audit Act of 1984, as amended, including
review of all audit reports and completion of all close-out duties for
the plans, by:
1.
Requiring Indian tribes or tribal organizations that expend
less than $750,000 in Federal funds during a fiscal year to
submit a certification that they are not required to submit an
audit to the Division of Internal Evaluation and Assessment and
the Awarding Official or Education Resource Officer.
2.
Providing the OMB with annual updates to the audit
Compliance Supplement for all programs included in a plan
(e.g., annually updating the 477 Cluster and ensuring all
programs included in a plan are listed in the Cluster).
B.
BIA is the lead agency and is responsible for implementation of
the Act. BIA is responsible for the receipt and distribution of all
funds covered by a plan approved under the Act. As such, BIA is
responsible for rendering a management decision on any Single Audit Act
findings (e.g., resolving audit findings, preventing future findings)
involving Federal funds that BIA has transferred to Indian tribes to
support their plans.
C.
Affected agencies shall advise BIA of any facts or
circumstances that will assist in safeguarding Federal funds. BIA will
work with each of the affected agencies to take appropriate action
after discussing such facts or circumstances.
IX. Monitoring
A.
On-site monitoring will occur by the BIA once every three years
or as needed. BIA shall submit monitoring reports to affected agencies
within 90 days of completion of the on-site monitoring visit.
X. Technical Assistance
A.
BIA shall provide technical assistance to Indian tribes related
to audit findings or program activities.
B.
When determined to be feasible, affected agencies shall inform
BIA of technical assistance activities (including those that may
include site visits) made available to Indian tribes through the
originating program.
XI. Forum Meetings
A.
Parties shall attend an annual meeting which includes
participating Indian tribes, to be co-chaired by a representative of
the President and a representative of participating Indian tribes. See
25 U.S.C.  3410(a)(3)(B)(i).
B.
BIA shall convene a forum comprised of the affected agencies
and participating Indian tribes to identify and resolve inter-agency
conflicts and conflicts between the Federal government and Indian
tribes in the administration of the Act. See 25 U.S.C. 
3410(a)(3)(B)(iii).
XII. Annual Review
A.
Affected agencies shall collaborate on BIA's annual review of
the achievements under the Act, including the number and percentage of
program participants in unsubsidized employment during the second
quarter after exit from the program, and any statutory, regulatory,
administrative, or policy obstacles that prevent participating tribes
from fully and efficiently carrying out the purposes of the Act. See 25
U.S.C.  3410(a)(3)(B)(ii).
XIII. Public Statements
A.
The Parties shall coordinate all public statements and other
disclosures with regard to this MOA. No Party shall undertake any
publicity regarding the MOA unless the Parties consult in advance on
the form, timing, and contents of any such publicity, announcement, or
disclosure.
B.
Nothing in this section limits the Parties' ability to respond
to grantee inquiries regarding the Act, individual 477 proposed plans,
or this MOA.
XIV. Duration and Ability to Extend
A.
This MOA becomes effective on the date of final signature. This
MOA will be reviewed by the Parties every five years. At any time, any
Party, upon 90-day written notice to the other Parties, may suggest
amending this MOA. Any amendments to the MOA require mutual agreement
of the Parties. The MOA may be terminated by mutual agreement of the
Parties upon thirty (30) days advance notice of intent to terminate, or
if the Act is repealed or revoked.
XV. Commitment of Funds
A.
Nothing in this MOA constitutes a commitment or obligation of
funds. All activities under this MOA are subject to the availability of
funds.
Appendix A
This is a list of programs that tribes have historically been able
to include in 477 plans. These are examples shared in this MOA for the
information of the new Parties by the Parties participating in the 477
demonstration prior to passage of Pub. L. No. 115-93.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Department
Eligible Program
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Health and Human Services
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
Health and Human Services
Native Employment Works
Health and Human Services
Child Care and Development Fund
Health and Human Services
Community Service Block Grant
Interior
BIA: Job Placement and Training
Interior
General Assistance
Interior
BIE: Johnson O'Malley
Interior
Higher Education
Interior
Adult Education
Labor
WIOA Section 166, Indian and Native American Programs
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Zientek.
At this time, I am going to turn to Principal Chief Hoskin.
I know you have to leave here shortly. For any questions that
anyone has for the Principal Chief, let's do those first so he
can depart. We can try to get as many of those questions
covered as possible. I would turn to Senator Lankford first.
Senator Lankford. Thank you. I appreciate that. I know you
have to catch your flight.
Let me ask, you make a request that $58.6 million and to
combined six different grants. How would that be used, and what
would that look like? That is the current request at this
point. How would that be used?
Mr. Hoskin. Senator, it is a broad range of programs. But I
had mentioned the effort to combat opioid addiction. We are
doing things from the treatment standpoint, but this gives us
the opportunity, just by way of one example, to get folks who
are ready to get into the workforce, but then they can turn
their experience and the skills we give them into helping
others who are struggling with addiction.
We have people who have other barriers to employment,
whether it is physical barriers, which would have been the plan
with the disability grant that we did not get to incorporate,
to overcome those barriers. With our new effort to send people
to technical training schools, we can fill needs for our new
health care system, which in addition to the high-level
professional positions, we need a lot of people with technical
health training. Because we have 850 jobs to fill in this new
facility that you toured. To do that, we need to put our people
to work. They want to go to work.
But these funds, running it through the efficient 477
Program, will help us do that. We have our work cut out for us.
That is one of the reasons you see that spike in spending, is
because particularly the demand for health care professionals.
Senator Lankford. So just a quick clarification there, and
I want to watch everyone else's time as well. The 477 for you,
is it, you mentioned administrative barriers.
Mr. Hoskin. Right.
Senator Lankford. Is it easier to access, is it forms to
fill out, is it less bureaucracy in the back? What makes the
biggest difference? All these programs you are eligible for, to
be able to use individually. So what makes it work for you?
Mr. Hoskin. It is so much easier when a Cherokee citizen
who has needs comes into the Cherokee Nation and can go to one
counselor and get a one stop shop for their needs met right
there. And then that counselor and the people above that staff
member are not hampered by these various bureaucratic reports
that we have to make. So one report, one budget makes it
seamless up the chain, so that the front-line staff worker can
help that citizen with a range of opportunities. It is
wonderful to see someone come into, say, our human services
department, because they can't make it to the end of the month.
And this one case worker suddenly changes their life and they
are able to chart a new future with a career, because they can
seamlessly do that.
So when we cut out the bureaucratic hurdles, and we can
overcome the barriers of the MOA, we can really effectively
change people's lives in a very efficient way.
Senator Lankford. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Vice Chairman Udall.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chief Hoskin, as
you mentioned in your testimony, the Department of Labor denied
Cherokee's request to include the disability improvement
initiative grant in your 477 plan. The department's decision
was based on a provision in Section 3 of the December 2018 MOA.
My understanding is that the Nation and the 477 Work Group
disagreed with this decision. Can you briefly summarize the
basis of your objection to the MOA's limitation of 477
eligibility to competitive grants that are exclusively
available to federally recognized tribes?
Mr. Hoskin. Certainly. And I would direct the Committee's
attention to Section 5A(1)(b) of the Indian Employment Training
and Related Services Consolidation Act. The problem here is the
MOA misinterprets the law and narrows the eligibility for the
grants to those that are exclusively available to Native
American recipients. That is not what the law says, it is not
what the Congress intended. And it also excludes opportunities
that are granted on a competitive basis with other entities.
So the agencies and the Administration has just narrowed
the focus too much and cost us this opportunity to again change
the lives for our citizens. So if we can accomplish something
to overcome this hurdle imposed by the MOA, we will be able to
do that.
Senator Udall. Thank you very much for that answer.
Chief Hoskin, tribes and Congressional authors of the 2017
amendments believe the MOA does not comply with the statute in
the following ways. Could you tell me if you agree with these
ways that have been indicated? I think there are about five of
them.
Transfers DOI's authority to determine 477 program
eligibility to other departments. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Hoskin. I agree with that. That is an abdication, as
the other witness mentioned.
Senator Udall. Restricts the universe of eligible programs
by narrowing the 477 Program's purpose.
Mr. Hoskin. Yes, and we experienced it.
Senator Udall. Limits eligibility of competitive and block
grant programs.
Mr. Hoskin. Yes, we experienced that.
Senator Udall. Allows departments to extend the review
deadlines for 477 plan evaluations.
Mr. Hoskin. I agree. Needless delay.
Senator Udall. And allows departments to deny waiver
requests.
Mr. Hoskin. I agree.
Senator Udall. And all of those in violation of the statute
and the intent that most of us up here, I think, were trying to
direct the department.
Mr. Hoskin. And all avoidable, Mr. Vice Chairman, with the
consultation that I know the Congress intended.
Senator Udall. Yes. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you, Principal Chief. I understand you
do have to catch a flight. I think those were the main
questions people wanted to get in so you are able to go when
you need to.
At this point, we will turn to five-minute rounds of
questions. I will begin with Director Bighorn.
Both President Andersen's and Ms. Zientek's testimony
mentions the memorandum of agreement signed by the Federal
agencies, Section 9 of the 2017 amendments gives the Secretary
of the Interior exclusive authority to approve or disapprove a
477 plan. Instead, Interior has given away this authority to
Federal agencies who now have final determination authority on
which programs are eligible for inclusion in a 477 plan. Why
did the Interior give away the exclusive authority that
Congress provided in Section 9?
Mr. Bighorn. Senator, thank you for your question. The
approval process still remains within the Department of
Interior. We read the statute and it doesn't give us, the
Secretary of the Interior, the authority to interpret the
regulations and statutes of any of the Federal partners.
As we talked about today, the MOA was developed in
consultation and coordination with the 11 other agencies with
11 other missions coming together to try and provide a
consistent document that would provide not only to the Federal
partners but also hopefully to the tribes the process for
getting a plan approved.
So we still reach out to the Federal partners, as I said in
my testimony, we coordinate with the Federal partners to
determine whether or not the programs being proposed for
inclusion into a 477 plan meet the statutes and regulations of
the various other 11 agencies.
So we still have the authority to approve and disapprove of
those plans. But we do consult with the other 11 agencies on
the plans that are submitted by the tribes.
The Chairman. Do you want to commit to reworking the MOA so
that it accurate implements the law? Or do you believe a
legislative fix is necessary?
Mr. Bighorn. As I said before, Senator, we interpret the
law to state that it doesn't give the Secretary of the Interior
the authority to interpret the statutes and regulations. The
MOA allows any party to come forward with a proposed amendment
within 90 days to consider a proposed amendment. I believe the
Secretary of the Interior, as we as the Assistant Secretary, is
willing to consider any amendments that may come forward from
the other parties.
The Chairman. Are you willing to rework the MOA, is my
question.
Mr. Bighorn. Are we willing to rework the MOA?
The Chairman. Rework the MOA. Are you willing to rework the
MOA?
Mr. Bighorn. If Congress, certainly we are willing to
provide technical assistance to the Committee. And if the
Committee says that we need to, if there is a law passed that
says we need to go back and revisit the MOA, then I am sure we
would go back.
The Chairman. But my question is, are you willing to rework
the MOA, or do you feel it requires legislation to change the
MOA?
Mr. Bighorn. I think that the MOA, legislation would help
to go back and rework the MOA. Because the MOA, in the
legislation that we received there was no guidance on how to go
about developing and producing the MOA.
Okay. You should consult at BIA. I want an answer, are you
willing to rework the MOA, or do you feel you need legislation
from us in order for you to do that. You may need to consult
with others on that, but I want an answer to that question.
Mr. Bighorn. Senator, I don't think I will be able to give
you an accurate answer to that question today. I certainly can
go back and visit and get back to you.
The Chairman. I understand you may need to do some
consulting, but I want an answer to the question. Thank you.
Ms. Zientek, in your testimony you highlighted several
areas where the MOA fails to comply with the law or is
otherwise contrary to the intent of Congress. What is the most
important part of the memorandum, in your opinion, that needs
correcting?
Ms. Zientek. Well, I would have to say it is three parts.
First off is get rid of the insertion of the word primary
employment and training as a purpose. Primary is not in the
law. The second thing that I would say is also with the
definition of competitive, where solely, the law says solely or
in part. So that needs to be corrected. And the third is the
abdication of authority by the Secretary of Interior, giving
away the authority to make that decision of approval plans.
The Chairman. You are co-chair of the Work Group. You would
be willing to continue to work with us as we work to address
these things?
Ms. Zientek. I would be very glad to work with you.
The Chairman. President Andersen, in your testimony you
mentioned you have been the President and CEO since 2005, and
that the Bristol Bay Native Association has utilized the 477
Program since about 1995. So quite some time. Based on your
considerable experience, can you speak to how more local
control in the administration of the Federal programs has
helped provide individuals in your community with long-term
employment?
Mr. Andersen. Thank you for the question, Senator. I think
the best way I can answer that is through statistics. Just over
the years, we have averaged, the population of my region is
somewhere between 5,000 and 7,000 people. We serve an average
of about 600 clients a year through 477. The latest statistics
that we had completed show that we have 549 clients that were
served, and those that terminated services, there were 65
adults, 61 youth and 120 cash assistance, for a total of 246.
We have had five adults enter unsubsidized employment,
while 27 achieved other employment outcomes. Other employment
outcomes include clients who already have jobs but need
assistance to maintain them. We have had 52 youth in 2018
complete the work experience program. Our cash assistance, it
kind of varies from year to year. But 65 achieved miscellaneous
education outcomes.
New jobs, we have created five new jobs. We have helped 28
businesses, provided them assistance. And we have helped six
vets, just in 2018, with service at a high priority. The
childcare assistance program is probably one of the most
important parts of 477 that allows our people to go back to
work or continue working who lack childcare assistance. Without
assistance, they would have to probably give up work.
So in the years that I have been involved with BBNA, this
is one program that we have seen grow. We don't disagree with
the BIA that this is an important program, we agree with them
totally. We did backflips when this law passed, because it so
much met all of our needs, all of the needs not only within
Bristol Bay, but throughout the State of Alaska.
Then the MOA comes along, and it kind of makes us wonder
whether or not the rule of law applies to BIA, or the
Department of Interior, or the 12 agencies that are listed in
the MOA. Because there are five areas that are completely not
in compliance with the law. How clear, how much more clear do
you have to be with the word exclusive? Exclusive authority.
How much more clear do you need to be when you say, programs
that are granted are solely or partially for tribes?
I don't understand, and I am being candid here, because it
is just real frustrating having to deal with this since
December. We are afraid even to try to submit any new plans,
because we don't want to jeopardize what we have already. We
already operate LIHEAP, we don't want to jeopardize our 477
plan and our LIHEAP funding by trying to include it in the 477,
into our plan. Because it would be denied. That has been the
experience so far.
It is just really frustrating that here we have, we want to
live by the rule, we want to help BIA to do their job more
efficiently, more effectively. We are the boots on the ground.
We are carrying out the programs that they would have had to
carry out themselves. We are doing it for them. We want to be
as successful as they would be, and even more, because we are
serving our communities and our tribes.
Our people look to us for leadership. If they have programs
denied, it is really, really frustrating. We want to add more
programs. But we are afraid to do that.
We recently, thanks to Senator Murkowski and Senator
Sullivan, Bill Barr came to Alaska. When he returned from
visiting our communities up there, he declared a crisis in
public safety. During the AFN convention, the Alaska Federation
of Natives Convention, he announced about $42 million would be
given to Alaska, or provided to Alaska. And we understand that
this might be to the C-TAS, the Consolidated Tribal Assistance
Solicitation program that DOJ offers. And we don't want to add
those, because we don't want to jeopardize funding, we don't
want to jeopardize approvals.
I have a sense that the funds will come to the C-TAS
program, but we are afraid to take the chance under the new
rules of having our plans continually considered in complete
and questions continually asked for more information.
The Chairman. Thank you. Vice Chairman Udall.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Chairman Hoeven. I want to echo
the Chairman's question and statement. I think he said very
strongly, the department must commit to amending the MOA. Mr.
Bighorn, I would even use the legal term shall commit to
amending the MOA. I think that is tremendously important,
especially when you hear from all the tribes and nations how
this has impacted them.
It is my understanding that the negotiation process for the
December 2018 MOA expanded nearly nine months, giving all
agencies ample opportunity to provide input on each provision.
However, according to your testimony, Ms. Zientek, these
months-long negotiations took place ``behind closed doors and
without any meaningful tribal input.'' Can you confirm that
tribes were not consulted during the drafting of the MOA at
all?
Ms. Zientek. That is correct. We were called to a meeting,
and said, we are going to be releasing the MOA the next week,
that is the extent of tribes being spoken to about it.
Senator Udall. Do you feel the lack of meaningful tribal
involvement in the original MOA drafting process contributed to
the implementation issues described here today?
Ms. Zientek. I do. I believe that it was left to the front-
line individuals that were causing us issues, and why Congress,
why this bipartisan law passed was to fix those issues. So they
found a way to put them back in the MOA and cause those same
issues again, or even more.
Senator Udall. Mr. Bighorn, I hope you and the department
agree that consulting is the bedrock of a strong government-to-
government relationships with the tribes. How will the
department improve its 477-related consultation efforts moving
forward?
Mr. Bighorn. Thank you for the question, Senator. Yes, we
certainly support self-determination, self-governance. That has
been one of the bedrocks of --
Senator Udall. And consultation.
Mr. Bighorn. And consultation, yes.
Senator Udall. The crux of this question is about
consultation.
Mr. Bighorn. In consultation, obviously, the Department of
Interior has a consultation policy on major issues that come
forward. In this particular instance, of course, leading up to
the drafting of the MOA and the signing of the MOA, the statute
basically told the 12 agencies who were subject to this law
that, you need to get together and develop an MOA. To the best
of my knowledge, the statute didn't put any consultation
processes in place.
When we went forward and drafted the MOA, and I was part of
many of the meetings, it was an effort by the 12 agencies to
come forward and put together an implementation plan. Since we
were responsible as Federal departments to implement the 477
amendments, we came together to try to make it, like I said
earlier, a consistent document that hopefully would be
understood by all individuals who were participating with the
477 Program.
As we move forward, working with the 477 Tribal Work Group,
we have these annual meetings to go forward and talk about
these issues and have some meaningful consultation and
conversation, really, with the Tribal Work Group. We have those
in place, the law puts those in place, a yearly meeting. But we
also have an opportunity to meet with them at the national
meetings and regional meetings. So we have continuing dialogue
with the Tribal Work Group on issues of importance to them and
concern to them on the 477 plan.
Senator Udall. And you are committed to moving forward with
consultation?
Mr. Bighorn. We will move forward with consulting with them
at these meetings on issues that come up, yes.
Senator Udall. For over two decades, the 477 Program has
helped tribes cut through the complicated tangle of Federal
programming to address development. That silo-busting is the
key to success. But workforce development is not the only
policy initiative that is spread out across multiple Federal
agencies. As all of you know, public safety, behavioral health,
environmental protection, are just a few of the areas where
tribes have to try to cobble together a hodgepodge of Federal
grants to meet community-driven goals.
Ms. Zientek, should Congress look at applying the 477 model
to other areas, and if so, what policy areas do you think would
benefit the most?
Ms. Zientek. Most definitely. I would look in terms of
Indian Health Service and some other agencies as well. I can
see the HPOG, Health Professionals Opportunities Grant, was
actually a program being operated by Cook Inlet Tribal Council.
That program is a perfect fit in 477, or using the 477 model in
other agencies. I know our tribe is working on a self-
governance panel for that very purpose.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Ms. Zientek. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Murkowski.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bighorn, I want to go back to a comment that you just
made. You indicated to the Vice Chairman that the implementing
legislation that says that the 12 agencies shall come together
and establish this MOA didn't require in its language any
consultation, so you didn't feel like you needed to do it.
One of the things that I am all over every agency that
comes to my office, when they are talking to me about their
relationship with our tribes in Alaska, I say, this
consultation should not be something that you are directed to
do. Consultation should be something that is inherent, that as
an agency you go to the tribes, you have that consultation. We
all know that some agencies are better than others.
I am a little bit surprised to think that when you were
talking about this approach, this consolidated approach to
efficiency, that when the 12 agencies come together to talk
about how we are going to make this work with the tribes that
nobody thought that maybe consultation at that point would be
important, even if it was not directed and outlined in the law
So was it an oversight, do you think? Or in hindsight--I do
you understand now that there are these efforts to bring in
that level of consultation. Was it because it simply wasn't
outlined that nobody felt that you needed to do it?
Mr. Bighorn. Senator, thank you for the question. When we
were looking at developing the MOA, we approached it from the
perspective of, Congress has asked us to come up with an MOA to
implement the program from the Federal perspective. And there
was no discussion at that point as to tribal consultation,
because again, it wasn't something that was required within the
law.
Also, the 12 agencies that were around the table felt that
this was, the charge for us to come up with the implementation
of the program, how we were going to implement the program.
Senator Murkowski. How the agencies were going to implement
it. Well, actually, you are not implementing it. Because as Mr.
Andersen has said you all are the ones that are implementing
it. You are taking the obligation and the responsibility that
these agencies have for these programs, and asking the tribes
to do that work for you, and they are happy to do it. We have
clearly heard that. They are eager to do it. Because they
believe strongly that they can get greater efficiency, greater
flexibility, truly make this work better for all those that
they serve.
So it just seems to me that there was a real failure here
on the consultation part, if you are basically saying, here,
you take over this obligation, the fact that there was not a
level of consultation.
Let me ask, though, because I am a little bit confused on
the MOA being reopened. You have heard here requests for the
BIA to reopen the MOA. In a letter that we received October
15th, from Assistant Secretary Sweeney, she says, during this
meeting, September 20th, during this meeting the tribes asked
the Federal agencies in attendance to consider reopening the
MOA for modifications. The Federal agencies in attendance
committed to considering the tribes' request.
So that was September. This is a letter that we received in
October. We are now in November. The question to you was just
asked by the Chairman, whether there is a consideration for
reopening of the amendments. And you have asked for time to go
back and seek further discussion with others.
It seems to me that it has been out there by the agencies
now for a couple of months to noodle over whether or not you
are looking to reopen this. You have indicated that there is a
process for amendments to be submitted. But is that the same
thing as reopening the MOA? Are they two different processes?
Mr. Bighorn. Senator, the process I outlined earlier is in
the MOA, and allows any of the 12 other agencies who are
parties to the MOA to propose an amendment. Now, what you are
talking about is revisiting the MOA or reopening it.
Senator Murkowski. Right.
Mr. Bighorn. That is something separate.
Senator Murkowski. Right.
Mr. Bighorn. And as I said earlier, I will need to go back
and visit with my leadership to determine if that is something
that is going to happen.
I do know that, as you say, we have had the letters from
the Work Group and letters from Congress asking us to consider
some of the inconsistencies that have been provided from the
tribes' perspective. We are still reviewing those letters and
certainly considering those.
But I don't have any information today to indicate that we
would be reopening the MOA. I would have to go back again and
visit with my leadership and get back to you on that.
Senator Murkowski. Okay. I would just again repeat for the
record here that at the meeting on September 11th, again,
according to this letter from Assistant Secretary Sweeney, the
issues were discussed related to the MOA, and then on September
20th, a couple weeks later, at the meeting of the Indian tribes
and Federal agencies, during that meeting, again, the ask was
made to consider reopening the MOA for modifications. We are
now here in November.
So it seems to me that there has been a lot of opportunity
for the agencies to be discussing this. In the meantime, what
you have happening, and I hope that you have heard this
clearly, and I hope that the other agencies have heard this
clearly, what is happening is the good work that needs to be
done on the ground is being halted. Decisions are being made
not to move forward with additional programs. What Mr. Andersen
has just outlined, with what is coming to many of the tribes
right now through these grants that are being made available to
us through Department of Justice, there is a real hesitancy to
figure out, okay, how can we be most efficient in getting these
funds out to those who need them.
That is who we should be thinking about. But we are not,
because we are saying, we need to be careful here, because we
don't want to jeopardize this, we don't want to be in a
situation where a program is going to be denied. So what you
have happening, because of these inconsistencies within this
MOA, because of these denials that Ms. Zientek has outlined so
very, very clearly, you have a process that was designed to be
more efficient becoming twice less efficient because of where
we are right now.
So my ask to you is to go back to those that you are
working with on this and convey to them, certainly this
Senator's urgency, and I would hope this Committee's urgency,
that you look at this very critically, very closely, and very
quickly. Because in the meantime, the efforts that need to be
made to allow for the good benefits of 477 to proceed are being
hung up. If there is any question about that, I would ask that
they read the transcript of what Mr. Andersen has just outlined
in his response to Chairman Hoeven, because he articulated
very, very clearly what his happening as a consequence of this
confusion that has been created, these impediments that have
been created by this MOA.
There are too many of us that have worked far too long on
this to be kind of stalled out right now. I hate that you have
to be the bearer of my critical review here, but all we are
trying to do is to fulfill the responsibilities that again, the
agencies have, and you have good people that are prepared to
take it up and to do so in a manner that makes good sense with
good efficiency and better management of the Federal dollars
that are at stake. It is our own Federal agencies that are not
allowing us to be as efficient as we need to be.
So I would ask you to take that message back to your team.
Mr. Bighorn. Senator, yes, I will do that. Thank you.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you. And I thank you, Ralph, for
coming all this way, and for your very clear statement.
Mr. Andersen. Thank you, Senator, and thank you for your
leadership.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Murkowski.
Senator Cortez Masto.
STATEMENT OF HON. CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NEVADA
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Let me just echo the concerns that you have heard today.
Absolutely, I think that this MOA can be addressed without
legislation.
But what I am hearing, just so I understand, is you know
about the concerns that have been addressed by our tribal
communities, but no action was taken to address those concerns
through the MOA, right now, as we sit here today.
Mr. Bighorn. That is correct, at this point.
Senator Cortez Masto. For purposes of just reviewing the
MOA, let me just say this, it can be terminated by mutual
agreement of the parties upon 30 days' advance notice of intent
to terminate. Thirty days, done, boom, you can start all over
again if you so choose to do.
But I do have concerns that the intent here, and again, I
am not going to belabor this because you have heard it over and
over from my colleagues, and I absolutely agree with them, is
to work with the tribal communities, not to hinder, not to put
barriers up, not to prevent them from getting these funds.
But let me ask you, Ms. Zientek, prior to the amendment and
the expansion, there were four agencies working together. At
that time, were you seeing similar types of inconsistences with
the laws with respect to the interpretation from those initial
four agencies?
Ms. Zientek. Well, three were players, the fourth never
came to the table, the Department of Ed, even though it was
allowable by law. There was an MOA in place since 2005, just
needed to be brushed off and expanded.
HHS had thrown up several roadblocks. Because of those
roadblocks, that is why we came to Congress to please fix the
law, and why P.L. 115-93 was passed was to fix those issues. We
still have some interpretations where HHS believes a tribe must
operate a program for a full year before they can put in 477. I
know that is hitting the Cherokee Nation with the TANF program.
Terrible expense to set up all the accounting and financial
requirements and training of their staff to turn around and
throw it out the door a year later.
So yes, there has been, yes, there are still roadblocks,
that is why P.L. 115-93 got passed.
Senator Cortez Masto. In the original MOA, with the four
agencies, was there tribal consultation when that was created?
Ms. Zientek. Actually, I wasn't around for the very first
one. But I was around, I have been 23 years with the tribe and
477. And for the second one, yes, the predecessor to Spike, Ms.
Lynn Forcia, did actually reach out to tribes a copy of the
MOA, and we were able to make comments and put that forward.
We provided, actually, that copy of the MOA back to the
agencies in February, I believe, of 2018, through Hankie
(phonetically) Ortiz before she was relocated.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. So let me just be very
clear, and I hope, Chairman and Ranking Member, I hope you
don't have to come back before us, and I hope we don't have to
do legislation, because I do think it is unnecessary. Just
reading through the MOA myself, I don't think you need to be an
attorney to find the inconstancies with the current law. So it
should be addressed by the agencies in a timely manner.
But I am hopeful that we can somehow put a time frame on
this and monitor it to make sure that we are bringing them back
before us if it is not done in a timely manner, so that we are
addressing these concerns, at the very least, through
legislation, which I think is unnecessary. Thank you.
The Chairman. Senator, I think that is right on the mark.
So I think I would just follow up with a question to Director
Bighorn as to when we can expect a response.
Mr. Bighorn. Mr. Chairman, I will go back and talk to my
leadership and get back to you as quickly as possible, take all
the information that I have had given to me today. I understand
the urgency of this Committee. We also would like to resolve
any issues that have come up, and I give you my guarantee that
I will take this back to my leadership and get back to you as
quickly as possible with some information.
The Chairman. Yes. Why don't you get back to us within 30
days? Even if you don't have a definitive answer, the Committee
would like to hear back within 30 days.
Mr. Bighorn. Mr. Chairman, I will take that back to my
leadership, in 30 days.
The Chairman. Okay. The other thing is, did the Department
of Interior follow Executive Order 13175, which mandates
consultation in developing the MOA? Was that done?
Mr. Bighorn. In the development of this MOA, there was no
tribal consultation in the process of developing it. It was
just, as Ms. Zientek said, the MOA was completed and then we
had a meeting with them to update them on what was developed.
The Chairman. Right. So you can see our concern, and I
think a clear path to go back and redo the MOA with
consultation. But that is what you are going to come back to us
with, and then we will go from there.
Vice Chairman Udall.
Senator Udall. Thank you very much to all the witnesses
here today. Just two quick things. One is the comment on 477,
and Mr. Bighorn, this really is, both these comments are really
directed toward your leadership. I know you have been sent with
a policy here, and you don't necessarily set that policy. I
would really take issue with your statement that the statute
that we are talking about here today directed the department to
draft and implement the MOA without consultation, without
consultation. The Department of Interior knows very well that
any direction it is given to act is to be one with
consultation. To say that the statute does not direct it runs
counter to all Indian law principles, existing executive
orders, and the spirit and the language of the law that is
before us.
We need you very quickly to comply with what exists in your
department in terms of a mandate to move in the right direction
on this.
Also one other brief note, I plan to raise this with
Assistant Secretary Sweeney. I do understand she is not here
today. I would ask you to bring this back to the department, to
her, to the deputy, to the secretary. I am once again
frustrated by DOI's glacially slow progress with remediation of
the health and safety issues at the Pine Hill School in New
Mexico, after tireless prodding from me and my staff and
requiring DOI to provide my office with weekly updates.
The department finally announced a facility remediation
plan in April of this year. However, since then, the department
has failed to provide its required progress reports. By the end
of the week, I would like the department to submit updates on
the following items: replacement of the perimeter safety
fencing, repair of the middle school roof, and remediation of
mold in the library, gymnasium, and kindergarten classroom.
With that, thank you again to all the witnesses here today,
and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Vice Chairman Udall. If there are
no more questions for today, members can, however, submit
follow-up questions for the record, and the hearing record will
be open for two weeks
So again, I want to thank all the witnesses, as well for
being here, and for your testimony. To both you, President
Andersen, and Ms. Zientek, thanks for your good work and what I
thought was just very clear testimony today. So we greatly
appreciate you.
Ms. Zientek. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thanks so much. And Director Bighorn, we look
forward to working with you on this important issue. Thank you.
Mr. Bighorn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you all.
With that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:09 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Tom Udall to
Hon. Chuck Hoskin Jr.
Question. There is a severe health care provider shortage in Indian
Country, contributing to lowered health outcomes for many tribal
communities. However, you noted that the Cherokee Nation is using the
477 Program to train some individuals in health professions. How has
the Cherokee Nation leveraged the 477 Program to start addressing its
own health care provider shortages?
Answer. The Cherokee Nation P.L. 102-477 Program assisted 361
individuals with vocational training services during the last fiscal
year. Of these, 187 were enrolled in Health Occupations. The majority
of these were Certified Nursing Assistants/Certified Medication
Assistants at 70, followed by Licensed Practical Nursing at 37. The
others were a combination of Dental Hygienist, Sonographers, Emergency
Medical Technicians, Echocardiography Technicians, Radiology
Technicians, Pharmacy Technicians, Surgical Technicians, Medical
Coding, Occupational Therapy Assistants, and Physical Therapy
Assistants.
During the current fiscal year, the PL 102-477 Program will
continue training in Health Occupations, prioritizing training in
Addiction and Substance Abuse Treatment, Pain Management, and
Behavioral Health in order to address the on-going opioid crisis.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Tom Udall to
Margaret Zientek
Identifying 477-Eligible Grant Programs
Question 1. I understand the 477 Tribal Workgroup is compiling a
list of programs across participating departments that meet the
statutory requirements for 477 eligibility. Why did the Workgroup
decide to take on this task? Does the Workgroup believe it would be
helpful for the 12 federal agencies involved in the 477 Program to
produce a non-exclusive list of eligible programs?
Answer. The 477 Tribal Work Group has begun the process of
compiling an ad-hoc list of programs across the 12 participating
department that meet the statutory requirements for 477 eligibility as
a tool for both Tribes and the agencies to see for themselves the
possibilities Congress provided by significantly expanding the
eligibility under the amended 477 law, as amended. The Work Group's
list is unofficial and intended to help Tribes with a starting-place in
thinking about whether, and how, expanding their individual 477 plans
could benefit their communities. This effort started during the time
between the passage of the amended 477 law and the issuance
interdepartmental MOA one year later, during which time the Department
of the Interior placed a moratorium on new or expanded plans.
We also undertook this work in response to certain federal
agencies' history of bad-faith dealing with respect to the 477 program
and in anticipation of those agencies attempting to undermine the
program. As the testimony of the November 6, 2020 hearing made clear,
our concerns were prescient.
The Work Group has considered and debated, over the years, whether
it would be helpful for the agencies to compile their own, non-
exclusive, list for use amongst themselves and with the Tribes. There
might be some utility in having such an ``official'' list. However, we
are deeply concerned that the agencies would make eligibility
determinations about specific programs without the context provided by
the rest of a plan, and that those initial eligibility determinations
would become de facto final determinations, even if styled as ``non-
exclusive.'' Our experience in related contexts leads us to be
concerned that that any program not included on the agencies' list
would automatically be denied for inclusion in a plan.
Moreover, it is very likely that the eligibility determinations for
inclusion on the official list would be made by each individual agency,
which would undermine Congress' clear intent that the question of
whether a program is eligible for inclusion in a 477 plan is left to
the Department of the Interior alone. Therefore, the Work Group does
not, at this time, support an agency-compiled list of eligible
programs.
Technical Assistance
Question 2. Cherokee Nation Principal Chief Hoskin testified his
Tribe is using the 477 program as part of their efforts to develop a
pipeline to train Native workers in the health care sector. If Tribes
are interested in using 477 to train their members in areas like health
care, public safety, or education, where can they go for technical
assistance to meet that goal?
Answer. As Cherokee Nation Principal Chief Hoskin testified, Tribes
try to address the needs of their community through a comprehensive 477
strategy. One of the critical needs in many of our Native American
communities lies within the Health Care Sector. For some parts of the
country, that need may be in the Education or Safety Sectors.
The Division of Workforce Development Director Terrence Parks and
his front-line staff Awarding Official Technical Representatives are
our best resources for Technical Assistance. Mr. Parks and his staff
are very dedicated and work to reach out to tribes to help secure
technical assistance from peers and other sources.
Currently, due to circumstances not divulged to tribes, Tribes are
not able to access technical assistance from Mr. Parks. Tribes look
forward to the issue being resolved so that we may once again be able
to rely on the knowledge and assistance Mr. Parks offers.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. John Hoeven to
Spike Bighorn
The Senate Committee on Indian Affairs worked to amend Public Law
102-477--``the 477 program'' to increase employment opportunities in
tribal communities through enabling greater tribal self-determination
and decreasing unnecessary federal bureaucracy. In 2017, based on the
success of the 477 program and with tribal support, the amendments were
passed by Congress and signed into law. These 2017 amendments expand
the 477 program to 12 federal departments, clarified program and
funding eligibility, reaffirmed BIA as the lead agency in operating the
477 program, and charged the Secretary of the Interior in conjunction
with the heads of the other participating federal departments to enter
into a memorandum of agreement (MOA) providing for the implementation
of the law. At the hearing, the Committee heard from tribal leaders and
the chairwoman of the P.L. 477 workgroup regarding Indian Country's
concern over the MOA and its misapplication of the law.
Question 1. Will the Department of the Interior commit to re-
working the interdepartmental MOA so that it accurately reflects the
law?
Answer. The Department believes that the MOA complies with the law.
As with any program, we continually evaluate whether we can make
improvements, and the 477 program is no exception. The Department and
the other Federal partners are still in the process of implementing the
477 program, consistent with the statute and the MOA. Accordingly, when
appropriate, part of the Department's evaluation efforts will include
initiating tribal consultation to solicit input from Indian Country
regarding implementation of the 477 program, including input concerning
the language intent of the law.
Question 2. What actions has the Department of the Interior taken
to ensure the MOA will be re-worked?
Answer. The Department and the other Federal partners are still in
the process of implementing the 477 program, consistent with the
statute and the MOA. As noted above, when appropriate, the Department
will initiate tribal consultation to solicit input from Indian Country
regarding implementation of the 477 program.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Tom Udall to
Spike Bighorn
Identifying 477-Eligible Grant Programs
Question 1. The departments that participate in 477 do not
proactively determine which of their grants will qualify for inclusion,
placing the burden of identifying potentially 477-eligible grants on
Tribes. In a recent briefing, Department of the Interior (DOI) staff
informed Committee staff that they once attempted to compile a list of
477-eligible programs, only to have to idea rejected by the other
departments. Please describe any attempts by the Department to compile
a list of 477-eligible programs and, if the Department ultimately set
aside such an effort, the events that led to the Department halting its
efforts.
Answer. To clarify the process and discussion surrounding the 477-
eligible programs, the Department did not represent that its ideas were
rejected by other departments. During the 477 MOA development process,
federal partners, including DOI, discussed developing a list of
programs that may be eligible for integration into tribal 477 plans.
However, at that time, the federal partners agreed that compiling such
a list may be perceived by federal agencies and Tribes as all-
inclusive, thereby restricting the inclusion of additional programs at
points in the future. Yet, as a way to help Tribes identify potential
477 eligible programs, on September 19, 2019, BIA sent a spreadsheet of
programs that had been identified by tribes for potential inclusion in
a 477 plan to all of the 477 tribal partners.
Question 1a. What other actions has DOI taken to reduce the burden
of identifying 477- eligible grants on Tribes?
Answer. The Act does not require that DOI carry the administrative
burden of identifying 477-eligible grants for Tribes across the federal
government. Instead, our efforts have focused on administering the 477
program on behalf of the federal partners. DOI and its federal partners
have been, and continue to be, open to hearing tribal views about
additional programs that may be eligible for inclusion in the 477
program.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto
to Spike Bighorn
Duckwater Shoshone Issue
In accordance with the Nevada Native Nations Land Act the BLM
Nevada state office is currently developing a survey to define new
boundaries for the Duckwater Shoshone Tribe in Nevada. Pursuant to this
law, the survey was to be completed within 6 months of enactment (April
2017). However, the BLM has missed this federal statutory deadline by
more than 2.5 years. The BLM has also not responded to the tribe's
meeting requests to begin negotiations on a self-governance compact.
Question 1. Can the BIA please work with the tribe and their agency
counterparts at BLM to ensure this issue is resolved in a timely
manner, and provide an update to my office?
Answer. The Department is committed to working with the Duckwater
Shoshone Tribe on completing the boundary survey as required by the
Nevada Native Nations Land Act (P.L. 114-232). While the land was
conveyed immediately by the law, the BLM continues to work with BIA on
finishing the boundary survey. The BLM is in the final stages of
completing the required survey. Additionally, the BLM has been working
with the tribe on a self-governance compact for grazing. The BLM last
held a meeting with the tribe in April, 2019, and continues to work
with the tribe going forward on grazing and range management issues.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Tina Smith to
Spike Bighorn
The Senate Committee on Indian Affairs worked to amend the Public
Law 102-477--``the 477 program''--to strengthen tribal self-
determination and support economic development on tribal lands. Those
amendments, which were signed into law in 2017, intend to give tribal
governments better control of how funding is used. I'm concerned by
reports that federal agencies, particularly the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS), are not carrying out these amendments
as intended.
Question 1. If an Indian tribe proposes in its 477 plan to spend
some of its workforce development program funding on a jobs-related
native language and cultural component, do you agree that the statute,
as amended, requires the federal government to approve the tribe's
plan?
Answer. The intent of the 477 program is for DOI to administer it
on behalf of federal partners. Pursuant to that purpose, the MOA
prescribes the process for evaluating and acting upon Tribes' proposed
477 plans.
Question 2. Do you agree that the mandatory waiver authority in 25
USC 3406 means HHS must identify and grant any requested waiver that is
``necessary to enable the Indian tribe to efficiently implement the
[tribe's 477] plan'' so long as the waiver is not inconsistent either
with (a) the purposes of 477 or (b) a statute that is specifically
applicable to Indians and not a statute of general applicability?
Answer. 25 U.S.C.  3406(d)(2) provides that a waiver request may
only be denied if it is (a) inconsistent with the purposes of the Act,
or (b) the provisions of law from which the program included in the
plan derives its authority that is specifically applicable to Indians.
Question 3. What is your view of the purpose of 477?
[25 USC 3401: ``The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate
the ability of Indian tribes. . .to integrate the employment,
training and related services they provide from diverse Federal
sources in order to improve the effectiveness of those
services, reduce joblessness in Indian communities, and serve
tribally determined goals consistent with the policy of self-
determination, while reducing administrative, reporting, and
accounting costs.'']
Answer. The purpose of Public Law 102-477 is to facilitate the
ability of Indian tribes and tribal organizations to integrate the
employment, training and related services they provide from diverse
Federal sources in order to improve the effectiveness of those
services, reduce joblessness in Indian communities, and serve tribally
determined goals consistent with the policy of self-determination,
while reducing administrative, reporting, and accounting costs.
Question 4. Do you agree that native language training and cultural
education activities are services related to job training within the
purposes of 477?
(25 USC 3404(a)(l)(A)(x): ``The programs that may be
integrated pursuant to a plan. . .shall be only programs
implemented for the purpose of. . .any services related to
the[se] activities [job training, welfare to work and tribal
work experience, creating or enhancing employment
opportunities, skill development, assisting Indian youth and
adults to succeed in the workforce, facilitating the creation
of job opportunities].''
Answer. Pursuant to the statute, each tribal plan is reviewed by
the Department and affected agencies. If a Tribe submits a plan that
includes Native language training and cultural education activities,
the plan will be reviewed to determine whether such training and
activities may be included in a 477 plan.
Question 5: In your review, does native language skill and cultural
knowledge enhance employability in Indian Country?
Answer. Depending on labor market opportunities and other factors,
language skills and cultural knowledge may enhance employability in any
community.
Question 6. The Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe in my state has a long
and productive history of making maximum use of its 477 authority. The
Band is using its TANF funds to help integrate its language and culture
into its job training efforts. Do you agree that this approach is
precisely what the Band is authorized to do under 25 USC Section
3404(b)?
Answer. The Band, like other eligible Tribes and tribal
organizations, may seek approval of a 477 plan that incorporates
programs that are eligible for inclusion in its 477 program for the
purposes stated in 25 U.S.C.  3404. The Department has worked with HHS
and the Band so that the Band's 477 Master Plan for October 1, 2019, to
September 30, 2022, could be approved.
[all]