- DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
[Senate Hearing 115-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
----------
THURSDAY, MAY 10, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 9:37 a.m., in room SD-138, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Lisa Murkowski (Chairman)
presiding.
Present: Senators Murkowski, Alexander, Capito, Daines,
Rubio, Hyde-Smith, Udall, Leahy, Tester, Merkley, Manchin, and
Van Hollen.
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
STATEMENT OF HON. RYAN ZINKE, SECRETARY
ACCOMPANIED BY:
OLIVIA BARTON FERRITER, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, BUDGET,
FINANCE, PERFORMANCE, AND ACQUISITION
DENISE A. FLANAGAN, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF BUDGET
opening statement of senator lisa murkowski
Senator Murkowski. Good morning. The hearing will come to
order.
Today, we will review the fiscal year 2019 budget request
for the Department of the Interior.
I would like to welcome back to the subcommittee our
witnesses this morning, Secretary Zinke, accompanied by Deputy
Assistant Secretary for Budget, Finance, Performance, and
Acquisition, Olivia Ferriter; and the Director of the Office of
Budget, Denise Flanagan. So welcome to you all. And, Mr.
Secretary, welcome back to the subcommittee.
The Energy and Natural Resources Committee held its budget
hearing back in March, and I appreciate the opportunity to
further discuss the details of your budget with you today.
Over the past year, we have been able to work very closely
on a host of issues that are crucial to Alaska, and I thank you
for your commitment and your attention to these very important
matters and all that you have done to promote the responsible
development of our State's abundant natural resources.
Just as a reminder to colleagues, we are going to adhere to
the early bird rule this morning. I will call on Members in the
order they arrived, going back and forth. We will do 6-minute
rounds of questions. It is my hope that we will be able to do a
couple rounds in an effort to give everyone an opportunity to
address the issues that they wish to raise.
The fiscal year 2019 budget request for the Department of
the Interior is $10.5 billion for programs within the
jurisdiction of the Interior subcommittee. This is roughly $2.5
billion below the enacted level, a reduction of 19 percent. As
with every President's budget request, there are portions of
the budget that I support and others that I will note my
concerns.
I do appreciate the budget's emphasis on greater energy
security and increasing responsible development of our natural
resources. An important effort is the Department's work on a
new 5-year plan for offshore leasing. I am pleased that the
draft proposed plan includes the Arctic OCS, which holds
enormous potential on both the Beaufort and the Chukchi Seas.
I know Members from other States have differing views on
including some new areas in the plan and that stakeholders and
the public have offered extensive comments. I support a plan
that balances greater access while maintaining protections in
areas where development may not be appropriate at this time.
And I, along with the rest of the Alaska delegation, have made
clear where those protections offshore of Alaska should
continue.
I am also pleased with the budget's emphasis on our
Nation's mineral security. This is an issue that I have been
working on for many years, and I appreciate both you and
President Trump recognizing the importance of reducing our
Nation's dependence on foreign sources for critical minerals
that are essential to our economic security.
There are some reductions in the budget that I cannot
support. One example is with the State of Alaska and our Alaska
Natives, who are still waiting for the Department to convey
title to millions of acres of their lands more than 50 years
since statehood. So it is hard for me to accept a 38 percent
reduction to the Department's program that issues conveyances
to those who have already waited far too long to receive title
to their lands.
Alaska also has one half of all federally recognized
Tribes. The Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) provides essential
programs for Alaska Natives and American Indians that are
fundamental to the Federal Government's legal obligations to
our First Peoples, and I am concerned by many of the proposed
reductions to the BIA.
Some of the programs that I will note with concern are the
proposed elimination of the Tribal Courts program and the Small
and Needy Tribes program. These provide critical resources to
some of the poorest and most remote villages in Alaska.
We had an opportunity yesterday in Indian Affairs to have
the President's nominee for Assistant Secretary to the BIA,
Tara Sweeney, come before us, and it was made very clear by
Members, both Senator Tester and Senator Udall here, that we
have high expectations for the Assistant Secretary. It is a
difficult job, but her department needs to be resourced
appropriately.
Mr. Secretary, in your testimony, you highlight the
importance of addressing the deferred maintenance problem
across the Department. The budget request proposes to establish
a new public lands infrastructure fund to address the
multibillion-dollar maintenance backlog at our Nation's parks,
refuges, and the Bureau of Indian Education schools.
Similar proposals have been introduced by Members of the
Senate, including Senator Alexander. I look forward to working
with you and my colleagues on this issue in both my role as
Chairman of this subcommittee and as Chair of the Energy and
Natural Resources Committee.
We have made significant investments in deferred
maintenance across the Department. With the 2018 omnibus
appropriations bill, the National Park Service construction
account received a $150 million increase. This is the largest
annual percentage increase ever for this appropriation, and
funds were provided to other land management agencies as well.
The BIA was provided an additional $162 million, including
$105 million for education construction, $24 million to restart
the facilities replacement and construction program to improve
public safety in Indian Country, and $31 million to replace
badly outdated dams and irrigation systems.
I know that the omnibus was passed just over a month ago,
and the Department is still working on the spending plans for
the individual bureaus to submit to the subcommittee, but we do
hope to get those details soon. We recognize that the fiscal
year is passing quickly, and it is important to get those
resources out on the ground.
With a budget agreement in place from the outset of the
appropriations process, I am optimistic that we can move bills
quickly and in regular order. And I thank the Chairman of the
full Committee on Appropriations and his Ranking Member, Mr.
Leahy, for their commitment to moving these appropriations
bills forward and doing so quickly and in an orderly manner.
So know my commitment, and I know my Ranking Member here,
we have pledged to work aggressively with you to do just
exactly that.
We cannot expect the Department of the Interior or any of
the other agencies funded by this bill to function efficiently
when we do not pass final appropriations bills until roughly
half the fiscal year has passed. And I think we saw that play
out in 2017, 2018, and we need to do a better job. So I look
forward to working with my colleagues to address their
priorities for this year's Interior bill.
Mr. Secretary, I look forward to working with you and your
staff to identify the highest priorities, so that we can ensure
that you have the resources that you need to fulfill your goals
for the Department. So again, I thank you for being here.
I turn to my colleague, the Ranking Member from New Mexico,
for his comments, but I know we also wanted to provide the Vice
Chairman of the full committee an opportunity to make comments.
Senator Udall. Senator Leahy, please go ahead. I know you
have many other things going today.
statement of senator patrick j. leahy
Senator Leahy. I thank you, Madam Chair and Senator Udall.
I also appreciate what you said about, basically, regular
order. You and I have served on this committee for a long time.
We have seen it work very well. I think of the leadership one
of my dearest friends, the late Ted Stevens from your State,
when he was Chair, and another dear friend, the late Dan
Inouye, when he was Chair, and we made it work.
It is no secret that Senator Shelby and I have spent a lot
of time talking about this. We want to bring it back. He as
Chair, myself as Vice Chair, we have every intention of
bringing it back. The Senate would be better, and the country
would be better.
And I know, Mr. Secretary, we had expressed our concerns to
you last year when the President proposed to eliminate or
reduce critical programs in the fiscal year 2018 budget. You
reportedly said to your own staff you weren't happy about the
budget proposed by the White House, which had a 12 percent
overall cut to the Interior Department. But now you are in
charge, and if you weren't happy with the 12 percent cut, you
have requested a 19 percent cut.
You have cut many of the same core environmental
protection, conservation, land management, and Tribal programs
the administration tried and failed to cut or eliminate last
year. Your budget would starve the Department of its ability to
enforce environmental safeguards, protect wildlife, and manage
our cherished public lands.
The commitment to our public lands has always been a
bipartisan one. It goes back to the days of Teddy Roosevelt.
But not only would you starve the Department of those needed
amounts, you would do that while at the same time opening more
public lands and waters to mineral and fossil fuel extraction.
Now, the administration has proposed billions of dollars
for a border wall to be built without complying with our
Nation's bedrock environmental laws. It is going to be quite a
shock to a lot of landowners, ranchers and all, in Texas and
elsewhere when they see what it would mean.
Our unique system of public lands was created so that all
Americans from all walks of life, rich and poor, young and old,
from Alaska to Vermont and everywhere in between, may enjoy the
outdoors and the benefits of our public lands. And these lands
provide public health benefits, recreation opportunities,
ecosystem preservation, and jobs. But your budget would abandon
the Land and Water Conservation Fund and Congress' bipartisan
promise to the American people.
For more than 50 years, the Land and Water Conservation
Fund (LWCF) has been an important funding source for State and
local outdoor recreation facilities; city parks that might be
part of critical green infrastructure; and acquisition of
public forests, wildlife refuges, parklands.
Vermont, like every single State represented here, has
benefited from LWCF investments. But we have more to do. We
want to protect the scenic vistas along the Appalachian
National Scenic Trail and Vermont's Long Trail. We need to
create and expand community parks, develop recreation
facilities, and implement locally-supported recreation plans.
I have concerns your Department may be delaying the
obligation of LWCF funding, given the administration's lack of
support, even though Congress, in a bipartisan effort,
appropriated the funds. Your first quarterly report shows more
than $133 million in prior years' unobligated balances in LWCF
line-item projects. It troubles me that such delays could harm
our ability to safeguard natural areas threatened by
development or see them auctioned off to the highest bidder or
special interest.
In this committee, we define who we are as a country. We
set our priorities. And I will work with the Chair of this
subcommittee, and I will work with the Chair of the full
committee, if we have set priorities and we have written it
into law, we expect everybody to follow the law, including you.
Thank you.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Udall.
statement of senator tom udall
Senator Udall. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
And, Senator Leahy, good to have you here today and help us
lead off.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for appearing before the
subcommittee as we begin our examination of the fiscal year
2019 budget for the Department of the Interior. We appreciate
being able to hear from you and to ask questions about your
budget request.
I also want to welcome Ms. Olivia Ferriter, Deputy
Assistant Secretary for Budget, Finance, Performance, and
Acquisition, and Ms. Denise Flanagan, Director of the
Department's Office of Budget. This subcommittee couldn't do
our job without the support of the Department's Budget Office,
so I want to recognize the terrific work that Ms. Ferriter and
Ms. Flanagan and their staffs do every day, especially in the
face of a challenging budget request.
Thank you very much, both of you.
As we begin to talk about the Department's budget, I want
to emphasize just how important the Department is to my home
State of New Mexico. The decisions made by the Department
determine whether our natural and cultural resources are
protected and managed responsibly, and whether we uphold our
trust and treaty responsibilities for the Tribes and pueblos
who live there.
So that is why I want to begin by thanking you, Mr.
Secretary, for taking three important actions within the last
year to help New Mexico.
First, I appreciate that you personally helped work through
a number of issues to allow land to be donated at no cost to
taxpayers to finally provide public access to the Sabinoso
Wilderness. Sabinoso is a stunning landscape that is now open
for hunting, fishing, and recreation. Public lands boost our
local economies and add jobs, and special places like Las
Vegas, New Mexico, benefit greatly. I will never forget our
horseback ride down into the Sabinoso.
Second, I want to recognize the Department's efforts to
finalize the contract to build the new Laguna Elementary
School, which was just signed in the last week. I had been
working with the pueblo and the Bureau of Indian Education
(BIE) for several years to replace this school, and this
funding is great news for the entire Laguna Pueblo community.
And finally, I want to say thank you for continuing the
landmark Bureau of Land Management (BLM) and Bureau of Indian
Affairs (BIA) planning efforts started under the previous
administration to ensure that energy development does not
encroach on culturally significant areas around Chaco Canyon. I
am also pleased that BLM recently walked back the decision to
offer lease sales in the area, which is particularly important
since this planning process is still underway.
But I remain concerned that there is still a directive in
place for BLM to offer quarterly lease sales that have the
potential to impact Chaco. And I am also concerned how recent
changes in the BLM planning process will impact the ability to
protect the significant cultural resources at Chaco and in
other places across the country.
I also want to say that I appreciate your focus on
improving outdoor recreation and public access, and that you
are committed to working with Congress to address the deferred
maintenance challenges at the National Park Service and other
Interior bureaus, something that this subcommittee has also
made a priority.
But frankly, Mr. Secretary, your goals do not match the
reality of your budget request. For starters, your budget
request walks away from the decades-long Federal commitment to
the Land and Water Conservation Fund by ending Federal land
management acquisition and cutting most discretionary grant
programs.
Given your previous support, you have to know how critical
the Land and Water Conservation Fund is for recreation, whether
it be funding projects to acquire inholdings, so we can manage
Federal lands more efficiently, providing access to landlocked
pieces of public land, or even funding parks and other projects
at the State and local level.
You have said repeatedly that you want to provide more
resources to the field, but the budget request slashes funding
for most land management and science bureaus by double digits,
and proposes to cut thousands of jobs, including positions that
are on the frontline of caring for our public lands.
It also proposes cuts for many of the Department's partners
and doesn't include the full funding our counties depend on
from the payments in lieu of taxes program.
You have said you want to uphold our Nation's trust and
treaty responsibilities and support Tribal self-determination,
but Tribal programs are decimated by this budget. Funding for
BIA is cut by 21 percent, including significant cuts to
education, public safety, and natural resource programs.
My concerns are not limited to the budget, and it is my job
to speak up when I see policies and actions that I believe are
flat-out wrong. The monuments review that the Department
conducted, and the decisions to eviscerate Bears Ears and Grand
Staircase-Escalante, are a travesty. I have serious doubt
whether these actions will survive scrutiny by the courts.
Until that question is answered, I believe that moving forward
with land management plans that will open these iconic areas to
development is reckless.
I couldn't agree more with the decision to roll back the
previous administration's rule to reduce methane waste, or with
a lack of meaningful public involvement as BLM crafts the new
rule.
I do not support the administration's efforts to move full-
steam ahead on the plan to drill in the Arctic National
Wildlife Refuge, and I still believe the plan to develop this
pristine landscape will not stand up to environmental review.
I am concerned about the recent decision to hike fees at
national parks, which will put a bigger financial burden on the
American families we want to visit our parks.
I remain concerned that, today, on the 146th anniversary of
the 1872 Mining Law, we are still not having the necessary
conversations about reforming this antiquated law. We are
allowing nearly 161,000 abandoned mines through the West to go
unaddressed, while at least 33,000 of these mines are
documented to be contaminating our environment. The next Gold
King Mine disaster is around the corner like a ticking time
bomb. And the budget reduces already inadequate resources for
abandoned mine land cleanup at the same time that you are
boosting mineral development.
I have serious questions about a number of management
issues at the Department, starting with the reassignments of
career members of the Senior Executive Service, and the lack of
documentation and transparency regarding these moves.
Mr. Secretary, you want our permission to reorganize the
entire Department, but it is not even clear whether you have
the right policies in place to manage your most senior career
staff members. The Department has not provided sufficient
detail on its actual plan for reorganization, including how
much it would cost to Congress or the public. And I am
particularly troubled by the lack of Tribal consultation so
far.
Finally, I am concerned by reports that the Department has
been slow to spend the funding Congress provided in fiscal year
2018. We enacted an omnibus bill that included more than $860
million worth of program increases for the Interior Department
this year, including major investments in national parks and
Tribal infrastructure. We also provided $425 million in total
for Land and Water Conservation Fund priorities at the Interior
Department and the Forest Service.
The Members of this subcommittee want to make sure that
these funds get spent as Congress intended and ensure that the
Department doesn't walk away from the bipartisan budget that
Congress passed and the President signed. The administration is
not proposing to rescind any funds from the Interior Department
at this point, so there is no excuse not to get funds into the
field as quickly as possible.
As you can see, Mr. Secretary, we have a lot to talk about
this morning. I look forward to hearing your testimony and to
delving into the issues I raised when it is time for questions.
Thank you very much for being here.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Udall.
Secretary Zinke, the floor is yours. Take the appropriate
time that you wish to outline your priorities here, and know
that we will have plenty of questions to elicit even more
discussion. And I do not know whether Ms. Ferriter and Ms.
Flanagan also will be speaking, but you, too, are welcome.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Please proceed.
summary statement of hon. ryan zinke
Secretary Zinke. Thank you, Chairman Murkowski. Ranking
Member Udall, good see you as always, and, Senator Tester,
Members. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to testify in
support of President Trump's fiscal year 2019 budget for the
Department of the Interior. With your permission, I would like
to submit my entire statement for the record.
Upfront, public lands are not a Republican or a Democrat or
red or blue issue, they are a red, white, and blue issue. The
public lands should bring us all together for the benefit of
our great public lands. I am a Teddy Roosevelt Republican. I
think he set our Nation on a journey, which we benefit from. It
is time to look at the next 100 years, to look at how we can
best manage our treasures.
The President has been very clear about his priorities and
is keeping his promises to the American people. The budget
supports one of those promises in a big way, rebuilding our
national parks infrastructure. It calls for the largest
investment in the history of this country to public lands, in
specific, our Park Service, our Indian schools, and our
Wildlife Refuge System.
As we all agree, our public lands are our greatest
treasures, but they have suffered serious neglect over the
years. Interior's deferred maintenance backlog is $16 billion;
$11.7 billion of that is from our National Park Service,
approximately $1.2 billion from our Wildlife Refuge System, and
just under a billion needed for our Indian schools.
The President's budget proposes legislation for a new
Public Lands Infrastructure Fund to address the deferred
maintenance problem. This legislation is our top priority. The
Fund would provide up to $18 billion over 10 years for
maintenance and improvement of our national parks, our national
wildlife refuges, and the Bureau of Indian Education funded
schools. It would be funded from all energy revenues on public
lands, similar to the Land and Water Conservation Fund, except
it includes all energy sources.
I think, as a Secretary, it is a fair proposition that if
you are going to gain wealth through energy development,
whether it is oil and gas, or wind, or solar on public lands,
then you, too, should have an obligation to maintain and
support those public lands in perpetuity.
In 2016, 330 million visitors entered our park system and
spent an approximate $18.4 billion in nearby communities and
supported about 318,000 jobs.
Overall, recreation is an $887 billion industry in this
country and growing. Our park system is being loved to death.
Recreation trends are up, and Americans should have the
opportunity to enjoy our national parks and our public lands,
but we need to invest in our infrastructure to go along with a
record-setting number of visitors. Otherwise, quite frankly,
the park experience we have grown to love will no longer be in
existence.
The Public Lands Infrastructure Fund will also fund 150
Bureau of Indian Education schools in 23 States, primarily in
the West, where the school maintenance backlog is at least $634
million. Interior has the responsibility and the honor of
educating about 48,000 American Indian students, and their
families rely on Interior to deliver a quality education in a
safe environment, but our schools are notoriously in poor
condition and underfunded. I think American Indian kids deserve
a world-class education, too.
The budget also presents the opportunity to reorganize the
Department for the next 100 years, which I look forward to
talking to you in as much detail as we have about the
reorganization.
The budget includes about $18 million to begin shifting
resources to the front line. I have been to the front line a
lot, and the front line is undermanned. From a former Navy
commander's perspective, if the front line is healthy, so is
the force, and our front line is not healthy.
In planning this reorganization, we continue to take into
account feedback from Congress, Governors, Interior employees,
conservation groups, and all stakeholders. I will walk through
each and every group we have talked to and where we are in that
process. Last week, we held employee listening sessions and
stakeholder meetings again in Colorado, New Mexico, and
Wyoming, and more are planned in early June.
We are basing our new unified boundaries on science, to
include watersheds, wildlife corridors, and ecosystems, so we
can better manage our public lands and waters in a more
coordinated way based on the American conservation ethic of
best science, best practices, greatest good, longest term.
The budget also recognizes that American strength relies on
American energy. Under President Trump, we are pursuing an
American energy dominance position. And today, I am happy to
report that this has been successful. Across our public and
private lands, America is producing about 10.6 million barrels
a day. For the first time in 60 years, we are a net exporter of
liquid natural gas, and we are on track to become the largest
oil and gas producer in the world.
We are also preparing the largest offshore lease of wind
and continue to highlight an all-of-the-above energy portfolio,
which is prudent for the years to come. President Trump's tax
cuts and smart regulation are helping grow the economy and
increase our energy portfolios to achieve American prosperity.
Our total budget request for this year is $11.7 billion.
The budget clearly lays out the Administration's top priorities
of strongly supporting the American people and rebuilding our
infrastructure, fixing our schools, achieving energy dominance,
and being fiscally responsible.
With that, again, I continue to appreciate the bipartisan
support of this committee. I appreciate all of your hard work.
And again, our public lands are our greatest experience and
greatest treasures in this country, and I look forward to
working with you together to make sure we achieve that goal.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Ryan Zinke
Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Udall, and Members of the
subcommittee, I am pleased to appear before you today to discuss the
2019 President's budget for the Department of the Interior. The 2019
budget request for Interior is $11.7 billion.
2019 budget priorities
Interior's 2019 budget prioritizes American interests with targeted
investments to advance American energy dominance, enhance public access
to public lands, and strengthen the economy through infrastructure
investment, regulatory relief, and fiscal responsibility. The
Department's 2019 budget reflects the administration's commitment to
strike the right balance of development and conservation of America's
resources to advance important national objectives.
A major component of the 2019 budget is the Public Lands
Infrastructure legislative proposal, which will provide up to $18
billion to address Interior's deferred maintenance backlog in the
national parks, national wildlife refuges, and Bureau of Indian
Education-funded schools. The investment in the Interior's
infrastructure will be funded by Federal revenues derived from rents,
rights of ways for energy purposes, and royalties collected by the
Department of the Interior. The proposal complements the President's
national infrastructure investment initiative and recognizes the
strategic importance of long-term investment in America's treasures.
generating revenue and utilizing natural resources
Growing America's Economy
Across Interior's diverse mission, the 2019 budget emphasizes the
Department's crucial role in promoting economic growth for America.
America's lands hold tremendous job-creating assets. Interior supports
$254 billion in estimated economic benefit, while direct grants and
payments to States, Tribes, and local communities provide an estimated
$10 billion in economic benefit. In 2017, the Department collected $9.6
billion from energy, mineral, grazing, and forestry activities on
behalf of the American people. Interior also supports the economy by
eliminating unnecessary and burdensome Federal regulatory requirements.
For example, in 2017, Interior initiated 21 deregulatory actions all
with significant associated savings for the taxpayer, once enacted.
The 2019 budget maintains support for Interior programs that play a
critical role in encouraging national infrastructure development. The
2019 budget includes $98.8 million for the Fish and Wildlife Service's
planning and consultation activities to support development while
avoiding species conflicts. This request enables FWS to meet legal
consultation requirements and avoid logjams that could delay
infrastructure projects and associated economic benefits to
communities, States, Tribes, and companies. The request includes $118.7
million for the Bureau of Reclamation's construction of water delivery
systems for Tribes and local communities. In addition, Reclamation
continues to explore future water storage opportunities. The budget
also includes $48.3 million for the Bureau of Land Management's
cadastral program, which maps and surveys the lands and resources
needed to permit rights-of-way and other infrastructure project
requirements in a timely fashion.
Advancing Energy Dominance
Interior plays a significant role in the administration's objective
to achieve America's energy dominance. The budget proposes $792.0
million in current and permanent funding for energy related programs
across the Department. Interior's 2019 budget continues to support an
``all-of-the-above'' energy development strategy, increasing funding
for onshore and offshore oil and gas, expanding coal activities, and
sustaining the current pace of renewable energy development.
A large portion of Interior's energy development activities occur
on the Outer Continental Shelf. The 2019 request includes support from
offsetting collections for a total offshore energy development and
safety program of $379.2 million. The budget includes a total of $179.3
million for offshore oil, gas, and renewable energy development
activities managed by the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management. It
includes $9.4 million for BOEM to prepare the 2019-2024 National OCS
Oil and Gas Leasing Program. The request for BOEM also includes $28.1
million for Renewable Energy activities across the Bureau. The 2019
budget includes $199.9 million for the Bureau of Safety and
Environmental Enforcement's programs to streamline the permitting
process, conduct inspections, evaluate emerging offshore technologies,
improve safety, conduct training, and maintain up-to-date policies,
standards, and guidelines.
Onshore, the budget includes $176.3 million in current and
permanent funding for the BLM oil and gas management program which
generated $348.9 million from bonus bids derived from onshore oil and
gas lease sales in 2017. The 2019 budget includes $137.2 million in
appropriated funds for BLM oil and gas management and oversight,
including leasing, permitting, and inspections. This funding will be
used to expand areas available for leasing, expedite permitting, and
improve various aspects of program management. The budget includes
$19.5 million for the BLM coal management program to help reduce
processing times, simplify the lease application process, and improve
the timeliness to complete lease sale fair market value determinations.
The budget includes $16.0 million for BLM to support onshore Renewable
Energy development.
An important component of Interior's natural resource programs is
the collection and disbursement of receipts from development. The 2019
budget includes $137.5 million for the Office of Natural Resources
Revenue. In 2017, Interior held the first meeting of the re-established
Royalty Policy Committee, which includes 20 members representing local,
Tribal, and State governments and other stakeholders. The RPC advises
the Secretary on the fair market value and revenue collection from
Federal and Indian mineral and energy leases, including from renewable
energy sources.
Increasing Natural Resource Development
Interior manages a wealth of additional natural resource assets
that require balanced stewardship and management. Maintaining healthy
and productive forests requires active management. The 2019 budget
includes $9.5 million for BLM's Public Domain Forestry program and
$90.0 million for the Oregon and California grant lands. Both programs
support jobs and local economies through timber and timber product
sales. The programs also maintain and improve the productivity and
resilience of forest and woodland ecosystems through sales and forest
development projects such as density management and reforestation.
The BLM actively manages rangeland and grazing activities on public
lands in the West which remain a vital part of local western economies.
The 2019 budget includes $82.1 million for the Rangeland Management
program. The BLM manages nearly 18,000 livestock grazing permits and
leases on the public lands.
Another example is the U.S. Geological Survey Mineral Resources
program which conducts assessments to identify critical minerals and
estimate potential supplies. A recent Secretarial Order directs all
Interior bureaus to identify a list of critical minerals, identify
domestic sources, and streamline permitting to encourage domestic
production of these critical minerals. The 2019 budget for USGS
includes $19.1 million to support this administration priority. With
this funding, USGS will accelerate nationwide geological, geophysical,
and topographical surveys of the United States to locate domestic
critical mineral sources.
conserving our land and water and expanding outdoor access
Interior is the steward of America's public lands and cultural
resources for the benefit of current and future generations. Taking
care of the resources we have rather than acquiring new Federal lands
continues to be a top priority in the 2019 budget. To administer
ongoing projects, the budget for land acquisition programs across the
Department is $8.1 million.
The 2019 budget includes $4.6 billion for operating programs in the
three primary land management bureaus--BLM, FWS, and the National Park
Service. This funding supports the day-to-day management of the natural
resources and public amenities of America's national parks, national
wildlife refuges, and BLM-managed public areas, including its national
conservation lands. Within this request is funding to support visitor
services and safety, law enforcement, and maintenance of facilities.
Early eradication and control of invasive species is an example of a
core stewardship activity shared Department-wide, which is funded
through land management operations. Across Interior, the 2019 budget
includes a total of $103.1 million for invasive species activities to
address significant issues such as the spread of invasive mussels and
Asian Carp.
The Land and Water Conservation Fund matching grants provided to
States, and through States to local governments, support the
acquisition and development of public outdoor recreation areas and
facilities all across the Nation. The 2019 budget continues a funding
shift that began in 2018 for NPS State Assistance grants from
discretionary to mandatory funding. Starting in 2009, discretionary
LWCF appropriations for the State Assistance program were supplemented
by revenues from certain oil and gas leases in the Gulf of Mexico, as
authorized by Section 105 of the Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act.
Under existing law, this permanent funding for NPS State Assistance
grants is expected to reach $89.3 million in 2019.
Ensuring the availability of water is central to the Department's
resource stewardship mission and is vitally important to communities
across the West. The 2019 budget includes $1.0 billion for
Reclamation's water resource programs to ensure millions of customers
continue to receive the water and power essential for daily life,
healthy local economies, and land management. The 2019 budget includes
funding to continue the WaterSMART water conservation grants and funds
Title XVI water recycling reuse research grants to support local
innovation efforts to stretch water supplies.
The 2019 budget maintains an important commitment to Interior's
neighboring communities, by including $465.0 million in the
discretionary request for the Payments in Lieu of Taxes program. The
PILT payments offset the loss in property tax revenue for communities
with significant Federal lands in their jurisdictions.
fulfilling our trust and insular responsibilities
The Department of the Interior upholds the Federal Government's
unique trust responsibilities by fostering government-to-government
relationships between the Federal Government and federally recognized
Tribes, American Indians, and Alaska Natives. The U.S. also has
important relationships with the affiliated insular areas including the
territories of American Samoa, Guam, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. Interior administers and
oversees Federal assistance to the three Freely Associated States: the
Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands,
and the Republic of Palau.
The 2019 budget addresses Federal responsibilities and Tribal needs
related to education, social services, infrastructure, and stewardship
of land, water, and other natural resources. The budget prioritizes
support for programs that serve the broadest service population rather
than initiatives that are more narrowly focused. The President's budget
maintains the administration's strong support for the principle of
Tribal self-determination and efforts to strengthen Tribal communities
across Indian Country. The budget calls for full funding for Contract
Support Costs and Tribal Grant Support Costs that Tribes incur from
managing Federal Indian programs.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs also undertakes initiatives to promote
resilient Tribal communities. The 2019 budget includes $2.5 million to
address the opioid crisis, which has been particularly devastating in
Indian Country. The funding will support BIA participation in intra-
and interagency initiatives that support opioid and substance abuse
prevention efforts. The BIA liaisons will align, leverage, and
coordinate Federal efforts and resources to assist American Indian and
Alaska Native communities in achieving their goals to reduce the supply
of drugs, provide opioid addiction prevention assistance, and otherwise
combat the opioid crisis, which is an administration priority.
The 2019 budget includes $173.0 million across the Department to
honor Indian land and water Settlement commitments. This includes
$127.3 million in Reclamation and $45.6 million in BIA. The budget
continues to meet Federal responsibilities outlined in enacted land and
water rights claim settlements with Indian Tribes to ensure they have
access to land and water to meet domestic, economic, and cultural
needs.
In 2019, the Office of Insular Affairs will continue to execute
activities which bolster healthcare capacity, strengthen island
economies, and fulfill U.S. compact obligations. The proposed 2019 OIA
budget is $608.0 million, with $84.1 million in current appropriations.
protecting our people and the border
A key component of Interior's land stewardship and public safety
goals is management of wildland fire. The 2019 budget provides $388.1
million for wildfire suppression. The budget responsibly funds 100
percent of the rolling 10-year average cost for wildfire suppression in
the Departments of Agriculture and the Interior within discretionary
budget caps, and proposes a separate annual cap adjustment for wildfire
suppression operations to ensure adequate resource availability during
severe fire seasons.
Over 12.5 million acres under Interior's jurisdiction are within 50
miles of the United States-Mexico border. More than 40 percent of the
border, or 820 linear miles, is managed by Interior's land management
agencies and the U.S. Forest Service. Interior is engaged with the
Department of Homeland Security to increase security on the Southwest
border, including 74 border miles on Tribal lands primarily made up of
lands located on and managed by the Tohono O'odham Nation in Arizona.
The budget includes $1.8 million to continue implementation of the
Department's Southwest Border Radio Demonstration Project, which is an
example of the coordination which occurs to help protect our border.
The project was developed in cooperation with BLM, FWS, NPS, and the
U.S. Forest Service in the Southwest border region to support the land
mobile radio program and infrastructure, and ensure continuity of
communications essential for safety, law enforcement, and resource
management in the area.
Interior also plays an important role in preparation for and
addressing the aftermath of natural hazard events. The 2019 budget
includes $117.3 million for the USGS Natural Hazards programs to
maintain important nationwide monitoring networks, including volcano
and earthquake networks, which provide vital scientific information to
emergency managers.
modernizing our organization and infrastructure for the next 100 years
Infrastructure Management
Interior manages an infrastructure asset portfolio with a
replacement value exceeding $300 billion, ranging from elementary and
secondary schools serving Indian children in the West, to highways and
bridges serving the daily commuting needs of the Washington, D.C.,
metropolitan area. Many of these assets are deteriorating, with older
assets becoming more expensive to repair and maintain in good
condition. Taking care of this significant asset portfolio is a
persistent challenge.
Interior's deferred maintenance backlog has grown to over $16
billion in 2017 of which over $11 billion belongs to NPS. In addition
to funding proposed in the administration's Public Lands Infrastructure
Fund, the 2019 budget for NPS includes $281.5 million in current
funding for construction and deferred maintenance projects.
Construction and maintenance funding across the Department totals over
$1.4 billion in 2019, excluding Reclamation.
Management and Reforms
During the peak summer seasons, the Department of the Interior has
nearly 70,000 employees in 2,400 locations across the United States,
Puerto Rico, U.S. Territories, and Freely Associated States. Interior
is also taking bold steps to better position itself for the next 100
years. In response to the President's Executive Order on a
Comprehensive Plan for Reorganizing the Executive Branch, Interior is
working to reorganize its operating structure to establish unified
regional boundaries to provide better coordination across the
Department to improve mission delivery and focus resources in the
field. The 2019 budget includes a total of $17.5 million for this
effort. The budget also proposes additional shifts to better align
functions within the Department and respond to Congressional direction
related to the Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians. The
Department is continuing to evaluate the advantages and disadvantages
of BOEM and BSEE being separate organizations with the understanding
that revenue collection activities need to be separate from safety.
The Department annually spends nearly $3 billion to procure goods
and services, over $1 billion on information technology, and over $300
million to administer acquisition and human resources services. In
2019, Interior will work to achieve cost savings of $52.7 million
across the Department, through more aggressive use of shared services
and use of multiagency ``Best in Class'' procurement vehicles, such as
shared contracting with other bureaus and Federal agencies.
bureau highlights
Bureau of Land Management.--The 2019 budget request for BLM is $1.0
billion. The budget proposes $930.6 million for the Management of Lands
and Resources appropriation and $90.0 million for the Oregon and
California Grant Lands appropriation--BLM's two operating accounts. The
BLM budget proposes to restructure several budget lines to provide
greater management flexibility and improve coordination of program
activities.
Through BLM's multiple-use mandate, the 2019 budget advances energy
resource development which generates revenues for Federal and State
treasuries and local economies. The budget includes $137.2 million in
Oil and Gas appropriated programs to strengthen overall program
capacity, improve management, and expedite permitting to facilitate
increased environmentally responsible energy development. Within the
total, $9.5 million will establish a competitive leasing program in the
1002 Area of the Alaska North Slope, as required by the recently
enacted Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, and bolster BLM's capacity for
permitting activities in the National Petroleum Reserve-Alaska. The
budget also includes $19.5 million to strengthen BLM's Coal Management
program and $16.0 million to meet anticipated market demand in the
Renewable Energy program.
To maintain the BLM's land stewardship responsibilities, the budget
includes $82.1 million for Rangeland Management and $66.7 million for
the Wild Horse and Burro Management program. The budget also proposes
$53.2 million for Recreation Resources Management and $26.3 million to
continue support for the National Conservation Land areas.
The budget includes $90.0 million for the Oregon and California
Grant Lands programs. At this level, the BLM will focus resources on
timber harvests as it pursues the timber sale targets specified in the
2016 resource management plans.
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management.--The 2019 budget request for
BOEM is $179.3 million, including $129.5 million in current
appropriations and $49.8 million in offsetting collections from rental
receipts and cost recoveries. The budget proposes to offset a decline
in offsetting collections with an increase in direct appropriations.
The 2019 budget includes $9.4 million to facilitate the development of
a new National Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Gas Leasing Program.
Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement.--The 2019 budget
request for BSEE is $199.9 million, including $132.1 million in current
appropriations and $67.9 million in offsetting collections from rental
receipts, cost recoveries, and inspection fees. The budget proposes to
offset the decline in offsetting collections with an increase in direct
appropriations. The budget proposes $12.7 million for Oil Spill
Research.
Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement.--The 2019
budget request for OSMRE is $121.7 million in current appropriations.
The budget includes $52.4 million for State and Tribal regulatory
grants, a level consistent with anticipated State and Tribal program
obligations.
Bureau of Reclamation.--The 2019 budget includes $1.0 billion for
Reclamation's water resource programs to ensure millions of customers
continue to receive water and power essential for daily life, healthy
local economies, and land management.
The 2019 budget includes a total of $447.0 million for
construction, planning, and management of water and energy projects and
programs. Funding for these activities supports water supply, drought
preparedness and response, land management including recreation areas,
and promotes water reliability by addressing the impacts of Reclamation
projects on fish and wildlife. The budget also provides a total of
$444.0 million for water and power facility operations, maintenance,
and rehabilitation activities. Reclamation emphasizes safe, efficient,
economic, and reliable operation of facilities, ensuring systems and
safety measures are in place to protect the facilities, Reclamation's
employees, and the public.
The 2019 budget continues support to address America's water
reliability and availability by investing to modernize existing water
infrastructure. The 2019 budget includes $10.0 million to continue the
WaterSMART water conservation grants and $3.0 million for Title XVI
water recycling reuse research grants that support local innovation
efforts to stretch water supplies.
The 2019 budget continues to support water technology innovation by
incentivizing research through Reclamation's Water and Power Technology
Prize Competitions. Reclamation's prize competitions target difficult
scientific and technological problems related to infrastructure, water
availability, and environmental compliance that affects water delivery
and hydropower generation. The budget also includes $7.6 million for
Reclamation to proactively stop the spread of invasive mussels in the
West, including preventing the spread of zebra and quagga mussels into
the Columbia River Basin.
U.S. Geological Survey.--The 2019 budget request for the USGS is
$859.7 million. The budget includes $72.9 million for satellite
operations, which includes $31.9 million to continue development of the
Landsat 9 ground system component for launch in 2021.
The request emphasizes science to inform energy and mineral
development with $84.1 million for the Energy and Minerals Mission
Area, including $19.1 million to locate domestic critical mineral
sources. These commodities are those minerals with important uses
particularly in technology, and no viable substitutes, yet face
potential disruption in supply. This funding will support the
administration's initiative to spur critical mineral resource
development in the United States.
The budget for Natural Hazards is $117.3 million to support
essential hazards monitoring, and provide scientific information needed
by resource managers and policy makers. The budget maintains support
for nationwide networks of more than 8,200 streamgages and nearly 3,000
earthquake sensors. The 2019 budget includes $96.1 million for
Ecosystems programs, focusing on nationally significant priorities,
including detecting and responding to invasive species and wildlife
disease, research supporting the conservation and recovery of species
at-risk or protected by law, and science supporting biological resource
management. The budget provides for continued collection of high-
resolution elevation and hydrography data for the Nation, including
modernizing maps for Alaska and complete national lidar coverage by
2033.
Fish and Wildlife Service.--The 2019 President's budget requests
$1.2 billion for FWS programs of which $1.1 billion supports FWS
operations. The budget prioritizes funding to maintain operations and
maintenance for the National Wildlife Refuge System at $473.1 million
and includes $50.0 million for the National Fish Hatchery System.
Ecological Services programs are funded at $211.8 million and the
budget prioritizes funding for Planning and Consultation and species
Recovery activities. The budget is $74.8 million for FWS conservation
grants including $31.3 million for State and Tribal Wildlife Grants,
$33.6 million for the North American Wetlands Conservation Fund, $6.0
million for the Multinational Species Conservation Fund, and $3.9
million for Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation. The budget
proposes $7.0 million for FWS land acquisition activities, which
includes $12.0 million in new budget authority and a $5.0 million
proposed cancellation of prior year balances.
National Park Service.--The 2019 budget request for NPS is $2.7
billion which includes $299.0 million provided in the Budget Policy
Addendum for 2019.
The budget proposes $2.4 billion for NPS operations. Within this
account funding is prioritized for the care and maintenance of existing
resources, including repair and rehabilitation projects, which
addresses the deferred maintenance backlog, and cyclic maintenance
projects, which ensure maintenance is conducted in a timely fashion to
avoid increasing the deferred maintenance backlog. The budget proposes
$241.3 million for the Construction account, which includes $157.0
million for line-item construction activities.
The request provides $32.2 million for National Recreation and
Preservation programs to support local community efforts to preserve
natural and cultural resources. The 2019 budget includes $32.7 million
for the Historic Preservation Fund core grants-in-aid programs. The
budget assumes funding for Land and Water Conservation Fund State
Assistance Grants shift from discretionary to mandatory funding from
offshore oil and gas receipts, estimated to support an $89.3 million
program. The budget requests $8.8 million to administer both ongoing
Federal land acquisition projects and American Battlefield Protection
grants, and includes a $10.0 million cancellation in available prior
year balances, for a net total of -$1.2 million for Land Acquisition
and State Assistance.
Indian Affairs.--The 2019 budget request for Indian Affairs is $2.4
billion. Funding for Operation of Indian Programs totals $2.0 billion.
In 2019, priority is given to programs serving the broadest audience
rather than initiatives or pilots. Within this total is $741.9 million
for Bureau of Indian Education programs where funding focuses on direct
school operations and full funding for Tribal Grant Support Costs. The
main operating account also includes $350.1 million for Public Safety
and Justice programs including $2.5 million to address the opioid
crisis which has been particularly devastating in Indian Country. The
budget includes $258.9 million for Trust Services programs to fulfill
key fiduciary trust responsibilities.
The budget fully funds Contract Support Costs at $231.0 million,
which will cover all anticipated Tribal program administration
requirements at the requested program funding level. The budget
requests $133.3 million for Construction programs and prioritizes dams,
irrigation projects, and irrigation systems which deliver water to aid
economic development as well as protect lives, resources, and property.
The budget prioritizes funding within education construction for
improvement and repair of existing facilities. The budget also includes
$45.6 million to provide payments to ongoing Indian Land and Water
settlements and $6.7 million for the Indian Guaranteed Loan Program.
departmental offices
Office of the Secretary.--The 2019 budget request for Departmental
Operations is $134.7 million. The budget reflects the proposed transfer
of $140.5 million associated with the Office of Natural Resources
Revenue to a new appropriation within Department-wide Programs.
Office of Insular Affairs.--The 2019 budget request for OIA is
$84.1 million of which $81.0 million is for Assistance to Territories
and $3.1 million is for Compact of Free Association programs.
Office of the Solicitor.--The 2019 budget proposes $65.7 million
for the Office of the Solicitor to provide legal counsel, administer
the Department's ethics program, and help resolve legal issues among
bureaus and offices as they fulfill their duties.
Office of Inspector General.--The 2019 budget proposes $52.5
million for the Office of Inspector General to continue support for
audit and investigations across the Department. The budget supports the
need for case management system maintenance, OPM security clearances,
continuous data monitoring, and information technology systems
assistance.
Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians.--The 2018
budget requests $107.1 million for OST. The budget proposes several
organizational changes including to realign OST under the Assistant
Secretary--Indian Affairs; to shift the Land Buy Back Program for
Tribal Nations to OST; and proposes OST assume coordination of certain
functions of the Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation.
department-wide programs
Payments in Lieu of Taxes.--The 2019 budget proposes $465.0 million
in discretionary funding for PILT. This amount includes $68.1 million
provided in the Budget Policy Addendum for 2019.
Office of Natural Resources Revenue.--The 2019 budget request
includes $137.5 million for ONRR's receipts management programs as a
separate appropriation to increase transparency of the program. The
request includes $3.7 million for anticipated contract cost increases
to maintain the Minerals Revenue Management Support System.
Central Hazardous Materials Fund.--The 2019 budget requests $2.0
million for the Central Hazardous Materials Fund to support program
management and legal staff. The program will fund highest priority
remediation projects based on the availability of recoveries and focus
resources on remediation projects with potentially responsible parties.
Wildland Fire Management.--The 2019 budget request for the Wildland
Fire Management Program is $870.4 million. The request provides $388.1
million for Suppression Operations to fully fund the 10-year average.
Separately the administration proposes an annual cap adjustment for
wildfire suppression operations during severe fire seasons. The budget
includes $322.2 million for wildland fire Preparedness activities to
support Interior's firefighting capabilities. To maintain proper
stewardship of public lands and address wildfire risk, the budget
includes $150.6 million for Fuels Management activities. The budget
includes $9.5 million to support high priority restoration of public
lands damaged by wildfire.
Natural Resource Damage Assessment and Restoration.--The 2019
request for NRDAR is $4.6 million. The budget includes funding needed
for ongoing damage assessments and restoration activities.
Working Capital Fund.--The 2019 budget proposes $56.7 million for
the appropriated portion of the Department's Working Capital Fund. The
request includes $46.8 million for the Financial and Business
Management System and $9.9 million for Department-wide Cybersecurity
needs.
legislative proposals
Public Lands Infrastructure Fund.--The 2019 budget launches the
Administration's Public Lands Infrastructure Fund (PLIF) to address
repairs and improvements in national parks, national wildlife refuges,
and BIE-funded schools. The PLIF would dedicate 50 percent of the
Department's incoming, unallocated energy leasing revenues that exceed
the 2018 budget baseline estimates, for the NPS, FWS and BIE
infrastructure needs. These revenues will be deposited into the Fund
and will be capped at a total of $18.0 billion.
Bureau of Reclamation Title Transfer.--The administration has a
proposal to better facilitate title transfer of Reclamation facilities
to non-Federal entities when such transfers are beneficial. This
proposal will allow local water managers to make their own decisions to
improve water management at the local level, while allowing Reclamation
to focus management efforts on projects with a greater Federal nexus.
Cancel Southern Nevada Public Land Management Act Account
Balances.--The budget proposes legislation to cancel $230.0 million in
unobligated balances from the Southern Nevada Public Land Management
Act program over 3 years. This would redirect a portion of program
balances to the Treasury for broader taxpayer use. The SNPLMA program
is not proposed for elimination and viable conservation efforts will
continue to be supported.
Land and Water Conservation Fund.--The LWCF receipts authorization
expires at the end of fiscal year 2018 and the administration will
review options for reauthorization.
Recreation Fee Program.--The budget proposes to permanently
reauthorize the Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement Act, set to expire
in September 2019. As a precaution, appropriations language is also
submitted proposing a 2-year extension through September 2021. The
revenues collected by Interior from these recreation fees--nearly
$318.8 million in 2017--are an important source of funding for land
management operations, maintenance, and improvements to recreation
facilities on public lands.
Termination of EPAct Geothermal Payments to Counties.--The budget
proposes to restore Federal geothermal leasing revenue allocations to
the historical formula of 50 percent to the States and 50 percent to
the U.S. Treasury by repealing Section 224(b) of the Energy Policy Act
of 2005.
Wildland Fire Suppression Disaster Cap Adjustment.--The budget
responsibly funds 100 percent of the rolling 10-year average cost of
wildfire suppression in the Departments of Agriculture and the Interior
within discretionary budget caps, and proposes a separate annual cap
adjustment for wildfire suppression operations in severe fire seasons,
similar to how unanticipated funding needs for other natural disasters
are addressed.
conclusion
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the President's 2019
budget request for the Department of the Interior. This budget
maintains core functions important to the American people and supports
transformation the Department needs to accomplish more effective
management over the next 100 years. It reflects tough choices to
prioritize and focus limited resources where investments have the most
impact while continuing to deliver access and services that are
critical to Americans. Achieving success in all of Interior's important
responsibilities for the American people is the Department's primary
focus and Interior is committed to take action to better accomplish our
mission. Thank you again for your continued support of the Department's
mission. This concludes my written statement and I look forward to your
questions on this budget.
Senator Murkowski. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I
take it neither Denise nor Olivia are going to make a comment?
Thank you.
REORGANIZATION
Mr. Secretary, let me begin with reorganization. What does
it mean? How is it coming? Who is involved?
And you and I have had several conversations about your
desire to really prepare the Department for the next 100 years
and gain efficiency, so that these bureaus function in a more
harmonious fashion. I think we recognize that we have been
dealing with this over the years. You just have these silos
within your agencies, within your bureaus, and it makes it
difficult internally and externally.
You laid down the original concept. I know that you have
been refining that as you gain input from within the agency,
from Governors, from Congress, and from other stakeholders.
Senator Udall noted a concern about not engaging as much
with Tribes. I would like you to address that piece of it
because it is important that we have that consultation as well.
Can you discuss where we are with the reorganization, how
you have incorporated what you have gained from this outreach,
and how you envision this reorganization being implemented?
Secretary Zinke. Well, thank you for the opportunity. Let
me address, first, the problem.
[The information follows:]
The chart here is how we are currently organized. Imagine
an organization or business that hasn't been really reorganized
in 150 years. Welcome to the Department of the Interior.
Let's say you have a trout and a salmon in the same stream.
Upstream, you have a dam. Downstream, you have irrigation. And
that stream passes by or through a U.S. Forest Service holding.
This is currently how we manage our resources. The trout is
managed by me, though Fish and Wildlife. The salmon is by NOAA,
Department of Commerce. Upstream water temperature and flows
are generally managed by the Army Corps of Engineers, but not
always. Sometimes the same basin is Department of the Interior
exercised through the Bureau of Reclamation. Downstream
irrigation is oftentimes Bureau of Reclamation.
Forest Service holdings are interesting. The surface is
Department of Agriculture exercised by U.S. Forest Service.
Subsurface is BLM.
When we have an Indian compact about water, which we
normally do, it is the State, BIA, and the Tribe itself.
Same stream, same issue, whether it is replacing a bridge
or repairing a riparian bank, we are likely to have multiple
biological opinions independently produced by different bureaus
with different missions in different regions.
It is an impossibility, structurally, to manage, and so
this is our proposal. Let me give you an example of how we are
currently organized in Interior.
This is currently just Interior, how we are organized. It
reflects a very old Department of the Interior, and every time
a bureau came into existence--for instance, for Bureau of
Reclamation, most of those projects were out West, the regions
were put in place to reflect that period and activity.
So I challenge you to figure out on this map how we can
manage. Next slide.
[The information follows:]
So this is what we did, similar to unified regions, similar
to how the military has combatant commands overseas, we asked
the United States Geological Survey (USGS) to strip current
boundaries and look at science. How would we be the best
stewards, and what would be the divisions based on watersheds,
ecosystems, wildlife corridors, about 13 variables?
They came back with a map dividing our country into about
13 different regions, based on pure science. Then I took those
regions, and I brought in my SES, my Senior Executive Service,
not political appointees, but careers. They looked at it, and
they offered a number of recommendations. I did not agree with
every recommendation, but I took every recommendation.
What you have before you is a recommended reunification of
regions so the Park Service has the same region as the Bureau
of Reclamation and the same region as the BLM.
Then what I did is I brought in the Governors. The
Governors' principal concern was making sure the BLM State
Director remains in place. I did that.
Then we looked at making three functional areas and doing
them jointly. By ``joint,'' I mean that within these new
regions, that recreation--because trail systems should connect;
wildlife corridors and flyways, that nexus should be protected;
bike paths should connect; and there is no reason why a
trailhead cannot start in a Forest Service holding and
transcend into a park.
Secondly, the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). All
stakeholders should be at the table in the very beginning of
NEPA rather than independently produce the biological opinions
or the Environmental Impact Statements (EISs) and the
Environmental Assessments (EAs), and finally permitting. Each
of those different regions will have those two or three areas
done jointly, but the makeup is different.
If you are in Alaska, you have different recreation than in
Florida, and so the different divisions will be made up of
Interior staff drawn from different bureaus, but they will
reflect what is in that region.
We are also pushing the authority and power out to make
more decisions on the region level rather than DC, because if
you do not know the difference between the Yukon and the
Potomac, maybe you are not the best position to make the
decision on the Yukon.
Lastly, Interior itself. Today, 16 percent of Interior is
retirement age. In 5 years, 40 percent of Interior is
retirement age. So we are a very senior Department. We do not
have to reduction in force (RIF) anybody. But if someone
retires as a GS-15, perhaps, in Washington, or one of our large
centers, we can recode that billet to a GS-7 and send them
closer to the field.
Lastly are Native Americans. I am a sovereignty supporter,
in that sovereignty should mean something. The decision on
whether to incorporate Bureau of Indian Affairs and to what
extent is a one-on-one relationship with the Tribes themselves.
We have made no decision to do that because consultation should
be among equals, and I think it is to their advantage to be at
the table on these critical decisions about permitting or NEPA
or recreation. But the decision on whether to change from our
current structure to fully incorporate into this structure is a
decision that the Tribes themselves, I think, should make as
equals. I think it is to their advantage of being at the table
at the very beginning, but the consultation is beginning. What
that structure would look like, we are not exactly sure.
I can tell you the different groups. I brought Simon
Roosevelt and Gifford Pinchot III in the office, the two
greatest icon families in the history of conservation. I had
roundtables with National Geographic and Audubon Society, and
we had a conservation roundtable, because before I bring it to
Congress and this body, I want to make sure we have it right,
and we walk through unintended consequences. Because this will
be the largest reorganization in the history of this
Department, and we just want to make sure we have it right.
Senator Murkowski. I appreciate you providing background. I
know that colleagues will want to drill down more into the
specifics, whether it is at this hearing or at other occasions.
Senator Udall.
REORGANIZATION
Senator Udall. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
And just a comment initially on the reorganization. Bureaus
have management issues because, by law, they have conflicting
missions. So I do not see how changing regional boundaries
resolves the fact that the BLM has a different legal
responsibility and legal responsibilities than the Park Service
or the Bureau of Reclamation.
So it is your job as the Secretary to take all of those
responsibilities and work it through. My initial thought is, I
do not see how changing boundary lines deals with the
conflicting missions.
As you know, on the public lands, on most of it, you are
doing a lot of multiple use, and you are trying to balance
endangered species versus oil and gas, for example. I do not
know how drawing the lines really makes a difference there.
ETHICS
But, Mr. Secretary, before we start, there has been a lot
of focus recently on ethics issues across Government, and I
want to make sure that this subcommittee does our due diligence
while recognizing we have limited time this morning and a lot
of ground to cover. So I want to ask just one quick question,
which I hope will be an easy yes or no for you.
Secretary Zinke, in keeping with the public trust, you are
currently in compliance with the standards of Government
conduct and your Trump ethics pledge, is that correct?
Secretary Zinke. That is correct, and may I quote the
Office of Inspector General's most recent reported
investigation, ``We found that Zinke's use of charter flights
followed relevant law, policy, rules, and all regulations.''
Senator Udall. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
2018 BUDGET
I also want to ask you about the agency's plans to execute
the fiscal year 2018 budget. As far as I know, the Department
has not yet released its budget to the field, even though no
funds are being proposed for rescission and even though you
have made prioritizing resources for the Department's
frontlines a personal priority.
I have also heard some concerning reports that the
Department may choose not to follow congressional direction,
including in the omnibus on a bipartisan basis, including fully
restoring funds for bureau programs or implementing Federal
land acquisitions and partnership programs, such as the USGS
Climate Science Centers and water research grants.
It is critical that this subcommittee has the confidence
that, when we pass a budget, the Department will execute it, so
I want to clear all of this up.
By what date can we expect the budget to be released to the
field? And will you commit to us that the Department will
follow congressional intent, including direction provided in
both the omnibus bill and the explanatory statement, and spend
the funds Congress provided without further delay?
Secretary Zinke. We are not holding up funding. As you
know, the omnibus, the way it was structured----
Senator Udall. What date are we releasing the budget to the
field?
Secretary Zinke. We should have the control numbers out
soon.
Senator Udall. ``Soon'' is a couple of weeks?
Secretary Zinke. A couple of weeks.
Senator Udall. Okay.
Secretary Zinke. As you know, the budget is supposed to be
done--and I do not fault anybody, but the system. It is
supposed be done in October. The omnibus was recently passed.
We had to review what was in the omnibus, put the control
numbers out.
As a former Congressman, I follow the law and the
congressional intent. The way our Government works and should
work is, you make the laws, you put in the budget and the
budget lines. My job is to execute it. I get called by Members
saying, ``Where's the money?'' and I say the same thing.
Some of the processes that were in place, particularly on
grants, which I know you are obviously aware of, is the way we
were doing it is that money had to be put in the account before
the field would actually put in the request for review. What we
are doing now is, we are making sure all the paperwork is in
before the grant is done. The tracking to make sure that when
money is allocated and Congress determines that that is a
reasonable expenditure of taxpayer dollars, is preapproved, so
when the money comes in, we can automatically deliver the
grants.
I apologize that, last year, I inherited a process. We are
making a better process. We did not have a database between
bureaus to track different grants. Grants were going out the
door, and there was no way to track whether or not those grants
were being spent per congressional intent. We are fixing that.
Senator Udall. Okay. And to end, what I gather from what
you said is that you intend to follow the direction provided in
the omnibus and the explanatory statement, and follow
congressional intent. And you have said that here today.
Secretary Zinke. Absolutely.
Senator Udall. Is that correct? Yes, okay.
Madam Chair, I am going to let other Members here go on to
their questions. I know we are going to have a second round or
maybe more. Thank you.
Senator Murkowski. Senator Daines.
Thank you.
Senator Daines. Secretary Zinke, thanks for being here. You
are a great advocate for Montana and for the West as a whole.
NATIONAL PARK RESTORATION ACT
I am especially happy to work with you on the National Park
Restoration Act to ensure dedicated revenues flow to our
National Parks maintenance backlog. We have talked about the
$11-plus billion backlog. We have great bipartisan support.
Every time I see Senator Angus King, he asks me, when are we
going to have a hearing on that? So I am excited about moving
that forward, working with you on that. We have, I think, an
opportunity to fix this problem.
YELLOWSTONE GATEWAY MINERAL WITHDRAWAL
I want to thank you also for your commitment to the
Yellowstone Gateway mineral withdrawal. You are working on that
with the Forest Service while we work for permanent withdrawal
here in Congress.
I also want to commend you for prioritizing oil, gas, and
coal leasing in other parts of our great State.
COTTONWOOD DECISION
Secretary Zinke, as you know, Congress recently partially
reversed the Ninth Circuit's disastrous Cottonwood decision. I
first want to thank you for championing my legislation to
repeal this decision first as a Member of the House and now as
Secretary of the Interior. Unfortunately, the recent action in
Congress does not apply to all BLM lands, only the Oregon and
California Railroad Revested Lands (O&C) lands.
The question: Do you support my efforts to apply the
Cottonwood fix to all BLM lands?
Secretary Zinke. It is prudent policy to remove the
Cottonwood decision to provide Interior better management
decisions. Yes, we do support being more aggressive.
I think the omnibus had a good beginning, but it did not go
far enough to give us the tools we need to manage our whole----
Senator Daines. Right. In that light, Mr. Secretary, and I
agree with you, the omnibus language only protects two of
Montana's seven national forest plans from litigation related
to reconsultation for new listings of new habitat. Further, the
omnibus did not protect plans or projects from legal challenges
regarding reinitiating consultation when ``new information''
has not been previously considered.
The Forest Service has already received notice of intent to
sue that reference the new-information requirements, and it is
only a matter of time before formal legal challenges are
brought forward that further delay implementation of important
projects.
My question is, do you support my efforts to likewise
reduce this consultation red tape when Federal agencies receive
``new information'' about a species?
Secretary Zinke. Yes, I support any legislation that
provides a better management tool, because we are mismanaging
by misaction.
We sat this morning on a Forest Service roundtable between
Secretary Perdue and myself, and many Members here. We are just
stuck in the mud on regulation that perhaps a lot of it was
good-intentioned, but it is not allowing us to actively manage
our holdings.
In this case with Cottonwood, it does not allow the
Department and the field to actively manage. When we do not
manage, we mismanage. We are destroying, in my opinion, the
habitat, in many cases, that we want to protect.
FIRE
Senator Daines. And, Mr. Secretary, as we heard this
morning at that briefing, the outlook for the fire season for
the northern Rockies looks to be above average. In other words,
we are going to have a tough fire season, according to the
Forest Service.
It is time to get the fringe litigators out of the forest
and put the loggers back into the forest. Thank you for your
help in that regard.
LAND AND WATER CONSERVATION FUND
I want to shift gears and talk about the Land and Water
Conservation Fund. I am disappointed to see the significant
reduction in proposed funding for LWCF. I am encouraged by your
budget mentioning the need for reauthorizing the program. I am
optimistic this committee and Congress as a whole will maintain
our commitment to that program, as it is one that has robust
bipartisan support.
My question is, do you agree that LWCF is a good program
that benefits Montana?
Secretary Zinke. I have long been a supporter of the LWCF
program. As a former Congressman, I have seen the benefits of
the LWCF program. I have been a supporter of a permanent
authorization.
It is hard to justify taking in more land when we have not
addressed the maintenance problem of our current holdings, and
I am hoping that a bipartisan bill you are sponsoring on
maintaining and getting a system in place where we can maintain
our current property, would be a big step. If we are
maintaining what we have, then I do agree with expansion of the
LWCF program.
But also, there is a difference between appropriated and
authorized. Now, over the course of time, authorized, the gap
is about $18 billion. So that means $18 billion had been
authorized that has not been appropriated from that account.
And so our current system, I think this is why we need a
permanent authorization.
Senator Daines. I agree with you, Mr. Secretary. We will
work with you to that end.
BLACKFEET WATER SETTLEMENT
I want to thank you for visiting the Blackfeet Reservation
earlier this year to authorize the first transfer of funds for
the Blackfeet water settlement, which we worked together to
enact while you were in Congress. I know you understand as well
as anyone how crucial the settlement is to the State of Montana
and the Blackfeet Nation.
In order for the settlement to become effective by 2025,
all appropriations must be appropriated. I do not think we will
get there with the current levels of funding proposed in the
administration's budget. In order for us to meet that
condition, over $50 million a year must be appropriated to the
settlement.
I want to do everything I can to ensure that this
settlement gets realized. That is why I have secured language
with your support in this year's Water Resource Development Act
authorization bill to allow earlier access to appropriated
dollars for the settlement. I want to explore the fiscal year
2019 appropriations bill as another vehicle.
My last question is this. Will you work with me in securing
as much funding as possible to implement the settlement, so it
can become enforceable prior to 2025, including the proposed
legislative language and proposing more funding in both the
Bureau of Reclamation (BOR) and the Bureau of Indian Affairs
(BIA) accounts in future budgets?
Secretary Zinke. Yes, I am committed to work with you on
this because, at the end of the day, waiting until an account
is full--it is present value of money. Some of those projects
that could have been addressed earlier at a lower cost could
have been made. But to ask an Indian nation to wait until an
account is fully funded in order for them to begin the process
I think creates hardship.
I would love to work with you on it. I think it is a
bipartisan effort. To get the resources to the frontline
sooner, I think that is an admirable goal.
Senator Daines. Thanks, Mr. Secretary.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Daines.
Senator Tester.
Senator Tester. Thank you, Madam Chair and Ranking Member.
LAND AND WATER CONSERVATION FUND
Thank you for being here, Secretary Zinke. I appreciate
having you here with your crew to talk about the budget. You
talked in your opening statement about the national treasure
that our public lands are, and you said that you were a Teddy
Roosevelt Republican. You said that before. I have heard you
say it before. I appreciate it. Teddy Roosevelt is one of the
people that I really look up to.
What has made Teddy Roosevelt an icon was his ability to
come into an area that was almost all wild and realize that it
wouldn't always be that way unless he did things like set up
parks. So that vision is what really, I think, sets Teddy
Roosevelt apart from just about any other President that has
served, when it comes to our public lands, which brings me to
the Land and Water Conservation Fund, a fund that has been
fully funded twice since 1978 when it was first set up at $900
million off of offshore oil.
Your budget puts in $8.1 million. From the questions
Senator Daines had just asked, your statement to him was that
you did not want to bring more land in to the public lands
domain, because there is a maintenance problem.
Did I mis-hear you on that, or is that correct? Is that why
we are at $8.1 million?
Secretary Zinke. The Land and Water Conservation Act
removes--the proposed budget removes new acquisition funding.
It prioritizes the resources we have.
Upfront, as you know, the budget is a proposal. And this is
where the two branches come together----
Senator Tester. I got you.
Secretary Zinke [continuing]. And discuss priorities. I
have always worked with you on Land and Water Conservation.
Senator Tester. Yes, and I appreciate that, Mr. Secretary.
The chairwoman talked about Tara Sweeney yesterday.
Here's the problem. The problem is that we all come from
different parts of the world. Public lands is a western thing.
It truly is. And for people to really understand here how
important this is, we have to have an advocate in the
administration--that is you--to be able to say, you know what?
$8.1 million when it should be funded at $900 million, because
I know in your heart, that is where you think it should be
funded--and do not let me put that in your heart, unless it
really is in your heart. But we have to have a person who
stands up, and says, whoa, come on.
So $8.1 million, let's just be honest, I mean, what was the
justification for that? Are there no projects nationwide?
Because the truth is, these ecosystems aren't going to be
around in 10 or 20 years. Teddy Roosevelt, they were going to
be around in 10 or 20 years, when he toured the country. But
now, they are not. We are seeing lands being sold and
checkerboards being taken away.
So I just want to get your opinion, because it is really
important that the Secretary of the Interior understands it. It
is not all on us. Some of it is. A good portion is on you.
Secretary Zinke. I agree. It takes working together on it.
I have been an advocate of the Land and Water Conservation
Fund.
We need to address our $11.7 billion backlog in our parks.
And then our $1.2 billion in our wildlife refuges. And, oh, by
the way, parks, even though in the West we think that all the
public land is out West, it is really not. We have great public
land battlefields----
Senator Tester. Sure do.
Secretary Zinke [continuing]. On the East Coast that also
need to be maintained.
The priority of this budget is the infrastructure repair
backlog and bringing a discussion between the two groups.
INFRASTRUCTURE FUND
Senator Tester. That brings me to my next question, and
that is that the revenue for rebuilding the national parks is
not going to be taxpayer dollars. It is going to come off of
all energy projects similar to LWCF.
LWCF is funded at a pittance, $8 million when it should be
$900 million. Why should we think that this proposal is going
to be any different, if it is going to be similar to LWCF?
Secretary Zinke. Well, the proposal, which is bipartisan,
was also a recommendation from numerous commission studies.
Senator Tester. I got you.
Secretary Zinke. But it also expands it. The idea is this,
it is a sound and prudent policy.
Senator Tester. It is fine if it is done. And LWCF is a
sound and prudent policy, too, to take offshore drilling
revenues and put $900 million toward this project in 1978
dollars, and they are not near as much now as they were in
1978. And we are funding it, I do not know, at 1 percent of
what it should be?
Secretary Zinke. This is why there are two branches of
Government, and why I am committed to work with you on it.
Senator Tester. Good. I appreciate that.
RURAL WATER PROJECTS
Now I want to talk about rural water projects. This is an
issue that Senator Daines also brought up, and he said $50
million for a Blackfeet water settlement to take into the
compact, to use his numbers.
We have a project in north central Montana. We have a
project in northeastern Montana. When I was first elected to
the State legislature in 1998, these were $100 million projects
total. Now they are north of $300 million projects total.
Fiscal year 2017, there was $84.6 million, which wasn't
near enough. In fiscal year 2018, there is $120 million, which
isn't near enough.
Your proposal is $33.9 million. Blackfeet is going to
require $50 million in and of itself each year moving forward.
We have the North Central water project that is 75 percent
unfinished that is going to get just under $4 million.
We are talking water infrastructure. We are talking about
living up to our trust responsibilities. We are talking about
making sure that these projects get built in my grandkids'
lifetime, because at this rate, they are not.
How do we justify this kind of a budget figure?
Secretary Zinke. So what happened, and why are we here?
This was the great promise of Bureau of Reclamation.
Senator Tester. Yes.
Secretary Zinke. It is that the Government would come in,
make significant investment, because the local ranchers and
farmers did not have the ability. Then over time, the water
districts would pay those projects off, and the title then
would be transferred.
The problem is Bureau of Reclamation rarely transferred
those titles. We are in the process of transferring, I think,
well over 300 of these titles to free up maintenance money, so
we can maintain our obligations.
This did not happen overnight, and it just wasn't the last
Administration. This has been decades.
Senator Tester. You are right. But this is the lowest
number that we have seen, that I have seen in 11.5 years that I
have been here. It is the lowest number.
And these are Indian water settlements. They are not
irrigation projects. This is trust responsibility.
Do the other communities get an opportunity to take
advantage of this? You bet they do. And it is good, because it
is good for rural America.
These projects will never be built. There isn't enough
money in this budget to take care of operations and
maintenance, much less putting pipe in the ground.
Secretary Zinke. The budget does include about $173 million
for Indian compacts. I understand that the obligations far
exceed that, but we also have to remove our overhead and our
legacy projects and transfer those titles, that will be
significant, to put more money into places where it is needed
rather than to continue to march on and not transfer these
titles.
Senator Tester. Thank you for being here. These projects
will not get done unless there is real money in them. It is
just not. Transferring, all that stuff, not going to happen
unless there is money in the accounts, whether it is LWCF,
whether it is Native American water settlements. I did not even
get into manpower. Those are big issues.
Thank you for your service.
Secretary Zinke. Thank you, sir.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Tester.
Senator Capito.
Senator Capito. Thank you, Madam Chair.
OFFICE OF SURFACE MINING
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here with us today.
I want to begin, first of all, by thanking you for some of the
common-sense regulatory reforms that you have made,
specifically the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement (OSM) guidance memo from the previous director,
which ordered the agency staff to conduct a backdoor
implementation of the stream buffer zone that had been
nullified by the Congressional Review Act. That was the right
thing to do from both pragmatic and legal perspectives, and I
want to personally thank you for providing much-needed
regulatory certainty in our country's mining communities. We
certainly see that having good results in the State of West
Virginia.
NATIONAL PARK RESTORATION ACT
I would also like to thank you for your Department's
support and would like to hear your comments on S. 2509, the
National Park Restoration Act, which would use excess Federal
energy and mineral revenues to address our national parks
maintenance backlogs. This legislation, I think, would go a
good way in assisting with the renewal of our parks.
We have one that is very special to me in Harper's Ferry,
which in and of itself has $15 million in maintenance backlogs.
So I do not know if you would like to comment on S. 2509.
Secretary Zinke. I do. I support the legislation. In the
budget, it has the largest investment in the history of this
country for Park Service and wildlife refuges.
And you are correct. The idea is this. All energy on public
lands, whether it is offshore or onshore--and it is different
than LWCF. LWCF is only offshore, but it also doesn't affect
any current programs. It is net dollars going to Treasury after
the Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act (GOMESA), after LWCF.
There is a number of revenue streams that get carved off.
What is different is it includes all energy on Federal
lands, and it is net dollars going into Treasury. Half of that
would fold back and go into a parks, wildlife refuges, and
Indian education infrastructure account.
Senator Capito. I am hopeful we can move that, because when
it was first brought to my attention--Senator Alexander, I
think, was leading the charge on that--it seemed like a good
way to solve a very difficult and expensive issue. So thank you
for your support on that.
CANAAN VALLEY VISITOR CENTER
I am just going to move along to an issue that is of
concern to me in West Virginia, but I have repeatedly received
assurance from the Fish and Wildlife Service that the
replacement of our Canaan Valley National Wildlife Refuge
visitor center, which is falling down, has been the agency's
highest priority in the northeast region. During these
conversations, I was informed that it would move to the top of
the list once the one in front of it was completed.
That happened, but in your budget proposal, Canaan Valley
was again leapfrogged and is again still number two in the
region but is also separated by that new northeast project by a
full 14 spots on your whole national review. I have put in
language in the fiscal year 2018 Interior appropriations how
important this is.
Senator Manchin, who is my counterpart, obviously, from
West Virginia, we are both onboard on this. We visited there.
I would just like some comment on that, and I want to have
the assurance that this is still a top priority. I know it is
for the Northeast. I have talked to the Fish and Wildlife folks
there just recently. Any comments you might make on that would
be appreciated.
Secretary Zinke. It was brought to my attention, the
project, and when we release our budget controls, you are going
to be very happy.
Senator Capito. Well, enough said. I will take that. Other
than that, since I have gotten that answer, I know when to quit
when I am ahead. So thank you very much.
Senator Murkowski. Very good. Thank you, Senator Capito.
Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
GLEN ECHO PARK
And welcome, Mr. Secretary, and thank you for your service.
I want to start with an issue close to home in my State of
Maryland, Glen Echo Park.
Over 16 years ago, back in 2002, the National Park Service
and Glen Echo Park entered into a management agreement that
gave Montgomery County, Maryland, management authority over the
park. That agreement is set to expire very shortly on June 7.
We have been working for about 2 years to try to get the
parties together to negotiate in good faith at the bargaining
table.
I would like to get your commitment to get your team to the
table next week. I can assure you I will get the Montgomery
County representatives at the table to finish this up, because
if it expires, you are going to create a situation with a lot
of chaos and uncertainty.
Secretary Zinke. My understanding is you personally have
gone to one of those meetings.
Senator Van Hollen. I have. You are right, Mr. Secretary.
And I hoped, after that, that we would be able to resolve this
quickly.
Secretary Zinke. My commitment, if I have to go personally
with you, we are going to get it done.
Senator Van Hollen. Great.
Secretary Zinke. It is an important park, and my
understanding is the ``negotiations'' are going well. But I am
personally involved in it now.
Senator Van Hollen. Okay. I am grateful for that, because
the clock is ticking. As I said, June 7 is the expiration date.
And this is an agreement that actually saves the National Park
Service a lot of money. I mean, we have been raising some of
the fees, as Senator Udall said, at the park.
Secretary Zinke. As a former SEAL, I have not lost many
battles, and I do not intend to lose this one.
Senator Van Hollen. Hopefully, they can resolve this, but
if not, I look forward to sitting down with you, Mr. Secretary.
I appreciate that.
Secretary Zinke. They will work it out.
5-YEAR OCS PLAN
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you. Now a little more
controversial issue, and this has to do with the January 4
announcement where you have set out draft regulations to open
the Atlantic coast to oil and gas drilling, including my State
of Maryland. And within a very short period of time, I think it
was 5 days later, you tweeted out, and I am quoting, ``Taking
Florida off the table for offshore oil and gas,'' and then you
attached a statement, ``Removing Florida from consideration for
any new oil and gas platform.''
I am sure you can understand why States like Maryland had
their eyebrows go up with that. It sounded very arbitrary and
capricious.
So my first question is does that still stand? Is Florida
off?
Secretary Zinke. Yes, I remain committed that there are no
new oil and gas platforms off the coast of Florida. They are
still in the process legally, but I am committed to that.
Allow me to tell you what I did, really shortly. It was
zero-based. I put everything on, and if I would have left
Florida off, it would have been arbitrary and capricious. So I
put Florida on.
Senator Van Hollen. Mr. Secretary, here is the thing. I
think that it might have been arbitrary and capricious to leave
them off, since you were looking at everything. In my view, it
is just clearly arbitrary and capricious to then, by tweet, say
that you are taking them off, and, at the same time, testifying
that they are still in the process legally, but you have
already made the decision politically to take them off. That
sounds arbitrary and capricious.
So what I would like is to get a commitment to put Maryland
in the same category, because I saw your testimony before the
Energy and Natural Resources Committee, chaired by the Chairman
of this subcommittee, and Angus King asked you about this,
Senator King from Maine.
He asked you about this, and you said these were the
criteria. Florida was different for three reasons. One, every
Member on both sides of the aisle wrote you a letter saying
they are opposed to it. So, Mr. Secretary----
Secretary Zinke. That is true, plus the Governor.
Senator Van Hollen. So the Maryland delegation is on record
opposing this in a bipartisan way, number one.
So then in Maine----
Secretary Zinke. And I have talked to the Governor.
Senator Van Hollen. Then in Maine you said, well, the Maine
Governor was actually in favor of it, but the reality is, in
Maryland, Governor Hogan, a Republican Governor, is on record
against it.
Secretary Zinke. And I have talked to the Governor.
Senator Van Hollen. So my question to you is, given that we
meet those criteria, can you tell me today that we will be
treated the same as Florida?
Secretary Zinke. You will be treated the same in Florida
under the process. Florida is a little different. It is called
a----
Senator Van Hollen. No, I am asking you whether you will
treat us the same as Florida in terms of tweeting out later
today that we are off the list.
Secretary Zinke. Florida has a moratorium in place, so it
is a little different.
Senator Van Hollen. Mr. Secretary, you know that that
moratorium is not on the Atlantic coast. You know that
moratorium is in place on the gulf coast. It was put in place--
--
Secretary Zinke. Here is some----
Senator Van Hollen. Let's just be real, right? This was
about the Atlantic coast, including the Atlantic coast of
Florida. Yes, there is a Florida moratorium on the gulf coast.
It has nothing to do with Florida's Atlantic coast. You took
Florida's Atlantic coast off. At least, according to your
testimony the other day, because their delegation was
unanimously against it, and their Governor was against it.
Those conditions apply in Maryland.
Secretary Zinke. And a moratorium, which is off the coast
of Florida, which would not allow the drilling of oil and gas.
Senator Van Hollen. Off the gulf coast.
Secretary Zinke. Off the gulf coast.
Senator Van Hollen. Not the Atlantic coast.
Secretary Zinke. Right.
Senator Van Hollen. That moratorium is not in place off the
Atlantic coast of Florida, so----
Secretary Zinke. I have some good news for you, though. The
good news is this. It is that there are no known resources off
the coast of Maryland. Number two is the President has ensured
that we take the local community in consideration and the views
of this body, the representatives. Three is that there is no
infrastructure off the coast. And four is that State waters
matter, so you would have to actually bring something offshore
through State waters.
If the State decides to say no--but since you have no
resources, you have no infrastructure in the State----
Senator Van Hollen. I appreciate that, Mr. Secretary----
Secretary Zinke [continuing]. I think you are going to be
very happy with our planning process as we go through. We
should release the first draft at the end of the fall.
Senator Van Hollen. Okay, well, I just hope we could sort
of put this on hyper-speed, like you did in Florida. I mean,
you have to admit, it looked very political, right? Meeting
with the Governor, making that public announcement by tweet. I
just hope that Maryland and other States that meet those
criteria get the same consideration.
I appreciate your testimony. I may ask you a little bit
more about other aspects of this, if there is a second round.
Thank you.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator. And yes, we will
have a second round.
We are now going to turn to Senator Merkley.
Secretary, I am going to excuse myself for about 7 minutes,
while I go ask questions in another Appropriations
subcommittee. Senator Udall will have the gavel here. Thank
you.
Senator Merkley.
FIRE
Senator Merkley. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary, for
coming and carrying on this dialog with us. I think it is a
productive exchange of concerns that particularly involves the
public opportunity to understand these issues a little better.
And I do appreciate the cooperation in tackling the
challenge of fire-borrowing, which has been something that has
so damaged the Forest Service year after year previously.
Having the 2020 date of ending that practice of viewing big
fires as national disasters I think is very appropriate and
helpful.
I also am going to keep pushing in the budget for more
funding for thinning our forests. We have 1.6 million acres in
Oregon that has already gone through the environmental process.
We found that in the fires last summer in Oregon where we had
thinned and taken the fuels off the floor of the forest, that
they were fire-resistant, and it made a big difference.
KLAMATH
OMB has allocated--let me back up. There is a budget that
Greg Walden and Senator Wyden and I pushed for, plussing-up for
water conservation and delivery. We did plus it up, and OMB
intends to allocate $10.3 million to the irrigators in the
Klamath. It is just on the verge of the check being written,
but my understanding is, as of this morning, it hasn't quite
been written, but I think it is going to happen soon. Is that
your understanding?
Secretary Zinke. I did meet with Congressman Walden on the
issue. We are going through the legal part of that language.
The Solicitor in Sacramento said that language would not allow
us to pump, even though, in good faith, Interior and yourself,
Senator Wyden, Greg Walden, all worked tirelessly to get the
language in, and I think we assumed that language had legal
standing to do what it was intended to do, we are looking at
it, because an objection was brought up that that language
might not give us the latitude to do it. So we are looking at
fixes.
It is a priority with me, because Interior made a
commitment to do it. You moved heaven and Earth to get the
language in there, and we need to work together to find a fix
if, in fact, the language--and it would be our mistake. The
language may not allow us to do it legally, but we think there
are fixes to it.
Senator Merkley. I am available 24/7 to work with you, as I
know my colleagues are. And thank you for that.
We had understood, as of last week, that the pumping was
okay, but the land idling might have to be repaid and that that
was the piece. So we will be part of ongoing conversations,
trying to figure this out and get the funds into place. But
thank you for working with us.
Secretary Zinke. My understanding is that is the case. We
can do it, but we cannot pay. We have to ask the irrigators for
faith on it, and then put the language in. But we would support
corrective language to do that.
Senator Merkley. Thank you. I really appreciate that.
That region has gone through--this could be the fourth
worst-ever drought in about a 15-year period, so it has been
tough down there.
CHETCO RIVER MINERAL WITHDRAWAL
On July 25, the mineral withdrawal expires on the Chetco
River. This is a National Wild and Scenic River, world-class
salmon and steelhead, during a period where many of our rivers,
the salmon runs are virtually disappearing.
The relevant Congressmen--Congressman DeFazio, Senator
Wyden, and I--have written to you and asked for your help
extending that, so Congress can have the chance to try to fit
this in when we do some kind of collective bill, as we often
do, in a large piece. We are just not sure what the timing of
that is going to be, but I would appreciate your help, if we
can extend that.
Secretary Zinke. I have asked to pull the file on it and
have it up to my desk. I know our staffs are working together
on that. I have not seen the paperwork yet, but I asked for it
to come up.
Senator Merkley. Thank you. I appreciate that.
5-YEAR OCS PLAN
Then for the last minute, I will also turn to this oil
drilling question. As you can tell by a variety of questions,
many States are very concerned.
We do not have too many tracks that are prime drilling
territory off Oregon and Washington, but there is one for sale.
Because we have crab, we have shrimp, we have groundfish, we
have oysters, we have salmon, and we have whiting, and I am
probably missing three or four more, plus our tourist industry
along the coast--it is the most beautiful coast to be found in
the world. So we love the coast, and we have a big tourism
industry about it, in addition to all of this fishing and
shellfish side. So folks are very alarmed and would love to
have, as you noted, that you were taking into account the local
and State voices, I would ask that you take into account that--
I know our Governor has talked with you, and thank you for
meeting with her--we are very concerned about this.
Secretary Zinke. You have my commitment that the local
voice will be heard.
And Oregon and Washington, three things. One is there are
no significant resources off the coast. Two, there is no
infrastructure to support oil and gas. Three is that there is
opposition. You would have to go through State waters. And
fourthly is the President has made it very clear in his
guidance to me that the local and State voice would be heard.
Senator Merkley. Thank you. I appreciate that. I will tell
you, even though we do not have much in known resources, there
is some. But also, the type of echolocation, the explosions
that are done to get more information on the geological
formations, that itself can have a big impact on our whale
migration and our fish stock, so we were concerned even if that
type of exploration should at least be made.
So thank you very much for listening to the local voices.
Secretary Zinke. May I add really quickly that seismic is
also used for wind. It is also used for extraction of sands to
restore the coast. So, carefully done, I would say seismic is
far less destructive than mining of sand for our coastal
restoration. But science is prudent in the way we look at it,
at the effects and causes and impacts.
Senator Udall [presiding]. Thank you.
Senator Alexander.
Senator Alexander. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
DEFERRED MAINTENANCE
Good to see you, Mr. Secretary. Good to see you. First, Mr.
Secretary, I would like to thank you for your visit to
Tennessee a couple of weeks ago.
My colleagues may not know that he turned out to be a Good
Samaritan. On his way out of the Great Smoky Mountains, some
woman had a dead battery and came up to him and asked for help
without knowing he was the Secretary of the Interior. He helped
her. And the next thing, it was all over the news, not because
of him, but because of her. So thank you for that.
But thank you especially for your visit, for the purpose of
emphasizing the importance of dealing with the deferred
maintenance, the $11.6 billion of deferred maintenance backlog
in the 417 units of our national parks system.
You visited the Look Rock campground on top of Chilhowee
Mountain as an example of that. It has been closed for 5 years.
It is a place where 5,100 families a year would camp and where
15,000 would go for daytrips. But they have not been able to do
that, because of no money to fix the water treatment system and
other problems. You pledged to find $2 million to fix it, and I
thank you for that.
But I thank Senator Udall and Senator Murkowski for the
increases in funding in deferred maintenance that this
subcommittee recommended and that the committee approved,
because I know you can use it in New Mexico, and we sure can
use it in Tennessee and North Carolina.
So thank you, Mr. Secretary, for that visit.
Let me ask you, in a larger way, Look Rock campground has
$2 million in deferred maintenance to fix it up, but the Great
Smokies has $215 million in deferred maintenance. Its
appropriation is only $20 million a year. The country has $11.6
billion. Several hundred million of that is the National Mall.
You were saying even the George Washington Parkway, Mr.
Chairman, is part of that.
So these are big expenses, and if we do not do something
extraordinary to deal with that, it will never get done, which
is why I want to salute you and the administration for
proposing that we take a tried and true principle, which is use
some of the money from royalties, from energy exploration on
Federal lands, and use it for an environmental purpose.
The Rockefeller Commission recommended that in the early
1960s. That produced the Land and Water Conservation Fund. Over
the years, every conservation group I know has supported the
idea of taking money from offshore drilling and use it for
billions of dollars of Land and Water Conservation Funds.
When Senator Domenici was here, we worked together to take
some more money out of gulf coast oil and gas drilling and put
into the State side of Land and Water Conservation Fund. And
now you have proposed that we use money from all of royalties
to address this $11.6 billion backlog.
I am pleased to report, we have at least two pieces of
legislation here with bipartisan support. Several Members of
this committee have joined with me, Daines, Capito, Gardner,
Heinrich, King, Manchin, Tillis. That is a pretty good start in
bipartisan support. Then Senator Portman and Senator Warner
have another bill, all headed in the same direction.
This looks to me like something that might become law. If
we have conservation groups, Republicans, Democrats, President
Trump, you all behind it.
What can you tell us about our chances for success with
legislation to deal with deferred maintenance of national
parks?
Secretary Zinke. In my opening remarks, I talked about how
our public land experience in this country is not a Republican
or a Democrat or independent issue. It is an American issue.
There are certain things that should transcend partisanship,
even in the current political atmosphere. I would think
dedicating a fund to address what America loves--and America
loves our parks, America loves our wildlife refuges, and we
have a treaty obligation to make sure that our Indian kids have
a world-class education, too.
You talk about our maintenance backlog, even though the
Memorial Bridge, our project was released under-budget and
ahead of schedule, it was $239 million.
It is not just the things you see. It is the things you
don't see. You don't see our sewer systems. Our water----
Senator Alexander. So the Memorial Bridge, if you will
excuse me for interrupting, cost more to fix than the entire
maintenance backlog for the most visited national park in the
United States, the Great Smokies.
Secretary Zinke. Yes, sir. And a water system in the Grand
Canyon at $170 million would nearly cover your entire backlog.
The $11.7 billion of backlog in our parks system, about half is
roads.
I do have to apologize to you, because I did say something
that wasn't true when I was at Smoky. I said that the new road,
the link, was competitive. I would say it is not competitive.
It rivals any of our road systems in our parks. It is a
beautiful road. But that link was going to increase traffic.
There is no doubt that America is going to want to be on that
road and see the majesty of that valley. That is going to incur
a larger maintenance issue on the existing roads.
Our parks are being loved to death. That road alone will
increase visitation, because I think every American is going to
want to go on that road. It is an epic completion of a long
project. But it is gorgeous, magnificent, majestic scenery on
that road.
Senator Alexander. Mr. Chairman, he is talking about the
Foothills Parkway around the edge of the Great Smoky Mountain
National Park, which was authorized first in 1944. This section
of it is being opened toward the end of this year.
Senator Udall. That is great. That is great to hear.
Senator Alexander, you are finished? Okay, good, thank you.
Secretary Zinke. That project started in 1960.
LAND AND WATER CONSERVATION FUND
Senator Udall. Yes. You know, when you talk, Mr. Secretary,
about these needs, I mean, that is the reason we have the Land
and Water Conservation Fund. Where you say we love our parks to
death, the reason we have the Land and Water Conservation Fund
and the reason the commission that Senator Alexander talked
about was put in place, and the high numbers that Senator
Tester talked about, are to have additional parks at the local
level, at the State level, at the national level. That is why
it is so important that you get those funds out the door.
My understanding is that the Land and Water Conservation
Funds are stuck right now.
REORGANIZATION
But let me just turn to the reorganization first. I want to
note that this subcommittee has a long-standing process for
reviewing and approving departmental reorganizations before
they are implemented, even if they have no funding impact. So
we expect you to work closely with us before any changes are
made on the ground.
So what is the Department's plan for submitting its
reorganization proposal to Congress? Do you intend to submit a
reprogramming proposal? Or do you plan to wait until the fiscal
year 2019 budget is approved to move forward? Will you move
before Tribal consultations take place? Which is absolutely
crucial, as you know.
Secretary Zinke. Our process is, we are going through the
stakeholders. Again, we started out with the USGS on basic
science. Then we brought our SESs in to change the boundaries a
little. Then we brought in stakeholders. We are continuing to
talk on the House side. We continue to ask for meetings with
you to go through to make sure that when we do a reprogramming
letter, that it is not a surprise, because there are a lot of
stakeholders.
We are having a conservation group roundtable, I think next
week, which is a large spectrum across-the-board, to go through
it and get input.
On the Tribal consulting, we have begun the process. But
again, we have not made a determination on whether the Tribes
themselves are a part of the reorganization or remain as they
are. That decision, I think, when I say Tribes are sovereign,
is a decision they should make. What we have to do is
articulate why I think and why the Department thinks it is to
their advantage. But, ultimately, it is a decision that they
are going to have to make, one way the other. We are prepared
either way with the BIA.
I want to emphasize, it doesn't really affect a park unit
or a wildlife refuge in the new regions. What it affects is the
decisions on recreation, the National Environmental Policy Act
(NEPA), and permitting that operate on a landscape level,
because trail systems should connect. We talked about it, that
there is no reason why a trailhead cannot start in a BLM
property and transcend into a park.
But at present, you talked about different missions, there
absolutely are different missions in each of the different
bureaus. There is goodness in having service discipline, but
where we can harmonize and connect the resources, like wildlife
corridors, I think it is important that the bureaus on those
critical components that lead to a healthy environment and
better stewardship, those areas, I think, we should go joint
and make those decisions, along with the State, for a better
outcome.
Senator Udall. Mr. Secretary, will you submit, for the
record, a schedule for Tribal consultations?
Secretary Zinke. We should be able to have that to you.
[The information follows:]
TRIBAL CONSULTATION SESSIONS ON DOI REORGANIZATION
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date
Time (Local)
Location
Venue
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
**Listening Session**
1:00 pm-3:00 pm
Kansas City, Missouri
**Listening Session**
Sunday, June 3, 2018
NCAI Mid-Year Conference
Marriott Kansas City Downtown
200 W. 12th Street
Kansas City, MO 64105
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tuesday, June 19, 2018
9:00 am-1:00 pm
New Buffalo, Michigan
Four Winds-New Buffalo Casino
11111 Wilson Road
New Buffalo, MI 49117
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thursday, June 21, 2018
9:00 am-1:00 pm
Billings, Montana
BIA Rocky Mountain Regional
Office
2021 4th Avenue,
North Billings, MT 59101
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monday, June 25, 2018
9:00 am-1:00 pm
Albuquerque, New Mexico
National Indian Programs Training
Center
1011 Indian School Road, NW
Albuquerque, NM 87104
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thursday, June 28, 2018
9:00 am-1:00 pm
Jackson, California
Jackson Rancheria Casino Resort
12222 New York Ranch Road
Jackson, CA 95642
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tuesday, July 24, 2018
9:00 am-1:00 pm
Banning, California
Morongo Band of Mission Indians
Tribal Chambers
12700 Pumarra Road
Banning, CA 92220
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thursday, August 2, 2018
9:00 am-1:00 pm
Juneau, Alaska
Elizabeth Peratrovich Hall
320 W. Willoughby Avenue
Juneau, AK 99801
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tuesday, August 7, 2018
9:00 am-1:00 pm
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
Embassy Suites Oklahoma City
1815 South Meridian
Oklahoma City, OK 73108
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thursday, August 9, 2018
1:00 pm-4:00 pm
Philadelphia,
Pearl River Resort, Golden Moon
Mississippi
Hotel & Casino
13541 Hwy 16 W
Philadelphia, MS 39350
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Senator Udall. Good, because I think it is very important.
It sounds like you are leaning to including them, and then you
are going to make the case. And so, I would just like to know
and be able----
Secretary Zinke. Well, I am leaning----
Senator Udall. Because we are being asked by Tribes.
Secretary Zinke. Yes, I want to make it clear, you need a
commitment, I am not going to include the Tribes unless they
want to, because consultation should be more than an email, or
it should be more than a phone call. True consultation is
working together.
We are prepared either way. But I think, personally, it is
to the advantage of the Tribes to be at the table on water
decisions, recreation decisions, wildlife corridors earlier. I
think it is to their advantage. But they will have to make that
decision themselves.
I am prepared either way. But I do think, from a kid who
grew up in Montana with the Great Plains Tribes, I think it is
an advantage to look at traveling systems, NEPA, permitting,
and recreation, because the Tribes have a stake in that. And,
organizationally, to be at the table, I think is a good thing.
Senator Udall. Yes. The other issue here is, we have 573
Tribes. And so what if 100 want it, and the rest don't? Where
do you come out there?
Secretary Zinke. I think we are probably going to be
flexible in our regions, and we have to have a clear
preponderance in these different regions. The good thing is
that----
Senator Udall. By clear preponderance, then, you mean if a
robust minority say no, you are going to override them, in
terms of----
Secretary Zinke. No, what I am saying is that we are going
to work with everybody. You are right, out of 573 Tribes, it
becomes challenging, and maybe we will look at a test to see
how it would work.
But again, the decision on the Tribes, I respect
sovereignty. And each of the nations is unique. They differ in
opportunities, in challenges, in culture. I enjoy representing
the Tribes as Secretary of the Interior. We are the only
Department that should be the champion of our Tribal nations,
and I champion decisions and freedom of choice.
Senator Udall. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary.
Senator Murkowski [presiding]. Thank you, Senator Udall.
Senator Rubio.
Senator Rubio. Thank you very much.
5-YEAR OCS PLAN
Thank you for being here, Secretary. Thank you for coming
down to Florida after the storm and going down to Flamingo in
the Everglades with us. It is a place I frequently fish off of,
and we are making progress there. So thanks for your visit and
being a part of it.
I do want to take exception to something that was said here
earlier, a complete untruth. Senator Merkley claimed that
Oregon's coast was the most beautiful in the world, and that is
just not true, because, obviously, Florida holds that
distinction.
Secretary Zinke. I will stay out of that.
[Laughter.]
Senator Rubio. Yes, sir, I understand. But I needed to
correct the record.
EVERGLADES
I want to talk a little bit about the Everglades. Its
restoration is, I think, the most ambitious environmental
restoration in the history of all mankind. You can make that
argument. And we have made real progress, and we are on the
cusp now of making real advances on the completion of several
important projects.
So the integrated delivery schedule for that restoration
assumed Federal contributions of $147 million across the Corps
and the Department of the Interior toward that restoration in
fiscal year 2019, and then an average of more than $185 million
from 2020 through 2030.
This year, the administration only budgeted $118 million
after requesting $131 million in fiscal year 2018.
Unfortunately, we are heading in the wrong direction, and I
hope that the budget does not reflect the administration's
commitment to Everglades restoration.
So, my question for you, and obviously for the
administration, is this the direction that we are headed with
Everglades restoration? Because if it is, I think it portends
poorly to the future of this project, which is a critical
national treasure, not just to Florida but for the country.
Secretary Zinke. When I went down there, as you know, it
remains a priority. I think it is as much structural as it is
funding. We talked about the way that the project is with the
Army Corps of Engineers is, rather than have approval of one
project, each subcomponent has to be categorized as a new
start. That itself lengthens the amount of time on these
projects and doesn't give the Army Corps of Engineers enough
flexibility.
So just throwing more money at it I don't know is the
solution. I think it is streamlining the process, so we can
make better decisions sooner, so it does not languish.
There is no doubt in my mind that the health of the
Everglades depends on the right plumbing of the water, and that
is the priority. It will take a serious effort between all
players and all stakeholders to prioritize the plumbing first,
because if we do not get the plumbing right, the rest of it
will never, ever be healthy.
Senator Rubio. Yes. I think most would agree they would
want to have a more efficient way of getting approval on these
projects moving forward. But it still gets back to the question
of the total sum. I actually agree. In fact, the longer we take
to complete these projects, the more expensive they become.
So just going back to the total number, why is the number
in 2019 significantly less than it was in 2018? It was $131
million in 2018, and now the proposals for $118 million. Is
that a function of the projects that are ready that you think
could be funded this year? What is behind the reduction, since
we know that in order to continue the pace on this project, to
be able to truly say that we are on pace to do it, we have to
be near the $147 million. It isn't just throwing money. That is
what this is budgeted at, if it stays on schedule. And for
every year we fall off schedule, the price tag may actually go
up.
So what is the new number this year lower than last year
reflective of?
Secretary Zinke. Yes, I will work with you. I think some of
it has to do with our ability to execute, again, because if we
could work together to--and it is not just a question of money.
We agree it is a priority, and I am committed to make it a
priority with you.
But we have to make it also structurally easier. When we
have funds, they actually go to moving the ball ahead. We are
not getting far. I would contend we could double the money, and
we wouldn't make double the amount of movement up the field.
Structurally, we have to work together.
On the 14 of June, I think we are having the South Florida
Ecosystem task force, and I would invite you or a member of
your staff to be a part of that and prioritize your efforts
with it. Then we come to what we need, probably tweaks in the
law a little to allow a prioritization and making sure we
streamline. The money itself goes to bringing the ball up the
field, so to speak, and getting things done, rather than just
continuing a bureaucracy. Because right now, as you know--and
you follow this issue better than, I think, anybody--we are on
pace never to get it done.
I mean, quite frankly, we need to shorten the timeframe. We
can do it, if we can allow the right people the flexibility and
the power to get it done without having to go through line by
line by line by line, and approval on each of those lines. If
we do it as a system, we can get this project done.
Senator Rubio. I would say that, clearly, I am not a
believer in just throwing money at things. In this particular
case, there are projects that are ready to go. If the money
were available, we can move on it.
But the one thing I want to make clear, because I do think
you have touched on something that a lot of people would agree
with, so I just want to have it clear, it is your position that
individual Everglades projects should not each be subject to
new starts designation, that we should be able to do things
systemically.
Secretary Zinke. I do. There are some projects that
actually are ahead of schedule, so it is not all doom and
gloom. There is a trail system. There are some gates and stuff
that are actually ahead of schedule. So that is good.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Rubio.
INDIAN AFFAIRS
Mr. Secretary, I mentioned earlier that we had an
opportunity in Indian Affairs to hear from the President's
nominee for Assistant Secretary to Bureau of Indian Affairs, a
woman that I feel is eminently qualified who can move into
places where perhaps she is not invited and make sure that the
voices of our Native peoples are heard. I am very, very pleased
that you have provided that support to her.
But those of us on the subcommittee yesterday shared that
we thought that she had a pretty hard job. You have noted the
deficiencies within the Bureau of Indian Education and your
efforts to try to address some of the backlog issues with our
schools. Making sure that our Native children receive a quality
education must be a priority.
There are other areas that we all feel very strongly about
where we do not feel that either this administration or the
previous administration or the previous administration before
them did enough to provide for and meet our trust
responsibilities to our Native people. Certainly, from a public
safety perspective, that is one where we feel that there is
extreme vulnerability.
Senator Tester raised it yesterday. I have raised it. But I
will just cite my concerns that, in the proposed budget, we are
seeing an effort to eliminate funding for certain programs that
we have been working to advance and provide for that safety,
whether it is the Tribal Court funding; whether it is
additional support for the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA)
with a set-aside for our Native people; the Small and Needy
Tribes funding, which for us in Alaska is incredibly
significant because these are smaller Tribes that otherwise
would have very limited opportunity for any resourcing; the
Tiwahe Initiative, which is a pilot program to really help
provide for a level of safety within our communities and to put
pathways forward that can help with not only family and social
services but alternatives to incarceration, prevention, and
intervention.
I would just ask you for your support, because we are going
to put a lot of pressure on Tara Sweeney when she is confirmed
and is in this position. When we think about the trust
responsibilities--and you and I have had this conversation so
many times, and I know where your heart is on this. You have
shared it with me directly. You have shared it publicly, saying
that you respect the responsibility and the obligation that you
have as Secretary for our Native peoples.
I have heard your comments to Senator Tester here that we
have the executive proposing and the legislative branch
disposing, but know that I am going to be very aggressive in
trying to ensure that we continue to make headway with so many
of these projects that are perhaps smaller dollar amounts, but
that, when it comes to providing for the public health, safety,
wellbeing, and education of our Native people, we want to be
working with you on these.
Secretary Zinke. Well, thank you. In regard to our
Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs, I do pick the best, most
qualified individual to be a secretary. In this case, it was
the first female Native Alaskan in the history of the
Department of the Interior.
Senator Murkowski. We are very proud of that.
Secretary Zinke. As well as we had the first female
director of the Bureau of Reclamation. I can tell you, if I get
more than 7 out of 16 through the Senate, there will be more
firsts.
A frustration? It took over a year for my director of the
USGS, who also is an astronaut, he has a Ph.D. in Earth
sciences. He has had a Top Secret and Single Scope Background
Investigation (SSBI) and Sensitive Compartmented Information
(SCI) security clearance. He is probably the most imminently
qualified director of the U.S. Geological Survey in the
service's history, and that is saying a lot, because we had
John Wesley Powell, and it has taken a year to get him through
the process.
I was talking to the Ranking Member. It reminded me when
his father was the Secretary of the Interior, he had everybody,
his complete staff, in place in the seats in 2 weeks. It is
unlikely as a Secretary that I will have a director of the Park
Service, a director of BLM, and a director of the Fish and
Wildlife Service by 2 years in.
Senator Murkowski. That is unfortunate, because we need
them all. And know that my commitment is to help move these
individuals through the process as quickly as we can,
recognizing that the job on the ground is pretty significant.
COOPER LANDING BYPASS
Let me ask a couple quick more parochial questions. We have
been trying to move the Sterling Highway near the Cooper
Landing away from the Kenai and the Russian Rivers. This is the
spawning ground for our big king salmon. We have a preferred
bypass route at Cooper Landing. It is called the Juneau Creek
alternative. Virtually everybody involved agrees that it is the
best option.
Last week, the Department of Transportation and the State
of Alaska reached an agreement to finalize the Environmental
Impact Statement (EIS). It is the longest running EIS in the
country. We are not very proud of being the first in everything
and certainly not that.
This is a big moment for us, and I thank you for helping us
get to this place. The next piece is going to be to complete a
land exchange between the Kenai National Wildlife Refuge and
Cook Inlet Regional Inc. (CIRI).
So my ask of you this morning is to give me an update on
where you believe that land exchange may be, and when we can
anticipate that you will be able to initiate it.
Secretary Zinke. The EIS, as you know, was signed on March
8. The record of decision, the ROD, is nearly done. And we
should have that shortly, within days, done. Then we start with
the Cook Inlet, it is the regional corporation, to look at
that.
Senator Murkowski. Right.
Secretary Zinke. Given the success of King Cove, I would
say we can get this done. If it is a priority of the Secretary
and a priority of this body, and we work together, actually,
Interior can work quickly on things.
Senator Murkowski. Well, know that we look at this
particular project and say, we do not think it has been
quickly, but we welcome the opportunity to move it quickly
under your guidance here.
Secretary Zinke. I can say with 100 percent confidence that
we will be faster than the EIS.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you. That is not saying much, but
I appreciate that.
It just seems that we deal with multigenerational, many
decades-long projects, and people grow old and retire and move
on. We want to get this one resolved.
Secretary Zinke. And, Madam Chairman, I understand that 20
acres on a scale of Alaska is a rounding error somewhere.
ABANDONED WELL REMEDIATION
Senator Murkowski. Yes. We have been dealing with another
legacy project since basically the 1940s when the Federal
Government came into Alaska and authorized private firms to
explore for oil and gas inside the National Petroleum Reserve.
Those operators walked away and failed to properly abandon and
cap some 136 wells that were in that situation.
The Government spent $96 million on plugging the legacy
wells between 1982 and 2013. It got another $50 million for the
cleanup work in 2014.
Since I have been here in the Senate, this was one of my
early priorities. I recognize that it is challenging to get to
the remaining wells for cleanup. I understand that. But just
because it is challenging does not mean that we do not advance
it. And the way that we advance it is by putting sufficient
resources into the budget to address the final cleanup.
I need to know that you will continue to work with me to
address the backlog on this cleanup. We need to have an annual
update on how many wells are fully addressed, how many remain,
and the average cost per well going forward. I need to know
that we have that action plan, and, in addition to the action
plan, that we have the resources that will allow for the
completion of this very unfortunate legacy that was left by our
Federal Government.
We would never allow a private operator to get away with
that, and we know that. We would fine them until they had
nothing left. We need to rectify this.
Secretary Zinke. As you know, 24 of the 50 wells have been
addressed. The average cost of the wells is about $1.8 million.
Having said that, the first wells were the easiest. In the
omnibus, I think it had about $10 million in it. We think that
will cover another four wells. But some of the wells that we
are looking at in the future are going to be more expensive.
We have a plan. Our remediation team has identified it. The
sooner we get to it, the less cost it will be.
Senator Murkowski. It is also coordinating with other
projects that may be going on in the region. As you know, when
you are sitting up there literally at the top of North America
in an area where you do not have access to roads, mobbing up
and mobilization for a project is extraordinarily expensive.
Oftentimes, what we see is, you will put the equipment on
the spring barge that comes in, in July. You do the work, and
then you move it back down to the lower 48, and you have been
able to facilitate a couple different projects.
But knowing that somebody else, the Department of Defense,
might be doing a cleanup, for instance, down by Point Lay where
they have a mobbing operation that needs to be done shows
inefficiencies in coordination between Interior and DoD. I do
not think that we talk to one another like that, but it is
something that I would like to sit down and explore with your
team as we get that update.
Secretary Zinke. I do talk to General Mattis, now Secretary
Mattis, a lot, and we have a great relationship. I fought with
him in Fallujah. He is a great general. We do share and
collaborate on a lot of issues. This is probably one that we
just need to bring into the fold.
Senator Murkowski. Good, good.
Senator Udall.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Madam Chair.
SAGE GROUSE
Mr. Secretary, I appreciate you want to improve resource
stewardship by getting bureaus to focus on regional landscapes
and to work across Federal, State, and local lines, but I would
also point out that we have an example of where the bureaus
were able to do that already, the regional sage-grouse plans at
your Department, and your Department is now in the process of
scrapping those.
The Department is moving from regional sage-grouse plans
developed with extensive stakeholder input to plans that allow
each State Governor to decide whether oil and gas projects
occur on Federal land.
How can I reconcile your rhetoric about the importance of
regional collaboration with the reality that the Department is
choosing to implement State-based plans for sage-grouse when we
all agree that conservation of the sage steppe is a regional
issue?
We all know that wildlife don't look at State lines. They
look at the habitat in the area where they live.
Secretary Zinke. Well, first of all, States do matter. The
great State of New Mexico matters.
Senator Udall. Well, they weren't doing it on the sage-
grouse until everybody got together and tackled that.
Secretary Zinke. Every Governor but one asked for
amendments on the one-size-fits-all plan, and had the
reorganization been in place, likely it would have taken place
on a regional basis. The States get a say. The Governors get a
say. Every State but one asked for formal amendments. The State
that did not, asked for changes, but no amendments. The one-
size-fits-all, I am convinced, is not the appropriate
stewardship.
Some States focus on the sage-grouse habitat. Some focus on
removal of vegetation, on juniper trees, some on captive
breeding.
I think States' flexibility to address issues with their
fish and wildlife professionals, is prudent policy.
Senator Udall. Well, I think the reality is that, State
flexibility, it ends up that we end up deteriorating the
habitat for the sage-grouse.
HEADQUARTERS MOVE
Moving on now, are you planning to move the BLM
headquarters or a significant portion of the headquarters staff
out of the Washington, DC, region during the fiscal year 2019
or move any other bureau besides BLM? And if so, have you done
a cost analysis of the additional costs that these moves would
include, including staff relocation costs, as well as long-term
travel and management costs?
Secretary Zinke. We certainly have not made any decisions.
We are evaluating our costs, what it would look like,
consequences, unintended consequences.
The three areas we are looking at are BLM, most of the
Western States have a high percentage of BLM; Bureau of
Reclamation, which is all on the West side; and, a long-shot
possibility, Fish and Wildlife for those fish and wildlife
issues on both coasts that are significant.
We are looking at what that would be. I think, from a
management point of view, when you have such States as Nevada,
which over 80 percent of Nevada is BLM, certainly New Mexico
has an enormous BLM holding, it is best to put people closer to
where the issues of the day are.
We have not made any decision. I cannot give you numbers,
because we are still looking at what the consequence would be.
When we do have the numbers, then there is no doubt I will be
talking to this body.
SES REASSIGNMENTS
Senator Udall. Okay. Mr. Secretary, I was very concerned by
the decision to reassign a large number of Senior Executive
Service members, as we discussed in our hearing last year. Have
you fully implemented the inspector general's recommendations?
And are they being followed with respect to any SES
reassignments that are currently pending?
Secretary Zinke. On the SESs, it is interesting. The last
administration moved 140, including Olivia, who sits next to
me. They used the same procedure that the IG had commented on
but made no changes. The IG inspection comments,
recommendations, were made in 2003.
The last administration moved 140. I moved 27. But today, I
am glad to report we have made every recommendation from 2003
that now I know is in existence. Quite frankly, when we looked
at--formed a board and moving it forward, we were using the
same procedure as the last administration. I did not realize
there were IG recommendations in 2003. We found it. I read it.
We made the changes.
Senator Udall. Great. More specifically, are individuals
being reassigned? Are they notified in advance and consulted
throughout the process? Are they provided a rationale for their
move, based on clear criteria regarding how their reassignments
benefit the agency?
Secretary Zinke. Yes, we follow--our procedure in the
future--and the board, in my knowledge, has not met yet. We
follow every policy, procedure, regulation, transparency, by
the letter of the law.
CHACO CANYON AND CARLSBAD CAVERNS
Senator Udall. You and I have talked a lot about Chaco
Canyon and the development there. We really appreciate the
delaying of the lease sale around Chaco that was scheduled for
March. There are still too many questions around resource
protection for the 5,000-plus acre documented cultural sites in
the San Juan Basin, and I am glad to hear that BLM and BIA are
continuing to work together with the Park Service on a resource
management plan amendment. And I urge you to consider a full
suite of alternatives in this plan, including a no-action
alternative.
I also understand that the March lease sale will be on the
block again in December, and I strongly urge you to not move
ahead unless the plan amendment has been signed and there has
been robust Tribal consultation and input from stakeholders.
But I am also concerned about resource protection in the
Permian Basin around Carlsbad Caverns National Park as well
where you have scheduled a lease sale, I believe for September.
I have heard that some of the potential parcels could impact
the cavern systems or are located in other environmentally
sensitive areas.
I also understand that the Park Service has shared its
concerns with BLM about the impacts to this cave and karst
ecosystem from oil and gas drilling.
Are you aware of these objections? Will you heed them and
delay leasing around Carlsbad Caverns National Park until a
full assessment can be done, as we have done around Chaco, to
ensure that development will not jeopardize the national and
natural treasure that Carlsbad is?
Secretary Zinke. I have always agreed, there are some
places that oil and gas production is fine, and other places
that are too sensitive. The reason why we delayed others, if
there is a legitimate reason based on science, on either
cultural or scientific or impact, then we withdraw it. We are
looking at it closely.
Sometimes a park superintendent will relay a concern. We
ask that that concern is based on science and studies. If it is
gut feeling, then just say it is gut feeling, and we will
investigate it and look at it.
Usually, a person that is out in the field day-to-day has a
better feeling about a local community because they live in the
local community, about the environment because they live in the
environment. I value the field's opinion oftentimes, or
science, more than I would consider it from our lovely people
we have here. But unless you live out there, it is a different
story.
IZEMBEK ROAD
Senator Udall. Mr. Secretary, you raised King Cove. Maybe
Senator Murkowski is more up-to-date than I am on that, but
could you provide the committee an update on the Izembek road?
I think I sent you a letter last week on that.
Secretary Zinke. My understanding is it is going through an
EIS process, and it is on schedule. I will get back to you. I
do not know specifics. I have not looked at it in a couple
weeks. I did note that you have a letter, and I asked where we
sit on it, but I think it is proceeding. They are just doing
the EIS to get the actual permit for the road itself.
Senator Udall. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator, for that.
Secretary Zinke. It could be an EA, rather than EIS, by the
way.
POLYCHROME PASS
Senator Murkowski. Tourist season is coming up and Denali
National Park is one of our Nation's most visited parks, and we
are very proud of that. Denali is, If you want to go to Denali,
there is one road in and it is the same road out. It is a
narrow, winding, long, gravel road, and it is in serious
disrepair in certain parts because of mudslides and subsidence
issues.
I have been visited by folks that are very concerned about
how we address the deferred maintenance within Denali, and more
specific to Polychrome Pass, a very technically challenging
component of the road. We are just engaging in cyclical
maintenance by gravel backfill on an annual basis. I think
everybody knows that we are going to have to invest probably
significant dollars, probably hundreds of millions of dollars,
to reconstruct or reroute.
What is the long-term fix for Polychrome Pass? We have been
kind of using the funding through this annual maintenance, and
I have been told that by doing this, it might actually affect
our eligibility to receive funds from larger sources like the
line-item construction or DOT's park road money accounts.
We want to keep this from being an accident just kind of
waiting to happen here, and I am concerned about how we are
going to address this going forward.
Secretary Zinke. My understanding is the NPS started some
geotechnical studies and examination, I think in 2016. I will
see where that study is. I do not think it is completed on what
the recommended courses of action are. I believe it will be
challenging and expensive. I have never seen anything that is
not challenging and expensive in Alaska.
Senator Murkowski. Or big.
Secretary Zinke. Or big. But I do not think it precludes
eligibility in different programs on it.
Senator Murkowski. Okay.
Secretary Zinke. But right now, we are in the critical
maintenance mode of making sure the road is passable. So that
is what we are currently engaged in. A longer term fix, I will
look where that study is done and make sure we have it timely.
We may have to have some outside consultants with that,
just because the geology is a little challenging.
Senator Murkowski. Well, I know that there are a lot of
folks that are looking at it. Just knowing that it is on your
radar as well is very important.
5-YEAR OCS PLAN
I mentioned the inclusion of the Arctic OCS in the new 5-
year plan. I noted that the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management
(BOEM) is requesting additional funding and personnel resources
in your fiscal year 2019 proposal for planning and
implementation of the new program. It probably requires some
extensive outreach. You have mentioned it to several of my
colleagues here today, with respect to the broader plan, the
consultation, and the coordination with stakeholders.
One of the things that I would ask of you, A number of
Alaskans have shared their desire for the Department to focus
on good science, but consult frequently and require best
management practices and stipulations for sensitive areas that
are utilized for subsistence.
I want to encourage those within BOEM to utilize the
research partnerships that we have in place, such as the Alaska
Coastal Marine Institute at the University of Alaska Fairbanks
(UAF), and to collaborate and support the environmental science
that is necessary going forward, and ensure that BOEM is
prioritizing the environmental work that needs to be done prior
to the lease sales.
I just wanted to share that concern from Alaskans and make
you know that we think that is a very important part of the
prospective lease sales going forward.
Secretary Zinke. There is no doubt that offshore oil and
gas presents a greater risk than onshore. That is why we focus
on a regulatory framework that incorporates innovation, best
science, best practices, to increase reliability, safety, and
environmental stewardship.
But we are very aware that offshore oil and gas production
can lead, if not done properly, to catastrophe, especially in
coastal areas that rely on tourism and fishing, and off the
coast of Maryland. These are important issues.
So to do it right, again, is making sure that innovation--
the regulatory framework should not be punitive, nor should it
be set up where industry innovation and best practices cannot
be incorporated into it. And to some degree, it is working
together with those that are in the industry to properly
evaluate innovation. No one is more innovative than America as
far as energy goes. We are magnificent.
Sometimes our regulatory framework doesn't allow the
innovation that does improve safety, reliability, and better
environmental stewardship, and we have to be cognizant of that.
Our BOEM people are the very best in the world. Nobody is
better than BOEM at providing the framework in innovation.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you.
Let me defer to Senator Van Hollen, who has just come back
in for a second round.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
And, Mr. Secretary, again, thank you for your earlier
response. I have a couple follow-up questions, with respect to
drilling.
We talked about the Atlantic coast drilling, and the
Chairman may have just asked about the safety questions. But I
understand that there may be proposed changes that would scale
back some of the safety provisions that were put in place after
the Deepwater Horizon fiasco. Is that correct?
Secretary Zinke. That is not correct.
Senator Van Hollen. Okay.
Secretary Zinke. Our regulatory framework, our goal is
this: use innovation, best science, and best practices to
increase reliability, safety, and environmental stewardship.
Sometimes, as you know, a regulatory framework does not
allow industry best practices, nor does it allow the
incorporation of innovation.
There are a lot of sensor devices that are on wellheads
that far exceed the regulatory framework. In some cases, we
need to catch up.
And like you, I understand that offshore oil and gas is a
greater risk. The industry understands that, too. Nobody wants
a spill.
Senator Van Hollen. All right.
Secretary Zinke. So our framework does not skirt. We
increase safety and reliability.
Senator Van Hollen. I saw a recent report that, I guess in
response to some of the concerns people have raised, there were
some inspectors that were sent down to the gulf that did some
spot inspections without notice and actually uncovered some
very serious violations. Isn't that the case?
Secretary Zinke. I am a former military officer. I think
companies need to be held accountable, and I am absolutely in
support of surprise inspections.
Senator Van Hollen. Good. No, no, and I thought that was
thing.
Secretary Zinke. And you are right, and this is why you
have them.
Senator Van Hollen. I thought the findings underscored the
importance of not scaling back the safety protections we have.
MIGRATORY BIRD TREATY ACT
Let me ask you another question related to damages from oil
spills, because I understand that changes that you have made or
a reinterpretation of the Migratory Bird Act would mean that
oil companies responsible for oil spills would no longer have
to pay damages for massive loss of bird life under the
Migratory Bird Treaty.
That was the finding? Is that correct?
Secretary Zinke. That is not correct.
Senator Van Hollen. Okay, well, let me ask you this
question. If there is an oil spill today and millions of birds
are killed, would the perpetrator of the oil spill or the
person who caused the oil spill be responsible for damages as
they have in the past?
Secretary Zinke. Absolutely. The change to the Migratory
Bird Act had to do with accidental. What does that mean?
Criminally, for an accidental, let's say an oil company is
driving on a road in Montana and hits a bird on the windshield
accidentally. Now, should that individual be held criminally
liable to it?
Senator Van Hollen. So, Mr. Secretary, I understand----
Secretary Zinke. Our legal staff says that was not legal.
Senator Van Hollen. Okay. Mr. Secretary, my understanding,
and correct me if I am wrong, is there has been no case in the
United States ever brought in that kind of situation.
But here is my question. Obviously, the Deepwater Horizon
disaster was an accident, was it not? Exxon Valdez was an----
Secretary Zinke. If you are coming to the conclusion that
the modification in the Migratory Bird Act would in any way
affect the company being held responsible, there are multiple
paths to keep a company responsible on migratory bird damages,
and this in no way affects that.
Senator Van Hollen. All right, because the distinction you
drew just now in your example was between something that was
accidental or intentional.
Secretary Zinke. Criminal. Criminally negligent or
accidental. There is a difference between willingly and
knowingly, but to say accidental in an oil spill, that is
damages. That is not what we are talking about.
Senator Van Hollen. Okay. I just want to clarify that,
because, obviously, the Deepwater Horizon was an accident.
Secretary Zinke. I will give you the list of regulatory
framework that will hold an oil company or any company liable
for----
Senator Van Hollen. Okay, that would be great, if we get a
clarification, because I----
Secretary Zinke. They are absolutely liable, and I agree
they should be liable.
ARCTIC NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE
Senator Van Hollen. I appreciate that. And the last
question I have, and maybe I will leave it for you to answer
for the record, and I know the chair of this committee in a
little different position on this issue than I am, in the
Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. I would be interested in the
scientific data that you believe needs to be collected, or the
professionals at the Department of the Interior need to be
collected in order to make a sound decision on that.
There is a lot of concern that the process is going to be
short-circuited, and it would be very helpful if you could get
back to me in writing with the scientific information that you
think needs to be gathered in order to make a sound judgment
going forward.
Secretary Zinke. I can assure you that we are going to
follow NEPA by the letter of the law, skip no steps. There is
no doubt that--I was sued six times the first day I was in the
office. There is no doubt that I am going to get sued multiple
times over any decision, especially oil and gas. But we are
going to follow every regulation, policy, dot the i's, cross
the t's. I will skip no steps in NEPA, because I think the
American public deserves it.
GLEN ECHO PARK
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you. And just circling back to my
very first question, I appreciate your commitment to get your
team together to resolve this Glen Echo Park issue. Hopefully,
we will not have to be present, but I appreciate your
commitment to be present, if that is necessary.
Thank you.
Secretary Zinke. If necessary, you and I will be at the
meeting.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you.
Secretary Zinke. And I hope the parties listen to us.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Thank you.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator.
1002 AREA
Mr. Secretary, following my colleague's comments about the
process going forward within the 1002 area, I note that the
public hearing and comment process has begun. The schedule was
released yesterday with regard to the seven communities that
BLM and their representatives will be in. You are out in Arctic
Village, Utqiagvik, and Venetie, all areas that are in the
region, not necessarily in the 1002, that are small, very
remote communities.
But everyone needs to be heard, and the effort to not just
go to Anchorage and Fairbanks and Washington, DC to gain these
important comments from the public is appreciated. I do
appreciate that you are making the effort to go to the most
remote and the smallest of these communities.
As you prepare for this EIS, I think it is important. I
think we all recognize that every i needs to be dotted and
every t needs to be crossed. The process needs to be robust and
thorough and fair and transparent. You have committed that to
me and to Alaskans, and we look forward as that moves forward.
A couple more questions, and I think both Senator Udall and
I just have a couple more, and we will be able to wrap up. We
have votes that start here in about 10 minutes.
EARTHQUAKE SENSORS
With regard to our seismic array, we have earthquake
monitors, as you well know. It is called the USArray. They are
currently operated by the National Science Foundation (NSF).
These are going to be decommissioned this year. We have been
working with USGS and others on the cost of transferring these
stations from NSF to USGS. We have put a million dollars in the
omnibus, and we are working toward incorporating data from the
USArray EarthScope, as well as $1.4 million toward the cost of
purchasing the monitors.
I am hoping that we are giving you enough resources to
complete it. But I would ask if you know whether USGS has
started a dialogue with NSF about the transfer and the
purchase. Are we there yet? Are we going to be able to do this
in time? It looks like Ms. Flanagan's body language indicates
that we are getting there.
If you do not have the information at this point in time, I
understand. But it is something that we want to make sure
everything kind of lines up, time-wise.
Secretary Zinke. They are in dialogue. I think we are on
track for it. Considering the importance of the project to have
scientific data on seismic early warning----
Senator Murkowski. In the most seismically active place in
North America, we appreciate that.
Secretary Zinke. The USGS has always been identified as a
leading science body of the world. In some cases, our systems
are antiquated. We have good people, but we need to advance our
systems. Some of the buildings have been deteriorated.
The infrastructure we talk about in our parks also extends
into the infrastructure needs of our U.S. Geological Survey.
They need the right tools, in many cases, and the right
systems. Some of those systems are better sharing between
government entities, and some of them are better sharing
between public-private partnerships.
So we are looking at that, too. Who has the best science,
how to get it to the field the fastest, away from a
bureaucratic labyrinth, and we are looking at how to achieve
that.
Senator Murkowski. If you think that we are not on track
with this transfer and the purchase, if your folks can let us
know, that would be greatly appreciated.
VOLCANO MONITORING
When you speak about aging infrastructure, when it comes to
volcanos, we have been working with you all. We understand that
waivers may be necessary for analog monitors to stay in
operation while the conversion within the system takes place.
We have included report language in the omnibus bill. We
included $12 million for the analog to digital conversion. We
are hoping that the funding has been approved for the
distribution, and that it is going to be sufficient to allow
for all these stations to be updated.
Secretary Zinke. I want to say yes. I think that control
number either has been released or is soon to be released.
Senator Murkowski. Okay.
Secretary Zinke. But I can emphasize an example of why
early warning is important. In Hawaii, everyone is focused on
the surface, what they can see in the housing development. What
they are really not focused on, there is a plume that continues
to advance out to sea that, eventually, that cantilever is
going to break. And when that huge volume of lava breaks, it is
going to displace an enormous amount of water. The West Coast
may be at risk.
And so having early warning devices that would indicate
that, I think, is an important--it is just public safety.
Senator Murkowski. It is public safety. We have a volcano
in Alaska. I just read the news yesterday, the day before, I
think it is Mount Cleveland. It is on alert again. It is
tourist season, so our volcanoes are showing off, Mother Nature
at her finest. But being able to monitor is so important.
PALAU
My last question for you has nothing to do with Alaska. It
has to do with Palau. I had an opportunity to travel to the
Pacific islands a couple months ago. As you know, the Energy
Committee has oversight of our territories here. Many of these
Pacific islands share some of the same issues that we face in
Alaska. So I told them I was going to monitor many of your
issues and help advocate where I can.
I was able to visit with the President of Palau when I was
there and deliver the good news that, after 7 years, the
omnibus finally made good on our commitment to fund the Palau
Compact. That went on, unfortunately, for too long, because we
did not move as quickly as I think we should have. That was
noticed by our friends in Palau and elsewhere in the Pacific.
I certainly hope that the Department is making an effort to
do right by Palau. The issue that was raised with me by the
President was you all said that this was going to happen, but
when will we see the funding actually make it to Palau?
The question for you this afternoon is, what is the current
status of the Palau Compact and the situation with regard to
the funding that was promised, pursuant to that compact?
Secretary Zinke. A general comment, a lot of folks do not
realize that Interior is in 12 time zones. We stretch from the
Virgin Islands, which went through a hurricane, all the way to
Palau, and you were out there.
Palau, to us, on influence, when you have the Chinese that
have casinos that are billions of dollars of cash flow every
month, and China continues to expand its influence on the
Western Pacific, and that influence is at the expense of the
United States of America, and when our budget lines are small
in comparison to a cash flow of a casino, there is a little
frustration.
Our commitment to our territories is to be as flexible as
we can, to remove the administrative burden and understand that
they are a little different, as Montana and Alaska are.
Sometimes the one-size-fits-all doesn't really fit how life is
conducted out in our territories.
The more flexibility we can give them, I think the better
to work with them, because, financially, we just cannot
compete, as a Nation, when you have a cashflow of $4 billion a
month on a casino.
It is a concern to the Department of Defense, certainly, it
is to me, as a concern it should be to our Nation, that we make
sure we honor our treaty obligations and treat our territories
with dignity, respect, and support.
Senator Murkowski. I am sure they will be pleased to hear
those final comments there. Because when we make that
commitment that we will be there, when it appears that we have
not kept that commitment or that we have delayed it, it does
cause them to question that relationship that we have. And it
does leave room for others to come in and wield influence, as
we are certainly seeing with China.
And it is not just Palau. The Freely Associated States, the
Republic of the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of
Micronesia, we have put in place financial assistance
provisions in these amended compacts that were enacted back in
2003. They are supposed to expire at the end of fiscal year
2023, and there was concern that was raised about what happens
when we come to the end of this 5-year period, and the
discussion out there is about the views from the Department and
the views from the administration regarding how we maintain
U.S. influence in this region when the current aid agreements
expires.
I know that we tend to think that 5 years is a long way
away, but when you are sitting out there and you realize that
it doesn't feel like too many people back here are thinking
about them, they worry about that timeline. So I put that on
your radar screen as well.
You note the reality of your jurisdiction, 12 time zones,
moving from one ocean to another, and to that third ocean as
well, the Arctic Ocean. Your responsibilities are significant
and very diverse in many ways.
I do not know if you care to comment on whether or not the
administration has a view with our Freely Associated States and
where we go after 2023.
Secretary Zinke. We share your concerns. We are scheduled
to have I think the first State visit to the area shortly. I
think it is scheduled, I want to say in June, which will be
good.
Senator Murkowski. Good.
Secretary Zinke. But I think they feel, to a degree,
neglected when I go out there. I think probably they have been,
in many areas. They are an important part of the United States,
and their issues are our issues. Though I think Interior needs
to step up the level of commitment.
I look forward to going out with you and seeing it. It has
been a long time for me to go out in the Western Pacific. So I
think I am late in going back out.
Senator Murkowski. I know they will welcome you.
Senator Udall.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Madam Chair.
OIL AND GAS LEASE SALES
In January, BLM issued new guidance about how to conduct
oil and gas lease sales. This guidance makes public
participation optional, allows only 10 days for the public to
protest a lease sale, and directs agencies to avoid doing any
new environmental review, just to name a few things. This takes
away flexibility from the field staff to use their best
judgment about where, when, and how to lease parcels.
I understand, under this new process, decisions on removing
parcels from lease sales must now be made by the Deputy
Secretary, not the local, field, or State director, as has been
previously the case.
All of this is in contrast to the previous memorandum,
which encouraged BLM to solicit robust public input before
leasing and provide ample time for public review. These public
engagement opportunities are essential for leasing to be
successful and for the Government not to end up in a cycle of
lease sale delays and litigation.
Secretary Zinke, why has your administration taken these
steps to limit the public process for oil and gas leasing?
Doesn't the public have a right to comment on the development
of their public lands? Will you commit to allowing for broader
public comment and returning to a minimum of 30 days of public
comment, or draft lease sales, or 30 days to lodge protests?
Secretary Zinke. I will work with you on this issue,
because I think the public does have say and a voice. It is
their land, after all. So public land deserves----
Senator Udall. That is our point here.
Secretary Zinke. Yes, I will work with you on it. The State
managers and the State BLM directors have an enormous amount of
say, and some of it was consistency. Some of it was, quite
frankly, we were behind 300, 400, 500 days sometimes in
workload to get a permit out. And this body has been critical
of that. So we are trying to be more efficient.
But I agree with you that the public has a say and should.
Senator Udall. Yes. Thank you.
BEARS EARS
You have testified that oil and gas resources are not
available in the Bears Ears area and that there is no active
request to mine uranium there. However, your own Department
produced documents during their review showing that there was
potential for energy and mineral development. These include
USGS maps indicating a high potential for oil and gas
occurrence within the monument's boundaries. And Energy Fuels
Resources, the owner of a uranium processing facility adjacent
to the monument, also sent you a letter on May 25, 2017, asking
to reduce the boundaries specifically because there are uranium
and vanadium deposits located within the monument.
How do you reconcile your previous statements with your own
agency's records? And if you did not review those materials
created by your own Department, what did you use to reach your
recommendations for the President?
Secretary Zinke. Let me make it clear on Bears Ears. There
are little, if any, oil and gas resources within the boundaries
of Bears Ears. Oil and gas leasing activity was never part of
the discussion.
In Bears Ears, after the revised boundary, after I restored
400,000 acres of wilderness back to wilderness--and you and I
both love wilderness--after I restored a national forest back
to national forest, the revised boundaries are still larger
than Bryce Canyon and Zion combined. The real action was
opening up public land for public access and stop road
closures, and making sure hunting and fishing can be enjoyed by
everybody. That was the real action taken. There wasn't one
square inch of land that was removed from Federal protection.
But I do listen to States, as said earlier. And when every
Member of the Utah delegation, both in the House and the
Senate, and the Governor, and the State legislature, all
probably wanted it to be rescinded, it was the decision and
recommendation to me that the borders be revised to protect the
assets that are in there, the antiquities, which are absolutely
true.
In New Mexico, you and I went out there, and what made a
difference is the good people in New Mexico, the preponderance
were for it, even though some of the, perhaps, objects to
protect antiquity maybe were a little bit of a stretch. As you
know, the World War II bombing crater that you couldn't see
except by Google Earth, that was told to me, in a straight
face, it looks like a World War II battleship. I thought it
looked like Jesus. But even that, I said, at the end the day,
the good citizens of New Mexico, both the State Senators, most
of the Representatives, and your Governor were all comfortable
with it. So there lies the decision.
Senator Udall. Yes, and we really appreciate what you did
in New Mexico.
A vote has been called. As the chairwoman knows, we are
right in the middle of it now, and you know the urgency of
that. Thank you very much for your service, and we look forward
to following up with the questions to you. I hope you will give
us some prompt answers.
Secretary Zinke. I will.
Senator Udall. Thank you very much.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator Udall.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
Secretary, thank you. As has been noted, I am sure that
other Members will have questions that they would like
submitted for the record. We will keep it open for a week.
And your prompt replies, of course, are always appreciated.
[The following questions were not asked at the hearing, but
were submitted to the Department for response subsequent to the
hearing:]
Questions Submitted to Hon. Ryan Zinke
Questions Submitted by Senator Lisa Murkowski
Question 1. During your time in Alaska you were able to see the
North Slope and the part of Alaska that makes the United States an
Arctic nation. Can you please describe what is included in your budget
request that is specific to Arctic-related activity, or how you view
the Department's mission and activities in the Arctic?
Answer. More than 20 percent of all land that the Department of the
Interior manages is located in the Arctic, a vast area that amounts to
62 percent of the U.S. Arctic. The Department's responsibilities in the
Arctic include managing responsible on- and off-shore oil, gas and
mineral development, managing natural and cultural resources for the
benefit of future generations, and upholding Federal trust
responsibilities to Alaska natives, among others.
The 2019 budget request for the Department features targeted
investments to further the Administration's America First national
energy goals. At the same time, this budget reflects the President's
commitment to fiscal responsibility. The budget request includes $111.7
million for the Department's activities in the Arctic, including an
increase of $9.5 million to establish a competitive leasing program in
the 1002 Area of the Alaska North Slope, as required by the recently
enacted Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, and bolster the Bureau of Land
Management's (BLM) capacity for permitting activities in the National
Petroleum Reserve-Alaska (NPR-A).
In the last year, the Department has advanced Arctic energy
production, as required by Secretarial Order 3352, by improving
permitting activities in the NPR-A and initiating new resource
assessments for areas of the North Slope, including the 1002 area. The
BLM is processing the drilling permit application to enable production
at Greater Mosses Tooth 2 and currently analyzing public comments for
the project's proposed Draft Supplemental Environmental Impact
Statement.
The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management published the Draft Proposed
Program for the Outer Continental Shelf 2019-2024 Leasing Program in
January of this year, which includes three lease sales each in the
Chukchi and Beaufort Seas to enable development of estimated
Undiscovered Technically Recoverable Resources of more than 20 million
barrels of oil and 100 trillion cubic feet of natural gas.
The BLM recently awarded a task order to plug and abandon five more
wells using funds authorized by the Helium Stewardship Act of 2013.
Surface work began in the summer of 2017 and subsurface work will be in
the winter of 2018-2019.
Recognizing the importance of the Department's trust
responsibilities, the President nominated the first Alaska Native to
any Senate confirmed position by selecting Inupiat Tara Sweeney to
serve as Assistant Secretary of the Interior Department for Indian
Affairs. A prominent Alaska Native leader and acclaimed businesswoman
with the Arctic Slope Regional Corporation, Ms. Sweeney's confirmation
will enhance the quality of life, promote economic opportunity and
provide quality educational opportunities for American Indians, Indian
Tribes and Alaska Natives, while protecting and improving their trust
assets.
Question 2. I'd like to shift gears a bit and talk about BLM's Wild
Horse and Burro Program. As we have discussed many times, growing herds
and drought in much of the west is causing the condition of the wild
horses to deteriorate, native wildlife and endangered species to be
impacted, and the rangelands to be on the verge of collapse. Simply
put, the status quo on the range is not ecologically sustainable nor
humane. I appreciate the report you submitted to us outlining options
to get the program on a sustainable path forward, which clearly lays
out the management tools and what they mean in terms of the timeframe
for reaching appropriate management levels and cost of the program. Can
you discuss the potential consequences of inaction on this issue given
the herd numbers and rangeland conditions this year from the
perspective of both the impact to the horses and public land resources?
Answer. As of March 2018, the BLM estimated that public lands were
home to nearly 82,000 wild horses and burros (WHBs), more than three
times the national Appropriate Management Level. If nothing is done to
limit population growth, public rangelands will continue to be
degraded, and WHBs will continue to stray onto other public and private
lands searching for forage and/or water.
The current overpopulation of WHBs on the arid rangelands of the
West is impacting the health of western rangelands and the quality and
quantity of forage and water available for domestic and wildlife
species, as well as Federal and State threatened, endangered, and
sensitive species. These negative impacts, including to WHBs
themselves, will grow more severe across even larger swaths of the
western public rangelands if populations continue to expand.
Expanded populations of wild horses increase the likelihood that
productive perennial grasses will be converted to low-value exotic
annual grasses. This conversion is already occurring in certain areas
and is impacting permitted livestock grazing and increasing the risk of
wildfires. Furthermore, wild horses outcompete native ungulates for
forage and water, and trample stream banks to mud, which may deter
hunters, anglers, and native wildlife enthusiasts from visiting public
lands. Overpopulated WHB herds are increasing the frequency and number
of vehicle/animal collisions, which is a serious safety hazard.
WHB populations cannot be controlled at sustainable levels by
predators, weather, or other factors. When over populated, WHB can
graze and trample shrubs and grasses to bare ground. WHB overgrazing
can also severely damage clean water, sagebrush ecosystem quality, and
increase erosion. Every biological population has a specific carrying
capacity that represents the maximum population size that can be
supported in a particular area without destroying the habitat or
becoming ``self-limiting'', in which animals begin to succumb from lack
of food or water. WHB populations in many areas may have already
reached that carrying capacity and if population continues unchecked,
western landscapes will become unrecognizably damaged.
Question 3. I have previously expressed a concern about mitigation
requirements that are unreasonable.
3a. Can you share with me your plans for developing a policy
for true mitigation that can help shorten permitting times and
increase conservation results on the ground?
Answer. Executive Order 13783--``Promoting Energy Independence and
Economic Growth'' (March 28, 2017) rescinded the Presidential
Memorandum on Mitigating Impacts on Natural Resources from Development
and Encouraging Related Private Investment (November 3, 2015). The
Secretary of the Interior subsequently issued Order 3349 on American
Energy Independence (March 29, 2017), which directed Department of the
Interior (DOI) bureaus to reexamine mitigation policies and practices
to better balance conservation strategies and policies with job
creation for American families. Pursuant to Secretarial Order 3349, the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) published a notice in the Federal
Register (FR) on November 6, 2017 (82 FR 51382) requesting additional
public comments on the FWS' 2016 mitigation policies. In addition, in
carrying out Executive Order 13777, ``Enforcing the Regulatory Reform
Agenda,'' DOI published a document entitled ``Regulatory Reform'' in
the FR of June 22, 2017 (82 FR 28429), which requested public comment
on how DOI can improve implementation of regulatory reform initiatives
and policies and identify regulations for repeal, replacement, or
modification. The FWS is currently considering revisions to its
mitigation policies, in light of the comments received and the
Administration's priorities.
3b. I am pleased that the FWS has for some years been
certifying mitigation banks because this brings to light the
real issues on a level playing field: what conservation results
are good enough for the species, and are these results
affordable by the private sector. But not all of these banks
are considered as positive factors during listing decisions. In
the pending listing decision for the lesser prairie chicken,
there are certified banks holding a significant area of the
most important habitat but are not ``counted'' toward the good
that might preclude the need to list. What must be done to
count all helpful conservation in the listing decision?
Answer. The Endangered Species Act requires the FWS to make
decisions based on the best scientific and commercial data available,
which includes taking into account all conservation efforts being made
to protect a species. In determining whether a species meets the
definition of an endangered species or a threatened species, the FWS
must evaluate all identified threats by considering the effects of the
threats and the expected response by the species in light of any
actions that could ameliorate the threats, including offsetting habitat
loss through conservation banks or other mitigation. Conservation
efforts that have a known track record of implementation and
effectiveness are considered in the status assessment as to the
contribution of each effort and how they ameliorate threats to the
species. In contrast, for conservation efforts that have not yet been
implemented or have not yet demonstrated effectiveness, the FWS' 2003
Policy for Evaluation of Conservation Efforts When Making Listing
Decisions (PECE) identifies criteria that the FWS will use in
determining whether formalized conservation efforts that have yet to be
implemented or to show effectiveness may be relied upon in the species'
status determination. The criteria identified in PECE are used to
evaluate whether we have sufficient certainty in such formalized
conservation to inform our listing determination. Once we determine
that a conservation effort is sufficiently certain to be implemented
and effective, we assess the degree to which it improves the status of
the species when drawing our overall conclusion as to whether a species
warrants listing or not.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Tom Udall
Question 1. I understand that the BLM analyzed the impacts of the
changes the Department is proposing to the 2016 Methane Waste
Prevention Rule.
1a. What were the results of that analysis related to the
amount of reduced natural gas production, the increase in
methane emissions, the increase in wasted natural gas and
pollution, and their associated financial costs?
Answer. Impact on production.--The proposed rule would reverse the
estimated incremental changes in crude oil and natural gas production
associated with the 2016 rule. Over a 10 year evaluation period (2019-
2028), the BLM estimates that 18.4 million barrels of crude oil and
22.7 billion cubic feet (Bcf) of natural gas will be produced and sold
(which would have been deferred under the 2016 rule). However, it is
estimated that with the proposed rule, there will be 299 Bcf of forgone
natural gas production (that would have been produced and sold under
the 2016 rule). For context, the per-year averages of these estimated
volumes represent a small fraction of a percent of the total U.S. crude
oil and natural gas production in 2015.
Impact on methane emissions.--The proposed rule would result in
forgone methane emissions reductions from the baseline of an estimated
175,000--180,000 tons per year. Over the 10 year evaluation period
(2019-2028), the forgone methane emissions reductions are estimated to
be 1.78 million tons.
Impact on pollutants.--The proposed rule would result in forgone
Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) emissions reductions of an estimated
250,000--267,000 tons per year. Over the 10 year evaluation period
(2019-2028), the total forgone VOC emissions reductions are estimated
to be 2.59 million tons.
1b. The 2016 rule was initiated to address GAO
recommendations to modernize BLM's outdated requirements to
reduce the waste of gas production and loss of revenue due the
American public. How does the revised rule address the issues
identified by GAO to limit waste of the resource and the
resulting loss of revenue?
Answer. The BLM described in the preamble to the proposed rule that
the regulatory landscape has changed. The EPA has finalized regulations
(40 CFR, Part 60, Subpart OOOO and Subpart OOOOa) which address losses
of natural gas from many of the sources covered by the 2016 rule. The
BLM reviewed the statutory and regulatory restrictions on venting and
flaring from oil and gas wells in 10 States with the most significant
Federal oil and gas production. The BLM notes these top producing
States (New Mexico, Wyoming, Colorado, North Dakota, Utah, California,
Montana, Texas, Alaska, and Oklahoma) have instituted regulations
addressing methane emissions, and the industry has undertaken voluntary
efforts to reduce methane emissions.
1c. How will BLM monitor voluntary efforts by industry to
reduce flaring, venting, and leaking of natural gas?
Answer. The BLM's proposed rule does not contain provisions to
specifically monitor industry's voluntary efforts to reduce the venting
and flaring of natural gas. However, the BLM will monitor venting and
flaring as part of normal inspection and enforcement activities.
Furthermore, operators will be required to report all volumes of lost
gas under applicable Office of Natural Resources Revenue (ONRR)
reporting requirements.
1d. How much revenue will be lost by removing the
requirements of the 2016 rule? Please specify a total amount,
as well as a breakout for States, Tribes, and the Federal
Treasury.
Answer. The proposed rule is expected to result in forgone royalty
payments to the Federal Government, tribal governments, and States.
Over the 10 year evaluation period (2019-2028), total forgone royalty
payments of $26.4 million (NPV using a 7 percent discount rate) or
$32.7 million (NPV using a 3 percent discount rate) are estimated.
The requested breakout is as follows:
FOREGONE ROYALTY OVER 10 YEARS (2019-2028)
[Dollars in millions]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NPV using a 7
NPV using a 3
percent discount
percent discount
rate
rate
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Federal Government.............
$11.2
$13.9
Tribes.........................
$4.0
$4.9
State governments..............
$11.2
$13.9
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1e. The 2016 rule went through a significant public process,
with listening sessions across the country, meetings with
industry, conservation groups, taxpayer advocates, and Tribes,
and a public comment period. Why is the Department not
following a similar open and public process for the revised
rule being proposed?
Answer. The BLM's proposed rule was published in the Federal
Register on February 22, 2018, and was open to public comment for 60
days. During that time, it generated over 600,000 comments from
individuals, environmental groups, industry, States, and Tribes. In
addition, the BLM notes that it is engaged in ongoing efforts to
consult with interested Tribes regarding the proposal revision of the
2016 rule.
1f. The Navajo Nation sent a letter to the Department on
April 18, 2018, asking for a forum in which the Navajo people
can voice their opinions on changes to the rule and that you
engage in formal Tribal consultation. I understand that the
public comment period ended on April 23, 2018, but there is no
legal reason why a public meeting can't occur after public
comment has ended. Will you hold public meetings in the Navajo
Nation and elsewhere, and engage in the appropriate tribal
consultation before moving ahead with changes to the rule?
Answer. The BLM is committed to engaging in meaningful Tribal
Consultation. Through a letter dated November 21, 2017, the BLM
notified 428 Tribal leaders and representatives of its intent to
propose a rule to revise the 2016 rule. In the letter, the BLM offered
to participate in an in-person consultation or to accept for
consideration written comments, at the recipient's convenience. These
letters were sent 3 months before the BLM published the proposed rule
in the Federal Register. The BLM received letters from several Tribes
(including the Navajo Nation). The letters included comments on the
proposal and, in some cases, requested consultation. The BLM notes that
these consultations are ongoing and extend beyond the 60-day comment
period afforded to the general public. The BLM is currently reaching
out to the Navajo Nation and the other Tribes that requested
consultation.
Question 2. Both the fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019
President's budgets have proposed eliminating the U.S. Geological
Survey's Geomagnetism Program in order to ``address higher
priorities.'' Why is the monitoring of geomagnetic storms, with their
potential impact on the electrical power grid, not a priority for the
Department? How can Congress and the Department best assure long-term
stability for this program? In which general regions of the country
should the magnetometer network be expanded and how many additional
stations would be needed at what cost?
Answer. The USGS Geomagnetism Program is not well aligned with the
USGS mission. The program primarily serves the missions of the
operational space weather agencies, NOAA (the Space Weather Prediction
Center of the National Weather Service) and the Air Force (557th
Weather Wing). While the real-time magnetic field data produced by USGS
magnetic observatories are critical for accurate alerting of
geomagnetic storms, the budget focuses on the core mission activities
and legislative mandates of the USGS.
The regions that would benefit most from increased coverage are the
upper Midwest and Northeast, where models indicate that
geomagnetically-induced currents and corresponding risk are expected to
be high. As noted in the Federal Space Weather Action Plan, a few
additional stations would significantly increase the accuracy of
forecasts and alerts. Outside of the contiguous United States, space
weather forecasts would be improved with observatories on U.S.
territories in the Western Pacific (e.g., Midway Island) and in
Antarctica.
Question 3. The Department continues to make changes to the
proposed new regional boundaries and has not yet offered specific
detail on what the other organizational changes associated with the
reorganization will be.
3a. What is the Department's schedule for finalizing a
proposal and briefing the subcommittee on the details of the
proposal including, but limited to, (1) a final set of
boundaries; (2) a proposed organizational chart, (3) a proposed
implementation timeline, including actions expected in future
fiscal years; (4) a cost-benefit analysis of the proposed
changes; (5) and legal analysis of your authorities to
undertake the reorganization generally and make the proposed
changes specifically?
Answer. Department leadership intends to continue to work with
Interior staff, Congress, governors, and stakeholders to develop a
fulsome plan for the new organizational structure. The relocation of
bureaus will occur in the future, only after such input has been
received and after Congress approves any necessary reprogramming
request. Each bureau is currently organized with its own chain of
command which will not change with the adoption of common regions.
It is expected that communications efforts related to such a
reorganization would be sustained over a period of years while the
realignment of regions takes effect. While a cost-benefit analysis has
not been conducted at this early stage, organizing the Department's
bureaus within common geographic areas will allow for more integrated
and better coordinated decisionmaking across bureaus and help
streamline operations.
3b. Please provide, as requested during the hearing, a
complete list of the Department's expected tribal consultation
sessions regarding the reorganization, including dates,
locations, and participating Tribes.
Answer. As Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary--Indian Affairs
John Tahsuda indicated in his May 5, 2018, letter to Tribal Leaders,
this consultation began with a listening session, held on June 3, 2018,
at the National Congress of American Indians Mid-Year conference in
Kansas City, Missouri. Formal consultation sessions have been scheduled
for the following dates and locations:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date
Time
Location
Venue
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tuesday, June 19...............
9:00 a.m.-1:00 p.m.....
New Buffalo, MI..........
Four Winds-New Buffalo
Casino, 11111 Wilson Road,
New Buffalo, MI 49117
Thursday, June 21..............
9:00 a.m.-1:00 p.m.....
Billings, MT.............
Bureau of Indian Affairs
Rocky Mountain Regional
Office, 2021 4th Avenue,
North Billings, MT 59101
Monday, June 25................
9:00 a.m.-1:00 p.m.....
Albuquerque, New Mexico..
National Indian Programs
Training Center, 1011
Indian School Road, NW,
Albuquerque, NM 87104
Thursday, June 28..............
9:00 a.m.-1:00 p.m.....
Jackson, California......
Jackson Rancheria Casino
Resort, 12222 New York
Ranch Rd., Jackson, CA
95642
Tuesday, July 24...............
9:00 a.m.-1:00 p.m.....
Cabazon, California......
Morongo Casino Resort and
Spa, 49500 Seminole Dr.,
Cabazon, CA 92230
Thursday, August 2.............
9:00 a.m.-1:00 p.m.....
Juneau, Alaska...........
Elizabeth Peratrovich Hall,
320 W. Willoughby Avenue,
Juneau, AK 99801
Tuesday, August 7..............
9:00 a.m.-1:00 p.m.....
Oklahoma City............
Embassy Suites Oklahoma
City, 1815 South Meridian,
Oklahoma City, OK 73108
Thursday, August 9.............
1:00p.m.-4:00 p.m......
Choctaw, MS..............
Pearl River Resort, Golden
Moon Hotel & Casino, Hwy
16W, Choctaw, MS 39350
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additional updated information on these sessions can be found at:
https://www.bia.gov/as-ia/raca/doi-reorganization
3c. Is there a plan to solicit public comment on a
reorganization proposal? If not, why not?
Answer. As indicated in a previous response, our intention is to
continue to work with Department staff, Congress, governors, and
stakeholders to develop a fulsome plan for the new organizational
structure. Any bureau relocation will occur in the future, only after
such input has been received and after Congress approves any necessary
reprogramming request. The Department will adhere to the preferences
expressed by Tribes. Department employees have also been encouraged to
email any ideas on this topic, and a web portal has been established to
make available several options for providing feedback on the
reorganization.
3d. During the hearing, we talked about the fact that
coordination on issues is often challenging because bureaus
have to reconcile different statutory missions. How does this
reorganization fix that problem? How does the proposed
reorganization take into account the different legal
authorities and mandates given to separate Interior bureaus?
Answer. We believe that organizing the Department's bureaus within
common geographic areas will allow for more integrated and better
coordinated decisionmaking across bureaus and help streamline
operations. Bureaus within a region will also be focusing on common
issues, geographies, and landscapes, and thus taking a comprehensive
approach instead of a bureau-centric approach.
Moreover, moving decisionmaking authority to the regions and away
from Washington, DC, will allow managers in the field to make better-
informed decisions than those made in headquarters, often thousands of
miles away, and to implement more responsive decisionmaking regarding
the needs of State and local governments and stakeholders. This
responsiveness will also be enhanced by the creation of an Interior
Regional Director position, which will serve as an arbitrator,
facilitating coordination among bureaus in a region and allowing for a
more integrated and better coordinated decisionmaking process.
3e. How will proposed changes streamline interaction with the
non-Interior agencies like the Army Corps, NOAA, and Forest
Service, that you've highlighted on the complexity of Federal
decisionmaking? Are you engaging these other agencies and
soliciting their input as part of the reorganization planning
effort?
Answer. We believe that the same benefits of more integrated and
better coordinated decisionmaking will result from this reorganization.
We will also invite other agencies to co-locate with us or designate
liaison officers to each of our common regions.
3f. What are you specifically proposing to spend the $17.5
million in your budget request for the reorganization on--
especially since the plans don't seem final? Are there specific
FTE actions, including relocations, assumed as part of this
budget proposal?
Answer. The funding request included in the fiscal year 2019 DOI
budget involves a separate initiative to relocate one or more Bureau
headquarters in the west nearer to the DOI lands being managed. At this
time, there is no specific proposal for which we would seek
Congressional direction. We anticipate the development of specific
plans during fiscal year 2019.
3g. How is DOI determining the total costs of the proposed
reorganization? Does the plan factor in short- and long-term
expenses from relocation costs and other personnel-related
actions?
Answer. We have not, at this early stage, conducted a cost-benefit
analysis, as we think there is little cost associated with changing
lines on a map.
3h. Does the Department expect to implement any Reduction-in-
Force action to implement any part of the reorganization
proposal?
Answer. We have no plans to implement a Reduction in Force related
to this reorganization.
3i. What kind of cost-benefit analysis is the Department
performing on the proposal?
Answer. As indicated in response to an earlier question, we have
not, at this early stage, conducted a cost-benefit analysis, as we
think there is little cost associated with changing lines on a map.
3j. New Mexico's BLM State Office oversees four States--New
Mexico, Kansas, Texas and Oklahoma--that face similar land
management issues, including oil and gas development. Yet under
your most recent proposed map, New Mexico will be in one
region, while the other States are in other regions. How will
issues that span the boundary between these four States be
addressed by your proposal? And why is this new structure more
efficient and effective than the status quo?
Answer. For those projects, agreements, or plans that are split
between two or more regions, the region that is designated the lead
region will be the one whose staff and expertise is best positioned to
bring the activity to a successful completion. The goal is to have more
integrated, responsive, and better coordinated decisionmaking.
3k. There Department has more than 4,000 FTE in New Mexico,
including hundreds of employees located at the FWS and BIA
regional offices in Albuquerque. Does your proposal include any
plans--on a short- or long-term basis--to relocate any of those
positions out of State?
Answer. Although the objective is to relocate staff resources
closer to Interior's stakeholders in the West from the D.C. area, we do
not have specific relocation plans at this early stage.
3l. What concerns are you hearing from your employees--and
how are you addressing them?
Answer. In January 2017 we conducted a 2 day workshop involving
career SES Regional Directors from all of our bureaus, as well as a
number of their colleagues from bureau headquarters. During this
workshop event we engaged in a conversation about how to best structure
and pursue the adoption of common regions. Many of the suggestions
coming out of that event were incorporated into the draft map of our
proposed Department level regions. In addition, the Secretary, in his
visits to DOI field installations around the country, routinely talks
to employees about our reorganization proposals. Department employees
have also been encouraged to email any ideas on this topic, and a web
portal has been established to make available several options for
providing feedback on the reorganization.
Question 4a. Please provide a detailed list of agency actions
developed in response to each of the four recommendations issued by the
Office of the Inspector General on April 10, 2018, regarding Senior
Executive Service reassignments. Those recommendations are as follows:
4a1. Document a plan for reassigning senior executives to
ensure accountability for transparent, economical, and
efficient Government.
Answer. The Department implemented Senior Executive Service (SES)
reassignment best practices on April 30, 2018. These included (1)
establishing a written record for the SES reassignment before the ERB's
notice to the SES employee incorporating the reasons for the
reassignment within the notice of the reassignment; (2) communicating
the reassignment with the SES employee in a respectful manner; (3)
reaching outside of Interior to broaden the executive bench; and (4)
building upon plans to increase the number of SES members who are
rotating to improve talent development, mission delivery and
collaboration in a strategic manner.
4a2. Communicate with all affected senior executives and
supervisors before issuing notifications of reassignment to
maintain a transparent reassignment process and to gather the
information needed to make informed decisions.
Answer. One of the best practices includes communicating the
reassignment with the SES employee in a respectful manner.
Specifically, it is expected the bureau/office leadership would
personally contact and consult with the impacted SES member to discuss
and provide the business reason for the reassignment, as well as allow
an opportunity for the SES members to express personal issues,
preferences and alternatives, if appropriate.
4a3. Estimate and plan for all costs associated with
geographic moves.
Answer. The Department of the Interior established a reassignment
checklist, which outlines documentation that needs to be provided and
criteria that needs to be addressed to the Executive Resources Board
when a reassignment is requested. One of the criteria is if the
reassignment involves a geographic move, the bureaus' request must
acknowledge the bureau/office has planned for the cost of the move and
has available funds.
4a4. Implement the guidance outlined in the OPM's September
9, 2009 memorandum for establishing an ERB, to include
developing a formal charter detailing the roles and
responsibilities of all members; including a mix of political,
nonpolitical, career, and noncareer members; and requiring
appropriate documentation.
Answer. The Department of the Interior's Executive Resources Board
established a charter effective April 27, 2018. The charter outlines
roles and responsibilities of all members and outlines standards for
documentation of the meetings and retention of records.
Question 4b. Please provide copies of any agency documents
developed to govern the Executive Resources Board process specifically
or the SES reassignment process generally, including any directives
related to records documentation.
Answer. All the documents referenced in this response are included:
(1) a copy of the memo ``Senior Executive Service Reassignment Best
Practices'' dated April 30, 2018; (2) a copy of the SES Reassignment
Checklist; and (3) a copy of the Executive Resources Board Charter.
Question 4c. What objective criteria is the agency using to decide
future SES reassignment decisions--and how is agency leadership
ensuring that SES reassignments are being made to leverage the skills
of senior employees for the benefit of the agency and provide important
leadership and professional development opportunities?
Answer. As outlined in the memo ``Senior Executive Service
Reassignment Best Practices'' dated April 30, 2018, reassignments are
to be based on legitimate management reasons. Requests for
reassignments and reassignment notifications to the SES members are to
include reasons why they are needed in and/or would be a good fit for
the positions into which they are to be reassigned.
Question 4d. What are the total financial costs to the agency,
including relocation costs, associated with the 27 SES reassignments
covered by the Inspector General's report?
Answer. Of the 27 SES reassignments covered in the Inspector
General's report, only a small portion actually involved geographic
relocations. Transferred Federal employees may receive entitlements
such as enroute per diem and transportation for the employee and
family, miscellaneous moving expenses related to ending and beginning
residence at an old and new duty station, residence transactions
(closing costs) related to the sale or purchase of a residence to
include lease termination costs, and household goods shipment and
regular storage. Transferred employees may also receive discretionary
expenses such as a house hunting trip, temporary quarters subsistence
expenses, shipment of a personally owned vehicle, use of a relocation
services company, and home marketing incentive payments. Transferring
employees cost on average about $90,000 to $100,000 to geographically
relocate, but expenses will vary based on the entitlements that a
transferring Federal employee receives.
Question 5. Leading up to the March scoping report on sage grouse
plan changes, BLM lost thousands of public comments.
5a. How is the Department reevaluating its plan changes now
that these comments have been found?
Answer. The BLM did not receive public comments from two
organizations. We have worked with those two organizations to ensure
their input was captured in the BLM's project record. The missing
comments, once received by the BLM, were reviewed, analyzed, and found
to be consistent with existing issues identified by other members of
the public. These comments did not offer substantive new information or
change the scope of issues that the BLM is addressing in its land use
plan amendments. The BLM also issued an addendum to its March scoping
report reflecting the addition of new comments.
5b. How will the Department remedy the breakdown that
occurred in this instance to ensure that a similar event does
not occur during future public comment periods?
Answer. The BLM takes seriously its obligation to engage with and
listen to the American public. In this case, it remains unclear why the
BLM never received the automated form letters generated electronically
by the two organizations. The BLM reviewed and researched the event and
found no flaws with any of the BLM email systems that receive public
comments. Going forward, the BLM will use the BLM NEPA Register
(generally known as ``ePlanning'') which provides a digital receipt
upon successful submission of any comments.
5c. How will the revised sage grouse plans released earlier
this month, which remove sagebrush focal areas designations and
encourage categorical exclusions for development projects,
allow the Department to prioritize conserving the big-game
winter range and migration corridors on the sagebrush steppe
that is the subject of Secretarial Order 3362?
Answer. Sagebrush Focal Areas do not contain management actions
designed specifically to affect big game habitat. The management
flexibility proposed in the Greater Sage Grouse plans still requires
the BLM to carefully consider the potential impacts of development
activity on sage grouse and sagebrush habitats. None of the management
actions proposed in the Greater Sage Grouse plans would preclude the
Department's ability to address and manage big game winter range
habitat and migration corridors. Big game habitat and migrations
corridors will continue to be managed in sagebrush steppe in accordance
with BLM and DOI policy and S.O. 3362.
5d. What is the Department doing to ensure proposed lease
sales on public land do not include important migration
corridors and crucial winter range for big game species while
also pursuing ``energy dominance''?
Answer. The Department works extensively with State fish and
wildlife agencies, the Western Association of Fish and Wildlife
Agencies (WAFWA), and other partners to identify, conserve, and enhance
important big-game populations, winter range, and migration corridors
habitat on Federal lands. Proposed lease sales, like all Federal
actions, must be in compliance with the BLM's approved Resource
Management Plans and are subject to interdisciplinary environmental
review and analysis for impacts to a variety of resources, including
crucial wildlife winter range and migration corridors. Final agency
decision documents disclose all impacts of the associated action and
include project design features and site-specific implementation
requirements to balance winter range and migration corridor habitat
conservation and management objectives with energy development.
The Department also helped fund development of WAFWA's Crucial
Habitat Assessment Tool (CHAT), which provides an online map of
priority wildlife habitat for use in the Department's planning and
permitting processes. This tool helps agencies avoid or mitigate
negative impacts to important wildlife habitat resources.
The BLM is working closely with western States to obtain
comprehensive winter range habitat data for bighorn sheep, deer, elk,
and pronghorn for use as part of planning and project environmental
reviews. States have primary authority over management of wildlife and
designation of crucial wildlife habitat within their boundaries and the
Department is proactively working with the States to review and update
Federal-State Memoranda of Understanding to reflect new management
priorities, improve cross-boundary resource management, and better
serve the accomplishment of mutual objectives associated with game
species population management and conservation of winter ranges and
migration corridors.
5e. The 2015 decision by the Fish and Wildlife Service not to
list the greater sage grouse for Endangered Species Act
protections was founded on the habitat protections included in
Federal land use plans, many of which the Department is
proposing to remove in the revised sage grouse plans released
earlier this month. Did the Department take into account how
the revisions could lead to a warranted decision for the sage
grouse when the Fish and Wildlife Service initiates its next
five-year review?
Answer. The 2018 Greater Sage-Grouse plan amendments seek to
improve alignment with State management plans, increase the BLM's
management flexibility and improve access to public lands and
resources. An important criteria in the BLM's planning efforts is the
status of Greater sage-grouse. The Department, State governments and
local governments share the management goal of conserving sage grouse
and sagebrush ecosystems to avoid the need to list the Greater sage-
grouse as a threatened or endangered species. The draft plans remove
overlapping designations, clarify management strategies, and better
align with the conservation measures of each State. Removing certain
plan designations like Sagebrush Focal Areas does not necessarily
change the underlying management for the species.
Question 6. To date, the only national monuments to be recommended
for modifications are Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante, based
on your monuments review in 2017.
6a. Are there any plans to modify any other existing
monuments that were reviewed during that process?
Answer. As directed by Executive Order 13792, Secretary Zinke
reviewed certain designations under the Antiquities Act. As part of
this process, the Secretary provided final recommendations to the White
House on December 5, 2017. The decision to act on any of these
recommendations will ultimately be made by the President.
6b. Over 99 percent of the 2.8 million comments to the
Department related to the national monuments review opposed
making changes. Given this overwhelming and near unanimous
opposition, how were these public comments considered relative
to the interests of those with a desire to develop resources
from the land protected within the original monument
designations?
Answer. Collecting public comments was one of the three primary
steps completed as part of the National Monument review process. The
first step included gathering facts by examining existing proclamations
and object(s) to be protected, and considering segregation of the
object(s) to meet the ``smallest area compatible'' requirement in
accordance with the Antiquities Act of 1906. Additional information was
collected about the scientific and rational basis for the boundaries,
land uses within the monument, public access concerns, authorized
traditional uses, and appropriate environmental and cultural
protections. The second step included holding meetings with local,
State, Tribal, and other elected officials; non-profit groups; and
other stakeholders, as well as providing an online format for public
comment. The final step included a review of policies on public access,
hunting and fishing rights, and traditional uses such as timber
production and grazing, economic and environmental impacts, and
potential legal conflicts, which culminated into the final December 5,
2017 report. Public comments were considered in concert with the
information gathered at other steps in the review process to develop
the recommendations included in the final report.
6c. If oil and gas development and uranium mining aren't, in
your view, potential activities in Bears Ears, what are the
activities you want to allow that wouldn't be permissible under
the 2016 designation?
Answer. The range of multiple uses that may be allowed within the
boundaries of Bears Ears National Monument, as modified on December 4,
2017, and in the surrounding area (some of which may have been included
in the 2016 designation) will be determined through the BLM's land use
planning process. The BLM's planning process includes public scoping
and ample opportunities for public comment and consideration of the
interests of local communities.
6d. You've been clear in previous testimony that oil and gas
was not part of your ``decision matrix'' on Bears Ears. Did the
access to oil and gas, coal, or other minerals play a role in
your recommendation to the President to shrink Grand Staircase-
Escalante?
Answer. The Order listed several factors to consider when making
that determination including the requirements and original objectives
of the Antiquities Act, including the Act's requirement that
reservations of land not exceed ``. . . the smallest area compatible
with the proper care and management of the objects to be protected'';
the effects of a designation on the available uses of designated
Federal lands, including consideration of the multiple-use policy of
section 102(a)(7) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act (FLPMA)
(43 U.S.C. 1707(a)(7)), as well as the effects on the available uses of
Federal lands beyond monument boundaries.
Question 7. Secretary Zinke, I know that you and I share a strong
belief in the need to protect horses and I know how much you love them.
I am encouraged that BLM's recent report to Congress identifies several
non-lethal management techniques that can bring wild horse populations
under control--thank you for providing us with options that include
strong non-lethal management.
7a. Do you believe there are effective and sustainable
options to manage wild horses and burros that do not involve
killing them? Certainly, those who are ill or injured may need
to be euthanized, but can you offer a way to manage our healthy
wild horse population without sales that will lead to their
slaughter and without having to destroy tens of thousands of
mustangs?
Answer. The BLM is developing alternatives to manage wild horses
and burros sustainably. A combination of removals, sterilization, and
temporary fertility control treatments are necessary to achieve and
sustain healthy wild horse and burro populations at appropriate
management levels. However, without the currently prohibited management
approaches, relying solely on removing more animals from on-range
populations than can be placed in private care (adopted or sold) each
year will result in significantly increased holding costs now and into
the future. Under any of these management scenarios, the BLM is
committed to keeping holding costs as low as possible through
partnerships, off-range pastures, and innovative efforts to increase
the numbers of animals placed into private care.
7b. One of the options detailed in the report is
sterilization, which has not been utilized on a large-scale
basis by the BLM. How does BLM plan to sterilize horses: what
form of sterilization would be used, where will the
sterilization be conducted, how will physical suffering be
minimized, and what are the project costs?
Answer. The BLM is considering three principal surgical methods for
large-scale sterilization work. Currently, there is no reliable
chemical method to sterilize either mares or stallions. Gelding
(castration) and vasectomy are two procedures that can be used to
sterilize stallions. Spaying mares by surgically removing their ovaries
would be used for sterilizing mares. The per-animal costs for these
treatments are approximately $100-200 for males and $300-350 for
females, which does not include gather and holding costs. Since a
stallion and mare are typically treated together, the total cost per
pair is approximately $3,200. However, sterilization of mares remains
the more reliable population growth control. Since one male can
impregnate multiple mares, sterilization of an even large number of
males has not been shown to effectively reduce population growth.
The procedures would take place in temporary holding facilities or
in established corrals and would be conducted by veterinarians. The
wild horse would be under aseptic conditions, with appropriate
administration of anesthesia and analgesia. Animals would be monitored
after the procedure for signs of discomfort. Any animals showing signs
of post-operative complications would receive treatment as recommended
by a veterinarian.
The BLM is initiating a sterilization study of mares in Oregon to
research unanswered questions. This research will help assess the
large-scale application of the surgical technique used for spaying,
duration of recovery, and anticipated complication rates, among other
factors. This study will help determine the direction the BLM will take
in developing a sterilization program for long-term management of mares
on the range. The proposed procedure will follow an animal care and use
protocol approved by a university Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee to help ensure humane care during the study.
7c. The report notes that short-term fertility control
agents, such as PZP, have not been effective in controlling
large horse populations on sizeable Herd Management Areas
(HMAs). Please provide information on where fertility controls
have been used, noting HMA size and horse population, how many
horses were treated, the drug administered, the number of years
of control, and an explanation on why the treatment was not
effective for each specific HMA.
Answer. Through fiscal year 2017, using short-term fertility
control (ZonaStat, PZP-22, GonaCon): 36 HMAs have been treated once; 50
HMAs have been treated at least twice, and 8 HMAs have been treated by
darting at least once. These HMAs vary in size and numbers of animals
treated. Overall, since 2004, the BLM has applied over 7,600 treatments
in these 94 HMAs. In general, the difficulty in using short-term
fertility control agents to control population sizes falls into three
areas:
Logistically Improbable: In order to reduce an HMA's population to
its Appropriate Management Level (AML), about 80 percent of the mares
must be treated every year to have a population effect. In smaller
HMAs, with low AMLs, this can sometimes be possible, depending upon
terrain; however, in large HMAs or HMAs with difficult terrain, this
can be nearly impossible in any given year, let alone every year. The
more the animals are gathered, the more they learn to avoid the gather
facilities and move into more remote areas of the HMAs.
Financially Inefficient: Since it would be impossible to gather
only mares, and since populations are roughly 50 percent mare/stallion
mixes, the BLM has to gather twice as many animals as the number of
planned treatments. In addition, since these treatments are only
effective for 1 year, the BLM would need to have funding to do these
gathers every year on every HMA, which is logistically improbable. At
current population levels and under the best of circumstances, it would
take decades and billions of dollars to reach AML using only short-term
fertility control treatments.
Darting Mares with short-term Fertility Control: While darting can
be effective in small HMAs where animals can be easily approached, this
method is not practical in large HMAs, those HMAs where populations far
exceed AML, or in those with difficult terrain.
The BLM continues to use these short term fertility control agents
as a component of its overall growth suppression strategy. In addition,
the BLM continues to fund research projects related to developing
longer lasting fertility control vaccines.
7d. One of the options detailed in the report is
international transfers for humanitarian efforts or economic
development. What new legal authorities are necessary to
implement these transfers? How will BLM guarantee that animals
transferred overseas be treated humanely and prevent those
animals from being slaughtered or destroyed inappropriately?
How will animals be transported and what are the prospective
associated costs?
Answer. Legal authority to transfer wild horses and burros to
nonprofit organizations or other countries for humanitarian purposes or
to promote economic development outside the United States would be
required. Purchasers must sign a clause certifying humane treatment of
the animal; however, the BLM would have limited authority to enforce
any agreement that other countries or citizens of those countries might
make. Thorough vetting and building relationships with horse
communities in these countries can help alleviate some concerns
regarding the humane treatment of any animals going overseas.
Transportation could take any number of forms and would depend upon
multiple factors, but could occur via ship, aircraft, or truck.
Transportation costs vary widely depending on method and distance. The
BLM is currently preparing a Request for Information that will be used
to collect information from potential contractors related to
transporting animals humanely over long distances to other countries.
Question 8. The best available science, as assessed by the Western
Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies, has found that contact
between bighorn sheep and domestic sheep poses a significant threat of
transmission of respiratory disease to bighorn sheep and subsequent
die-off.
8a. How is BLM following its guidance to achieve a ``high
degree of confidence that there is low to no risk'' to bighorn
sheep when domestic sheep grazing is authorized or renewed?
Answer. BLM guidance, 1730--Management of Domestic Sheep and Goats
to Sustain Wild Sheep, includes goals and objectives within land use
plans, implementation-level plans, and land use authorizations to
support sustainable wild sheep and wild sheep habitat in fulfillment of
the BLM's multiple-use and sustained yield mission. The BLM promotes
sound management of domestic sheep and goats to sustain wild sheep and
bureau-wide consistency to reduce the potential for contact between
wild sheep and domestic sheep or goats that could result in disease
transmission between the species. The BLM considers the potential for
disease transmission in NEPA analyses. Wild sheep and domestic sheep
and goat management activities are planned, implemented, monitored, and
evaluated in consideration of current and desired conditions and the
potential for future changes in landscape and environmental conditions.
8b. How is BLM effecting the separation of domestic sheep or
goats from bighorn sheep on public lands and minimizing contact
between the species?
Answer. To reduce the potential for disease transmission, the BLM
considers (1) habitat distribution; (2) connectivity; (3) wild sheep
occurrence; (4) wild sheep population numbers; (5) proximity of wild
sheep populations to areas authorized for domestic sheep and goat
grazing or trailing; (6) risk of inter-species contact; (7) domestic
sheep and goat allotment boundaries and seasons of use; (8) domestic
livestock operational needs; and (9) other pertinent parameters
affecting the BLM's ability to provide for effective separation when
authorizing domestic sheep and goat uses on BLM lands.
8c. Is there any effective means to reduce the potential for
disease transmission between the species other than physical
separation? Is BLM analyzing the risk of contact before
authorizing domestic sheep grazing and trailing in bighorn
sheep habitat?
Answer. In addition to physical separation, temporal separation is
included among tools for reducing potential for disease transmission.
Presently, a risk analysis is conducted when domestic sheep or goat
grazing authorizations, including trailing, or other activities, are
under consideration when (1) land use plans are developed, including
revisions, relevant amendments, and implementation-level plans; (2)
issuing or renewing domestic sheep or goat grazing permits; and (3)
when risk has not previously been analyzed or when new/updated science,
information, analysis tools, models, or maps could substantially affect
the results of a previous risk analysis, as determined by the BLM
authorized officer (normally the BLM field manager). At the outset of
planning and when identifying the range of alternatives in the NEPA
review, the level of analysis should be commensurate with the presumed
degree of risk for inter-species contact and potential disease
transmission determined with coordination with partner agencies,
Tribes, and permittees, and lessees.
8d. How is BLM ensuring that contact will not occur and that
grazing allotments are not authorized in occupied wild sheep
range?
Answer. Once the risk of contact between wild sheep and domestic
sheep or goats is identified for a specific area, and for the range of
alternatives in NEPA, the BLM authorized officer evaluates the
identified level or extent of risk and determines if domestic sheep or
goat grazing can occur and still achieve effective separation from wild
sheep. The decision includes an assessment of how management practices
and topographic features are expected to provide for effective
separation as documented in the applicable NEPA analyses and decision
documents for proposed activities. The higher the level of risk, the
more likely that management practices or project design features will
be incorporated into decisions to achieve effective separation. This
includes not authorizing domestic sheep or goat grazing or trailing in
high risk areas.
8e. What is the BLM doing to follow this Committee's
direction related to bighorn sheep conservation and reducing
conflict with domestic sheep grazing allotments on public land?
Answer. The Federal Land Policy and Management Act (FLPMA) directs
BLM to provide opportunity to the public and affected interests,
including domestic sheep grazing permittees, to participate in the
analysis and decisionmaking processes for public land uses. Early and
timely communication with other Federal agencies, States, Tribes, local
governments, permittees, lessees, and partner organizations can
identify areas where use conflicts or potential for conflicts may
exist. These opportunities can also provide timely discussion to
address or mitigate identified conflicts. Regulation and policy
requires consultation, coordination and cooperation with these
agencies, groups, and affected interests when renewing grazing permits.
Public involvement primarily occurs through the NEPA and decisionmaking
process. In addition, the BLM, with partner organizations, provides
outreach to the public through educational efforts.
8f. How are grazing authorizations being implemented to
ensure that effective separation results in a high degree of
confidence that there is a low risk of contact with bighorn
sheep?
Answer. BLM guidance for the management of domestic sheep and goats
includes goals and objectives within land use plans, implementation-
level plans, and land-use authorizations to support sustainable wild
sheep and wild sheep habitat in fulfillment of the BLM's multiple-use
and sustained yield mission. A risk analysis is conducted when domestic
sheep or goat grazing authorizations, including trailing, or other
activities, are under consideration during (1) land-use plan
development, including revisions, relevant amendments, and development
of implementation-level plans; (2) issuance or renewal of domestic
sheep or goat grazing permits; and (3) when the risk has not previously
been analyzed or when new/updated science, information, analysis tools,
models, or maps could substantially affect the results of a previous
risk analysis, as determined by the BLM authorized officer (normally
the BLM field manager). The potential risk of wild sheep contact or
interaction with domestic sheep or goats will be analyzed using the
best available science and information, best available models, and
updated habitat maps. Grazing authorizations are implemented using this
guidance to ensure that effective separation results in a high degree
of confidence that there is a low risk or no risk of contact with
bighorn sheep.
8g. Are there high risk of contact allotments that have been
reauthorized?
Answer. Risk is assessed and documented at the field office level.
The information would need to be retrieved from field offices that
manage bighorn sheep habitats and permitted domestic livestock grazing.
8h. How many current grazing allotments directly overlap
bighorn sheep occupied habitat? How does BLM review allotment
renewals for risk of contact?
Answer. Eighty-five allotments with authorized domestic sheep or
goat use overlap occupied bighorn sheep habitats. Domestic sheep
grazing permits for allotments with bighorn sheep habitats are usually
reviewed as part of the grazing permit renewal process. Reviews may
occur at other times if high risk contact issues develop.
8i. Is BLM renewing allotments that have been documented as
high risk for contact?
Answer. When allotments are documented as high risk for contact,
the associated permit(s) become priority for completing NEPA, for
developing alternatives to current grazing, and for implementing
actions to achieve effective separation. These alternatives may include
changing timing of livestock use, closing portions of the allotment
where risk of contact is high, closing the entire allotment to domestic
sheep or goat use, or changing the type of use from sheep/goats to
cattle. Permits may be modified to achieve effective separation. The
BLM, along with partners such as the Wild Sheep Foundation, have worked
with permittees to relinquish their domestic sheep permit, or where
appropriate, to change from sheep to cattle grazing use.
8j. How many allotments up for renewal in 2018 have been
reauthorized and how many remain?
Answer. The BLM grazing administration database documents the
number of grazing permit expirations and renewals. Grazing permits and
allotments do not have a one-to-one correlation. Some permits have
multiple allotments. Many allotments have multiple permits.
During fiscal year 2018, 1,985 permits are scheduled to expire.
Reauthorization of these permits is done in accordance with the Federal
Land Policy and Management Act (FLPMA) authority (Section 3023 of
Public Law 113-291, NDAA 2015 amending Section 402 of FLPMA) and
processed and issued with environmental analysis and other regulatory
and legal requirements fulfilled.
8k. How many of those already renewed included new
environmental analysis and how many of those remaining will
receive environmental analysis?
Answer. At end of May 2018, 797 permits have been issued with
environmental analysis and legal and regulatory requirements completed.
An additional 568 permits are expected to be issued with environmental
analysis and legal and regulatory requirements completed by the end of
the fiscal year.
Question 9a. Under the December 22, 2017 M-Opinion related to
incidental take and the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA), if another
Deepwater Horizon or Exxon Valdez accident led to the death of millions
of birds, and it was later determined that the responsible party was
grossly negligent in taking basic steps to prevent the accident, would
that no longer violate the MBTA's prohibition on taking?
Answer. The M-Opinion concludes that the MBTA does not apply when
the intent and underlying purpose is not to take birds. Protections of
publicly held natural resources, including migratory birds, under other
authorities (such as the Comprehensive Environmental Response
Compensation and Liability Act, Oil Pollution Act, and Clean Water Act)
will still apply in these situations. Parties responsible for these
incidents will still be held accountable under the incidental take
prohibitions in the Endangered Species Act and Bald and Golden Eagle
Protection Act, as well as any applicable State laws. The M-Opinion
applies to all industries equally, and the Department will continue to
work with our industry partners to minimize impacts on migratory birds,
whenever proponents or operators are willing to work with us toward
this goal.
Question 9b. Under the December 22, 2017 M-Opinion related to
incidental take and the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA), if an oil
company knows that keeping an oil pit uncovered will kill thousands of
migratory birds and a $50 protective cover on the oil pit will prevent
the massive harm, can the company now ignore this simple, inexpensive
remedial measure and face no consequences?
Answer. Under the Department of the Interior's current
interpretation of the MBTA, the mortality of birds caused by an
activity that is not intended to kill birds would not be considered
prohibited take. We will continue to work with industry and other
partners who wish to minimize the impact on migratory birds from
development and activities that may result in unintended or incidental
migratory bird capture or mortality.
Question 9c. How is the December 22, 2017 M-Opinion consistent with
our treaty obligations with Canada and Mexico?
Answer. None of the four bilateral, migratory bird treaties that
the U.S. holds with Canada, Mexico, Japan and Russia explicitly
mentions prohibitions of take that is not fully intentional. Each
prohibits the deliberate take of protected birds and describes a close
season, during which such take may not occur. The Migratory Bird Treaty
Act of 1918, which is the U.S. implementing legislation for these four
treaties, does not explicitly include incidental take nor explicitly
exclude it from the list of prohibited acts in 16 U.S.C. 703.
Question 9d. Will plea agreements previously entered into for
unlawful incidental take under the MBTA that have ongoing effect
continue to be enforced? Will the Department seek to undo those plea
agreements?
Answer. There are no plans in place to undo plea agreements
finalized prior to issuance of the M-Opinion.
Question 9e. Did the Department engage in any analysis on the
potential impact of this policy change on the populations of migratory
birds and which species might be most affected? Did the Department
consider any alternative approach that might have alleviated legitimate
industry concerns?
Answer. The M-Opinion is not a formal policy or project that is
subject to such analysis under existing Federal statute. Any project or
step-down regulation developed from this interpretation of the MBTA
would be subjected to formal analysis under applicable Federal
statutes.
Question 10. Congress provided $333 million to the Department for
LWCF programs in fiscal year 2018. The Department's fiscal year 2019
budget includes $2.3 million for inholdings and exchanges at the Fish
and Wildlife Service and proposes $25 million in rescissions of
unobligated balances across the bureaus.
10a. How do you reconcile these funding amounts with your
public statements of support for LWCF and your direct knowledge
of the economic benefits this program brings to local
communities?
Answer. I have been a long-time supporter of the LWCF program, and
continue to be. The President's 2019 Budget focuses available funds on
the protection and management of existing lands and assets. DOI manages
more than 480 million acres of Federal land. Acquiring new lands is a
lower priority than funding ongoing operations and maintenance and
there is no request for major land acquisition projects in the
President's 2019 budget request.
10b. Do Federal acquisitions that reduce the checkerboard
pattern of land ownership, or improve public access make
management of Federal lands more or less efficient?
Answer. Federal land acquisition can be important for public access
to recreational activities and increasing administrative efficiencies.
The checkerboard system has made it difficult sometimes to transit
between Forest Service and BLM lands, and you need a bridge to go
between the two. However, we also need to focus limited resources on
the assets we already own. The President's 2019 budget focuses
available funds on the protection and management of existing lands and
assets. Recognizing this, the 2019 budget includes a proposal to
reauthorize the Federal Land Transaction Facilitation Act. This
important authority allows Interior to dispose of lands with low
conservation values and use the proceeds to acquire lands with high
conservation values.
10c. You have stated that we are loving our public lands to
death. In that context, doesn't it make sense to acquire lands
or conservation easements that open up more recreation and
hunting access points, in order to increase the American
public's recreational opportunities, ease the impacts of
overuse, and keep pace with the growing usage of our public
lands?
Answer. Land acquisition is a tool to consider, but in a
constrained fiscal environment we need to take care of lands and assets
we already own. Acquiring new lands is a lower priority than funding
ongoing operations and maintenance.
10d. I am concerned that the Department has been slow to
spend funds provided for Federal land acquisition projects
through the Land and Water Conservation Fund. By my count, the
Department is sitting on more than $400 million dollars' worth
of LWCF funds that Congress designated for specific projects in
fiscal year 2018 and in previous years. These projects were
identified by the Department as being important to protect
sensitive landscapes or improve access for hunting and fishing
and other recreation. Will the Department move forward on LWCF
projects without further delay so we can protect these special
places?
Answer. The Department will implement projects consistent with the
2018 enacted appropriations bill.
Question 11a. It is my understanding that you committed to Governor
Scott that there would be no new oil and gas platforms off the coast of
Florida. But you've also said that Florida is not exempt from the
ongoing planning process. How are those statements complementary and
how is your promise to the governor not pre-decisional? Why are you not
giving similar commitments to other States that aren't interested in
new drilling?
Answer. Section 18 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act
prescribes the major steps involved in developing the National OCS
Program, including extensive opportunities for public comment. BOEM
seeks a wide array of input during development of a National OCS
Program, including information on the economic, social, and
environmental values of all OCS resources. BOEM also seeks input on the
potential impact of oil and gas exploration and development on other
resource values of the OCS and the marine, coastal, and human
environments. The Secretary will continue to review incoming
information to inform his decisions on areas to be included or excluded
from the National OCS Program.
Question 11b. You have also said that there's little recoverable
oil and gas from Maine to Maryland, and that new drilling in the
Pacific Northwest is politically untenable. So why did you publicly
state that Florida's Atlantic Coast, where there is recoverable
resource, is off the table, but all the other States must wait for the
studies to come back to show that there's no oil and gas?
Answer. BOEM has been engaging with State, local, and community
stakeholders to obtain additional information for the Secretary to
consider regarding environmental resources, other uses of the areas,
and where potential interest in leasing exists, among other things.
Inclusion of areas in the Draft Proposed Program (DPP) does not
necessarily mean those areas will remain in the Proposed Program or
Proposed Final Program for oil and gas leasing. The Secretary will
continue to review incoming information to inform his decisions on
areas to be included or excluded from the National OCS Program.
Question 11c. What activities is the Department engaged in to
evaluate the current organization of BOEM and BSEE as separate bureaus?
If the Department decides to propose changes to their current
structures, will you undertake a significant public process of public
listening sessions, meetings with industry, taxpayer advocates,
impacted States, and conservation stakeholders?
Answer. As part of the reorganization plan to improve overall
operations, we are evaluating the structures of BOEM and BSEE. During
this process, we are engaging with staff throughout the Department and
will continue to do so as we move forward. No decisions have been made.
Question 12. You have previously testified that it is sometimes
difficult to delist or downlist a species that has recovered. I agree
with you that we want animals to be successfully recovered and get off
the list. How will the Department undertake such efforts with a Budget
Request that includes a $36 million cut to the programs that are
necessary for delisting, downlisting, and recovery?
Answer. The funding levels in the President's fiscal year 2019
budget request for the Ecological Services activity will allow FWS to
address priorities including developing recovery plans, conducting
five-year status reviews, and acting on recommendations to delist or
downlist species in cooperation with other DOI bureaus, Federal
agencies, States, and other stakeholders.
Question 13. On April 20th, the Bureau of Land Management issued
the Notice of Intent to prepare an environmental impact statement for
leasing the Coastal Plain. Your agency has requested $9.5 million
toward this project. I would like to explore how this money would be
spent.
13a. Can you explain to us how the resources requested in the
budget will go toward the goals of robust tribal consultation
and involvement? Will you be holding scoping meetings in all of
the Gwich'in villages? How many government-to-government
meetings do you plan to hold with each Tribe and how often will
you hold them? Will you be translating all of the materials
into Gwich'in to that it can be understood? How will you plan
to engage the Gwich'in villages in Canada that also rely on the
Porcupine Caribou Herd?
Answer. The BLM held several meetings within Alaska Arctic
communities prior to publication of the Notice of Intent to develop the
Coastal Plain Oil and Gas Leasing Program EIS. Since publication of the
Notice of Intent, the BLM has held government-to-government
consultations, Alaska Natives Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) Corporation
consultations, and scoping meetings in the villages of Kaktovik, Arctic
Village, Venetie, Utqiagvik, Fairbanks, Anchorage, and Washington, DC.
Invitations for government-to-government consultation were sent to 15
villages. Currently, six villages have indicated they would like to be
consulted. Government-to-government consultation will continue
throughout the life of the project.
The Department is researching the feasibility of translating
scoping materials into Inupiaq and Gwich'in. We have ensured that
Inupiaq or Gwich'in translators are present for scoping meetings in
Arctic communities.
The Gwich'in villages in Canada may participate in any of the
public processes.
In addition, the Department intends to consult the International
Porcupine Caribou Board in accordance with the international agreement
between Canada and the United States for the conservation of the
Porcupine Caribou Herd, and in accordance with Alaska National Interest
Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA).
13b. Please describe division of resources between the
agencies, including the role of Fish & Wildlife Service in
regards to an oil and gas program on the Coastal Plain and what
next steps that agency will be taking. Please also explain how
you are involving the local Alaska Fish and Wildlife Service
employees in the development and review of the environmental
impact statement to ensure that the information is generated by
those with the expertise and knowledge of the Arctic Refuge.
Answer. The BLM is the lead Federal agency for the Coastal Plain
Oil and Gas Leasing Program EIS; the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
(FWS) is a cooperating agency. The BLM will prepare the leasing
document, consistent with 43 CFR 3130 regulations. As a cooperating
agency, the FWS is integral to the identification of existing
environmental information, development of alternatives, lease
stipulations, best management practices, and review of draft products,
including the draft and final EISs. BLM Alaska's interdisciplinary team
is working closely with the Alaska Region FWS subject matter experts
regarding each resource in which they have subject matter expertise,
which includes weekly meetings to share information. In addition, FWS
participates in all scoping meetings for the EIS. FWS leadership
participates in Question & Answer (Q&A) panels with DOI and BLM
representatives during scoping meetings, and FWS staff answers
questions from stakeholders during the Open House events, as
appropriate.
13c. Have your agencies identified the scientific information
that needs to be updated so that it can evaluate the impacts of
all phases of oil and gas? What are those scientific needs;
please describe them in detail? What environmental studies will
DOI complete before evaluating and issuing any seismic
authorizations? How are you ensuring adequate time to collect
that information or conduct the necessary studies when the
agency is also pursuing a 1 year timeline? How much of the
requested $9.5 million dollars will go toward gathering the
missing scientific information?
Answer. The BLM is refining its funding estimates for all
anticipated activities needed to establish the competitive oil and gas
leasing program in the Coastal Plain, including funds needed to
complete the Coastal Plain Oil and Gas Leasing Program EIS. NEPA
requires analysis and use of existing information. Should the BLM
require additional resource information or monitoring needs to analyze
subsequent project proposals, they will be identified in the Record of
Decision (ROD). Currently, the BLM does not anticipate additional
studies prior to the environmental analysis for future geophysical
permits.
Question 14. On March 31, 2018, Secretary Zinke amended Department
Order 3345, which purported to delegate a ``[a]ll functions, duties,
and responsibilities'' of the Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife
and Parks to Susan Combs, Senior Advisory to the Secretary. Please
provide a comprehensive list of agency matters in which Ms. Combs has
participated since March 31, 2018 under functions, duties, and
responsibilities normally assigned to the Assistant Secretary for Fish
and Wildlife and Parks.
Answer. Ms. Combs, as the Senior Advisor to the Secretary,
exercising the authority of the Assistant Secretary for Fish and
Wildlife and Parks, has been providing policy guidance and direction
for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and National Park Service as
appropriate. She has also had responsibility for programs associated
with the management and conservation of natural resources, lands and
cultural facilities associated with the National Park and National
Refuge Systems, and the conservation and enhancement of fish, wildlife
and natural habitats.
Question 15. On August 31, 2017, Deputy Secretary David Bernhardt
issued Department Order 3355, which established new rules for the
Department's obligations under the National Environmental Policy Act.
Please provide a list of all Environmental Impact Statements, at any
stage of drafting, that the Department is now preparing and considers
governed by the rules set forth in Section 4(a) of the Order. Of this
list, please describe (1) which Environmental Impact Statements have
thus far prompted requests for deviation from the rules described in
Section 4(a); (2) the outcome of those requests, and; (3) the person
evaluating, granting, or denying those requests.
Answer. As part of implementing the Order, the Department is
working to standardize internal review, coordination, and tracking of
actions in progress.
Question 16. Please explain, with specificity, the means by which
the Royalty Policy Committee deliberates and votes on proposed policy
recommendations to the Secretary.
Answer. On March 29, 2017, Secretary Zinke signed the Charter
reconstituting the Royalty Policy Committee (Committee) in accordance
with the Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA). The Committee provides
advice to the Secretary, through the Counselor to the Secretary for
Energy Policy, on current and emerging issues related to energy and
mineral resource development on Federal and Indian lands.
The Committee's membership is composed of four sectors: State
governments, Tribal Governments, industry, and public interest/
academia. In order for the Committee to reach decisions, there must be
at least a majority of members present from each sector. In developing
its advice and recommendations for the Department, the Committee
strives to operate by consensus and with transparency. We post the
agenda; meeting materials and minutes; and lists of attendees on the
Committee website at www.doi.gov/rpc.
The Committee has formed three Subcommittees: Fair Return & Value;
Planning, Analysis, & Competitiveness; and Tribal Energy. Within each
of these subcommittees are numerous work groups that research and
develop preliminary proposals for subcommittee consideration. In
addition to the voting members of the full Committee, Committee
alternates and subject matter experts serve on the Subcommittees and
work groups. Neither the subcommittees nor the work groups are
decisionmaking bodies. To encourage transparency, each subcommittee
provides updates at the public meetings of the full Committee,
summarizing its discussions and activities for incorporation in the
Committee's public record.
Draft recommendations are developed by a Subcommittee, generally
based on the research of the work groups. Once consensus is reached
within the subcommittee regarding a draft recommendation, it may be
presented at the next public Committee meeting for the consideration of
the full Committee. Meetings are announced at least 15 days in advance
in the Federal Register, and meeting materials are posted on the
Committee's website, in accordance with FACA regulations. At every
public meeting of the full Committee, there is an opportunity for the
public to present written or oral comments. The Committee also may
invite one or more technical experts to present relevant information on
specific agenda topics at full Committee meetings. These experts,
however, only participate as presenters; they do not act as members of
the Committee, and do not participate in Committee deliberations or
decisionmaking concerning potential advice or recommendations to the
agency.
At the public meeting, the Committee members discuss and deliberate
the merits of any draft recommendations presented by the subcommittees.
The Committee may accept, reject, edit, or return a draft
recommendation back to the subcommittee presenting it for further work.
Only once consensus has been reached among the members of the full
Committee, after deliberation and discussion in a public meeting, may
the draft recommendation be approved by the Committee and delivered to
the Secretary as the Committee's recommendation.
Question 17. As you know, the BLM's Resource Advisory Councils are
made up of expert members of the public that advise the BLM on how
policy and land management decisions impact various local interests.
They are, in my opinion, one of the best tools we have to successfully
integrate public input into Interior's decisionmaking. Many of these
RACs, however, waited for their charter renewals until just recently
and have had no ability to advise your Department for over a year of
this administration. Additionally, you have directed the public to
address the political goals of this administration rather than serving
as voices of the community, as their creation was intended. Can you
explain the reasoning behind directing public advisory boards to
advance certain political goals? Does this mean you will only listen to
members of the public that are in line with this administration's
policy agenda?
Answer. One of the Department's top priorities is to restore trust
and be a good neighbor. The BLM recognizes the important role the
Resource Advisory Councils (RACs) have in the lives of Americans. RACs
must operate in a manner that is productive, transparent, and in
compliance with the Federal Advisory Committee Act and other Federal
regulations. The new charters provide clarity for RAC members and the
advisory role they play for the Secretary of the Interior (Secretary)
in accomplishing the Department's mission. By providing input on
Secretary's and Executive Orders, where applicable, the RACs serve as
important forums to listen to local communities and stakeholders
regarding the business of the Department and the impact that Federal
actions have on the public lands. The Department continues to renew the
charters of the RACs so that all Americans have opportunities to
provide input on the way the Department conducts stewardship. The
continuing approval of nominations will have a balanced membership
representing a variety of stakeholders and interests, as specified in
Federal laws and regulations.
Question 18. You recently appointed 15 representatives of the
outdoor recreation industry to the ``Made In America Outdoor Recreation
Advisory Committee.'' According to documents obtained by The Washington
Post, these new representatives include three people whom department
officials flagged as potentially having a conflict of interest on the
matter.
18a. Can you explain these conflicts of interest and pending
lawsuits and what you are doing to address them?
Answer. The Department believes that you are referring to a list of
possible committee members in which four had been identified under the
heading ``Potential Conflict of Interest'' as being either
concessioners or advocates for concessioner interests. In this context,
the concessioners are private businesses typically operating within a
National Park, whose financial interests may be affected by NPS actions
and so may have their own interests in mind regarding certain issues.
As is routinely the case for the Department's advisory committees,
these and similar potential conflicts are addressed in the ``Made in
America'' Outdoor Recreation Advisory Committee's charter in a
provision that requires the recusal of a committee or subcommittee
member from any specific party matter in which the member has a direct
financial interest. This provision is at paragraph 13 of the
committee's charter, with the heading ``Ethics Responsibilities of
Members.''
18b. Can you speak to the committee's composition almost
entirely of industry representatives--some with multi-billion
dollar contracts--who stand to profit from your policy
decisions?
Answer. With its focus on public-private partnerships, the ``Made
in America'' Outdoor Recreation Advisory Committee is specifically
intended to address issues relating to the leveraging of the private
sector in support of improving access to, and the facilities available
on, the nation's public lands and waterways. As such, it is both
necessary and desirable to engage with senior leaders in such
industries to develop the optimal recommendations for Departmental
actions to improve its programs. While the Department believes the
mission of the committee is such that there is limited risk that
committee members will be able to affect their own financial interests,
to the extent that such concerns are raised, the committee members will
be subject to recusal under paragraph 13 of the Committee's charter, as
discussed above.
18c. How will you ensure that the public's interest and
ownership of Federal lands and waters are prioritized and
protected when such a large percentage of your advisors are
driven by corporate profits?
Answer. Under applicable law, the committee's functions are
strictly advisory; any recommendations or advice it provides may only
be implemented through additional action by the Department. In deciding
on the appropriate action to take with respect to any particular
recommendation, the Department takes seriously and will adhere to the
principle that public service is a public trust and the ethics
prohibition of the use of public office for private gain. This, along
with any other procedural steps applicable to the proposed action, will
ensure the proper prioritization of the public's interest and ownership
of Federal lands and waters.
Question 19. Mr. Secretary, according to CNN, you recently stated
``diversity isn't important,'' ``I don't care about diversity,'' and
``I don't really think that's important anymore.'' This followed a
report that a disproportionate amount of career staffers you have
reassigned have been minorities--nearly a third being Native American
alone. How can you possibly reconcile this attitude with the mission
stated on your website that the Department of Interior ``protects and
manages the Nation's natural resources and cultural heritage; provides
scientific and other information about those resources; and honors its
trust responsibilities or special commitments to American Indians,
Alaska Natives, and affiliated island communities''? Isn't it clear
that honoring America's diverse cultural heritage is critical to
fulfilling the mission of the Department you lead?
Answer. As you correctly noted, the Department's commitment to
diversity is embedded in our mission and within our workforce. DOI's
employees are on the front-lines everyday providing the American people
critical services and support every day and throughout our Nation.
Secretary Zinke has demonstrated his commitment to Equal Employment
Opportunity and diversity in the workplace through several high-profile
initiatives such as tasking a working group to develop and implement
bureau action plans related to the employees' survey on harassment in
the workplace, and a Civil Treatment training course for all SES and
supervisors to bolster the Department's efforts to create a work
environment free from harassment. DOI's new anti-harassment policy and
bureaus' action plans are also in alignment with the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission's risk factors for harassment. For additional
information, please see https://www.doi.gov/employees/anti-harassment/.
The Department continues to implement its Diversity and Inclusion
(D&I) Strategic Plan. The D&I Strategic Plan sets specific goals,
objectives, and performance measures, which ensure that the Department
secures a high-performing workforce drawn from all segments of society;
cultivates a culture that encourages collaboration, flexibility, and
fairness; and institutionalizes diversity and inclusion as a key
strategic priority across all of the Department's programs. In
furtherance of the D&I Strategic Plan, the Bureau EEO Offices, and
Human Resources Offices continue to develop and maintain partnerships
and alliances with diverse professional organizations and educational
institutions.
The Department leverages these relationships to reach a broader and
more diverse pool of applicants for employment. In fiscal year 2017,
these organizations included, among others: League of United Latin
Americans Citizens, Urban American Outdoors, Society for Advancement of
Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in Science, Minorities in
Agriculture, Natural Resources and Related Sciences, Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), and other Minority Serving
Institutions. The Department continues share the power and diversity of
its workforce through its social media presence to strengthen the
Department's brand in improving recruitment and outreach efforts. The
Department now has the capability to reach all colleges and
universities and to expose the general public and the next generation
of conservation stewards to its various functions and multitude of
career opportunities. The Department continues to celebrate and support
diversity in our workforce so DOI's mission can be accomplished.
Question 20. During testimony last month in front of the Senate
Energy and Natural Resources Committee you singled out pass programs
for fourth graders, veterans, seniors and disabled people as rationale
for your proposal to raise fees in our National Parks. What plans do
you have to continue the very popular Every Kid in a Park program which
encourages 4th graders to visit our public lands and has leveraged
millions of private sector funding to defray transportation costs for
low-income children?
Answer. The Department plans to continue support for the Every Kid
in a Park program in 2018.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Patrick J. Leahy
Question 1. One of the missions of the National Wildlife Refuge
System is to protect cultural resources on conserved land. The
Missisquoi National Wildlife Refuge in Vermont has played a critical
role in conserving Native American burial sites contiguous with the
Refuge, helping to defuse difficult private land management
controversies, while also protecting wildlife habitat. The Silvio O.
Conte National Wildlife Refuge Comprehensive Conservation Plan even
includes the following as part of its Vision Statement: ``Working with
our partners, we are inspired to protect and enhance the natural and
cultural richness throughout the watershed.''
1a. Considering the National Wildlife Refuge System
commitment to cultural resources, and past successes in
conserving Native American sites in Vermont, how will the Conte
Refuge assess its conservation role in not only valuable
natural resources, but also the ancient petroglyphs sacred to
the State recognized Abenaki Tribe at the confluence of the
West River and Connecticut River in Vermont?
Answer. Cultural resources protection, including Native American
Sacred Sites, is an ongoing commitment of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, including the Silvio O. Conte National Fish and Wildlife
Refuge.
Question 2. You have been very clear about the priority that you
place on increasing the efficiency of the Department of the Interior,
and achieving that through a significant reorganization of regional
geographies. A few draft plans have been circulated. One showed Vermont
divided between two expansive new regions, which concerns me greatly. A
second map, though lacking detail, appears to show Vermont split
between the New England and Mid-Atlantic sub-regions.
2a. Does your reorganization plan for the Department of the
Interior divide Vermont between two regions or two sub-regions?
How does dividing one of the smallest States in the country
such that two different DOI bureaus will be needed to
coordinate delivery of services increase the Department's
efficiency?
Answer. The Department took a science-based approach in developing
these unified boundaries, and we are taking input from employees,
States, Congress, and other stakeholders to develop a fulsome plan for
the new organizational structure. While in some cases a State may be
included in more than one of the new regions, experiences in the Bureau
of Reclamation and Army Corps of Engineers indicate that such an
arrangement works. The goal of the reorganization is to have more
integrated, responsive, and better coordinated decisionmaking.
Question 3. There have been recent reports that you have regularly
used a personal email account to conduct official business. Under 44
U.S. Code Sec. 2911, you must forward ``a complete copy of the record
to an official electronic messaging account of the officer or employee
not later than 20 days after the original creation or transmission of
the record.''
3a. Have you and are you currently complying with the law by
forwarding any such records within the mandatory 20 day time
period under our public records laws?
Answer. Yes
Question 4. I understand that in response to a recent D.C. Circuit
Court opinion, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) is revising
the procedure for assessing applications for the importation of
elephant trophies and is currently considering trophy imports on an
application-by-application basis.
4a. Since that D.C. Circuit Court opinion was issued on
December 22, 2017, how many applications has the USFWS received
for the importation of elephant trophies?
Answer. The Service has received 67 applications to import elephant
trophies since the D.C. Circuit Court opinion was issued on December
22, 2017.
4b. How many of those applications for elephant imports been
approved? What final decisions are still forthcoming or pending
for those applications?
Answer. None of these applications has been approved or denied, as
they are still under review (see below).
4c. The President has stated before that he ``didn't want
elephants killed and stuffed and have the tusks brought back''
into this country. What is your point of view on this matter?
Will those case-by-case applications take into account the
President's position?
Answer. Import of African elephant sport-hunted trophies is allowed
under the ESA, CITES, and the African Elephant Conservation Act when
specific regulatory criteria are met. The FWS will grant or deny
permits to import sport-hunted trophies on a case-by-case basis
pursuant to its statutory authorities. As part of the permitting
process, the FWS reviews each application received for import of such
trophies and evaluates the information provided in the application as
well as other information available to the FWS.
Question 5. During your testimony before the subcommittee, when
discussing the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA) you gave an example of
``accidental take,'' where you described a hypothetical scenario where
a representative from an oil company that ``is driving on a road in
Montana and hits a bird in the windshield, accidentally.'' Surely it is
highly unlikely that in this hypothetical, with no other contributing
circumstances, the individual would be held criminally liable. However,
if that same oil company leaves its oil pits uncovered, even after
thousands of birds have died there and the best available science says
those pits should be covered as basic management practices, that is a
different matter.
5a. Do you view the death of birds in those uncovered oil
pits as an ``incidental take'' the same way you had with the
accidental example you gave that oil company driving on a
Montana road? Or should that oil company, with the uncovered
oil pit, be held liable under the MBTA because it knowingly
caused the take of birds because it was entirely foreseeable
and expected to occur?
Answer. The M-Opinion concludes that take (pursue, hunt, shoot,
wound, kill, trap, capture, or collect or attempt any of these actions)
of migratory birds protected under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA)
that is not the purpose of the activity that resulted in take, is not
prohibited under the MBTA. If the intent of the oil company is not to
take birds, then any take resulting from exposed oil pits would be
considered incidental and therefore not prohibited under the MBTA.
However, as before the M-Opinion was released, the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service will continue to investigate and work with the
Department of Justice to prosecute cases of prohibited take on a case-
by-case basis. We will continue to work with industry and other
partners who wish to minimize the impact on migratory birds from
development and activities that may result in unintended or incidental
migratory bird capture or mortality.
Question 6. I hear many concerns raised by Vermonters that under
your leadership the Department of the Interior is not committed to
keeping America's Federal lands public for the benefit of all Americans
and instead is interested in privatizing our national parks and public
lands.
6a. Do you oppose any and all proposals to privatize, sell
off, or transfer America's public lands out of public
ownership?
Answer. I adamantly oppose the wholesale sale or transfer of public
lands out of public ownership. I do support the use of authorizations,
such as the Federal Land Transaction Facilitation Act, which allow for
the sale of low conservation value lands so proceeds can be used to
acquire higher conservation value lands.
Question 7. The new ``Made in America'' Outdoor Recreation Advisory
Committee announced in March appears to be comprised mostly of members
who have a financial interest in the Department's policy decisions. In
fact, your own staff had flagged that some of those members had
potential conflicts of interest, but they were still selected to serve
on the Advisory Committee.
7a. Are you stacking this advisory Committee with industry
interests set to profit off of policy changes?
Answer. With its focus on public-private partnerships, the Made in
America advisory committee is specifically intended to address issues
relating to the leveraging of the private sector in support of
improving access to, and the facilities available on, the nation's
public lands and waterways. As such, it is both necessary and desirable
to engage with senior leaders in such industries to develop the best
advice and recommendations for Departmental actions to improve its
programs. The Department did not select members simply because their
industry may profit, but rather based on their diverse backgrounds and
expertise in recreational industries.
7b. Why did Department officials reject for this Advisory
Committee nearly every proposed individual who works in non-
motorized outdoor recreation activities such as mountain
climbing, hiking and kayaking?
Answer. The Department did not specifically reject such interests
for the committee. Rather, the Department selected, consistent with
applicable regulations, members with a balanced set of viewpoints with
respect to the function to be performed, which is to provide advice
regarding the private sector's views on possible public-private
partnerships to improve accessibility and infrastructure on public
lands and waters.
Question 8. Vermont's climate is changing and the same can be said
for the rest of the country. Throughout the northeastern U.S., spring
arrives earlier, bringing more precipitation and more frequent heavy
rainstorms. Summers are hotter and drier, while winter weather grows
more unpredictable from year to year. Severe storms increasingly cause
floods that damage property and infrastructure. In the coming decades,
changing climate is likely to harm ecosystems, disrupt agriculture and
winter recreation, and increase some risks to human health.
8a. Do you agree with the scientific consensus that climate
change is real and caused by human activities?
Answer. I agree the climate is changing, although it has always
changed. Whether man is the direct result, how much of that result is,
that's still a question.
8b. How are you addressing the causes and impacts of climate
change when managing our public lands and natural resources?
Answer. Interior is taking action to in a changing climate. For
example, it is clear elevated temperatures and longer seasons are a
factor leading to more forest fires and an extended fire season.
Interior is taking active management approaches as a stewardship
strategy to reduce the impact of wildfire.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Steve Daines
Question 1. Montana Tribes need strong, permanent leadership in
positions that serve Indian country. That includes an Assistant
Secretary for Indian Affairs, and national and regional BIA directors.
Can I get your assurance that you are working diligently to fill the
position of BIA director with a permanent leader who has a deep
understanding of the challenges Montana Tribes face?
Answer. BIA works to enhance the quality of life, promote economic
opportunity, and carry out the Federal responsibility to protect and
improve the trust assets of American Indians, Indian Tribes and Alaska
Natives throughout the country. I am well aware of the important role
the BIA Director fills in providing the necessary leadership for this
work, and I assure you that I am diligently working to fill this
position with a leader who has a thorough understanding of issues
affecting all Tribes, including those in Montana.
Question 2. The Department's September 2017 workplace survey
details an estimated 40.2 percent of BIA employees experienced one or
more forms of harassment over the course of a year. What are you doing,
as Secretary, to combat harassment within the Bureau of Indian Affairs?
Answer. BIA leadership developed and is now implementing an action
plan in response to the 2017 Work Environment Survey. The action plan
includes provisions requiring all supervisors to complete civility
training; establishing an ombudsman for both BIA and BIE; issuing a new
Indian Affairs harassment prevention policy; and fully implementing the
Department's Personnel Bulletin 18-01--Prevention and Elimination of
Harassing Conduct. We are monitoring receipt and review of the
Department's policy through a system that requires IA employees to
certify when they have read the policy. BIA and BIE HR offices are also
submitting monthly reports to the Department on all current, open
misconduct cases, including those dealing with harassing conduct.
Through these efforts, and my consistent messaging on this topic, we
are establishing a zero tolerance for harassment across Interior.
Question 3. The DOI workplace report excluded accounts of
harassment within the Bureau of Indian Education because you didn't
receive enough responses from BIE personnel. Mr. Secretary, how are you
working to increase reporting across DOI agencies and especially at BIE
so that DOI staff, which at BIE includes educators and school
administrators, don't suffer in silence?
Answer. We are working with the Associate Chief Information Officer
for AS-IA to identify solutions to the IT challenges experienced during
the 2017 Work Environment Survey. Although BIE did not have a response
rate high enough to generate data, we believe it is appropriate to
apply the BIA Work Environment Survey action plan items to BIE to
ensure that we combat harassment throughout both bureaus.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Marco Rubio
Question 1. What is the current status of the Department's National
Outer Continental Shelf Proposed Program for 2019-2024 being developed
by the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, and do offshore areas off of
Florida factor into that program?
Answer. In its analyses to support upcoming decisions on the
Proposed Program, BOEM is continuing to assess information gathered
from Governors, the public and others on the 25 planning areas
presented in the Draft Proposed Program (a map of the planning areas
can be found at: https://www.boem.gov/National-Program-Learn/). The
next step in the process is to publish a Proposed Program and Draft
Environmental Impact Statement, both of which will be available for
public comment. Additional public meetings will also occur after their
publication.
Process.--The National OCS Program includes the following steps
(note that timing could change):
--Request for Information and Comments--published July 2017, followed
by a 45-day public comment period that resulted in the
submission of approximately 816,000 comments.
--Draft Proposed Program (DPP)--published Jan 2018 with a 60-day
comment period that resulted in the submission of approximately
1.86 million comments. (23 public meetings were held during
this time.)
--Notice of Intent to prepare the Programmatic Environmental Impact
Statement--published January 2018 with a 60 day comment period.
--Proposed Program (PP)--expected to publish late 2018 with a 90-day
comment period.
--Publication of the Draft Programmatic Environmental Impact
Statement--expected to publish late 2018 with a 90-day comment
period.
--Proposed Final Program (PFP)--expected late 2019.
--Publication of the Final Programmatic Environmental Impact
Statement--expected late 2019.
--Approval of a Final Program (occurs at least 60 days after
submittal of PFP to the President and Congress).
This process provides the opportunity for the Secretary to winnow
the number of lease sales and areas under consideration based on the
analyses and public input that accompanies each proposal. For further
information, a flow chart of the above process can be found at: https:/
/www.boem.gov/BOEM-OCS-Oil-Gas-Leasing-Process/.
Question 2. To what degree has DOI communicated with the Department
of Defense and considered potential conflicts and interference to the
Joint Gulf Range Complex from drilling and pre-drilling activities in
the Eastern Gulf of Mexico?
Answer. DOI and BOEM work cooperatively with the Department of
Defense (DoD) at the planning, development, and operational stages of
OCS oil and gas leasing activities to ensure that each agency meets its
mission while not unduly interfering with the other's activities. This
has been accomplished for more than 30 years under a 1983 Memorandum of
Agreement (MOA) between DOI and DoD. The coordination and consultation
mechanisms set forth in the MOA have enabled DOI and BOEM to meet the
goal outlined in the OCS Lands Act to make OCS resources available for
expeditious and orderly development, and have enabled DoD to meet its
critical national defense and security mission.
Through implementation of the MOA, BOEM-authorized oil and gas
activities and DoD operations have co-existed for decades on the U.S.
OCS. For example, there are currently 28 OCS conventional energy leases
in the Eastern Gulf of Mexico Planning Area (two of these leases
straddle the Central Gulf of Mexico/Eastern Gulf of Mexico boundary).
Please refer to the included map that illustrates the Gulf of Mexico
active leases within military warning areas. In addition to these
leases, there are 321 leases in the Western Gulf of Mexico Planning
Area and 759 in the Central Gulf of Mexico Planning Area that have some
form of military-related stipulation(s). BOEM typically mitigates the
potential for multiple use conflicts with DoD activities by including
stipulations in its Gulf of Mexico oil and gas leases.
With regard to the 2019-2024 National OCS Oil and Gas Leasing
Program, BOEM and DoD have held a number of meetings and have been
closely coordinating to help ensure that the Secretary of the Interior
has the information needed about DoD's OCS activities when determining
the areas to be included or excluded from the National OCS Program. On
February 1, 2018, DoD provided comments in response to the publication
of the Draft Proposed Program to inform DOI that a detailed assessment
of the compatibility of military and OCS oil and gas development
activities in the DPP areas will be provided to DOI; and in April, BOEM
held a webinar to discuss and provide detail about offshore oil and gas
technology and development activities to help inform this compatibility
assessment. BOEM looks forward to receiving this input and continuing
to engage with DoD during the 2019-2024 National OCS Program
development process.
Question 3. Given that BOEM's own data suggests that the Straits of
Florida Planning Area has less than negligible development value even
at extremely high oil prices, would you oppose a Congressional
moratorium on oil and gas development in this area? What about in
Federal waters of the South Atlantic Planning Area off the coast of
Florida?
Answer. Section 18 of the OCSLA provides for a multi-phased process
with several opportunities for public input and analysis of eight
factors in relation to oil and gas activities in the OCS. This process
allows for consideration of, and response to, changed circumstances,
new information, and other factors that would be unavailable under a
blanket moratorium.
Question 4. Can you comment on the importance of partnerships with
State and local governments in managing the impacts of species, like
old-world climbing fern in the Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge,
Burmese pythons in Big Cypress National Preserve, or indo-pacific
lionfish in Biscayne National Park?
Answer. Working with partners such as State and local governments
is paramount when trying to manage the impacts of invasive species
throughout the United States, including old-world climbing fern in the
Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge, Burmese pythons in Big Cypress
National Preserve, and indo-pacific lionfish in Biscayne National Park.
Invasive species do not respect geopolitical boundaries and
partnerships to prevent, eradicate, and control invasive species are
most effective. Partnering allows for the sharing of the information,
skills, tools, and technologies that enable everyone in an area to
effectively prevent, eradicate, and control invasive species. Effective
partnerships integrate efforts from the local to national scales, which
helps to greatly enhance the effectiveness of prevention and early
detection and rapid response measures which are the most cost effective
way to manage invasive species.
Question 5. With what additional authorities can Congress provide
the Department to ensure maximum efficacy and efficiency in targeting
and eliminating invasive species populations in vulnerable ecosystems
within Federal lands and waters?
Answer. Reauthorize Title 18 of the Lacey Act: The injurious
wildlife provision of the Lacey Act is an important management tool
that the FWS uses to prevent the introduction and spread of invasive
species in the United States. However, as a result of an April 7, 2017,
D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals decision, transportation of injurious
wildlife between the 49 States within the continental United States is
no longer prohibited. The D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals decision
diminishes the ability of the FWS to manage the establishment and
spread of terrestrial and aquatic invasive species in the United
States. Additional steps that could be taken to strengthen and
modernize the injurious wildlife provisions of the Lacey Act could
include: (1) emergency listing authority for species that pose an
imminent threat; and (2) prohibiting importation of wildlife not yet in
trade until they have been assessed for injuriousness.
Reauthorize the National Invasive Species Act: Since the Act was
reauthorized in 1996, major advances in scientific knowledge associated
with the introduction, management, and impact of aquatic nuisance
species across the Nation have been achieved. Reauthorizing the Act
would provide an opportunity to incorporate new approaches to prevent,
control, and manage aquatic nuisance species, in particular programs
focused on prevention, early detection and rapid response to control or
eradicate high-risk and newly detected invasions, public outreach and
education, and research.
Question 6. The most recent report from the Department of the
Interior's Office of the Inspector General, which analyzed the proposed
entry fee and commercial use authorization (CUA) program changes,
specifically recommended making modest increases and holding extensive
dialogue with the travel and tourism industry before making changes.
Was the current proposal developed in keeping with such
recommendations? How often do you plan to re-evaluate entry fees and
CUA program changes going forward?
Answer. The NPS has engaged with the travel industry over the past
several years about the need to update entrance fee rates, which had
not changed since 1998, as well as creating consistency in the CUA
program. This interaction with industry groups like the National Tour
Association included multiple meetings between senior managers, as well
as NPS representation at events like the U.S. Travel Association's
International Pow Wow, the travel industry's premier international
marketplace and the largest generator of travel to the U.S. Once the
NPS finalized the changes, it provided the travel industry 18 months of
notice prior to implementing the changes. The NPS will re-evaluate
commercial tour entrance fees every 3 years. Similarly, the NPS intends
to evaluate road-based commercial tour CUA application and management
fees periodically to ensure parks are meeting the legal requirement to
recover administrative and management costs and may adjust CUA fees
accordingly.
Question 7. Will park entrance fees for group tours be pre-
calculated based on vehicle configuration or will operators need to
calculate the fees based on the people actually participating on each
trip?
Answer. The park entrance fees for group tours will be calculated
based on the number of customers on board the vehicle (driver and
guide/s are excluded).
Question 8. What authority do individual Park Superintendents have
to propose and modify entrance fees and CUA program changes? To what
degree do Park Superintendents have authority or responsibility to
mitigate impacts of any entrance fee or CUA changes on park users?
Answer. The NPS has been working toward full implementation of a
standard pricing model that groups parks by legislative designation to
determine appropriate fees. Fee changes may be proposed by park
superintendents or by NPS or Departmental management and always involve
public engagement pursuant to the requirements of the Federal Land
Recreation Enhancement Act (FLREA). Commercial tour entrance fees are
set at the national level for consistency; superintendents do not have
the ability to independently modify those fees.
The NPS set the fees and process for road-based commercial tours to
ensure fairness and consistency after feedback and discussions with
industry representatives.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Dianne Feinstein
Question 1. I am deeply concerned that the National Park Service is
moving toward phasing out historic grazing and ranching at the Point
Reyes National Seashore in a manner that is inconsistent with
Congressional intent.
The National Park Service is currently working on a General
Management Plan Update for ranching activities at Point Reyes National
Seashore pursuant to a legal settlement from July 2017. Per the
settlement, the Park Service has 4 years to complete this update to the
management plan. However, I am deeply concerned that the Park Service
may propose eliminating ranching altogether, which is not what Congress
intended when initially designating the National Seashore.
1a. Do you believe that historic ranching and dairy
activities should be maintained at Point Reyes National
Seashore?
Answer. The Department has consistently supported ranching at Point
Reyes National Seashore. Pursuant to a settlement agreement stemming
from litigation that began in 2016, the NPS is required to complete a
General Management Plan Amendment and Environmental Impact Statement,
including analysis of no ranching, reduced ranching, and no dairy
alternatives. The NPS will also evaluate alternatives that continue
ranching. The settlement agreement also authorized the park to issue
interim leases, covering the period through mid-July 2022, to all park
ranchers engaged in the settlement agreement.
In October 2017, the NPS released a conceptual range of six
alternatives for public comment, with an initial proposal that would
allow existing ranch families to continue beef cattle and dairy
ranching operations under agricultural lease/permits with 20-year
terms. The NPS expects to initiate the formal National Environmental
Policy Act process in the fall of 2018.
Question 2. On September 1, 2017, the Office of the Solicitor
issued an opinion (M-37048) that permanently withdrew a previous
opinion (M-27025) and superseded a third opinion (M-36964) with respect
to the Department of the Interior's interpretation of the General
Railroad Right-of-Way Act of March 3, 1875.
This new opinion followed the temporary suspension and withdrawal
of M-37025 on June 30, 2017 in order to ``determine if the analysis set
forth in the opinion is complete and whether post-2011 decisions should
be factored into the opinion.''
The new opinion (M-37048) stated: ``For the reasons set forth
below, this memorandum concludes that the rights-of-way granted to
railroad companies under the 1875 Act allow railroad companies to lease
portions of their easements to third parties without permit or grant
from the Bureau of Land Management (``BLM''), provided that such leases
are limited to the surface, broadly defined, of the easement and do not
interfere with the continued use of the easement as a railroad.''
I am deeply concerned that through this new opinion, the Department
is abdicating its role as a steward of public land and no longer
ensuring that railroads only permit use of their right-of-way for
railroad purposes. It is critical that railroad rights-of-way not be
abused and become a new loophole in environmental laws.
2a. What specifically prompted the Solicitor's office to
initiate the June 30, 2017 review of M-37025 and M-36964?
Answer. As explained in the June 30, 2017, memo from the Office of
the Solicitor that temporarily suspended M-37025, court action since
issuance of M-37025 in 2011 prompted a review of M-37025 to determine
if the analysis set forth in the opinion was complete and whether the
post-2011 decisions should be factored into the opinion. Specifically,
the memo noted that the U.S. Supreme Court discussed in detail the
General Railroad Right-of-Way Act of March 3, 1875 in Marvin M. Brandt
Revocable Trust v. United States, 134 S. Ct. 1257 (2014) and that the
1875 Act, as well as other rights-of-way grants, were at issue in
California State Court (Union Pacific Railroad Co. v. Santa Fe Pacific
Pipelines, Inc.) and a U.S. District Court (Serrano et al. v. Union
Pacific Railroad Co., et al.).
2b. I am concerned about potential conflicts of interest.
Were any waivers sought or granted for the individuals involved
in this review at every level of the Department?
Answer. No waivers were sought or granted for the individuals
involved in this review at any level of the Department.
Question 3. On September 14, 2016, the Bureau of Land Management
issued the Record of Decision for the Desert Renewable Energy
Conservation Plan Land Use Plan Amendment (DRECP) after nearly a decade
of careful negotiations with a broad range of desert community
stakeholders. The DRECP Record of Decision amended the California
Desert Conservation Area (CDCA) Plan, Bishop Resource Management Plan
(RMP), and the Bakersfield RMP in the Mojave and Colorado/Sonoran
Desert regions of southern California.
However, pursuant to the March 2017 Executive Order 13783,
``Promoting Energy Independence and Economic Growth'', the Bureau of
Land Management issued a notice in the Federal Register on February 2,
2018 to begin public comment on a review and potential revision of the
DRECP.
3a. What factors will be utilized in this decisionmaking
process?
Answer. Executive Order 13783, ``Promoting Energy Independence and
Economic Growth,'' directs Federal agencies to review all actions that
could ``potentially burden the development or use of domestically
produced energy resources.'' To meet the requirements of EO 13783, the
Bureau of Land Management (BLM) and interested stakeholders are
reviewing the DRECP to identify any potential burdens on domestic
renewable energy production in California.
Since February 2, 2018, the BLM hosted eight public meetings and
received more than 25,000 public comments on the Notice of Intent to
consider amending the three land use plans that underlie the DRECP. The
BLM also received a number of letters, which they are reviewing
carefully, from members of Congress and local governmental officials.
The BLM will use this information to help set the parameters and
scope of the review. As part of the review, they will evaluate whether
additional flexibility is needed to accommodate renewable energy
development and multiple use. Public participation is vital to this
process.
3b. What is the timeline for when the review will be
completed?
Answer. The BLM plans to publish a scoping report that summarizes
the public comments later this year.
3c. I am concerned about potential conflicts of interest.
Were any waivers sought or granted for the individuals involved
in this review at every level of the Department?
Answer. The Department's ethics policy requires all DOI employees,
including those of the BLM, to proactively identify potential conflicts
of interest and respond appropriately if any are identified. The
Department and the BLM have not identified any employees working on the
DRECP review with any conflicts of interest.
Question 4. I understand that the Department has implemented a new,
centralized grant review process that has created significant delays in
awarding appropriated funding to outside partner organizations for the
purposes intended by Congress.
I have heard from several California non-profit organizations that
these excessive delays in funding have had a crippling impact on
organizations that partner with the Department to provide critical
services and employment opportunities to small, often rural
communities, such as the Conservation Corps.
4a. How many Department staff are involved in this seemingly
large undertaking?
Answer. In addition to the grant program managers, the awards are
reviewed and approved by the relevant Assistant Secretaries. At the
Departmental level, a coordinator reviews the final package before
awards are made.
4b. What has been the result of this review to date?
Answer. The Department awards billions in grants and cooperative
agreements each year and the process provides a valuable check.
4c. When will the Department's review be completed?
Answer. The review is ongoing and there is no completion date.
Question 5. Thank you for your March 23, 2018 response to my
December 20, 2017 letter requesting the Department of the Interior
establish an interagency working group. I appreciate your stated
commitment to continue to support the State of California's efforts, as
well as to work with local agencies and other institutions.
However, I am disappointed that the Department will not create an
interagency task force, which would help to streamline the multiple
Federal agencies' relationship with State and local agencies.
5a. How is the Department fulfilling the commitments it made
in the August 31, 2016 Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
executed between the Department of the Interior and California
Natural Resources Agency, specifically, the objectives listed
in Section IV A, D and E of the MOU?
Answer. Interior's bureaus continue to coordinate on a routine
basis with the State of California and with local agencies. We maintain
a presence in the Salton Sea basin, and bureau representatives
routinely participate in coordination and technical meetings, including
State Salton Sea Management Program meetings, Salton Sea Authority
meetings, and DOI-State coordination meetings. Senior level officials,
including Regional and Deputy Regional Directors as well as
headquarters-level officials as necessary, remain involved in
discussions to an extent that will facilitate decisionmaking when the
State begins project implementation. Regional DOI representatives have
reached out to engage other Federal entities (including the EPA and
Corps of Engineers) as well.
Field and regional-level meetings between various Federal and State
agencies are occurring in order to organize information, authorities
and possible funding streams that will best meet the needs of the
Salton Sea as State-led projects become ready for permitting and
implementation. In addition, Interior is coordinating with partners on
multiple projects, including completing the Red Hill Bay Shallow Marine
Habitat project to meet habitat improvement requirements and dust
suppression on exposed playa; providing recreational boat access to the
Sea, which is currently restricted due to declining water levels;
partnering on efforts to reduce air quality emissions and subsequent
human health impacts through projects such as determining if ground
water can be used to reduce dust on existing exposed playa; and
constructing wetlands such as the Holtville-Alamo River wetlands to
improve water quality and support selenium reduction.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Chris Van Hollen
Question 1. Below I have an excerpt from the Committee transcript
where we discussed the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA) and future
claims seeking fines or penalties for violations of MBTA after an oil
spill.
Let me ask you another question related to damage from oil spills.
I understand that changes you've made with a reinterpretation of the
Migratory Bird Act would mean oil companies responsible for oil spills
would no longer have to pay damages for massive loss of bird life under
the Migratory Bird Treaty. That was the finding, is that correct?
Answer. That is not correct.
Question 1 [continuing]. In this question, you assert that it is
not correct that under the new legal opinion, or M-Opinion, of the
Migratory Bird Treaty Act, oil companies responsible for oil spills
would no longer have to pay damages for the massive loss of bird life
under the MBTA.
However, on April 11, 2018, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Principal Deputy Director Greg Sheehan issued a Guidance Memo to
Service Directorate on the recent M-opinion affecting the Migratory
Bird Treaty Act. The memo includes a 5 page attachment entitled
``Frequently Asked Questions Regarding Implementation of the M-
Opinion''. I have attached that document for your reference.
Question 5 of that Frequently Asked Questions Document poses the
question, ``How does the M-Opinion affect the Natural Resources Damage
Assessment program (i.e., specifically related to oil spills)?''
And the answer specifically states: ``In practice, however, the M-
opinion will have an effect on future claims seeking fines or penalties
for violations of the MBTA from companies responsible for oil spills
and hazardous releases. In addition to pursuing damage claims under the
NRDAR program, the Department has pursued MBTA claims against companies
responsible for oil spills that incidentally killed or injured
migratory birds. That avenue is no longer available.''
Mr. Secretary, the Guidance Memo issued to the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service Directorate makes it clear that the Department will no
longer have the avenue to pursue damage claims under the MBTA against
companies responsible for oil spills that incidentally killed or
injured migratory birds. Please clarify for the record whether, going
forward, the Department will be able to secure fines or penalties for
violations of the Migratory Bird Treaty Act against companies
responsible for an oil spill that incidentally and non-intentionally
kills birds similar to the BP Deepwater Horizon disaster of 2010, which
killed an estimated 1,000,000 migratory birds.
Answer. In practice, the new M-Opinion means that if an oil or
hazardous chemical release occurs and is not done with the intent of
taking migratory birds, the MBTA does not apply. Protections of
publicly held natural resources, including migratory birds, under other
authorities (such as the Comprehensive Environmental Response
Compensation and Liability Act, Oil Pollution Act, and Clean Water Act)
will still apply in these situations. Parties responsible for these
incidents will still be held accountable under the incidental take
prohibitions in the Endangered Species Act and Bald and Golden Eagle
Protection Act, as well as any applicable State laws. The M-Opinion
applies to all industries equally, and the Department will continue to
work with our industry partners to minimize impacts on migratory birds,
whenever proponents or operators are willing to work with us toward
this goal.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Jeff Merkley
Question 1. I am concerned about the pressing need to improve
public safety and fund Tribal police in Indian Country. This is an
issue that affects every Tribe across Oregon and the country. While
more funding is needed across the board, there is also a disparity
between Tribes in the allocation of Federal dollars for law
enforcement. A 2017 BIA report to Congress found that funding for
public safety runs $1 billion short each year. This problem is worse
for Tribes under State jurisdiction through PL 83-280 and Tribes with
compacts under Public Law 93-638.
For instance, in my State of Oregon, many restored Tribes do not
receive funding that Tribes that were never terminated receive. The
Confederated Tribes of Grand Ronde, for example, employ seven full-time
sworn officers and provide 24/7 coverage enforcing Oregon State law
over an area over 100 square miles. Yet they are not eligible for base
operations funding through BIA.
This committee included language in the fiscal year 2018 Omnibus
highlighting this problem and asking BIA to conduct an analysis of the
issue and report back to Congress. What is the status of this report?
Can I count on you to work with me on this important issue going
forward?
Answer. The BIA is reviewing the issue to develop the report.
Question 2. In the fiscal year 2017 Omnibus, Congress included
language requesting that the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) provide a
needs assessment for law enforcement and operations and maintenance
needs at treaty fishing sites on the Columbia River.
The BIA was supposed to provide that assessment to Congress within
60 days. 730 days later that assessment still has not been provided to
Congress. The fiscal year 2018 Omnibus noted the BIA's failure to
provide the report and requested in again. I have been told that BIA
has finally completed, but not released, the report.
I have personally visited some of these sites and have witnessed
firsthand the horrendous conditions they must endure because the
Federal Government has failed to meet its obligations.
2a. When will BIA be providing the requested needs
assessments to Congress?
Answer. The report will be transmitted to Congress once review is
completed.
2b. How will the BIA be incorporating the outcome of this
needs assessment into future budget proposals?
Answer. We are committed to providing resource stewardship and
protection throughout Indian Country. Budget formulation decisions are
based on delivering services that provide benefits to the greatest
number of Tribes nationwide.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Jack Reed
Question 1. Rhode Island's success in establishing the nation's
first commercial offshore wind energy project was based in large part
on significant outreach to existing ocean stakeholders, including
commercial and recreational fishermen, to identify and work through any
concerns early in the process. Based on comments from Rhode Island
fishermen, this is not occurring under the Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management's (BOEM) new expedited leasing process. What actions will
BOEM take to increase engagement with Rhode Island fishermen at each
stage of the leasing process to offset adverse impacts to the fisheries
economy?
Answer. Stakeholder engagement is integral to BOEM's renewable
energy planning and leasing efforts. BOEM recognizes that fishermen are
an important ocean user group that may be affected by offshore
renewable energy development. Throughout the entire process, including
early planning, leasing, and then review of lessee wind facility plans
and the construction and operations phase, BOEM strives to engage
fishermen. This is done through meetings, workshops, and soliciting
input into project siting, best management practices, and research and
monitoring. BOEM shares the results of research and monitoring during
public forums, and by making the material available on our website.
These meetings, workshops, and public forums may be regionally or
project/site-specific focused. Between 2012 and 2014, BOEM held nine
fisheries best management practices workshops throughout the Mid-
Atlantic and Northeast regions, which resulted in the development of
five best management practices and mitigation measures for the offshore
wind industry to address potential use conflicts with fishing. More
recently, BOEM sponsored a National Academies Atlantic Offshore
Renewable Energy Development and Fisheries Workshop in November 2017.
BOEM also participated in the Southern New England Offshore Wind Energy
Science Forum in December 2017, which focused on developments related
specifically to the Block Island Wind Farm project. Most recently, BOEM
held two open houses concurrent with regional fishery management
council meetings to solicit comments on four offshore wind-related
notices open for public comment in April 2018, as well as a workshop in
New Jersey in May 2018 to gather additional information regarding
leasing in the New York Bight. To help coordinate the renewable energy
planning and leasing efforts and to implement one of the previously
mentioned best management practices, BOEM requires that developers
provide a fisheries liaison, and has also published guidance to lessees
regarding fisheries communication plans, which BOEM continues to
evaluate based on feedback received from the fishing industry.
BOEM currently has several projects in the post-leasing phase. For
example, BOEM has started the environmental review process for the
Vineyard Wind project Construction and Operations Plan. BOEM is
considering the comments received during the public scoping meetings to
inform the impacts to fishing. BOEM will also hold public hearings on
the draft EIS to get public feedback on information related to
potential impacts from the project. All of this information will inform
the final EIS, and ultimately the BOEM decision regarding the project.
There is no new BOEM-initiated expedited leasing process; the
planning and leasing process is a coordinated and comprehensive process
that takes several years to complete and includes multiple
opportunities for stakeholder engagement (see https://www.boem.gov/
Regulatory-Roadmap/). During each of these opportunities BOEM will
endeavor to ensure that fisheries constituents have the ability to
provide comment. At a minimum, BOEM will ensure that affected fishery
management councils are notified of the opportunity to provide comment
via direct email and via updates at regularly scheduled fishery
management council meetings. Additional outreach may include meeting
with State-led fishery groups and having a fisheries outreach table at
relevant task force meetings. Throughout its process, BOEM holds public
meetings in order to inform what areas should be considered for
leasing, and what impact leasing decisions will have on fishery
resources and fishing. Depending on the potential impact of leasing to
fishing communities, BOEM may schedule additional meetings in fishing
port towns and specifically seek the participation of the fishing
industry.
BOEM conducts its leasing process in consultation with
Intergovernmental Renewable Energy Task Forces. Meetings of the Task
Forces are open to members of the public, where they may communicate
independently with BOEM and other agencies participating in the Task
Force concerning issues pertaining to the leasing proposal. BOEM and
other agencies meet with public stakeholder groups to address their
comments and concerns (e.g., the Rhode Island Fishery and Habitat
Advisory Boards and the Massachusetts Habitat and Fisheries Working
Groups). BOEM also regularly updates the New England Fishery Management
Council, the Mid-Atlantic Fishery Management Council, the South
Atlantic Fishery Management Council's Habitat Advisory Panel, and the
Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission on the status of projects
and opportunities for public comment.
Question 2. Oil and gas drilling off the coast of New England could
have devastating consequences for Rhode Island's coastal habitats as
well as the State's coastal economy. Our coastal waters are home to
plant and animal species that rely on a healthy marine ecosystem. Our
region is also known for its proud fishing heritage, which could be
quickly destroyed if an oil spill were to occur. Our coastal economies
generate more than $17 billion for New England annually and support
more than 240,000 jobs in tourism and other industries. You have
previously indicated that President Trump directed you to reestablish
our nation's offshore oil and gas leasing program in a way that ``takes
into consideration the local and State voice.'' Given the overwhelming
State and local opposition to drilling off the coast of Rhode Island,
will you commit to exempting the State from any new oil or gas leases
as a part of this Administration's offshore drilling plan?
Answer. Section 18 of the OCS Lands Act details the decisionmaking
process governing development of a National OCS Program. The Secretary
must consider eight factors when determining the size, timing, and
location of potential oil and gas lease sales among the different areas
of the OCS but has the discretion to reach a reasonable determination
based on his consideration of these factors.
The public comments from the Draft Proposed Program (DPP) and
information from the Proposed Program analysis and the draft
Programmatic EIS will further inform the Secretary's consideration of
OCS areas for potential leasing. Inclusion of an area at the DPP or
Proposed Program phase is not a final indication it will be included in
the final approved Program or offered in a lease sale.
Additional decision points remain in the process. The next step in
the process is to publish a Proposed Program and Draft Environmental
Impact Statement, both of which will be available for public comment.
Additional public meetings will also occur after their publication.
Below are the milestones remaining in the development of the 2019-2024
National OCS Program.
--Proposed Program (PP)--expected to publish late 2018 with a 90-day
comment period.
--Publication of the Draft Programmatic Environmental Impact
Statement--expected to publish late 2018 with a 90-day comment
period.
--Proposed Final Program (PFP)--expected late 2019.
--Publication of the Final Programmatic Environmental Impact
Statement--expected late 2019.
--Approval of a Final Program (occurs at least 60 days after
submittal of PFP to the President and Congress).
This process provides the opportunity for the Secretary to winnow
the number of lease sales and areas under consideration based on the
analyses and public input that accompanies each proposal. For further
information, a flow chart of the above process can be found at: https:/
/www.boem.gov/BOEM-OCS-Oil-Gas-Leasing-Process/.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you for your leadership.
Obviously, significant issues, and we want to make sure that
the expectations that we have for you and your team to do your
job as it relates to our public lands, their treasures and
their economic opportunities, that you have the resources to do
so. So we will be working with you.
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
And with that, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:11 p.m., Thursday, May 10, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene subject to the call of
the Chair.]