- NOMINATION OF RADM MICHAEL D. WEAHKEE TO SERVE AS DIRECTOR OF THE INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
[Senate Hearing 116-124]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-124
NOMINATION OF RADM MICHAEL D. WEAHKEE TO SERVE AS DIRECTOR OF THE
INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON INDIAN AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
DECEMBER 11, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Indian Affairs
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-563 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON INDIAN AFFAIRS
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota, Chairman
TOM UDALL, New Mexico, Vice Chairman
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska
JON TESTER, Montana,
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
STEVE DAINES, Montana
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
T. Michael Andrews, Majority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Jennifer Romero, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hearing held on December 11, 2019................................
1
Statement of Senator Cortez Masto................................
32
Statement of Senator Hoeven......................................
1
Statement of Senator Murkowski...................................
26
Statement of Senator Smith.......................................
27
Statement of Senator Tester......................................
29
Statement of Senator Udall.......................................
2
Witnesses
Weahkee, Rear Admiral Michael D. Nominee For Director of the
Indian Health Service, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.......................................................
4
Biographical information.....................................
7
Prepared statement...........................................
5
Appendix
Bresette, James L., Pharm.D., Member, Red Cliff Band of Lake
Superior Chippewa, prepared statement..........................
35
Letters of support submitted for the record
Response to written questions submitted by Hon. Tom Udall to Rear
Admiral Michael D. Weahkee.....................................
97
NOMINATION OF RADM MICHAEL D. WEAHKEE TO SERVE AS DIRECTOR OF THE
INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
----------
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 11, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Indian Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:48 p.m. in room
628, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. John Hoeven,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN HOEVEN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NORTH DAKOTA
The Chairman. Good afternoon. I will now call the
nomination hearing to order.
Today, the Committee will hear from Rear Admiral Michael D.
Weahkee, who has been nominated by President Trump on October
30th, 2019, to be the Director of the Indian Health Service in
the Department of Health and Human Services. The IHS Director
oversees the administration and delivery of health care
services to approximately 2.6 million American Indians and
Alaska Natives. Operating in 37 States through a network of
over 605 hospitals, clinics, and health stations, the IHS
employs over 15,000 professionals and utilizes a budget of
approximately $6.9 billion.
Rear Admiral Weahkee was born on the Navajo Reservation in
Shiprock, New Mexico, in a public health service hospital. He
is an enrolled member of the Pueblo of Zuni of New Mexico. He
is a husband and father of three children.
Rear Admiral Weahkee received his Bachelor of Science
degree from Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, in health
care management, and his MBA and Master of Health Services
Administration from Arizona State University. Rear Admiral
Weahkee began his career in health with the United States Air
Force, spent time as project manager for the Arizona
Association of Community Health Centers, and then later became
a commissioned Corps officer within the U.S. Public Health
Service.
Admiral Weahkee has risen to the ranks from Lieutenant
Junior Grade to his current flag rank of Rear Admiral. We
appreciate your service.
Most recently, in June of 2017, he was appointed to be
Acting Secretary of the IHS, becoming Principal Deputy Director
in September 2018. Since his appointment, Admiral Weahkee has
been filling the role of IHS Director, and is responsible for
overseeing the operating budget, workforce, and administration
of this important agency.
Just prior to his appointment, Admiral Weahkee served as
Chief Executive Officer for the IHS Phoenix Indian Medical
Center. As CEO, he was the lead official in overseeing the
largest IHS facility in the Country, with a user population of
over 111,000 Native Americans. The Phoenix Indian Medical
Center serves as a hub for Arizona, Nevada, and Utah patients.
Admiral Weahkee has received a number of awards and
recognition for his work with the Air Force and U.S. Public
Health Service, including the Public Health Service
Presidential Unit Citation, the Public Health Service
Outstanding Service Medical, and the IHS National Director's
Award. He is a member of a number of professional
organizations, including the American College of Health Care
Executives, Commissioned Officers Association, Military
Officers Association of America, Reserve Officers Association,
Association of Military Surgeons of the United States, and the
Arizona State University Alumni Association, Native American
Chapter.
Over 60 letters of support have been sent to the Committee
regarding his nomination, including from the Pueblo of Zuni,
the United States Air Force, National Indian Health Board,
Seattle Indian Health Board, California Rural Indian Health
Board, South Central Foundation, United South and Eastern
Tribes, and the Northwest Portland Area Indian Health Board. I
will include all letters received as part of the official
hearing record.
The Chairman. We look forward to your testimony today,
Admiral.
Specifically, I look forward to hearing about your vision
for IHS. I want to know how IHS is responding to the Dr. Weber
sex abuse incident, as well as getting off the GAO High-Risk
List.
With that, I will turn to Vice Chairman Udall for his
opening statement.
STATEMENT OF HON. TOM UDALL,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NEW MEXICO
Senator Udall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I start, I
just want to acknowledge that the President of the Mescalero
Apache Tribe in New Mexico, President Aguilar, is here in the
audience. I think he is probably here with some of his
councilmen and councilwomen. He has just newly become the
President of the Mescalero Apaches.
Thank you, Chairman, for holding this hearing to consider
Rear Admiral Michael Weahkee's nomination to serve as Director
of the Indian Health Service. By way of an introduction, I am
proud to note that Rear Admiral Weahkee hails from New Mexico.
He is an enrolled member of the Zuni Tribe, one of 23 in my
home State, who was born in IHS's Shiprock Indian Hospital on
the Navajo Nation.
He is a dedicated public servant, and a veteran of the U.S.
Air Force. Throughout his 23 years of service at the IHS,
Admiral Weahkee has demonstrated hard work and commitment to
Indian Country. He has received four IHS National Director's
Awards, three Outstanding Service Medal awards, and a
Presidential Unit Citation, the highest unit award issued to a
uniformed service.
Admiral, your career has been a credit to New Mexico and to
the Zuni Pueblo. Congratulations on being nominated to serve as
the IHS Director.
IHS has been without a confirmed director since 2013.
Unfortunately, the situation at the Service has grown even more
critical in the intervening years. The crisis in the Great
Plains worsened and spread to other IHS service areas, like
Billings, Bemidji, and Navajo.
The Government Accountability Office added the Service to
its High-Risk List of waste, fraud, and abuse. The Albuquerque,
Navajo, and other service areas have had staffing vacancy
levels shoot past 30 percent, and concerns over management
practices have intensified as more and more information from
the Weber patient abuse cases and reports of preventable
patient deaths have surfaced. Now, perhaps more than ever, it
is imperative that the IHS have a leader at the helm who has
the experience and commitment to bring about real change.
The Director of the IHS is more than just a manager of a
multi-billion-dollar budget and 15,000 full-time Federal
employees. If confirmed, Admiral Weahkee will be responsible
for developing IHS health care policy, ensuring the delivery of
quality, comprehensive care, advocating for the needs of all
Native Americans, whether they live in the most remote corner
of Alaska, or the busiest street corner in New York City,
supporting tribal sovereignty and upholding the Federal trust
responsibility.
That is why I view today's hearing as an opportunity not
only to clarify your personal policy views and plans for
reform, but also to get a firm commitment from you that you
will fight for transparency, for the resources you need to get
the job done, and for Indian Country.
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Admiral Weahkee,
for being here today.
The Chairman. Thank you, Vice Chairman Udall.
Are there other opening statements? If not, we will now
swear in the witness. Rear Admiral Weahkee, will you please
stand and raise your right hand?
Do you solemnly affirm that the testimony that you shall
give today shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but
the truth, under the penalty of perjury?
Mr. Weahkee. Yes, I do.
The Chairman. You can be seated.
I want to remind you that your full written testimony will
be made part of the official record. With that, Admiral, we
welcome your opening statement.
STATEMENT OF REAR ADMIRAL MICHAEL D. WEAHKEE,
NOMINEE FOR DIRECTOR OF THE INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman
Udall, for the introduction. To all members of the Committee, I
appreciate the opportunity to be here with you today.
I am joined today by my wife, Dr. Rose Weahkee, seated
immediately behind me, as well as my son Nicolaus, who is one
of our three children. His sisters Tamia and Sofia are both
engaged in finals this week, we are at the end of the semester,
and school commitments. So they are both out west.
My mother, Glinda Weddle, my brothers Charley and Tim
Weahkee, my sister Jessica, and her husband Cory Weddle, as
well as several other friends, colleagues and family members
who have traveled here to Washington, D.C., to support me
during today's hearing. I would also like to acknowledge and
honor my father, Jim Weahkee, who could not be here with us
today, as he is undergoing chemotherapy treatment back in
Phoenix.
First, let me say that it is an extreme honor, and I am
humbled to be here today. I am very grateful for your
consideration of my nomination by President Trump to serve as
the next Director of the Indian Health Service.
I want to thank all of the tribal leaders, all of the urban
Indian organization leaders, the national Indian health
stakeholder organizations, professional colleagues, and my IHS
team members for the outpouring of support that I have received
over the past two and a half years that I have served as the
Principal Deputy Director and the Acting Director of the Indian
Health Service.
As I reflect back on the significant points in my life that
I believe helped to contribute to where I sit today, I am
continually reminded of the many people whose influence played
a part in shaping the person that I have become and the path
that has led me here. From my mother, Glinda, I learned the
importance of a strong work ethic and of selfless service. From
my father, Jim, I inherited my ``Indian-ness'' and being Zuni,
and I learned the value of culture and traditions, and of
having a good sense of humor in life. My maternal grandparents
instilled in me a strong Christian faith and a desire for
service, which led me to follow in my grandfather's footsteps
and enlist in the Air Force.
Remembering my paternal grandparents, my uncle, and my
aunt, who were all taken away from our family way too early, I
am reminded of the terrible toll that diabetes and heart
disease, alcoholism and hepatitis C have inflicted upon our
Native people, and why the health care path that I have chosen
as my life's work is so very important. This Committee is well
aware that American Indians and Alaska Natives are impacted
disproportionately in comparison to the general U.S. population
for many different diseases and health conditions. My family is
not immune, and is representative of the issues that our
patients face throughout Indian country.
As was mentioned, I was born in one of our Indian Health
Service hospitals, on the Navajo reservation in Shiprock, New
Mexico. I have been a lifelong user of our system and many of
my family members continue to receive their care and treatment
at our IHS tribal and urban Indian organizations.
The IHS has transitioned dramatically in many ways since
its creation back in 1955, but there is still much work to do
to adequately meet the needs of our patients. The mission of
the Indian Health Service is to raise the physical, mental,
social, and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska
Natives to the highest level, and it is our responsibility to
uphold the Federal Government's obligation to promote healthy
American Indian and Alaska Native people, communities and
cultures, and to honor and protect the inherent sovereign
rights of Tribes. It is a noble mission, and it is ``My Why''
for working in Indian Health and it keeps me energized to come
in to work and face the many challenges that confront us each
and every day.
As is evident from recent news stories, our agency
continues to face many challenges, including the need to
recruit and retain qualified health care professionals, to
maintain aged facilities and meet certification and
accreditation requirements, and to overcome community issues
like inadequate housing, jobs, a lack of transportation and
other social determinants of health that need attention in
Indian Country.
In partnership with tribes and urban Indian organizations,
we have developed a comprehensive and aggressive five-year
strategic plan for the Indian Health Service that is focused on
expanding access to care, improving the quality of the care,
and improving the management and operations of the Agency. In
the past two years we have made significant strides to remove
the Indian Health Service from the Government Accountability
Office's High-Risk List, implementing 12 of the 14 open
recommendations that helped to land the agency on the list.
We have transitioned the Rosebud Indian Hospital from a
facility that was on the brink of decertification by the
Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services to now being fully
accredited by the Joint Commission. Just last week, CMS
conducted a recertification survey of the Pine Ridge Indian
Hospital, and we look forward to sharing the results of that
survey soon.
If I am fortunate enough to be confirmed by the Senate, I
promise to be guided by the core values of integrity and
transparency. I pledge to faithfully execute the laws written
by Congress, and to be responsive to your questions regarding
the agency.
We cannot solve everything at once, but we can make a
positive, real, and lasting difference in the lives and health
of our patients. And we can make what some say is impossible
possible.
Thank you for your consideration of my nomination and I
look forward to answering your questions here today.
[The prepared statement and biographical information of
Admiral Weahkee follow:]
Prepared Statement of Rear Admiral Michael D. Weahkee, Nominee For
Director of the Indian Health Service, U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services
Thank you Senator Udall for that kind introduction. Good afternoon
Chairman Hoeven, Mr. Vice-Chairman, and members of the Committee. I am
joined here today by my wife, Dr. Rose Weahkee, my son Nicolaus (one of
our three children, his sisters Tamia and Sofia are both engaged in
finals and school commitments this week out west), my mother Glinda
Weddle, my brothers Charley and Tim Weahkee, my sister Jessica and her
husband Cory Weddle, as well as several other friends, colleagues, and
family members who have traveled here to Washington, DC, to support me
during today's hearing. I'd also like to acknowledge and honor my
father, Jim Weahkee, who could not be here with us today as he is
undergoing chemotherapy treatment in Phoenix, Arizona.
First, let me say that it is an extreme honor, and I am humbled to
be here today. I am very grateful for your consideration of my
nomination by President Trump to serve as the next Director of the
Indian Health Service. I want to thank all of the Tribal leaders, urban
Indian organization leaders, national Indian health stakeholder
organizations, professional colleagues, and my IHS team members for the
outpouring of support that I have received over the past two and a half
years that I have served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting
Director of the Indian Health Service.
As I reflect back on the significant points in my life that I
believe helped contribute to where I sit today, I am continually
reminded of the many people whose influence played a part in shaping
the person that I have become and the path that led me here.
From my mother Glinda, I learned the importance of a strong work
ethic and of selfless service. From my father Jim, I inherited my
``Indian-ness'' and being Zuni, and I learned the value of culture,
traditions, and having a good sense of humor in life.
My maternal grandparents instilled in me a strong Christian faith
and a desire for service, which led me to follow in my grandfather's
footsteps and enlist in the Air Force as a young man.
Remembering my paternal grandparents, my uncle, and my aunt, who
were all taken away from our family way too early, I am reminded of the
terrible toll that diabetes, heart disease, alcoholism and hepatitis C
have inflicted upon our native people, and why the health care path
that I have chosen as my life's work is so very important. This
committee is well aware that American Indians and Alaska Natives are
impacted disproportionately in comparison to the United States general
population for many different diseases and health conditions. My family
is not immune and is representative of the issues that our patients
face throughout Indian country.
I was born in one of our Indian Health Service hospitals, on the
Navajo reservation in Shiprock, New Mexico. I have been a lifelong user
of our system and many of my family members continue to receive their
care and treatment at our Indian Health Service, Tribal and Urban
Indian facilities. The IHS has transformed dramatically in many ways
since its creation in 1955, but there is still much work to do to
adequately meet the needs of our patients.
The mission of the Indian Health Service is to raise the physical,
mental, social, and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska
Natives to the highest level, and it is our responsibility to uphold
the Federal Government's obligation to promote healthy American Indian
and Alaska Native people, communities and cultures, and to honor and
protect the inherent sovereign rights of Tribes. It is a noble mission,
and it is ``My Why'' for working in Indian Health and it keeps me
energized to come in to work and face the many challenges that confront
us each and every day.
As is evident from recent news stories, our Agency continues to
face many challenges, including the need to recruit and retain
qualified health care professionals; maintain aged facilities and meet
certification and accreditation requirements; and to overcome community
issues like inadequate housing, jobs, transportation and other social
determinants of health that need attention in Indian country.
In partnership with Tribes and Urban Indian Organizations, we have
developed a comprehensive and aggressive five-year strategic plan for
the IHS, focused on expanding access to care, improving the quality of
care that we provide, and improving the management and operations of
the Agency. In the past two years we have made significant strides to
remove the Indian Health Service from the Government Accountability
Office's High Risk List, implementing 12 of the 14 unimplemented
recommendations that helped to land the Agency on the list. We have
transitioned the Rosebud Indian Hospital from a facility that was on
the brink of decertification by the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare
Services, to now being fully accredited by the Joint Commission. And,
just last week CMS conducted a recertification survey of the Pine Ridge
Indian Hospital and we look forward to sharing the results of that
survey soon.
If I am fortunate enough to be confirmed by the Senate, I promise
to be guided by the core values of integrity and transparency. I pledge
to faithfully execute the laws written by Congress, and to be
responsive to your questions regarding the agency. We cannot solve
everything at once, but we can make a positive, real and lasting
difference in the lives and health of our patients.
Thank you for your consideration of my nomination and I look
forward to answering your questions here today.
______
biographical information
1. Name: Rear Admiral Michael Dean Weahkee (enrolled member of the
Zuni Indian Tribe).
2. Position to which nominated: Director, Indian Health Service.
3. Date of nomination: October 22, 2019.
4. Address: [Information not released to the public.]
5. Date and place of birth: [Information not released to the
public.]
6. Marital status: Married; Spouse's Name--Dr. Rose Lydia (Vazquez)
Weahkee.
7. Names and ages of children: (A) Tamia Rose Weahkee (B) minor
child (C) minor child. [Ages and names of minor children not released
to the public.]
8. Education:
A) Master of Health Services Administration, Arizona State
University, 1998
B) Master of Business Administration, Arizona State University,
1998
C)
Bachelor of Science-Health Care Management, Southern
Illinois University-Carbondale, 1996
D) Associate of Liberal Arts, San Juan College, Farmington, NM,
1991
9. Employment record: (See attached CV).
10. Government experience: (See attached CV).
11. Business relationships: (None).
12. Memberships: (See attached CV).
13. Political affiliations and activities:
(a) List all offices with a political party that you have held or
any public office for which you have been a candidate. None/Not
Applicable.
(b) List all memberships, offices held in, and services rendered to
all political parties or election committees during the last 10 years.
None/Not Applicable.
(c) Itemize all political contributions to any individual, campaign
organization, political party, political action committee, or similar
entity of $500 or more for the past 10 years. None/Not Applicable.
14. Honors and awards: (See attached CV).
15. Published writings:
Editorial in the Journal of American Medical Association,
Ending the HIV Epidemic: A Plan for America https://
jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle
/2724455?utm_source=jps&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign
=author_alert-jamanetwork&utm_content=author-author_engagement-
tfl&utm_term=3m
Op-Ed in Indian Country Today, Ending the HIV Epidemic in
Indian Country https://newsmaven.io/indiancountrytoday/opinion/
ending-the-hiv-epidemic
-in-indian-countryrCXSrHaH4EyGUBs6JnC8cw/
16. Speeches: Provide the Committee with two copies, and any
transcript of recording, if available, of any formal speeches you have
delivered during the last 5 years on topics relevant to the position
for which you have been nominated. Formal speeches include, but not
limited to widely attended public addresses, commencement speeches, and
conference lectures. Please include the date, place and organization
where they were delivered.
See recent speeches at this url: https://www.ihs.gov/newsroom/
directorsspeeches/
I have served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting IHS
Director since June 19, 2017.
17. Selection:
(a) Do you know why you were selected for the position to which you
have been nominated by the President? I have successfully fulfilled the
duties and responsibilities of this position for the past two and a
half years as the Acting Director and Principal Deputy Director of the
Indian Health Service.
(b) What in your background or employment experience do you believe
affirmatively qualifies you for this particular appointment? My
undergraduate and graduate education is in hospital and business
administration. I have served my entire 26 year professional career in
the government health care system, first in the United States Air
Force, then in the State Primary Care Association in Arizona, and for
the past 21 years in the Indian Health Service. I have served at the
headquarters, area and local service unit levels, as well as in both
the federal and tribal setting. My entire Indian Health Service career
has been in supervisory, management and leadership positions of
progressively higher levels of responsibility and accountability. I
have served as the CEO of the largest federally operated hospital in
the Indian Health Service and I led the team that reopened the Rosebud
Indian Hospital emergency department after it was closed in December of
2015. I am an enrolled member of the Zuni Indian Tribe.
b. future employment relationships
1. Will you sever all connections with your present employers,
business firms, business associations, or business organizations if you
are confirmed by the Senate? I am a career officer in the United States
Public Health Service, with 23 years of retirement credit. Following
this appointment, I would ideally return to service in another capacity
somewhere in federal government to fulfill a 30-year service ca reer
and retire at that time.
2. Do you have any plans, commitments, or agreements to pursue
outside employment, with or without compensation, during your service
with the government? If so, please explain. No/Not Applicable.
3. Do you have any plans, commitments, or agreements after
completing government service to resume employment, affiliation, or
practice with your previous employer, business firm, association, or
organization? (See response to B.1. above).
4. Has anybody made a commitment to employ your services in any
capacity after you leave government service? No.
5. If confirmed, do you expect to serve out your full term or until
the next Presidential election, whichever is applicable? Yes.
c. potential conflicts of interest
1. Describe all financial arrangements, deferred compensation
agreements, and other continuing dealings with business associates,
clients, or customers. None/Not Applicable.
2. Indicate any investments, obligations, liabilities, or other
relationships which could involve potential conflicts of interest in
the position to which you have been nominated. None/Not Applicable.
3. Describe any business relationship, dealing, or financial
transaction that you have had during the last 10 years, whether for
yourself, on behalf of a client, or acting as an agent, that could in
any way constitute or result in a possible conflict of interest in the
position to which you have been nominated. None/Not Applicable.
4. Describe any activity during the past 10 years in which you have
engaged for the purpose of directly or indirectly influencing the
passage, defeat, or modification of any legislation or affecting the
administration and execution of law or public policy, regardless if you
were a registered lobbyist.
I have provided testimony at the request of Congress, for the
purpose of informing and updating various oversight and appropriations
committees on the status of IHS activities and budget requests.
Testimony has been provided as follows: https://www.ihs.gov/newsroom/
congressionaltestimony/
Senate Committee on Indian Affairs
--March 12, 2019
--June 13, 2018
--April 11, 2018
--September 13, 2017
--July 12, 2017
Senate Interior Appropriations Subcommittee
--May 1, 2019
House Interior Appropriations Subcommittee
--April 9, 2019
House Natural Resources Subcommittee on Indian, Insular and
Alaska Native Affairs
--March 20, 2018
House Natural Resources Subcommittee for Indigenous People of
the United States
--September 25, 2019
5. Explain how you will resolve any potential conflict of interest,
including any that may be disclosed by your responses to the above
items. (None/Not Applicable).
6. Please provide written opinions provided to the Committee by the
designated agency ethics officer of the agency to which you are
nominated and by the Office of Government Ethics concerning potential
conflicts of interest or any legal impediments to your serving in this
position? (None/Not Applicable).
d. legal matters
1. Have you ever been disciplined or cited for a breach of ethics
by, or been the subject of a complaint to any court, administrative
agency, professional association, disciplinary committee, or other
professional group? If so, please explain. (No/Not Applicable).
e. relationship with committee
1. Will you ensure that your department/agency complies with
deadlines for information set by congressional committees? Yes.
2. Will you ensure that your department/agency responds to all
congressional inquiries from members of Congress in a timely manner?
Yes.
3. Will you ensure that your department/agency does whatever it can
to protect congressional witnesses and whistle blowers from reprisal
for their testimony and disclosures? Yes.
4. Will you cooperate in providing the committee with requested
witnesses, including technical experts and career employees, with
firsthand knowledge of matters of interest to the Committee in a timely
manner? Yes.
5. Please explain how if confirmed, you will review regulations
issued by your department/agency, and work closely with Congress, to
ensure that such regulations comply with the spirit of the laws passed
by Congress.
The Indian Health Service works closely with the leadership at the
Department of Health and Human Services to promulgate regulations and
policy that support the provision of safe, quality health care for
American Indians and Alaska Natives. The Agency works closely with the
HHS Office of General Counsel to review all legal considerations
related to draft regulations and policy as they are being developed. In
addition, the Indian Self Determination and Education Assistance Act
and the Indian Health Care Improvement Act require that the IHS work
closely and in partnership with the Tribes that we serve. This is
typically done through formal consultation with Indian Tribes and
Tribal Organizations, and through conferral with Urban Indian Health
programs. I will commit to fully complying with these laws and the
goals and intent of the Agency's Tribal Consultation and Urban Confer
policies. I also commit to providing timely responses and feedback to
Congress when information or technical assistance requests are made of
the Indian Health Service.
6. Are you willing to appear and testify before any duly
constituted committee upon request of the Congress on such occasions as
reasonably requested to do so? Yes.
f. general qualifications and views
1. How does your previous professional experiences and education
qualify you for the position for which you have been nominated?
For the past two and a half years I have served in an Acting
capacity, in the role for which I have been nominated (IHS Director).
These two and a half years of real world, direct experience have been
tremendously beneficial in preparing me to take on this challenge
officially. In addition, I have more than 20 years of Indian Health
Service-specific experience, working at all levels of the organization
and in a variety of different roles.
2. Why do you wish to serve in the position for which you have been
nominated?
I have dedicated more than two decades of service to the Indian
Health Service and I am very much invested in the fulfillment of the
Agency's mission, to raise the physical, mental, social and spiritual
health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level. In
addition, I was born in an IHS facility, at the Shiprock Indian
Hospital on the Navajo reservation. My family and I continue to receive
care at IHS facilities in New Mexico and Arizona, and I have many
friends, neighbors and relatives who also receive their care at our
facilities and through our system. I want to make a positive impact on
the Agency, and instill lasting change and improvements. I want to
improve the way that we do business, the culture of the Agency, and the
IHS brand. . .to make it an Agency that our Native people, our staff,
HHS and Congress can be proud of.
3. What goals have you established for your first two years in this
position, if confirmed?
In my first two and a half years as the Acting IHS Director, I have
focused on addressing quality of care concerns across the system, but
with a specific focus on facilities in the Great Plains Area, to
include the Pine Ridge and Rosebud facilities. I have pressed the
development and implementation of the new Office of Quality at the IHS
Headquarters level. This new office provides us with the oversight
structure and staffing needed to assure appropriate support, compliance
and accountability at all levels of our Agency (HQ, Area Offices and
Service Units). This new office is envisioned to grow to approximately
35 full time equivalent positions, each with a vitally important and
value added role. To date we have been able (with the support of
Congress and HHS leadership) to fund approximately 14 of those FTE
positions. I intend to continue the work necessary to realize full
implementation of this new office.
I have also focused intently on removing the IHS from the
Government Accountability Office's (GAO) High Risk List. In 2017, just
prior to when I came into the appointed role of IHS Principal Deputy
Director, the IHS was placed onto the GAO High Risk List due to a
number of factors, including lack of leadership and management
capacity; no demonstration of an organized action plan to guide the
Agency in moving forward with needed improvements; no demonstrated
progress in addressing longstanding GAO recommendations to the Agency.
In the two and a half years since, I have led to Agency to successfully
address 11 of the 14 outstanding GAO recommendations. I have led the
Agency to develop a new 5-year Strategic Plan, the first for the Agency
in almost a decade, which will guide the IHS and our partner Tribes and
Urban Indian health programs to address many of our long-standing
challenges and capitalize on many of the opportunities that exist for
improving care and treatment for our patients. I have focused on
recruiting and filling key leadership positions in the senior executive
ranks, both at the headquarters level and in the Area offices, as well
as filling key chief executive officer and clinical director positions
in our service units. The Rosebud Indian Hospital is now fully
accredited by the Joint Commission.
My goals for the immediate future include:
--Regaining Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
certification status for the Pine Ridge Indian Hospital. We are
within weeks of doing this and realizing this milestone is a
top priority for me;
--Working with Congress, HHS and the Office of Personnel
Management to equip the Agency with additional tools that will
enable us to better recruit and retain needed health care
professionals, both in clinical and administrative roles.
Recruitment and retention of staff is the key contributor to
many of our challenges within the IHS;
--Converting all I HS hospitals to an appropriate facility
type. Currently the majority of IHS hospitals are classified by
CMS as Acute Care Hospitals. Due to the low volume of
inpatients at many of our sites, some facilities do not meet
the criteria for being classified as acute care hospitals and
should be reclassified as either Critical Access Hospitals or
as Ambulatory health care facilities (Outpatient). Modernizing
our facilities to the appropriate facility type, and evaluating
whether new facility types and payment models should be
considered for the IHS is a high priority for me.
--I will rely heavily on the new IHS strategic plan that was
developed in partnership with Tribes and Urban Indian programs
to guide my efforts. The three overarching goals of the new
plan focus on improving access to care, quality of care, and
management and operations of the Agency. I will ensure that
everything that the Agency does incorporates the goals,
objectives and tasks identified in the new plan (budget
formulation, performance assessment, resource allocation,
etc.).
4. What skills do you believe you may be lacking which may be
necessary to successfully carry out this position? What steps can be
taken to obtain those skills?
I have found that Washington, DC-based policy experience has been
my largest deficit. I now have two and a half years of hard-earned
experience with this, but there is much more to learn. I learned a very
important lesson early in my tenure as the Acting IHS Director, when I
was assigned to testify at a Senate Appropriations Subcommittee hearing
in my third week on the job. My preparation for the hearing was not
ideal and I have worked with HHS and IHS officials over the past two
years to develop a process that works for me. My very public dialogue
with Senator John Tester (MT) during this hearing taught me the
importance of speaking to the needs and interests of multiple
audiences/stakeholders in my responses. Over the past two and a half
years Tribal leaders have impressed upon me the importance of keeping
Indian health care non-partisan, and that it is vitally important that
we have the support of both sides of the aisle in order to best meet
the needs and interests of our American Indian and Alaska Native
patients. That will be my goal moving forward.
5. Please discuss your philosophical views on the role of
government. Include a discussion of when you believe the government
should involve itself in the private sector, when society's problems
should be left to the private sector, and what standards should be used
to determine when a government program is no longer necessary.
I have personally historically favored small government over heavy
government engagement and oversight of the private sector. That being
said there are definitely times when the federal government must step
in to ensure that the obligations our country makes are honored and
adhered to. One of those scenarios is the trust responsibility owed to
Indian Tribes. I believe wholly in the federal government obligation
and commitment to uphold our trust responsibility to Tribes. The Indian
Health Service is responsible for providing federal health services to
American Indians and Alaska Natives. The provision of health services
to members of federally-recognized tribes grew out of the special
government-to-government relationship between the federal government
and Indian tribes. This relationship, established in 1787, is based on
Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution, and has been given form and
substance by numerous treaties, laws, Supreme Court decisions, and
Executive Orders. The IHS is the principal federal health care provider
and health advocate for Indian people, and our goal is to raise their
health status to the highest possible level. The IHS provides a
comprehensive health service delivery system for American Indians and
Alaska Natives, in some of the most rural and remote locations across
our country.
I have heard proposals and discussions from some in Congress and
from other health care systems about privatizing Indian health care.
These individuals point to the challenges and problems experienced in
our current system, and assert that privatization would alleviate or at
least mitigate many of these issues. I personally have no faith that
the private sector would be able to meet the needs and interests of our
Indian patients any better than the Indian Health Service, and in fact
I am confident that privatization would diminish care and treatment for
our patients. You can simply look to the large number of
rural.hospitals and health care facilities that are closing across our
nation, because private and non-profit health care organizations no
longer find them to be financially viable nor are they able to maintain
certification and accreditation in these low volume settings. The IHS
is a safety net for the patients who rely upon it for their care and
treatment, and ensures the fulfillment of the United States
government's obligation to our American Indian and Alaska Native
people.
That being said, there is definitely a role that private health
care organizations can play to supplement the primary care and limited
specialty services provided by the IHS system. A program similar to the
Veteran's Choice program in the Veteran's Health Administration, would
help to ensure that those Indian patients who live far away from IHS/
Tribal/Urban facilities could have access to care. Currently the IHS
only operates in 37 of the 50 States in the Union, and 70 percent of
American Indians and Alaska Natives now live in Urban settings away
from their home reservation-based health care facilities. Private
health care organizations could help to fill that gap and meet the
needs of our patients living outside of the current catchment area. I
would support the federal government partnering with the private sector
to develop such a program for our patients.
6. Describe the current mission, major programs, and major
operational objectives of the department/agency to which you have been
nominated.
The IHS Mission is to ``Raise the physical, mental, social and
spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest
level.''
The IHS Vision--``Healthy communities and quality health care
systems through strong partnerships and culturally responsive
practices.''
IHS Strategic Plan Goals (Access, Quality, Management and
Operations)
1)
To ensure that comprehensive, culturally appropriate
personal and public health services are available and
accessible to American Indian and Alaska Native people.
2)
To promote excellence and quality through innovation of the
Indian health care system into an optimally performing
organization.
3)
To strengthen IHS program management and operations.
7. What do you believe to be the top three challenges facing the
department/agency and why?
1)
Recruitment and retention of qualified clinical and
leadership staff;
2)
Need to transform the system into one that meets the needs
of patients. (Electronic Health Record Modernization, Use of
innovative technology/equipment, telehealth, in home dialysis,
right-size and appropriate facility types)
3)
Need to improve the culture of the Agency with a focus on
quality and accountability.
8. In reference to question number six, what factors in your
opinion have kept the department/agency from achieving its missions
over the past several years?
1)
Appropriate planning (lack of strategic plan for a decade)
2)
Prepared leadership/management (lack of investment in
workforce, Executive Leadership Development, other)
3)
Lack of Resources (Federal Disparity Index/Indian Health
Care Improvement Fund)
9. Who are the stakeholders in the work of this department/agency?
1) American Indian and Alaska Native Patients
2) 573 federally recognized Tribes
3) 41 Urban Indian Health Programs
4) Congress
5) American Taxpayers
6) Sister HHS Operating Divisions and Federal Agencies outside
of HHS
7) Other Health Care Providers and Health Systems
8) Academia
10. What is the proper relationship between the position to which
you have been nominated, and the stakeholders identified in question
number nine?
Mutual Respect, Transparency, Proactive Outreach, Consultative,
Interdependent, Accountability
11. The Chief Financial Officers Act requires all government
departments and agencies to develop sound financial management
practices. (a) What do you believe are your responsibilities, if
confirmed, to ensure that your department/agency has proper management
and accounting controls?
As the Agency's Principal, it would be my responsibility to ensure
full compliance with the Federal Managers Financial Integrity Act, as
well as assuring the development and maintenance of an enterprise risk
management system that complies with the goals and intent of 0MB
Circular A-123. I also feel strongly that the IHS needs to develop a HQ
level compliance program that includes inperson audits/inspections by
HQ subject matter experts to each IHS Area Office on an annual basis.
(b) What experience do you have in managing a large organization?
I have successfully managed the Indian Health Service for two and a
half years as the Acting Director and Principal Deputy Director. Prior
to this role, I was the Chief Executive Officer of the largest
federally operated hospital in the Indian Health Service.
12. The Government Performance and Results Act requires all
government departments and agencies to identify measurable performance
goals and to report to Congress on their success in achieving these
goals. (a) What benefits, if any, do you see in identifying performance
goals and reporting on progress in achieving those goals?
The Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) requires Federal
agencies to demonstrate that they are using their funds effectively
toward meeting their missions. The law requires agencies to have both a
5-year Strategic Plan in place and to submit Annual Performance Plans
describing specifically what the agency intends to accomplish toward
those goals with their annual budget request. GPRA also requires
agencies to set performance measures with specific annual targets.
GPRA measures for the IHS include clinical care performance
measures, such as care for patients with diabetes, cancer screening,
immunizations, behavioral health screening, and other prevention
measures. The agency also reports many non-clinical measures, including
rates of hospital accreditation, injury prevention, and infrastructure
improvements. The establishment of metrics helps to ensure that the
Agency's expenditure of resources are actually impacting upon the
ultimate goal of improving the health status of American Indians and
Alaska Natives. Without performance goals and metrics we do not know if
the programs and services being provided are impactful. When there is
no progress we should adjust our programming so that it better meets
the needs of patients.
(b) What steps should Congress consider taking when a department/
agency fails to achieve its performance goals? Should these steps
include the elimination, privatization, downsizing, or consolidation of
departments and/or programs?
I believe that step one should be for Congress to review whether
the Agency is appropriately resourced to fulfill the goals and
objectives assigned to it. If appropriately resourced and still not
meeting performance goals, then Congress should audit the Agency to
pinpoint the cause for not meeting expectations. If it is lack of
adherence to laws, regulations or policies, then leadership should be
held accountable and dealt with. If it is lack of vision and
leadership, then an appropriately pepared leader should be identified
and appointed. In the case of the Indian Health Service, the federal
government has a responsibility to ensure maintenance of the trust
relationship, which establishes a responsibility for a variety of
services and benefits to Indian people based on their status as
Indians, including health care. As such, the elimination or downsizing
of the program are contrary to this trust responsibility. Congress
should support innovation and work with executive branch leadership to
break down silos and provide resources when and where they are most
needed.
(c) What performance goals do you believe should be applicable to
your personal performance, if confirmed?
I believe that the goals that I laid out in response to questions
F.3. and F.7. above should be used as the basis for creating my
individual performance goals, should I be confirmed to serve as the IHS
Director.
13. Please describe your philosophy of supervisor/employee
relationships. Generally, what supervisory model do you follow? Have
any employee complaints been brought against you?
I prescribe to the 'Golden Rule' leadership philosophy .... to lead
as I would like to be led. As a health care professional, serving in an
industry that is service oriented and patient and family focused, I
also lean towards the use of servant leader and loving leader models.
My priority is to nurture and support my employees to the extent
possible. When this proves to not be enough, then I will help my
employees to find a better fit for their knowledge, skills and
abilities elsewhere in the organization, or if absolutely necessary
outside of the Agency. I have served for more than 20 years in our
Agency without having a formal complaint or lawsuit lodged against me
directly.
14. Describe your working relationship, if any, with the Congress.
Does your professional experience include working with committees of
Congress? If yes, please explain.
See my previous responses to questions C.4. and F.4.
15. Please explain what you believe to be the proper relationship
between yourself, if confirmed, and the Inspector General of your
department/agency.
As the Acting IHS Director, I developed and issued guidance to all
lHS employees outlining my expectations of the way that we work with
both the OIG and the GAO. A summary of that guidance is as follows:
Working with and Reporting to the OIG and GAO
I want to remind everyone of the commitment of IHS to work
positively and cooperatively with our external authorities, especially
with the HHS Office of Inspector General and the Government
Accountability Office. Consistent with that commitment, it is important
for all I HS employees to build and sustain a positive relationship and
to be responsive and cooperative in working with the OIG and the GAO. A
critical part of this overall responsibility includes the proactive
reporting of known or suspected fraud, waste, and abuse to appropriate
authorities. Anyone with knowledge or suspicion of child abuse must
report this information to local law enforcement, the IHS Headquarters
Division of Personnel Security and Ethics, or the OIG. The IHS hotline
number is (301) 443-0658, and the OIG hotline number is (800) 447-8477.
IHS health care practitioners, administrators and other personnel have
a legal duty to report known or suspected abuse. When reporting
something you see or suspect, you can be confident that leadership will
take the allegations seriously and without reprisal.
16. In the areas under the department/agency's jurisdiction to
which you have been nominated, what legislative action(s) should
Congress consider as priorities? Please state your personal views.
Advanced Appropriations for the IHS--To amend the Indian Health
Care Improvement Act (IHCIA) to authorize advance appropriations for
the Indian Health Service (IHS) by providing authority for two fiscal
years in succession, and for other purposes, and, relatedly, to amend
31 U.S.C.  1105(a) to make a conforming change to budget submission
requirements.
The IHS proposes to have its budget set on a two-year cycle,
establishing budget authority levels for a budget year and a separate
funding level for a subsequent year, with funds only becoming available
on October 1 of the second fiscal year. An advance appropriation is one
made to become available one year or more beyond the year for which the
appropriations act is passed. This change would protect IHS and Tribal
programs, in the same way that VA facilities are protected. I fully
support this proposal.
Sequestration Exemption for the IHS--To amend current law, section
256(e) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act
(BBEDCA) (2 U.S.C.  906(e)), to exempt the Indian Health Service from
future sequestration cuts. Similar to the advanced appropriations
request, this proposal would protect IHS and Tribal health programs
from funding reductions. I fully support this proposal.
ISDEAA Section 105(1) Lease Authority--To provide a new
appropriation account for the IHS with a lease prospectus requirement
for compensation provided to a Tribe or Tribal organization for a lease
under section 105(/) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education
Assistance Act (ISDEAA). In order to protect funds for federally
operated facilities a new funding source needs to be identified to meet
this need. I fully support the development of a new budget line for
this purpose.
Waiver of Indian Preference--Amend 25 U.S.C.  5117 to authorize
the HHS Secretary to waive Indian Preference laws, and issue related
regulations, applicable to IHS positions that fall under specific
conditions in order to fill positions in cases where the Secretary
determines there is an urgent staffing crisis or chronic persistent
vacancies in health professions. Currently waivers can only be granted
with Tribal resolution and concurrence. We often face challenges
filling key CEO and other service unit level positions because of the
lack of qualified Indian preference candidates. I support the goals and
intent of this new authority.
Elevate IHS Director to Assistant Secretary Level--Amend Federal
law to designate the Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) to be
a reference to the Assistant Secretary of Indian Health. The main goal
of this position elevation would be to provide more direct access to
the HHS Secretary, Deputy Secretary and Chief of Staff without going
through Assistant Secretary review and clearance.
Subsequent Reduction of ISDEAA Funding Level--Allow the Indian
Health Service (IHS) to reduce an Indian Self-Determination and
Education Assistance Act (ISDEAA) contra ctor's or compactor's ISDEAA
funding in subsequent years if an increase in the contractor/
compactor's funding was made pursuant to a statutory or regulatory
``deemed approved'' provision. This change would enable the Agency to
reso lve administrative errors and technical issues with agreements.
Currently there is no recourse for the Agency when errors are
discovered.
Contractibility of IHS Facilities Serving Multiple Tribes--Ensure
Indian Health Service (IHS) health care facilities serving more than
one Tribe may be contracted or compacted by an eligible Tribe or Tribal
Organization (T/TO) only if approved through Tribal resolution by all
Tribes primarily benefitting from the IHS health care facility. There
have been recent cases where Tribes served by a single facility have
differences of opinion regarding the future of the organization. As the
law is currently written, the IHS must enter into a PL 93-638 agreement
when a Tribes desires to do so, forcing arrangements that are not
always in the best interests of patients. Requiring consensus by all
Tribes served would be in the best interest of patients and reduce
administratively burdensome and unwieldy management/operations
arrangements.
FTCA Coverage for Urban Indian Programs--The Indian Health Service
(IHS) requests approval of the proposal to amend the Indian Health Care
Improvement Act (IHCIA) to provide Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA)
coverage to I HS-funded Urban Indian Organizations (UIOs) in the same
manner as Indian SelfDetermination and Education Assistance Act
(ISDEAA) contractors and mandate that all medical malpractice claims
and judgments be paid from the Department of Treasury's Judgment Fund.
This amendment would cover medical, dental, pharmaceutical, and
behavioral health counseling related health care services including
ancillary services provided to eligible Urban American Indians and
Alaska Natives (Al/AN) pursuant to grants and contracts awarded by the
IHS, as authorized by 25 U.S.C. Subchapter IV--Health Services for
Urban Indians of the IHCIA.
17. Within your area of control, will you pledge to develop and
implement a system that allocates discretionary spending in an open
manner through a set of fair and objective established criteria? If
yes, please explain what steps you intend to take and a timeframe for
their implementation. If not, please explain why.
Yes. The Indian Health Service allocates the vast majority of
annually appropriated funds based on stable base funding levels that
were established back in the mid 1990's. New funding and discrete
purpose funds are typically allocated based on funding formulas that
were developed in consultation and partnership with Tribes, and in
conferral and partnership with Urban Indian organizations. These
formulas include factors like active user counts, disease burden,
tribal size adjustments, etc. The goals of these formulas are to ensure
that all IHS, Tribal and Urban Indian programs receive an equitable
level of funding to help address the many challenges that our patients
face. Some of the programs that use formula allocation methodology
include the Purchased and Referred Care (PRC) program, the Indian
Health Care Improvement Fund (IHCIF) line, the Sanitation Facilities
Construction (SFC) program, t he Special Diabetes Program for Indians
(SDPI), etc.
Tribal Consultation occurs when there is a critical event that may
impact Tribes. The appropriation of funds to the IHS for a new or
expanded purpose meets this th reshold and would trigger the need for
the Agency to consult with Tribes about the appropriate use and
allocation of t hese funds. Several advisory committees have been
established to provide leadership, advocacy, and guidance to t he
Director on policy and program matters. Additional workgroups and task
fo rces would be established when new policy changes are proposed, or
when new sources of funding are provided by Congress. These committees
provide the init ial review and recommendat ions to the IHS Director,
and their feedback is sent out to all 573 Tribes and 41 Urban Indian
Organizations for review and feedback via a Dear Triba l Leader and
Dear Urban Indian Organization let ter. Once comments are received,
this information is then shared again with the Tribal workgroup or task
force for refinement of t heir recommendations to the IHS Director. As
t he IHS Director, it would be (and has been) my responsibility to make
a final decision about the allocation of new resources to the Agency.
The process used by the Indian Health Service is very much open, fair
and objective. . .and one of t he trade-off is t hat it does take some
time to do it right. There are also times when disparate viewpoints
arise between Tribes. In these cases, t he difficult role of deciding
what is best for the Indian health care system and our patients overall
falls to the IHS Director and I welcome t he challenge of fulfilling
this vita lly important role.
g. financial data
[Information not released to the public.]
Attachment
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Admiral. We will start with five-
minute rounds of questioning.
A recent Wall Street Journal article noted that inquiries
into a physician's work history are not always screened by an
IHS manager, which makes it easier for a doctor with conduct
issues to be hired. If confirmed as Director, how would you
ensure that all health care professionals hired by the Indian
Health Service are credentialed and in good standing with the
medical boards they are certified in?
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you for the question, Chairman Hoeven.
One of the primary responsibilities I feel as the principal of
the agency is to establish that tone at the top, and to create
the policies and the controls necessary to not only equip the
team members to identify when something doesn't quite look
right, but to feel free to report those items up, that we
should be creating a culture that celebrates success.
One of the items that we have worked on recently is the
implementation of a centralized credentialing system. This
enables transparency into the records of providers, not only at
the local level, at the service unit level, but also by our
area offices and at the headquarters level. So we have that
ability to really open up and be transparent in the records.
We are working through Dr. Michael Toedt, our Chief Medical
Officer, to firm up any loose ends in our policies. A good
example of this is if we have providers with licenses in
multiple States, and they may have an active license in one
State but a restricted license in another, that it is clear in
our policy that that person is not hirable, that that
individual had a restricted license for a reason, and that we
should not be employing them in our system.
Ultimately, the focus should be on keeping our patients
safe and elevating the quality of the care that we provide.
The Chairman. How will you make sure that you don't have a
repeat of something like what happened with Stanley Patrick
Weber?
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator. Again, hearing from my
mouth directly and from all members of our senior team that
those types of activities are absolutely unacceptable and will
not be tolerated. We cannot risk any harm to our patients.
Creating knowledge and awareness of, if you see something that
doesn't look right, report it, and let's let the investigation
play out. We want to make sure that not only are employees
trained, but that they have tested to that training, and that
they know their roles and responsibilities in the process.
So establishing policy control, tone at the top, I think
are the major items that I will be focusing on.
The Chairman. At the same time that you are making sure you
have proper accountability, how are you going to recruit the
health care professionals you need for IHS?
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator Hoeven. As I noted, tribal
leaders and urban Indian organization leaders helped us to
identify that recruitment and retention is one of our major
challenges. Stories like that of Dr. Weber do not help us in
that regard.
So what we need to do is focus really on all of the great
work that the agency is doing. We hear in the news reports
terrible stories like that of Dr. Weber, but we don't tell the
story enough about all the great work that is going on
throughout our Indian health care system, where we have places
like the South Central Foundation that is a two-time Malcolm
Baldridge Award winning health care system. People from around
the world travel to Alaska to learn from them.
We don't tout that enough. We don't tell the story about
Cherokee Nation standing up a medical school to train the next
generation of medical providers in reservation-based medicine.
So once those needs in Oklahoma are met, we will have these
Indian-trained physicians going out throughout the rest of
Indian Country.
We need to be innovative in our thoughts and how we
recruit. We need to partner with you for flexibility on items
like our scholarship and loan repayment program. We currently
use that as one of our central tools in attracting new
graduates and current students into our system, that we are not
as attractive as other systems like the armed forces and the
National Health Service Corps, because of the taxability issue.
If we could work to eliminate that tax burden, we could compete
better for a limited pool of students.
Also to have flexibility in the payback. Currently, our
system requires a two-year clinical payback. If we were more
like some of the other services, we could do a more flexible
payback schedule, perhaps a half time over a four-year period,
or a part time clinical, part time administrative payback.
These types of legislative actions would be very beneficial to
us in our recruitment efforts.
The Chairman. If you partner with the Public Health
Service, that is something we talked about as a way to attract
talent.
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Chairman. Very much, a primary
strategy is to work with the Office of the Surgeon General to
bring new commissioned officers into the Indian Health Service.
We have gained both the Secretary's and the Assistant Secretary
for Health, Brett Giroir's commitment that any new entrants
into the public health service will be focused to Indian Health
Service hard to fill slots as a priority. New physicians, new
dentists, new nurses, all professions, that those in direct
clinical positions in Indian Health Service are being
prioritized.
The Chairman. And if confirmed, will you commit to work to
improve the credentialing system, so that more dentists, for
example, who are more willing to come out and do pro bono work
and that kind of thing, are able to do so?
Mr. Weahkee. Absolutely. If confirmed, we will do so. I
know that Dr. Toedt and our dental professionals have already
conducted some initial demonstration projects to assess how we
can reduce that and streamline that process. So we look forward
to that.
We also need to partner with Congress to look at Federal
tort claims coverage for volunteers. Currently, our FTCA does
not automatically extend to volunteers in the Indian Health
Service.
The Chairman. Good. Thank you. Vice Chairman Udall.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Chairman Hoeven.
Admiral Weahkee, we covered very extensively the medical
malpractice issues reported in the Wall Street Journal. We have
had several here, talking about Dr. Weber and the abuses there.
But I just wanted to ask you very specifically, if confirmed,
will you commit to full transparency with Congress and the
tribes on these kinds of issues, and working with us to put an
end to these abuses?
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Vice Chairman Udall. You have my
full commitment to transparency and openness. I want to be
candid with all the Committee's requests.
Senator Udall. Thank you. If confirmed as Director of IHS,
you will transition from a career civil servant and member of
the uniformed services to a political appointee. As an
appointee, you will be asked to balance advancing the
Administration's policies with advocating for Indian Country's
priorities at the highest level within the Executive branch.
This balancing act can be difficult to achieve, especially when
those two tasks stand in conflict with each other.
Since 2017, we have seen the budget process reflect this
conflict. IHS and other Native programs at HHS have been the
targets of budget cuts under this Administration. Will you be a
fierce advocate for Indian Country at HHS? Will you be willing
to take on the political leadership to fight for needed
resources at IHS?
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator Udall. I will absolutely
continue in the same manner that I have over the past two plus
years to be a very vocal internal advocate within HHS. I do
feel confident that there is a lot of support for Indian health
within HHS, and the Secretary and Deputy Secretary have
expressed directly that they are in full support.
So adding my voice to that of our ANA commissioner, Jeannie
Hovland, and others within government, there is a lot of
education to do. But I do feel confident that we are making a
lot of progress, and that future requests are going to
demonstrate that.
Senator Udall. A Government Accountability Office study
released in September found that the Affordable Care Act
increased health insurance coverage among IHS patients, and
that federally operated facilities increased third party
revenues by 51 percent. The expansion in health insurance
coverage, especially through the ACA's Medicaid expansion, has
allowed the Federal, tribal and urban IHS facilities to
continue their operations and expand services beyond just life
and limb.
Do you agree with the findings of this report?
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator Udall. We have analyzed
data internally, and we have also met with our tribal partners.
It is evident that in many parts of the Country where there are
additional resources now available that our programs are able
to see and provide services for diagnostics, prevention, where
in the past they were only able to take care of life and limb
medical priority level one.
So any opportunity that we have to expand resources coming
into our Indian Health Care system definitely would be
beneficial.
Senator Udall. Do you believe that increased third party
revenues will result in improved health care outcomes for IHS
patients and Native communities?
Mr. Weahkee. I do believe that additional resources and
third party revenues would be used to benefit our patients and
improve health outcomes, reduce disparities, yes, sir.
Senator Udall. You listed recruitment and retention of
quality clinical and leadership staff as the top challenge
facing IHS in one of your responses to the Committee's
nomination questionnaire. The Albuquerque and Navajo service
areas have two of the highest IHS medical provider vacancy
rates in the Country. These staffing shortages have dire
impacts on Native communities in New Mexico.
Just last month, the ACL Hospital, which is located about
an hour west of Albuquerque, had to shut down its emergency
room and urgent care departments. Based on your experience as
Acting Director, what factors pose the greatest barriers to
recruitment and retention at IHS? If confirmed, how will you
overcome those barriers?
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator Udall. There are many
different challenges to recruitment and retention efforts in
the most rural and remote parts of our Country. Housing is a
substantial issue, and we have been thankful for the support of
Congress to provide funding for staff quarters. We have also
turned to innovative strategies to address lack of housing,
such as construction of 19-unit apartment complexes throughout
many different sites in Indian Country, Chinle and Crown Point,
Pine Ridge and Rosebud. We have been able to put these units in
at approximately $5 million per complex. That alleviates the
need to reserve homes for contract providers. We can provide
those single-family homes to young health care professionals,
extending the availability of housing throughout Indian
Country.
Transportation, education systems, when we are recruiting a
health care provider, we are also recruiting their family. We
need jobs for spouses. So one of the areas that we have been
working on through the Intradepartmental Council of Native
American Affairs is to partner with our sister agencies who
have funding to help meet these challenges and meet these
needs, and to address the economic development issues and the
housing issues, transportation issues, to help us attract
talent into remote locations like Acoma, Canoncito, and Laguna.
Senator Udall. Thank you for that answer. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Murkowski.
STATEMENT OF HON. LISA MURKOWSKI,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Rear Admiral Weahkee, thank you for visiting with me this
past week. Also thank you for your several visits up to this
date, to know and understand better some of the conditions that
Alaska Natives are facing when it comes to delivery of health
care.
I also appreciate your comments this afternoon as it
relates to recruitment and retention and what can be done here,
what we can help do in terms of encouraging more to come over
to the IHS system, and making available the scholarship and the
loan repayment programs that are offered by National Health
Service Corps and the loan repayment programs and the exempt
scholarship provisions that would help you, I think, be a
little bit more competitive. I know that is something that I
think is an important way that we can assist.
I also want to raise an issue that we had discussed, and
this relates to water and sanitation. As you know, in far too
many of our rural communities, we have communities that lack
any level of basic sanitation needs being met. We have no
running water; we have no sewer facilities. When you are not
able to have clean water to drink, or to bathe in, or to clean
your clothes, your home, disease is allowed to accumulate. We
have issues, whether they are respiratory issues, whether they
are just communicable diseases that are shared. I think we
recognize that these are a key and an integral part to how you
are able to better provide for the health care needs of so many
in my part of the Country, up in Alaska.
We know that Public Health Service, IHS, has recognized
that it makes sense to provide some incidental benefits to non-
Indians in an Indian community in order to get the full
sanitation benefits to the folks that are there. You have
authority under the Sanitation Facilities Construction Act. But
as we have discussed, there have been interpretations more
recently through the IHS that are perhaps more stringent as to
how those rules apply to non-Indian communities, requiring IHS
to then pay the pro-rata contribution for whole projects, which
then makes it absolutely impossible, infeasible to move
forward.
So I am hoping that we can continue to work with you to
ensure that we are able to do right when we say we want to meet
the statutory obligation of serving our Native communities as a
whole. This is something that is going to be a more complicated
and a broader approach, but I hope I have your commitment to
work in these areas where we know we will have direct and
positive impact on health outcomes.
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator Murkowski. I really enjoyed
our conversation. You have my full commitment to continuing the
dialogue and to work with our partners throughout government,
the Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, to bring the resources that they receive to meet
the needs of our Indian communities and our Indian homes as
well.
We know that, in personal visits that I have had the
opportunity to make, to Shishmaref and Wales, I have had the
opportunity to see first hand the limited facilities, the solid
waste concerns, the PASS system in some communities that has
been used as an innovative way of addressing sanitation. You
definitely have my commitment to continue scanning the
landscape for innovative solutions, and to best use the Indian
Health Service's resources to meet the needs throughout Indian
Country. We are talking about Alaska here specifically, but
Navajo Nation has many homes still without running water as
well. Ensuring that those formulas are constructed in a manner
that gets the money to the locations that need it the most.
In today's day and age, as I have heard you say many times,
we should not be relying on honey buckets, and we should really
take a public health approach to meet these needs.
Senator Murkowski. I appreciate the recognition that we
need to have these various Federal agencies working together.
The end goal is the overall health of our Native peoples. When
we get siloed because USDA has an interpretation, a language
that is one way, EPA has another, and we can't migrate through
these siloes, we are not able to accomplish what we need.
Mr. Chairman, I have raised the issue of the 105(l) leases
with Rear Admiral Weahkee. It is a big issue for IHS. It is
going to have significant budget impact. Senator Udall knows
full well, as we look at our Interior Appropriations bill, if
we don't find a solution to this soon, IHS is going to have to
reduce part of their budget to pay for these leases.
I have raised this issue with the Rear Admiral. I think it
is fair to say that you agree that this is a growing concern,
it is something that we need to get our arms around in terms of
understanding what the number of proposals is that we might
anticipate, what is the trajectory of growth. This is something
I am going to continue to press on. You have given me your
assurance that you are going to be working with us on that. I
think that is something that we all need to be very aware that
this could literally take over our IHS budget if we don't have
a greater understanding.
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator Murkowski. You have my
commitment to continue providing the assistance needed. And we
do have very willing tribal partners to help us project that
out-year cost. We have a Federal tribal work group that is
ready to help us identify the inventory of tribally owned
buildings being used for health care. And just to update the
rest of the Committee on the trajectory, it has basically
doubled every year. At the end of fiscal year 2019, we have
received 205 proposals, at an approximate cost of $100 million.
The Chairman. Senator Smith.
STATEMENT OF HON. TINA SMITH,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MINNESOTA
Senator Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Vice Chair Udall.
Thank you very much, Rear Admiral Weahkee, for coming in to
speak with me last week, I think it was. I enjoyed our
conversation very much. I appreciate your willingness to serve
in this role.
During my time on this Committee, I have heard from both my
Republican and Democratic colleagues a real concern about
budget cuts and inadequate funding for programs of Indian
Country, particularly Indian Health. Of course, we are always
balancing priorities, and it is a challenge. We are always
living in a world of limited resources. Yet I think when it
comes to our relationships with tribal nations, this is a
matter not of priorities, this is a matter of solemn trust and
obligation and agreement.
I bring this up because, as you and I discussed when you
came to my office, when the Federal Government shut down
earlier this year, we really failed in that obligation. So many
of us were deeply aware of the consequences this had in Indian
Country. Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice Chair, we are talking about the
challenges of recruiting health care providers to Indian Health
Service hospitals as an example, in Indian Country, recruiting
people. Yet the shutdown, we had this experience of making it
even harder to recruit people.
So my question, to start out with, is, will you commit to
be a fierce advocate within the Administration for advanced
appropriations in Indian Country?
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator Smith. In partnership with
the tribes and the National Indian Health Board, we did conduct
quite a bit of work in January and February of this year to
really assess the impacts of government shutdown on the Indian
Health system of care. We learned things like patients not
being able to make it to their appointments, or to emergency
care, even, because roads were not able to be plowed. So that
is a real patient safety issue.
We had some tribes that were in a situation where they had
to go and take short-term loans out, with high interest rates,
in order to make payroll. So these things are really creating a
lot of havoc throughout Indian Country. Internally, when we
have continuing resolutions or questions about continued
funding, we are not able to plan or prioritize as well as we
should be able to. So looking forward to the future, if we have
an unclear budget picture, or we don't know when and how we
will be able to modernize our electronic health record, or roll
out our community health aid program in the lower 48, or
further stand up our Office of Quality and Compliance Program.
So I have heard very loudly from tribal leaders that they
would like to see advanced appropriations in the same way that
the Veterans Administration has advanced appropriations for the
provision of direct health care, and not wanting to interrupt
and put patients at risk. I think that logic is very clear. We
have had robust dialogue within HHS and with appropriators
about this topic.
Senator Smith. Would you be willing to advocate for
advanced appropriations?
Mr. Weahkee. I am willing to share all of the impacts of
what not having advanced appropriations does to us.
Senator Smith. Maybe I can just take that for a yes.
Mr. Weahkee. I will go right up to the line with you.
[Laughter.]
Senator Smith. I am hearing a yes. Thank you, Senator
Murkowski, I am hearing a yes there.
We had a really interesting conversation about the
connection between mental health and physical health and the
importance of really looking at all of the factors that affect
people's whole health, really everywhere, but we were talking
specifically about your work in Indian Health Service. Senator
Murkowski and I have been thinking a lot about this, and
working on it, particularly when it comes to rural moms and
looking at the vast disparities that we see in health outcomes
and maternal mortality for women living in Indian Country,
Native women compared to white women around the Country.
Would you just talk a little bit about how you see that
issue, and how you would see working on that issue, should be
you confirmed in this role?
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator Smith. Maternal mortality
has definitely been a major focus area for us. In the past
months, we have had CDC roll out some recent reports that
demonstrate that our Native women continue to have much higher
rates of maternal mortality in comparison to non-Native women.
We have some strong partnerships with the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the American Academy of
Pediatrics.
We have been able to put together some patient bundles. Dr.
Michael Toedt, who is our chief medical officer, sitting here
to my right, has been very engaged in these activities. We have
invested resources and have hired a maternal and child health
expert at IHS headquarters to focus on issues like this. We
expect that this will be a significant focus area for the
agency moving forward, so that we can bring those disparate
rates down.
Senator Smith. Thank you very much. Mr. Vice Chair, I see
that I am out of time. I would just like to add that I would
like to enter into the record letters of support from the Red
Lake Nation and the Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe in Minnesota.
Senator Udall. [Presiding.] Senator Tester.
STATEMENT OF HON. JON TESTER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MONTANA
Senator Tester. Thank you, Senator Udall.
I want to thank you for your willingness to serve, Admiral.
A special thank you to your wife, Rose, thank you for being
here, and thank you for being a big part of the team. I mean
that.
The first question is for you, Admiral. You spoke of your
leadership team. Is it fully staffed at this moment in time?
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator Tester. We have, of all of
our Indian Health Service senior executive service positions
only two vacancies currently, out of about 35 positions. It is
the best we probably have ever been.
Senator Tester. That is good. So overall, in the IHS, can
you tell me what your staffing is?
Mr. Weahkee. Yes, sir, historically, and our current
vacancy rate, is at 20 percent across all professions out of
15,400 employees.
Senator Tester. Okay. So your vacancy rate is 20, and I am
not sure, we didn't cover this in the office, and thanks for
stopping in, I had a nice visit. Did you say your turnover is
about 5 percent, or was that somebody else I was talking to?
Mr. Weahkee. It must have been somebody else.
Senator Tester. Okay. What is your turnover rate?
Mr. Weahkee. We are probably, depending on the profession,
which we do track very specifically by profession, would likely
run into the thirties.
Senator Tester. Okay. So I have a parochial issue I want to
take up with you really quick, and you don't have to handle it
yourself, but it is why I asked if your leadership team was
fully staffed. You can pass this on. There is a dispute right
now between health care given by Glacier County, up by the
Blackfeet Reservation, and IHS. I am not saying IHS is wrong,
and I am not saying Glacier County is wrong. But it would be
great to put somebody on this, to get this resolved, if you
could. I would certainly appreciate this, once you are
confirmed.
I have a couple other questions. They kind of revolve
around what has already been said. I really, really appreciate
your answer to the Ranking Member on being an advocate for
funding. As I told you in my office, I have been through three
administrations now. We have had folks in front of this
Committee several times, and funding has always been a problem.
You are uniquely qualified to be in this position, because
you are Native American, you have used the services, you have
been in the system as an employee and as a utilizer. I think
that if anybody knows the challenges out there from a money
standpoint, it is you. It is important that you are a fierce
advocate for funding.
Have you had an opportunity, when it comes to retaining
people, and you are involved with the military, so you get
this, to take a look at some of the tools that the VA, that
Congress has given the VA to be able to hire and retain
employees? If you have, tell me if you would like those
authorities. If you haven't, I would just encourage you to have
somebody go over and work with the VA to determine what they
have to see if they would work for you.
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator Tester. I thank you for
bringing up the VA. I have, actually, looked quite in-depth at
the VA's authorities with envy. Title 38 authorities enable the
VA to compensate at higher rates. Their benefits packages are
much better than Title 5 and the hiring authority that we have
within the IHS.
Senator Tester. So they can actually be competitive with
the private sector that they are in competition with?
Mr. Weahkee. They can get a lot closer than we can, yes,
sir. Across many different professions, we have actually used
the VA's work to create our own pay scales for professions like
podiatry.
Senator Tester. Would you be willing to work with any of us
on the Committee, but I think it starts with the Ranking Member
and the Chairman, to try to get those authorities for IHS?
Mr. Weahkee. Absolutely, sir. We would very much love to
partner with you on that.
Senator Tester. I think there are some opportunities for
success here. I think you guys have a hard time. And it is for
a number of reasons. Part of it is compensation, part of it is
housing, which is more difficult than compensation, from my
perspective. We would love to work with you, and I know there
are other folks on this Committee that would love to work with
you. Since I am ranking on the VA committee, we are pretty much
up to our waist in some of the stuff that they have done there.
I want to thank you for being here. I want to thank you for
being in my office. Probably the only folks that know this are
the folks in your family that are in this room, but we had a
dust-up a few years ago. I want to tell you that we--evidently
you do know about that.
[Laughter.]
Senator Tester. I want to tell you that when I went back to
Montana and talked to the Native American population, they were
happy about that. They liked that. They loved me, and not for
any other reason but the fact that, and I will just say this
quite frankly, and this isn't on you, it is on the agency in
general, over decades and decades and decades, they don't
believe there is anybody in IHS that is fighting for them.
I would just tell you that, I think you are going to get
confirmed, and you should get confirmed. But if you leave here
without anything, I would just ask you to be a fierce fighter
for the Native Americans that you serve. If you do, they will
build statues to you. They need somebody.
IHS is, you know this, I don't need to preach to you, you
have been there, you have done that. But it really is
oftentimes a life and limb situation. If you are able to break
through that, you have a lot of people on this Committee that
are on your side, on both sides of the aisle, that will help
you be successful. I would just say, be aggressive and good
luck. Thank you.
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator Tester.
The Chairman. [Presiding] Vice Chairman Udall.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today seems to be the day for New Mexico tribes in the
Committee. Also present are a number of members of the Tesuque
Pueblo, including the Governor, Governor Herrera. Welcome here
today, and it is good to have you.
We talked about the facilities, Admiral, especially the
ones in New Mexico that have had some issues over emergency
rooms and urgent care and keeping them open. Will you commit to
making sure that the IHS facilities in New Mexico, like the
ACL, Crown Point, and Gallup IHS hospitals have enough staff to
keep the doors of their emergency rooms and urgent care open?
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator Udall. I commit to doing
all that we can to ensure that those emergency physicians,
emergency nurses, are there for our patients. That is really
the sole purpose and the reason for our agency, is to be that
safety net for our Native communities.
We do, when we are not able to hire directly, we contract
for those individuals to locums companies, at sometimes two to
three times the cost of what it would be if we could hire them
outright. But we are dedicated to identifying those resources
and having those individuals in place.
Senator Udall. Great. Thank you for that commitment.
It is no secret there is a severe health care provider
shortage in Indian Country. Indian Country needs more doctors,
more midwives, nurses, and lab techs. However, Indian Country
also needs more ways to help support Native youth who want to
serve their communities and earn a living.
Admiral Weahkee, do you believe IHS has a role to play in
developing a pipeline of Native youth into health professions?
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator Udall. I do believe
strongly that developing our own youth to work in our
facilities is a primary strategy that we should be using. I
have already initiated conversations internally with ANA
Commissioner Jeannie Hovland, and with the Office of Minority
Health, to look at their grant-making abilities to fund
programs that will introduce our Native youth to health care
professions at an early age, we are hoping as early as
elementary school and junior high, in fact, so they can start
along a path towards a health care profession.
Dr. Weahkee and myself are doing our own part. We are
really pushing our kids to pursue health careers. So we are
trying to train our own for the next generation of health care
professionals.
Senator Udall. We would like to see that. We are very
encouraged.
Earlier this year, you collaborated with your counterparts
at the CDC to publish an op-ed on efforts at the Department of
Health and Human Services to address HIV in Indian Country. I
am glad to hear you are working on this initiative. I was a bit
surprised, because just a few months before the op-ed was
published, the Department proposed eliminating the CDC's Good
Health and Wellness in Indian Country program, a program
specifically created to address HIV and other chronic diseases.
I am sure you would agree that this seems like a bit of a
disconnect.
If confirmed, will you continue to build partnerships with
sister agencies at HHS and will you commit to advocating for
Native programs like Good Health and Wellness at those
agencies?
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator Udall. I was ecstatic that
the Indian Health Service was involved early in the ending HIV
initiative. It is typical that IHS is an afterthought, but we
were included early in this endeavor. That is through the
leadership and vision of the Secretary and Director Redfield
from the CDC seeing how many of the communities were
overlapping with our rural reservation sites, Oklahoma being
one of those seven States that has a high number of new HIV
infection rates, and Maricopa County being another of those 48
communities.
Using science, using data to really direct the resources to
where they are needed, I think, is vitally important. Again,
the role of the IHS Director being that vocal internal advocate
to my sister agencies and their leaders about the needs in
Indian Country is of primary importance. You have my commitment
that, if confirmed, I will do that, yes, sir.
Senator Udall. That is great. Advocacy is so important.
Sometimes I hear from tribes where they are trying to just open
the door and get in and talk about a program with one of your
sister agencies. I think a call by your leadership team and
being a vocal advocate would just really make a difference
there.
Thank you very much, and we look forward to working with
you.
The Chairman. Senator Cortez Masto.
STATEMENT OF HON. CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NEVADA
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
Admiral, it is good to see you again. Thank you for meeting
with me last week.
When we talked, we talked about maximizing Medicare
enrollment in Indian Country. I appreciated the conversation.
There are a handful of different public data points on how
many tribal members are actually enrolled in Medicare. They
give a broad range of estimates. For example, the American
Community Survey data says 96 percent of tribal members report
Medicare coverage. The Survey of the Elders finds a Medicare
coverage rate of 78 percent. And the National Health Interview
Survey finds a Medicare coverage rate of 88 percent.
So does IHS have data that would help us to understand
actually how many tribal members who get coverage from IHS
facilities are Medicare eligible? And of those, how many are
enrolled in Part A, B, or D coverage? That is the data that I
am looking for, and I am curious if IHS has that already.
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator Cortez Masto. I appreciated
our conversation the other day as well.
We do work very closely in partnership with the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services. We have a regular conversation
with them about the needs and interests of Indian Country.
In terms of our data sets, we are very quickly building our
capacity, both on the Medicaid and the Medicare side, to track
all of our third-party reimbursements. I will have to go back
to determine whether or not we have the ability to split by
parts. But we do, of course, track very closely our coverage
rates and our reimbursements through Medicaid and Medicare.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. And that information is
helpful, for the reasons that I think we talked about in our
conversation in my office. I am working on a bill to enable
tribes to pay Medicare premiums on behalf of their members.
Making sure that our eligible tribal members are enrolled would
help provide access to care for seniors. It would help tribes
stretch their dollars further.
So do you see that type of policy, one that would boost
enrollment in health insurance, as beneficial to Indian
Country?
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator. I feel that any initiative
that will expand coverage for our American Indian and Alaska
Native beneficiaries would be helpful.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. I look forward to
hopefully working with you on this policy.
One final question. As you well know, of the Federal
programs in Medicaid, it is Medicaid that provides the greatest
volume of coverage to Indian Country. The ACA was a major boon
to that coverage. I saw that in Nevada, working with my tribes.
Today, Medicaid covers more than a quarter of the American
Indian and Alaska Native populations.
Like Medicare, Medicaid helps stretch IHS dollars farther,
and improves access to quality care. Does IHS know what portion
of the individuals you serve are eligible for Medicaid but not
enrolled, and whether there is a gap or not?
Mr. Weahkee. We do have data, and thank you again, Senator,
for the question, regarding our coverage rates. I feel strongly
that one of the challenges that we have within Indian Country,
not only on the Federal side, but on the tribal and urban side,
is educating our patients about the importance of enrolling in
Medicaid. Because it expands our purchasing power.
Many people see IHS as their health care plan, and why
should I apply for Medicaid or Medicare, IHS will take care of
me. So it is really an education opportunity for us to tell the
story about expanded services that we could provide, the
greater capacity that we could have if we were able to enroll
more people into the Medicaid coverage.
So in terms of rates, I will have to talk to our Office of
Resource Access and Partnerships. I don't have those
percentages off the top of my head. But we do track by State,
we do track, in many instances, by service unit or location.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. I look forward to that
information, and working with you and your team on how we can
close that gap.
Thank you so much. Congratulations on your nomination.
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Cortez Masto. I yield my time.
The Chairman. There being no further questions, if there
are any questions, they can be submitted in writing. Also, we
would ask that you respond within two weeks to any of those.
With that, unless there is any other question, or business
for the good of the order, I would like to again thank you,
Admiral Weahkee, for being here. We appreciate it very much,
and appreciate your testimony.
Thank you so much.
Mr. Weahkee. Thank you, Senator.
The Chairman. We are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:45 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
Prepared Statement of James L. Bresette, Pharm.D., Member, Red Cliff
Band of Lake Superior Chippewa
For the record, I am an enrolled member of the Red Cliff Band of
Lake Superior Chippewa. I do not take this action lightly as I am
concerned that my tribe may face IHS retribution based on me providing
this information.
As we discussed, please find the attached 2013 House Appropriations
Bill for the Indian Health Service * that was not voted upon in the
Senate due to a series of continuing resolutions for that fiscal year
and Senator Harry Reed's failure to take up a separate budget bill
opting for an omnibus spending bill instead.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The information referred to has been retained in the Committee
files.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note on page 80 in the IHS Direct Operations requirement for the
Agency to explain the departure of more than 25 senior leaders. These
longstanding and competent IHS employees were harassed, threatened and
chased from the IHS at the direction of IHS Director Yvette
Roubideaux's expressed policy of removing from IHS senior management
positions non-Indians without cause other than their race and others
she deemed to not be her people and ``loyalists''.
IHS under Roubideau'x direction and through the actions of her
``loyalists'' such as then-CDR Michael Weahkee conspired to and
violated multiple OPM personnel regulations to drive competent and
qualified federal employees from the IHS. While IHS can legally hire
based on Indian preference, IHS under Roubideaux's direction and with
Weahkee's assistance sought to replace non-Indians from senior
management positions based upon their race.
During this period, then-CDR Michael Weahkee was the IHS Office of
Management Services (OMS) Deputy Director and was fully cognizant as
well as an active participant in these highly suspect and illegal
personnel and funding violations.
Additionally, Roubideaux's ``loyalists'' directly worked, assisted
and tolerated bringing more Roubideaux ``loyalists'' into IHS
Headquarters (Rockville, MD) during 2010 and 2011 on extended temporary
duty (TDY) of multiple 180 day tours to reward them with high per diem
Washington D.C. as additions to their pay. IHS records will show direct
evidence of the excessive amount of funds spent in this manner unlike
any prior years.
Several long-term IHS and former IHS employees subsequently
contacted and met with members of the Senate Committee for Indian
Affairs and Appropriations staffs in late 2011 and early 2012. At that
time the SCIA and Appropriations staff were alarmed and yet not
surprised due to other information they had received. When they asked
how could they follow up surreptitiously as not to ``tip off'' IHS from
hiding evidence or obfuscating their committee oversight, the current
and former IHS employees advised them to ``follow the money'' spent in
TDY costs as a logical and evidentiary means to conduct their review
and open up additional areas of personnel and fiscal malfeasance.
When CDR Weahkee was charged and convicted of driving under the
influence of alcohol in Montgomery County, Maryland. rather than
disciplining CDR Weahkee, IHS at Director Roubideaux's direction
promoted him by assigning him to Phoenix Indian Medical Center (PIMC)
as COO and CEO to protect him, advance his career as a ``loyalist'' and
get him ``out of sight and out of mind'' at IHS Headquarters.
RADM Weahkee and the Agency should be questioned about these
occurrences both in the confirmation hearing and in written responses
from the Agency to assure RADM Weahkee has the opportunity to explain
these events and that these practices have been subsequently corrected
by the IHS.
Former and current IHS employees can be interviewed to assist with
additional facts and evidence as needed in support of and in addition
to that provided here.
Sincerely and respectfully submitted.
______
WINNEBAGO TRIBE OF NEBRASKA
December 18, 2019
On behalf of the Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska, I write this letter
in support of the confirmation of Rear Admiral Michael D. Weahkee to
serve as the Director of the Indian Health Service (``IHS''), U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
The Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska (``the Tribe''), a federally
recognized Indian tribe, is located in the northeast comer of what is
now known as Nebraska. The Tribe was historically served by the IHS
Winnebago Service Unit, which is part of the Great Plains Area, and
operated a thirteen ( 13) bed hospital, clinic and emergency room on
our Reservation. These facilities serve the citizenry of the Winnebago,
Omaha, Ponca and Santee Sioux Tribes, a service population of
approximately 10,000 people. In 2018, through the IHS Self-Governance
Program, the Tribe established the Winnebago Comprehensive Healthcare
System to transition IHS operations to tribal management and assume the
functions of the Winnebago Hospital which is now the Twelve Clan Unity
Hospital, the first of its kind in the Great Plains Area.
The Tribe appreciates Admiral Weahkee's support and attentiveness
throughout the transition of its hospital from IHS to tribal
management. Admiral Weahkee's leadership and integrity lend to his keen
sense of listening and deliberative manner in working with tribes. His
impressive leadership style is mission driven and he is effective and
genuine in his approach for creative and patient centered solutions.
Indian Country would do well with Admiral Weahkee at the helm of IHS.
I urge the Committee to swiftly approve Admiral Weahkee's
nomination and I look forward to his confirmation by the full Senate.
Thank you for your attention.
Sincerely,
Coly Brown, Chairman.
______
Great Plains Tribal Chairmen's Health Board
December 11, 2019
I, Jerilyn Church, President and CEO of Great Plains Tribal
Chairmen's Health Board, strongly supports the nomination of Rear
Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe and ask that
you support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service
(IHS) in the United States Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and
Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in
that time he has proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving
the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual
health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his Bachelor
of Science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a Master of Health Services
Administration and Master of Business Administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five-year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Jerilyn Church, MSW, President/CEO
______
Gila River Indian Community
December 11, 2019
On behalf of the Gila River Indian Community I write in support of
the confirmation of Michael Weahkee as Director of the Indian Health
Service.
It is critical for the position of Director of the Indian Health
Service to be filled. The health crisis facing Native Americans is well
documented. The Director is charged with carrying out the programs and
policies that have a direct effect on the health of our tribal
citizens. At the Gila River Indian Community, we run a comprehensive
health system with seven health facilities including hospitals,
clinics, and a dialysis center. It is imperative that our federal
partner at the Indian Health Service is engaged with the Community and
has the authority to carry out the policies of the Administration.
While we are aware that many in Indian Country have raised concerns
about Mr. Weahkee's commitment to consult and engage, the Community has
been encouraged by the level of outreach that Mr. Weahkee has conducted
in the past with us and his willingness to engage the Community and
Indian Country around budgetary issues, programs such as the Special
Diabetes Program for Indians, behavioral health issues, and tribal
inclusion in dealing with the opioid crisis. We hope that Mr. Weahkee
will continue to engage Indian Country upon confirmation and seek ways
to partner effectively with the Tribes so that we can improve the
health of our tribal citizens.
It is for these reasons that the Gila River Indian Community
supports the nomination of Mr. Weahkee as Director of the Indian Health
Services and hopes the Senate will promptly act on this confirmation.
Sincerely,
Stephen Roe Lewis, Governor.
______
Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe
December 10, 2019
I am writing on behalf of the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe to
express our support for the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael
D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe for the position of Director of the
Indian Health Service (IHS) in the Department of Health and Human
Services (DHHS). We respectfully request that you support his
confirmation for this position.
Our Tribe is a sovereign nation comprised of over 1,200 citizens
and located on Kitsap Peninsula in Northwest Washington State. In 1992,
we became one of the first Self-Governance tribes in the United States
and assumed control of our BIA and IHS programs. Providing quality
health care to our citizens and approximately 800 other American
Indians, Alaska Natives, and nonIndians living on our Reservation is
one of our paramount priorities. For this reason, we participate in the
Self-Governance Advisory Committee meetings, the DHHS Secretary's
Tribal Advisory Committee meetings, IHS and DHHS tribal consultation
sessions, and other meetings related to health care and tribal
governance. We do this with an eye towards improving our services to
our people and holding the United States accountable to its treaty and
trust responsibilities relating to health care.
We have had the opportunity to meet with RADM Weahkee in these
meetings and separately. We believe RADM Weahkee is well suited to be
the IHS Director and that his more than two years as Acting IHS
Director has provided him invaluable experience for the role. We find
RADM Weahkee not only to be competent to carry out the duties of the
IHS Director, but to do so in a manner that is respectful of tribal
sovereignty and with the best interests of Native Peoples at the
forefront. We believe he understands treaty and trust responsibilities
and expect that he will work diligently to carry them out. We ask you
to support RADM Weahkee's nomination and to work toward his quick
confirmation for the position of IHS Director.
Sincerely,
Jeromy Sullivan, Chairman
______
Spokane Tribe
November 25, 2019
The Spokane Tribe of Indians strongly supports the nomination of
Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and
ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health
Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy
Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half
years and, in that time, he has proven that he is capable and dedicated
to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social and
spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest
level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five-year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully;
Carol Evans, Chairwoman.
______
California Rural Indian Health Board, Inc.
December 6, 2019
I am happy and honored to provide a personal letter that strongly
supports the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of
the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as
Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). I am an enrolled member
of the Navajo Nation and reside in Rocklin, CA. Although this is a
personal letter of support, in my professional career, I currently
serve as the Director of the Research and Public Health Department at
the California Rural Indian Health Board, Inc. (CRIHB) located in
Roseville, CA. CRIHB is a network of 19 Tribal Health Programs,
controlled and sanctioned by 59 federally recognized Tribes, serving
American Indian and Alaska Native (AIAN) people residing in California.
I have had the privilege of knowing RADM Weahkee for over 15 years,
while he worked at CRIHB as the Director of Family and Community Health
Services. RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and
Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in
that time he has proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving
IHS and raising the physical, mental, social, and spiritual health of
AIAN to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a Master of Health Services
Administration and Master of Business Administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
During my personal and professional relationship with RADM Weahkee,
I have come to know him as a person with a high level of commitment and
dedication to improving the health and well-being of AIAN across the
country. He has dedicated his professional and personal life to AIAN
health care. He has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian health system of care, including in both the federal and Tribal
setting (i.e. CRIHB). He has served in the field, at the service unit
and regional office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the
national level. RADM Weahkee has successfully led IHS forward in a very
trying time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new IHS
five year strategic plan, the first in over a decade. He has pressed
IHS forward to address long-standing and unimplemented, external
oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability Office and
the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and implemented a
new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to ensure
appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area Offices
and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In partnership
with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner, RADM Weahkee
revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native American
Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the needs and
interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that Tribal and Urban AIAN communities face in addressing the
various health concerns that they are confronted with. It is this type
of leadership, commitment, and character that is needed in the IHS
Director. Thank you for your strong consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Vanesscia L. Cresci, MSW, MPA,
Director, Research and Public Health Department.
______
Alaska Tribal Health Compact
December 3, 2019
The Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act, Pub. L.
93-638, as amended authorizes the Alaska Tribal Health Compact (ATHC or
the Compact) which represents 229 tribes and their tribal health
organizations to operate health and health-related programs. The
Compact is the umbrella agreement that sets forth the terms and
conditions of the government-to-government relationship between Alaska
Native tribes and/or tribal organizations, and the United States
government. We write on behalf of the ATHC, in support of Rear Admiral
Michael D. Weahkee to be confirmed as permanent Director of the Indian
Health Service.
The Indian Health Service (IHS) is obligated to provide healthcare
services to Alaska Natives and American Indians (AN/AIs) in fulfillment
of the federal government's trust responsibility, however IHS has
lacked permanent leadership since 2015. On October 22, 2019, RADM
Weahkee was formally nominated by President Donald J. Trump to be
permanent IHS Director. Throughout his career, RADM Weahkee, a citizen
of the Pueblo of Zuni, has been a commendable advocate for AN/AIs.
Since assuming the role of Acting IHS Director in June 2017 and
continuing in his current role as IHS Principal Deputy Director, he has
worked to address numerous challenges facing the IHS and had made
concerted efforts to visit the IHS Areas and many rural Alaska Native
Villages in particular.
The Alaska Tribal Health Compact Co-Signers supports the
appointment of RADM Weahkee as permanent Director of the Indian Health
Service and requests expeditious Senate confirmation of him as
permanent Director of the Indian Health Service.
Sincerely,
Natasha Singh; Diana L. Zirul, Co-Lead Negotiator.
______
American Indian Health & Family Services of SE Michigan-
Detroit Urban Clinic
November 22, 2019
The American Indian Health & Family Services of SE Michigan-Detroit
Urban Clinic strongly supports the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM)
Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support
his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM
Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director
of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time he has
proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency and
raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of American
Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Chasity Dial, CEO.
______
Bristol Bay Area Health Corporation
November 26, 2019
The Bristol Bay Area Health Corporation a consortium of 28 tribes
in Southwest Alaska strongly supports the nomination of Rear Admiral
(RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you
support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS)
in the United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting
Director of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time
he has proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency
and raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of
American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five-year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address longstanding and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges that
native communities face in addressing the various health concerns that
they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong consideration of
this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Robert J. Clark, President/CEO
______
Cherokee Nation
November 6, 2019
Osyio. On behalf of the Cherokee Nation, the largest tribal
government in the United States with more than 380,000 citizens, I
strongly endorse Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee to be the next
Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS).
His leadership and commitment to improved health care access for
American Indians and Alaska Natives is second to none. He has been a
tremendous asset to Indian Country, serving as both the Principal
Deputy Director and Acting Director of IHS and deserves the opportunity
to lead the agency. I believe RADM Weahkee, a citizen of the Zuni
Indian Tribe, will improve the physical, mental, social and spiritual
health of tribal citizens across the country.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management from Southern Illinois University-
Carbondale, and both a master of health services administration and
master of business administration from Arizona State University in
Tempe, Arizona.
At Cherokee Nation, we collaborated with RADM Weahkee and IHS on
the historic joint venture project that recently opened and is now the
largest health care facility in Indian Country. It is a world-class
health center, and we are proud to partner with IHS and RADM Weahkee to
deliver the best possible care to our tribal citizens and to all Native
people in northeast Oklahoma.
Without a doubt, he has moved IHS forward in a positive manner, and
in a short amount of time. To better understand the challenges our
sovereign governments face in delivering health care, he has traveled
extensively throughout Indian Country, including many stops in Cherokee
Nation.
He would make an exceptional IHS Director and I ask that you
support his confirmation.
I am proud to offer my highest recommendation for Rear Admiral
(RADM) Michael D. Weahkee. If you have any questions or require further
information, please call me at (918) 323-5411.
Wado,
Chuck Hoskin Jr., Principal Chief
______
Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes
November 13, 2019
As Governor of the Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes, I write to offer my
support for the nomination of RADM Michael D. Weahkee for the Director
of the Indian Health Service (IHS).
RADM Weahkee has been serving as the Acting IHS Director for over
two years and prior to that he served as the chief executive officer at
the Phoenix Medical Center. A champion of Indian health responsibility,
RADM Weahkee is an extraordinary choice for the Director of IHS. In
good times and in bad, RADM Weahkee has always emphasized the utmost
importance of serving the public and Native American people. After
being named the Acting Director in 2017, RADM Weahkee led the IHS
through one of the most difficult crises ever experienced in Indian
Country. With remarkable courage and integrity, RADM Weahkee's highest
priority during the long-standing problems in the Great Plains Region
was to help resolve those issues while at the same time improve the
recruitment and retention of physicians at our IHS facilities.
Using all available means, RADM Weahkee's vision and leadership has
sparked extraordinary hope across Indian Country and has put the IHS on
the right track to provide quality health care for all Native
Americans. The IHS has a long history of being grossly underfunded by
Congress which greatly affects any IHS leadership from being effective.
With the strategic plan released by the IHS under RADM Weahkee's
leadership earlier this year, our tribe is confident that this plan
will improve the delivery of health care across Indian Country. The
fact that RADM Weahkee values the consistent input from tribes and
tribal organizations is a key element that shows he is the right person
to lead the IHS.
Thank you for your consideration, Mr. Chairman. I am truly blessed
to know RADM Weakhee. His leadership of the IHS over the past 2 years
has touched the lives of over 2 million Native Americans and we are all
better for it.
Sincerely,
Reggie Wassana, Governor.
______
The Chickasaw Nation
November 26, 2019
The Chickasaw Nation strongly supports the nomination of Rear
Admiral Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and asks that you
support his confirmation as director of the Indian Health Service (IHS)
in the United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
Admiral Weahkee has served as the principal deputy director and acting
director of the IHS for the past two-and-a-half years, and in that time
he has proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the agency
and raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of
American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
Admiral Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where
he served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his
bachelor of science in health care management degree from Southern
Illinois University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degrees from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
Admiral Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within
the Indian health system of care, including in both federal and tribal
settings. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level. He
has successfully led the IHS forward in a very trying time, overseeing
the development and implementation of a new five-year strategic plan
for the agency--the first in over a decade. Admiral Weahkee has pressed
the IHS forward to address long-standing and unimplemented external
oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability Office and
the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and implemented a
new Office of Quality at the IHS headquarters level, to ensure
appropriate management oversight and accountability by the area offices
and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In partnership
with the Administration for Native Americans commissioner, Admiral
Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian Country.
Admiral Weahkee has moved the IHS forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short period of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian Country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that Native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns with which they are confronted.
We believe Admiral Weahkee will make an excellent director of the
Indian Health Service, and that he will continue to work for all of
Indian Country. Your consideration is appreciated.
Sincerely,
Bill Anoatubby, Governor.
______
Congress of the United States--House of Representatives
I write to express my support for the nomination of Rear Admiral
(RADM) Michael D. Weahkee, member of the Pueblo of Zuni, for the
position of Director of the Indian Health Service in the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). I respectfully request
that you support his long-overdue confirmation for the IHS Director
position.
Indian Health Service (IHS) is a fundamental health care system for
Native Americans that provides services to 573 federally recognized
Tribes in the United States. Since the onset of the Trump
administration, the IHS Director position has remained without
leadership, which is extremely concerning since it provides critical
health care to approximately 2.2 million American Indians and Alaska
Natives (AI/ANs) who have lower life expectancies and disproportionate
disease burden because of discrimination in the delivery of health
services.
During the past two and a half years, the IHS Director position has
remained vacant. However, RADM Weahkee has exhibited and continues to
exhibit leadership, professional qualifications, and understanding of a
complex healthcare system as the intermediate Principal Deputy Director
and Acting Director of the II-IS. RADM has thoroughly shown his ability
to lead this department on behalf of Indian Country during this
elongated amount of time and further lead IHS in this capacity to
ensure that healthcare standards are upheld for AI/ANs.
Acting Director Weahkee's current position, and his past experience
and oversight of healthcare programs in Indian Country, makes him an
easy choice. His skills and institutional knowledge further add to
support his selection as the IHS Director. It is also important to note
that he is widely respected amongst tribal leaders and health
professionals due to his diligence in improving the lives of AI/ANs,
strong leadership, and development of IHS.
I thank you for your consideration of this endorsement and strongly
urge you to act on behalf of the approximately 2.2 million American
Indians and Alaska Natives who have gone without leadership in this
agency for too long. I would greatly appreciate your support of his
confirmation to ensure Congress upholds its trust responsibility to
provide health care services to federally enrolled tribal members who
deserve a Director at IHS.
Sincerely,
Deb Haaland, Member of Congress
______
December 6, 2019
I strongly support the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D.
Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support his
confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), RADM
Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director
of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time he has
proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency and
raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of American
Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale. and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters; at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS lntradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
I personally know RADM Weahkee's abilities as I supervised him
directly in his capacity as the Chief Medical Officer of the Phoenix
Indian Medical Center (PIMC), often referred to as the ``Flagship of
the Indian Health Service'', During his time at PIMC, RADM Weahkee,
reopened the Pediatric Outpatient Clinic, which had been closed under a
previous administration. Additionally, he revitalized and expanded
Obstetric services to better serve the pregnant American Indian women;
a service deeply valued by the surrounding Tribal communities. What
better focus can a leader have but to ensure a healthier American
Indian children's population? Additionally, RADM Weahkee, worked
closely with me to establish a more focused Hospital Governing Board,
focusing on and improving the quality of care direction, continually
surveying to Medicare Quality Standards, PIMC passed its most recent
quality of care survey conducted by The Joint Commission, RADM Weahkee
was a pleasure to work with and has devoted his entire health career to
preparing and serving the American Indian population.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Dorothy A Dupree, Former Area Director
______
Johns Hopkins Center for American Indian Health
November 20, 2019
I am writing to offer my strong support for the nomination of Rear
Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee, MBA, MHSA of the Zuni Indian Tribe,
asking that you support this confirmation as Director of the Indian
Health Service (IHS) of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as Principal Deputy Director
and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half years,
during which time he has proven highly capable and dedicated to
improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social, and
spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest
level.
RADM Weahkee's deep familiarity with IHS, experience at the tribal
level, and continued responsiveness to local issues show that he will
serve as a reliable and committed leader for IHS. Born in the Shiprock
Public Health Service Hospital on the Navajo Nation, RADM Weahkee was a
direct service user of IHS who went on to earn an MBA and serve as CEO
of Phoenix Indian Medical Center (PIMC), the Agency's largest federally
operated facility. With an annual operating budget of $156 million
during his tenure, PIMC was and remains an extensive, multifaceted,
community-oriented health care delivery system serving as a referral
center for seven other IHS hospitals and five health centers in the
Phoenix Area.
This management experience guided RADM Weahkee as he stepped into a
variety of roles at IHS headquarters including Executive Officer for
the Office of Clinical and Preventive Services, Director of the
Management Policy and Internal Control Staff office, and Deputy
Director for Personnel Functions in the Office of Management Services.
He encouraged the Agency to address longstanding external oversight
recommendations from the Government Accountability Office and the HHS
Office of Inspector General, and he oversaw the development and
implementation of a new five-year strategic plan for the Agency, the
first in over a decade.
His many accomplishments and steady management experience to date
show that he will continue to serve as a reliable and expert leader for
the Agency.
Sincerely,
Allison Barlow, Ph.D, MPH, Director.
______
GlobalPOV
December 3, 2019
GlobalPOV strongly supports the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM)
Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support
his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM
Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director
of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and has proven that he is
capable and dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical,
mental, social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska
Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a visionary and compassionate leader, with deep
understanding of the complexities of health services administration
tailored to diverse native communities.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new strategic
plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has pressed the
Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented external
oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability Office and
the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and implemented a
new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to ensure
appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area Offices
and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In partnership
with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner, RADM Weahkee
revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native American
Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the needs and
interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. IHS, and the Nation, would be
well served by his confirmation. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Cynthia K. Hansen, Ph.D.,President.
______
Friendship House
Nov. 18, 2019
I am writing to you today to strongly support the nomination of
RADM Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you
support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS)
in the United States Department of Health and Human Service (HHS).
RADM Weahkee has served honorably as the Principal Deputy Director
and Acting Director of IHS for the past two and a half years. During
that period, he has proven that he is capable and dedicated to
improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social and
spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest
level.
As a veteran of the United States Air Force, RADM Weahkee served as
a military public health specialist. His Bachelor of Science degree in
Health Care Management from Southern Illinois University-Carbondale
preceded his earning Master's degrees in both Health Services
Administration and Business Administration from Arizona State
University, Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee's impressive span of experience and expertise includes
his service in a variety of different roles within the Indian Health
Service (IHS) system of care, in both federal and tribal settings. He
has served in the field at the service unit and regional office level,
as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
To his great credit, RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency
forward in a very trying time, including developing and implementing a
new 5-year strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade.
Under his leadership, the Agency is successfully addressing long
standing external oversight recommendations from the Government
Accountability Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General.
He is to be commended for establishing and implementing a new
Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level to assure appropriate
management oversight and accountability by the Area Offices and federal
service unit hospitals and health centers. In partnership with the
Administration for Native Americans Commissioner, RADM Weahkee
revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
AmericancAffairs which provides a forum at HHS to discuss the needs and
interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has earned or strong support because he has been
successful in moving the Agenda significantly forward in a positive
manner and relatively short amount of time. His travel throughout
Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and issues that
our communities face in addressing their serious health concerns had
earned RADM Weahkee the trust and respect of urban, rural and tribal
communities.
RADM Weahkee has earned our strong support because he has been
successful in moving IHS significantly forward in a positive manner and
in a relatively short amount of time. His travel throughout Indian
country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and issues that our
Indian communities face in addressing their various health concerns has
earned RADM Weahkee the trust and respect of our urban, rural and
tribal American Indian communities.
In short, RADM Weahkee is a man of integrity and extensive
expertise and experience, and as such the kind of leader that we need
in this position. I write to you as an American Indian woman (Navajo
born and bred on the reservation, and urban area resident since 1963),
founder and CEO of Friendship House Assoc. of American Indians, Inc., a
residential substance abuse prevention, treatment and recovery facility
with a proud 50 plus year record of success in serving American Indians
of all tribes.
Thank you for your consideration of this strong endorsement of RADM
Weahkee for Director of Indian Health Service (IHS) of HHS.
Respectfully,
Helen Waukazoo, Chief Executive Officer.
______
December 6, 2019
I write today in support of RADM Michael Weahkee's nomination for
the position of Director-Indian Health Service.
I have known Mr. Weahkee professionally for many years and have the
highest regard for his work ethic, team approach and his administrative
capability. His commitment to a better quality of life for Native
communities via an improved health care system is unflagging. He has
begun building an IHS headquarters team that is equally committed to
the goal of providing the best system of health care, despite the many
serious challenges that IHS faces. A political appointee is absolutely
necessary to have in place since many important budget and policy
decisions are made at the Secretarial level at HHS and needs the input
from the political Directorship.
I spent 25 years at IHS headquarters as both a senior policy
analyst and External Relations director and can tell you first hand
that input from the Directorship at the HHS Secretarial level is
critical to ensuring that all of HHS and its agencies understand that
federal government health care is a responsibility of all of HHS.
Please do not hesitate to contact me if I can provide more
testament on behalf of Mr. Weahkee.
Leo J. Nolan
______
The Inter Tribal Association of Arizona
November 1, 2019
The Inter Tribal Association of Arizona, (ITAA), strongly supports
the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni
Indian Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as Director of
the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the
Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past
two and a half years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable
and dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriated management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native American Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internalyl at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Shan Lewis, President.
______
Indian Health Care Resource Center of Tulsa
November 4, 2019
Indian Health Care Resource Center of Tulsa strongly supports the
nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian
Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the
Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal
Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a
half years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and
dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Carmelita Skeeter, CEO.
______
American Academy of Pediatrics
December 10, 2019
On behalf of the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), a non-profit
professional organization representing over 67,000 pediatricians and
many pediatricians caring for American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN)
children, I am writing to offer principles to consider as you begin the
process of confirming a U.S. Indian Health Service (IHS) Director.
IHS directly provides and administers, in partnership with Tribes,
critical child health services. This care is vital given the
significant health disparities the AI/AN population faces. The impact
of historical trauma continues to manifest in the lives of AI/AN women
and children in the form of poor health outcomes and exposure to
ongoing trauma such as domestic violence and child maltreatment. The
preterm birth rate among Native women is 25 percent higher than the
rate among non-Hispanic white women, \1\ and the rate of AI/AN infant
mortality is nearly double the rate among non-Hispanic white infants.
\2\ Native children face higher risks for suicide, unintentional
injuries, and a variety of chronic conditions like Type 2 diabetes,
compared to all U.S. races.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ March of Dimes Foundation. 2019 Premature Birth Report Card.
November 2019. Retrieved from https://www.marchofdimes.org/materials/
US_REPORTCARD_FINAL.pdf.
\2\ U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Infant
Mortality. March 2019. Retrieved from: https://www.cdc.gov/
reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/infantmortality.htm#rates
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These serious disparities are not the result of lifestyle choices,
but are associated with the social conditions in which Native families
live. Approximately one third of Native families live below the poverty
line, the highest percentage of any group and twice that of the general
population. \3\ Improved access to quality health coverage is essential
to successfully addressing these disparities. An effective IHS director
with management experience providing direct care to this patient
population is needed to ensure that AI/AN children receive the quality
health services they need. The following are key principles we believe
are essential for the next IHS Director.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Health care for urban American Indian and Alaska Native women.
Committee Opinion No. 515. American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists. Obstet Gynecol 2012;119:201-5.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Prioritizing Child Health
Nearly one-third of the AI/AN population is under the age of 18,
compared to 24 percent of the total U.S. population. \4\ This means
that high-quality child health care is foundational to the success of
IHS. The next IHS director should demonstrate a commitment to guiding
the agency in a way that honors the importance of providing safe,
effective, timely, and culturally appropriate child health services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ National Congress of American Indians. Indian Country
Demographics. Retrieved from: http://www.ncai.org/about-tribes/
demographics
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Continuing Expansion of IHS Emphasis on Behavioral Health Services
We know that Native children and families face substantial health
disparities, many of which are rooted in social determinants of health
that stem from the historical trauma Native communities have faced
throughout our history. Poverty, alcoholism, substance use disorder
(SUD), chronic illness, mental health disorders, child abuse, and other
poor health and social conditions are the symptoms of these underlying
health crises in Native communities, not the cause of them. In
recognition of these issues, IHS has initiated efforts to better
address behavioral health needs, through programs such as the Zero
Suicide Initiative. The provision of effective and culturally
appropriate behavioral health services has been vital to addressing
these disparities and their harmful sequelae. It is also important to
expand access to behavioral health professionals with the appropriate
training to serve pediatric populations. The next IHS Director should
continue expanding the availability and quality of behavioral health
services to meet AI/AN children's health needs, including through more
effective use of appropriate telehealth services.
Addressing the Impact of NAS and Other Perinatal Substance Disorders
The ongoing impact of the opioid epidemic on women and children's
health is enormous. It is particularly acute in the AI/AN population,
which faces high SUD rates and experiences significant numbers of
births with neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS). IHS has demonstrated a
commitment to addressing this complex issue, and it is critically
important that the next IHS Director expand that effort and work
closely with Tribes, states, communities, and other stakeholders to
appropriately address this complex and serious issue with a treatment-
focused and trauma-informed public health approach that prioritizes
family-centric care.
Improving Health Provider Recruitment and Retention to Meet Need
Effective recruitment and retention programming is central to
ensuring IHS has the workforce necessary to meet the health needs of
AI/AN children. There are many providers throughout the IHS system
providing quality child health care services that improve the wellbeing
of their communities, and we need to continue to build and expand that
workforce. The challenges of the remote nature of many IHS sites,
housing shortages, provider burnout and vicarious trauma, and limited
amenities can make recruiting and retaining quality maternal-child
health providers difficult. The next IHS director should focus on
improving recruitment and retention efforts to ensure that IHS has the
child health workforce needed to meet the needs of the communities they
serve.
Conclusion
The next IHS Director will fill a critical role and oversee
important health service delivery and public health programs
benefitting AI/AN children and families. As you work to confirm an IHS
Director, we urge you to ensure that they have the qualifications,
expertise, and experience to uphold these key principles as well as a
commitment to partnering with tribes and communities to improve the
crucial health services offered by IHS. We look forward to working with
you during this important process.
Sincerely,
Kyle E. Yasuda, MD, FAAP, President.
______
California Rural Indian Health Board
November 25, 2019
It was my honor to serve as the Executive Director of the
California Rural Indian Health Board Inc., (CRIBB), a tribally
sanctioned Indian Self Determination Act contractor, providing training
and technical support to tribally operated health programs in
California from January 1987 to December 2013. I am a member of the
Cherokee Nation enrolled since 1976 and a graduate of the University of
California Berkeley School of Public Health class of 1982.
In my capacity as Executive Director of CRIHB I recruited, hired,
oriented and directly supervised Michael Weahkee where he served as the
Director Family and Community Health from May of 2001 until he was took
on a new assignment at the Phoenix Indian Medical Center January of
2008. As a member of the Commission Corp then Lieutenant Weahkee's
assignment to CRIHB was facilitated by the California Area Office of
the Indian Health Service. In January of 2003 in recognition of his
administrative competence and numerous contributions to the effective
implementation of our organizational goals he was designated Deputy
Director of CRIHB. In that capacity we worked closely together to
improve CRIHB organizational infrastructure, increase the number of
state and federal grant awards and to respond to the needs of Tribal
Health Programs and the communities they serve. I believe that this
frontline experience working for a tribal contractor under the
authorities of the Indian Self Determination Act expanded RADM
Weahkee's understanding of both the limits and opportunities available
to that portion of the IHS program that operates under contracts and
compacts and that this experience continues to inform his
decisionmaking to this day. I know RADM Weahkee to be a person of the
highest character, a strong and thoughtful leader, a good team member
and an experienced administrator.
In closing I would like to express my fullest support for the
nomination of RADM Michael D. Weahkee to serve as Director of the
Indian Health Service and hope that you will confirm him to that
position.
James Allen Crouch MPH, Retired Senior Advisor.
______
Creative Health Care Management
November 4, 2019
Please consider my strong support for the nomination of Rear
Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe for
confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
RADM Weahkee has served as Principal Deputy Director and Acting
Director of the IHS for the past two and a half years. Prior to that he
served as CEO of the Phoenix Indian Medical Center (PIMC) for three and
a half years. It is in that capacity that I observed his extraordinary
leadership skills as PIMC successfully engaged every staff member,
manager, executive, and provider in a cultural transformation process
designed to heal the organizational culture of PIMC while meeting all
of their strategic objectives. His active involvement in leading and
managing this process earned him the respect, admiration, and gratitude
of staff members, leaders, and providers throughout this organization.
I have been impressed with his strategic thinking, vision, and
commitment to the IHS mission, and I have learned that this man has
great integrity, compassion, humility, and sense of duty. As co-author
of a chapter in a multi-award-winning book called Advancing
Relationship Based Cultures, I had the privilege of interviewing RADM
Weahkee and seven other distinguished executives whose leadership
acumen had caught our attention. We learned that all of these leaders
prized authenticity, vulnerability, and humility in other leaders and
aspired to demonstrate these same qualities in their own leadership.
Each had been mentored formally or informally by loving leaders. RADM
Weahkee's comments poignantly provide a glimpse into who he is as a man
and a leader:
The risk of not developing the next generation is that you
have undeveloped resources, and you'll have to take on more
yourself. When I develop others, eventually they will get to
the point where they can develop the next generation. They'll
have the knowledge, education, and modeling of how to continue.
It won't stop with me. I feel like I have a personal
responsibility to pass it on ... to take what has been given to
me and share it with others and support others. I have the
capacity to teach more than one as many as are willing.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his Bachelor
of Science in Healthcare Management from Southern Illinois University
at Carbondale, and both his Master of Health Services Administration
degree and MBA from the Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has moved the IHS forward in a short period of time.
He has traveled extensively throughout Indian country to see and hear
firsthand the challenges and issues that Native communities face in
addressing the health concerns that confront them.
RADM Weahkee's education, military service, IHS leadership
experience, and personal integrity make him the right person to be the
National Director of the Indian Health Service. In RADM Weahkee, you
have someone who is not only the right person to lead right now; he is
also the right person to mentor and prepare the next generation of IHS
leaders.
It has been a highlight of my long career and one of the greatest
honors of my life to work alongside this extraordinary man. Please
consider endorsing RADM Weahkee for this vital role.
Respectfully,
Jay A Felgen, RN, MPA, Former CEO/President Emeritus.
______
Jeannie Hovland, Alexandria, VA
December 9, 2019
It is with great enthusiasm that I write in support of President
Trump's nomination of Rear Admiral Michael Weahkee for the position of
the Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS).
My first opportunity to work with RADM Weahkee was in 2016 when he
was detailed to the Rosebud IHS facility located in Rosebud, South
Dakota. During that time, I worked for Senator John Thune. I was
impressed by RADM Weahkee's professionalism and kind approach towards
tribal leaders, congressional staff, and IHS employees. He showed
respect as he listened and displayed strong leadership by responding
with workable ideas and solutions.
In June 2017, RADM Weahkee was promoted to Principal Deputy
Director of IHS and I continued to work with him in that capacity. He
participated in regular briefings with tribal leaders and congressional
staff from South Dakota and the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs.
Under stressful situations he seized ownership and maintained a
professional and respectful demeanor welcoming feedback and
recommendations.
In my current position as Commissioner of the Administration for
Native Americans, I have been able to work more closely with RADM
Weahkee. I have witnessed first-hand the respect and appreciation many
tribal leaders have expressed for his leadership at IHS. Currently, I
chair the Department of Health and Human Service's Intradepartmental
Council on Native American Affairs (ICNAA) and RADM Weahkee serves as
the Vice Chairman. He has been a remarkable partner in revamping the
ICNAA and his leadership is appreciated and relied upon across HHS. The
confirmation of RADM Weahkee would be a huge benefit to IHS and the
people they serve.
Thank you for your consideration of my support.
Kind regards,
Jeannie Hovland.
______
John J. Dimaggio
October 31, 2019
Please allow me to offer my highest recommendation of Rear Admiral
(RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe to be confirmed as
Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served
as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the
past two and a half years, and in that time he has proven that he is
capable and dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical,
mental, social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska
Natives to the highest level.
As the Chairman of AMSUS Sustaining-Members (Industry), as a
Trustee with the USPHS Commissioned Officers Foundation, as an advisor
to the Nurses Organization of Veterans Affairs, and as .an Assistant
Director of Federal National Accounts with US WorldMeds, I seek to
develop and support ethical public/private partnerships which promote
and advance our Nation's Public Health. RADM Weahkee has done, and will
continue to do, a brilliant job of leading & fostering better health
through better partnerships for IHS, and the Sovereign Tribal Nations,
by providing optimal care for American Indian & Alaskan Native
Patients, and optimal systemic value for IHS.
Please support RADM Michael Weahkee's confirmation as Director of
IHS. I deeply appreciate your, and your fellow Committee Members',
service to our Country, and your tireless efforts to provide the best
possible health and well-being for American Indian and Alaskan Native
Patients.
Warm Regards,
John J. DiMaggio,
Trustee, USPHS Commissioned Officers Foundation
Chairman, AMSUS Sustaining-Members (Industry)
Assistant Director, Federal National Accounts, US WorldMeds
Advisory Committee, Nurses Organization of Veterans Affairs
______
Kashia Band of Pomo Indians of Stewarts Point Rancheria
November 13, 2019
The, Kashia Band of Pomo Indians of Stewarts Point Rancheria,
``Tribe'', strongly supports the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM)
Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support
his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM
Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director
of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time he has
proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency and
raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of American
Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Dino Franklin Jr., Tribal Chairman.
______
Kaw Nation
November 19, 2019
The Kaw Nation strongly supports the nomination of Rear Admiral
(RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you
support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS)
in the United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting
Director of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time
he has proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency
and raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of
American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Lynn Williams, Chairwoman.
______
RADM (ret.) Kevin D. Meeks
December 1, 2019
I am writing to express my strong support of the nomination of Rear
Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask
that you support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health
Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy
Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half
years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and dedicated
to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social and
spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest
level.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit/tribal, and
regional office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national
level. I trust you are familiar with his official service record and
many of his accomplishments. I would like to focus this letter on my
personal observations of RADM Weahkee.
I first met RADM Weahkee in 2010 when he was working in the Office
of Management Services at IHS Headquarters. We worked on a number of
Agency specific Commissioned Corps issues together. We did not work
closely together again until April, 2016, when I contacted then CAPT
Weahkee, who was then serving as the Chief Executive Officer of the
Phoenix Indian Medical Center, on behalf of the Agency to inform him
that we needed him to lead a team of experts to oversee and lead the
IHS Rosebud Service Unit (RST). RST was undergoing significant
hardships at the time directly related to the provision of quality
health care, recruitment, retention, accreditation, certification, and
more. CAPT Weahkee readily agreed to fulfill this critical and
important request. He worked at RST from May-October, 2016 and
significantly improved the operation and moral in the Service Unit.
Even after he returned to his duty station, he continued to provide
assistance to the new RST leadership.
When he returned to his position as the Chief Executive Officer of
the Phoenix Area Medical Center (PIMC), I watched RADM Weahkee from
afar as he focused his staff's efforts on improving the quality of and
access to needed health care services. He led PIMC in several new
initiatives including Patient Centered Medical Homes, Improving Patient
Care, and developing various centers of excellence targeting major
health issues such as Hepatis C, HIV/AIDS, and others.
After RADM Weahkee was reassigned to IHS Headquarters as the
Principal Deputy Director, and acting IHS Director, he became my
supervisor. As the former Deputy Director for Field Operations, I
oversaw the twelve IHS Area Directors and the Office of Environmental
Health and Engineering. In this role, I was in daily contact with RADM
Weahkee and got to know him extremely well.
I have found RADM Weahkee to be extremely dedicated and committed
to improving the health of American Indian/Alaska Natives. He is
honest, sincere, and compassionate. He is a man of integrity, a proven
leader, one who leads by example. I do not believe that you can find a
better candidate for the position of IHS Director.
As you know, RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward
in a very trying time, overseeing the development and implementation of
a new five year strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a
decade. He has pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and
unimplemented, external oversight recommendations from the Government
Accountability Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He
established and implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS
Headquarters level, to ensure appropriate management oversight and
accountability by the Area Offices and federal service unit hospitals
and health centers. In partnership with the Administration for Native
Americans Commissioner, RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS
Intradepartmental Council on Native American Affairs, to provide a
forum internally at HHS to discuss the needs and interests of Indian
country.
You may hear reports of IHS shortcomings from various individuals
and entities in the next few weeks, but if you listen to them closely,
almost all of their concerns are related to issues that occurred many
years in the past and very little if any of their criticism is based on
current events.
There is no doubt that the Agency still has many issues to work on,
but RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner in a
relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively throughout
Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and issues that
native communities face in addressing the various health concerns that
they are confronted with. He is a strong advocate for Indian
healthcare, whether that care is delivered by the tribes, IHS, or Urban
programs. Thank you for your strong consideration of my endorsement of
RADM Michael Weahkee and I urge you and your Senate colleagues to
confirm him as the next Director of the Indian Health Service as
quickly as possible.
Respectfully,
RADM (ret.) Kevin D. Meeks
______
Kewa Pueblo Health Corporation
December 6, 2019
The Kewa Pueblo Health Corporation (KPHC), a Public Law 93-638
Title I program serving the Pueblo of Santo Domingo strongly supports
the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni
Indian Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as Director of
the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the
Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past
two and a half years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable
and dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
Given that RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive
manner and in a relatively short amount of time, the Health Board and
Governing Body of KPHC easily passed Resolution #2019-10 on December 2,
2019 supporting his confirmation (enclosure). * Consequently, given his
commitment to the stewardship of Indian Health across the nation, we
strongly urge the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs to endorse his
confirmation as the Director of the Indian Health Service, with all due
speed and enthusiasm, to the entire Senate of the United States of
America.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The information referred to has been retained in the Committee
files.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Respectfully,
Alan K.. Barlow, MS, MSHR, CEO.
______
Little River Band of Ottawa Indians
December 4, 2019
The Little River Band of Ottawa Indians strongly supports the
nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian
Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the
Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal
Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a
half years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and
dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Larry Romanelli, Tribal Ogema.
______
Major Larry Mahana, RN
December 3, 2019
I strongly support the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D.
Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support his
confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM
Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director
of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time he has
proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency and
raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of American
Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Major Larry Mahana, RN
Emergency Services Officer
AZWG-Civil Air Patrol.
______
Mathuram Santosham, MD, MPH
November 20, 2019
I strongly support the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D.
Weahkee, MBA, MHSA of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support
his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) of the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has
served as Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for
the past two and a half years, and in this time he has proven highly
capable and dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical,
mental, social, and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska
Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee draws from his experience as a veteran of the United
States Air Force, where he served as a military public health
specialist. His training in health care management from Southern
Illinois University-Carbondale and health services from Arizona State
University in Tempe has equipped him well to oversee a complex Agency
dedicated to service excellence.
RADM Weahkee's work within the Indian Health system, in both
federal and tribal settings, demonstrates a deep understanding of the
Agency and steady management experience. He has served in the field at
the service unit and regional office level and at IHS headquarters at
the national level. I admire the way RADM Weahkee has successfully led
the Agency forward, overseeing the development and implementation of a
new five-year strategic plan for the Agency. He has pressed the Agency
forward to address long-standing and unimplemented, external oversight
recommendations from the Government Accountability Office and the HHS
Office of Inspector General. He established and implemented a new
Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to ensure appropriate
management oversight and accountability by the Area Offices and federal
service unit hospitals and health centers. In partnership with the
Administration for Native Americans Commissioner, RADM Weahkee
revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native American
Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the needs and
interests of Indian country. Recently under his oversight the Agency
updated guidance to better deliver trauma-informed healthcare.
I appreciate that he has also traveled extensively throughout
Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and issues that
Native communities face in addressing the various health concerns. His
commitment to quality healthcare is unwavering and he takes this
responsibility seriously.
Thank you for your strong consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Mathuram Santosham, MD, MPH
Director Emeritus, Johns Hopkins Center for American Indian Health
Professor, International Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health
______
MDProvider
December 9, 2019
I strongly support the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D.
Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support his
confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM
Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director
of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time he has
proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency and
raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of American
Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
Let us reiterate that in a relatively short amount of time, RADM
Weahkee has successfully led the Agency with salient skill sets and
moved it forward into the future. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country, to visit and listen firsthand, the
challenges and issues that native communities face in addressing the
risk agents and various health burdens Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Babak Michael Nayeri, President/CEO
BGEN Xavier Stewart, Executive Vice President
______
Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe Indians
November 4, 2019
As Chief Executive of the Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe Indians, I am
writing in strong supports the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM)
Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support
his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM
Weahkee is an outstanding candidate and the Mille Lacs Band
respectfully requests that his nomination be expedited through the
confirmation process.
Over his two and a half years serving as the Principal Deputy
Director and Acting Director of the IHS, RADM Weahkee has proven his
competency and commitment to supporting Indian tribes in our battles to
restore the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of American
Indian people. He has a depth of experience serving in a variety of
positions within the Indian Health care system, and most important, he
has on-the-ground experience working in Indian country for reservation-
based health care systems.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Melanie Benjamin, Chief Executive
______
Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians
November 26, 2019
The Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians strongly supports the
nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian
Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the
Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal
Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a
half years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and
dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Yakoki,
Cyrus Ben, Tribal Chief.
______
Fort Belknap Indian Community
December 9, 2019
The Fort Belknap Indian Community strongly supports the nomination
of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and
ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health
Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy
Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half
years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and dedicated
to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social and
spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest
level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Andrew Werk, Jr., President.
______
Muscogee (Creek) Nation
October 27, 2019
The Muscogee (Creek) Nation strongly supports the nomination of
Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and
ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health
Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy
Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half
years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and dedicated
to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social and
spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest
level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
James R. Floyd, Principal Chief.
______
Native American Rehabilitation Association of the
Northwest, Inc.
December 3, 2019
The Native American Rehabilitation Association of the Northwest an
Urban Indian Health Program strongly supports the nomination of Rear
Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Tribe, and ask that you
support his confirmation as permanent Director of the Indian Health en
ice (IHS) in the United States Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and
Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in
that time, he has proven that he is capable and dedicated to the
American Indian and Alaska Nation patients IHS serves, and also to
improving the Agency to the highest level in partnership with
stakeholders.
This nomination is a continuation of service to the United States
for RADM Weahkee. He previously served the United States in the Air
Force (1993-96) as a military public health specialist. RADM Weahkee
has also served the United States and his Indigenous community in a
variety of different roles within the Indian Health system of care,
including in both the federal (1999-01 & 2007-Present) and tribal
(2001-07) setting and the role of Director of IHS is a natural
progression for such a recognized leader. RADM Weahkee obtained his
bachelor of science in health care management degree from Southern
Illinois University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
Drawing on his long term and specific understanding of IHS
operations, RADM Weahkee has pressed the Agency forward to address
long-standing and unimplemented external oversight recommendations from
the Government Accountability Office and the HHS Office of Inspector
General. RADM Weahkee has served in the field at the service unit and
regional office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national
level. He has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new fiscal-
year strategic plan with a focus on agency goals (1) To ensure that
comprehensive, culturally appropriate personal and public health
services are available and accessible to American Indian and Alaska
Native people; (2) To promote excellence and quality through innovation
of the Indian health system into an optimally performing organization;
and (3) To strengthen IHS program management and operations.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner in
his tenure as the Principal Deputy Director of IHS. He has visited our
facilities to see and hear firsthand the challenges and issues that our
community faces and to meet our patients in person. He is committed to
continue his diligent work to provide high quality health care services
for American Indians and Alaskan Natives. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Jacqueline Mercer, CEO.
______
Native American Health Center
December 2, 2019
The Native American Health Center, (a non-profit, Urban Indian
community clinic serving14,000 patients annually with 17 sites, 300
employees and a $35M operating budget in the SanFrancisco Bay Area)
strongly supports the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D.
Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support his
confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM
Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director
of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time he has
proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency and
raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of American
Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Sincerely,
Martin Waukazoo, CEO.
______
Native American LifeLines
December 4, 2019
Native American LifeLines, a Title V Urban Indian Health Program
serving Baltimore (MD) and Boston (MA), strongly supports the
nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian
Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the
Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal
Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a
half years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and
dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level, never forgetting that the over 70 percent of tribal
citizens residing in urban settings are an important constituency.
RADM Weahkee's qualifications are impressive. While in the United
States Air Force, he served as a military public health specialist.
Later, he obtained his Bachelor of Science in Health Care Management
from Southern Illinois University-Carbondale, and both a Master of
Health Services Administration and Master of Business Administration
from Arizona State University.
With regard to his service within the Indian Health system of care,
RADM Weahkee has served in a number of capacities in both federal and
tribal settings, as well as field, service unit, and regional office
levels, and of course at IHS Headquarters. It is important to note his
successful leadership in a particularly trying time for the IHS.
Specifically, RADM Weahkee oversaw the development and implementation
of a new five-year strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a
decade. He has pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and
unimplemented, external oversight recommendations from the Government
Accountability Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He
established and implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS
Headquarters level, to ensure appropriate management oversight and
accountability by the Area Offices and federal service unit hospitals
and health centers. Finally, in partnership with the Commissioner of
Administration for Native Americans, RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS
Intradepartmental Council on Native American Affairs to provide a forum
internally at HHS to discuss the needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has clearly moved the Agency forward in a positive
manner, and in a relatively short amount of time. And while his
accomplishments have significant national impact, we would be remiss
not to acknowledge the impacts felt at a local level in programs like
ours. RADM is engaged and accessible in Indian Country, which at a
senior level is a rare quality indeed. We appreciate his approach to
addressing the health care concerns in Urban Indian communities,
specifically viewing our challenges from a social determinants of
health lens, acknowledging the impacts of federal policies and
historical trauma among our people, and honoring our unique culture
through support of practice based evidence and culture as prevention
strategies. This perspective is well in tune with the priorities of the
community we serve and for the reasons outlined, we heartily support
RADM Weahkee's nomination.
Thank you for your strong consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Kerry Hawk Lessard, MAA, Executive Director.
______
Native Directions Inc.
November 27, 2019
Native Directions Inc. is an Inpatient Drug and Alcohol Program for
Native American Men. Our Program was founded in 1974, and has provided
treatment for our Native American brothers in a culture based treatment
facility, offering treatment from a Native American perspective and a
an Inipi on grounds for spiritual growth.
Native Directions Inc. strongly supports the nomination of Rear
Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask
that you support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health
Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy
Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half
years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and dedicated
to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social and
spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest
level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Ramona Valadez, Executive Director.
______
National Council of Urban Indian Health
December 5, 2019
On behalf of the National Council of Urban Indian Health (NCUIH),
and the 41 Urban Indian Health Programs (UIHPs) receiving grants under
Title V of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (IHCIA) and the
American Indian and Alaska Natives (AI/ANs) they serve and who we
represent, we write to express our support of the nomination of Rear
Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee. Furthermore, NCUIH would support any
action taken by this committee to ensure his confirmation as Director
of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the
Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past
two and a half years, and in that time he has voiced his support and
pledged to commit the Agency's efforts to ensuring the federal trust
responsibility to AI/AN people who live in urban communities and
receive health care services at an Urban Indian Organization (UIO).
Despite comprising over two-thirds of AI/ANs, urban Indians are too
often excluded from federal policies and programs designed to carry out
the trust responsibility. The federal trust responsibility extends not
only to tribal governments but also to individual Indians. Among the
most sacred of the duties encompassed within the federal trust
responsibility is the duty to provide for Indian health care. Congress
has long recognized the federal government's obligation to provide
health care for AI/AN people follows them off reservations.
While serving in his post, RADM Weahkee has repeatedly established
his understanding that UIOs are an integral part of the Indian health
system, which is comprised of the Indian Health Service (IHS), Tribes,
and tribal organizations, and urban Indian organizations (collectively,
I/T/Us). NCUIH looks forward to a continued partnership with him as
together, we work to ensure the overall health of Indian Country.
Thank you for your consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Maureen Rosette, Board President.
______
New York Indian Council, Inc.
November 14, 2019
The New York Indian Council, Inc. a subsidiary of the Rhode Island
Indian Council, Inc. strongly supports the nomination of Rear Admiral
(RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you
support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS)
in the United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting
Director of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time
he has proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency
and raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of
American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Darrell Waldron,
Executive Director.
______
Northern Cheyenne Tribe
December 4, 2019
The Northern Cheyenne Tribal President strongly supports the
nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian
Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the
Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal
Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a
half years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and
dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Rynalea Pena, President.
______
Northwest Portland Area Indian Health Board
November 20, 2019
On behalf of the Northwest Portland Area Indian Health Board
(NPAIHB), I strongly support the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM)
Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support
his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
Established in 1972, NPAIHB is a tribal organization formed under the
Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (ISDEAA), P.L.
93-638, representing the 43 federally-recognized Indian Tribes in
Idaho, Oregon, and Washington on specific health care issues.
NPAIHB's relationship with RADM Weahkee began when he worked at the
California Rural Indian Health Board and continued through positions he
held at IHS at the service unit and regional office level. In his role
as Principal Deputy Director/Acting Director of IHS, he has proven that
he is strong leader, capable and committed to improving the Agency and
raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of American
Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level. He has successfully
led the Agency forward in a very trying time, overseeing the
development and implementation of a new five-year strategic plan for
the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has pressed the Agency
forward to address long-standing and unimplemented, external oversight
recommendations from the Government Accountability Office and the HHS
Office of Inspector General. He established and implemented a new
Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to ensure appropriate
management oversight and accountability by the Area Offices and federal
service unit hospitals and health centers. In partnership with the
Administration for Native Americans Commissioner, RADM Weahkee
revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native American
Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the needs and
interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has traveled extensively throughout Indian country,
including to visit Northwest Tribes, to see and hear firsthand the
challenges and issues that American Indian and Alaska Native
communities face in addressing various health concerns. NPAIHB
leadership have also had the opportunity to address RADM Weahkee on
various issues through the tribal consultation process and other
meetings.
Lastly, RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force,
where he served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his
bachelor of science in health care management degree from Southern
Illinois University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona. RADM Weahkee's experience
in working with tribes, demonstrated leadership, and education strongly
support his confirmation.
Thank you for your strong consideration of this endorsement.
Sincerely,
Cheryle A. Kennedy, Vice Chair.
______
Oklahoma City Indian Clinic
December 6, 2019
The Oklahoma City Indian Clinic, an Urban Indian Health Program,
strongly supports the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D.
Weahkee of the Zuni Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as
permanent Director of the Indian Health en ice (IHS) in the United
States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has
served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS
for the past two and a half years, and in that time, he has proven that
he is capable and dedicated to the American Indian and Alaska Nation
patients IHS serves, and also to improving the Agency to the highest
level in partnership with stakeholders.
This nomination is a continuation of service to the United States
for RADM Weahkee. He previously served the United States in the Air
Force (1993-96) as a military public health specialist. RADM Weahkee
has also served the United States and his Indigenous community in a
variety of different roles within the Indian Health system of care,
including in both the federal (1999-01 & 2007-Present) and tribal
(2001-07) setting and the role of Director of IHS is a natural
progression for such a recognized leader.
Drawing on his long term and specific understanding of IHS
operations, RADM Weahkee has pressed the Agency forward to address
long-standing and unimplemented external oversight recommendations from
the Government Accountability Office and the HHS Office of Inspector
General. RADM Weahkee has served in the field at the service unit and
regional office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national
level. He has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five-year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade.
RADM Weahkee obtained his bachelor of science in health care
management degree from Southern Illinois University-Carbondale, and
both a master of health services administration and master of business
administration degree from Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner in
his tenure as the Principal Deputy Director of IHS. He has visited our
facilities to see and hear firsthand the challenges and issues that our
community faces and to meet our patients in person. He is committed to
continue his diligent work to provide high quality health care services
for American Indians and Alaskan Natives. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Robyn Sunday-Allen, CEO.
______
One Sky Center
November 26, 2019
As Director of the One Sky Center and a Psychiatrist who has worked
on American Indian issuesfor 45 years, I strongly support the
nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian
Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the
Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal
Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a
half years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and
dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level. I have worked and interacted with RADM Weahkee since
2003 and believe he is most suited for this position at this time.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. The IHS has a long history of
lack of enough funding and critical physician and staff shortages; both
of which effect access to care and ability to provide quality of care
that much of the rest of the citizens of the United States receive.
Please appoint RADM Weahkee to this position and provide the resources
the IHS needs to get the job done. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Roger Dale Walker, M.D., Director.
______
Professional Growth Systems
December 5, 2019
I wish to lend my support to the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM)
Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support
his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
My relationship with Rear Admiral Weahkee began in 2013 when he was
selected as Administrator for the Phoenix Indian Medical Center (PIMC).
At the time, I was providing consulting services to PIMC that included
strategic planning, management team development and design/
implementation of a new model for delivery of primary care services. I
continued to work with Admiral Weakkee after his appointment as Service
Unit Director at PIMC and through 2016.
At the time, Admiral Weakhee assumed his position at PIMC, the
organization was still experiencing a crisis of leadership. Six Service
Unit Directors had served at PIMC over a six plus year period. Data we
gathered for purposes of an organizational assessment found that lack
of leadership was the number one issue holding PIMC back from improving
performance.
From the moment, Admiral Weahkee took the helm as hospital
administrator until the end of his service as Service Unit Director,
the faith in leadership grew and the organization made substantial
improvements as a result.
The leadership strengths demonstrated during his tenure include the
following:
Integrity. His word was his bond.
Confrontation of key issues that had been avoided for years
Rational and decisive decisionmaking
Even temperament despite crisis conditions in some cases
Innovation. The finding of creative solutions to facility
deficiencies and lack of services.
Accountability for results with managers reporting to him
Improved performance of his management team and individual
members
Elevated morale of a formerly dispirited workforce who came
to believe a better future was possible
Consistency. He enforced policies that had gone largely
ignored in the past
Effective partnerships with tribal governments and
organizations throughout the Service Unit
An unwavering commitment to performance improvement
I have been associated in some fashion with the Indian Health
Service since serving two years as a commissioned officer in Alaska
from 1968-1970. The IHS has always been capable of attracting talented
medical officers with a strong commitment to serve beneficiaries. It
has often been the case that that commitment has been betrayed by
leadership that lacked the courage or ability to make needed changes.
I strongly believe that Admiral Weahkee can fulfil the need the
transformational leadership. His standards for rational thought, his
courage to make difficult decisions, his skill at building strategic
relationships and his even temperament coupled with persistence will
enable IHS to make substantial improvements.
I appreciate this opportunity to support his candidacy.
William Dann, Founder/Chairman
______
Profound Knowledge Partners, Inc.
November 13, 2019
We are in a unique position as owners of a small, woman-owned
business, Profound Knowledge Partners (PKP), headquartered in
Georgetown, Texas. As one of the authors of The Improvement Guide,
healthcare's reference book used worldwide, we were introduced to
healthcare by the Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI) in 2001,
working with Sweden, National Health Care System in the UK (NHS),
Canada, and Singapore. In that capacity, we have also had the privilege
of working with Indian Health Service (IHS) since 2009. Our first
exposure to the leadership of IHS was Rear Admiral (RADM) Charles Grim
at Cherokee Nation. It has been a pleasure to work with such
professionals at IHS over the last decade.
Our 2013 book, Transforming Healthcare Leadership, written with Dr.
Michael Maccoby, has allowed us to continue to work with Healthcare
leaders worldwide. In 2016, we conducted a leadership workshop in
Phoenix, Arizona, requested by the Area Director, ADM Charles Reidhead.
It was during this workshop that we had the privilege of meeting and
working directly with RADM Michael Weahkee and Rose Weahkee. Both are
exemplary healthcare leaders and professionals. Indian Health Service
is fortunate to have their dedicated service.
Since that time, we have been working directly with the leadership
of three regions of Indian Health Service (Portland, Phoenix, and Great
Plains). We have facilitated and developed others to improve Indian
Health Service's processes and services. Through the leadership and
strategic direction and support of RADM Michael D. Weahkee, improvement
work has expanded to Billings, Navajo, Oklahoma, Bemidji, and Nashville
Regions of IHS. Just this year, at Portland's Quality Symposium (where
the Tribes shared completed projects and results), Tribal leaders
confirmed the real and positive impact of these improvements on their
Tribal members.
Currently, at least 57 additional projects are led by Healthcare
Improvement Professionals in training. These projects entail engaging
IHS subject matter experts, identifying and testing changes, using
statistical evidence for improvement, implementing, sharing and
spreading improvements throughout the Indian Healthcare Service system.
This intense focus has increased the number of improvement efforts to a
total of 91 since 2016. Many of these efforts have improved service to
patients and families while reducing costs. Without RADM Michael D.
Weahkee's leadership and dedication to the Native Americans and Alaskan
Natives, the continued hard work and commitment to improvement of
Indian Health Service would not easily be sustained.
RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting
Director of the IHS for the past two and a half years. In that time, he
has proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency and
raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of American
Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
In this short time, we have seen signs of transformation to a
stronger, more engaged Indian Health Service striving to become a
Learning Organization. At the same time, they influence and positively
impact the physical, mental, social, and spiritual health of American
Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
We strongly support the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael
D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe and ask that you support his
confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they confront. Thank you for your strong consideration of
this endorsement.
Respectfully,
C. Jane Norman, President;
Clifford L. Norman, Vice President.
______
Pueblo of Jemez
December 3, 2019
The Pueblo of Jemez strongly supports the nomination of Rear
Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask
that you support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health
Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy
Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half
years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and dedicated
to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social and
spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest
level.
The Pueblo of Jemez, a Title V Self-Governance tribe, has had the
great privilege of directly working with him at the self-governance
advisory committee meetings in Washington, DC and secured his support
on health and human services issues critical to the Pueblo. He visited
the Pueblo in summer, 2019 to learn about our community and the needs
we have. We feel that he heard our needs and will work to help our
Pueblo secure the funds and support needed to provide quality health
care services.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country, including the Pueblo of Jemez, to see and
hear firsthand the challenges and issues that native communities face
in addressing the various health concerns that they are confronted
with. As a member of our sister Pueblo, Zuni Pueblo, the Pueblo of
Jemez strongly requests your approval of his confirmation.
Respectfully,
David M. Toledo, Governor;
John Galvan 1st Lt. Governor;
Elston Yepa, 2nd Lt. Governor.
______
Pueblo of Zuni
November 11, 2019
The Zuni Tribe strongly supports the nomination of Rear Admiral
(RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you
support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS)
in the United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting
Director of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time
he has proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency
and raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of
American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Val R. Panteah, Sr., Governor.
______
Red Lake Band of Chippewa Indians
November 22, 2019
The Red Lake Band of Chippewa Indians strongly supports the
nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian
Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the
Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal
Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a
half years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and
dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Darrell G. Seki, Sr., Chairman.
______
IHS office of Quality, Division of Patient Safety
December 5, 2019
The Northern Cheyenne Tribal President strongly supports the
nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian
Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the
Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal
Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a
half years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and
dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level. As a friend and colleague with Michael D. Weahkee
(Zuni) for over 15 years, I have witnessed firsthand his passion and
commitment to public service. I also share personal roots from the
state of New Mexico.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Regena Dale, MPH, BSN, RN.
______
Rising Star, LLC
November 7, 2019
I strongly support the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D.
Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support his
confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM
Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director
of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time he has
proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency and
raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of American
Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Joanne Schlosser, President.
______
Broward Health Medical Center
December 2, 2019
I, Roberto Cuesta, strongly support the nomination of Rear Admiral
(RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you
support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS)
in the United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting
Director of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time
he has proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency
and raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of
American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Roberto R. Cuesta, RPh.
______
Sacramento Native American Health Center, Inc.
November 21, 2019
The Sacramento Native American Health Center, Inc. (SNAHC) strongly
supports the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of
the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as
Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served
as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the
past two and a half years, and in that time he has proven that he is
capable and dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical,
mental, social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska
Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Britta Guerrero. CEO.
______
Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe of Michigan
October 27, 2019
The Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe of Michigan strongly supports the
nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian
Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the
Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal
Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a
half years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and
dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Ron F. Ekdahl, Tribal Chief.
______
San Carlos Apache Tribe
November 7, 2019
On behalf of the 16,800 members of the San Carlos Apache Tribe
(``Tribe''), I provide our wholehearted support of the nomination of
Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and
ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health
Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS).
RADM Weahkee's service is impeccable, one that has demonstrated
honorable service to Indian Country and the United States. As Principal
Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a
half years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and
dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level. As a veteran of the United States Air Force, where
he served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his
bachelor of science in health care management degree from Southern
Illinois University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
Throughout his career within the IHS, he has served in the field,
at the service unit and regional office level, as well as at IHS
headquarters at the national level. RADM Weahkee has successfully led
the Agency forward in a very trying time, overseeing the development
and implementation of a new five year strategic plan for the Agency,
the first in over a decade. He has pressed the Agency forward to
address long-standing and unimplemented, external oversight
recommendations from the Government Accountability Office and the HHS
Office of Inspector General. He established and implemented a new
Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to ensure appropriate
management oversight and accountability by the Area Offices and federal
service unit hospitals and health centers. In partnership with the
Administration for Native Americans Commissioner, RADM Weahkee
revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native American
Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the needs and
interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has been supportive of tribes in working to improve
services. His prior work with the California Rural Indian Health Board
gave him experience in the need for tribes to develop systems specific
healthcare amenities. With the constant changes in healthcare. it is
vital to have someone who is knovvledgeable for continued growth of all
Native Nations.
In our case. I came to know RADM Weahkee in 2015 during our Tribe's
negotiation of its assumption of the IHS Service Unit on our
Reservation. pursuant to the Indian Self-Determination and Education
Assistance Act (P.L. 93-638, 25 U.S.C.  5301, et seq.). which included
a newly constructed. $160 million hospital facility. We had reached an
impass on the state of the facility's water plant system. RADM Weahkee
graciously gathered together his team and effected a solution that
worked. Today. the San Carlos Apache Healthcare Corporation, a
subsidiary enterprise of the Tribe, runs the facility and employs some
700 employees, including some 150 physicians, and our hospital has on
average 20,000 patient contacts per month. Having a Director who
understands that need is vital for our growth and future.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with.
For these reasons, I respectfully request your endorsement of RADM
Weahkee. As we say in our Apache language, Ahi'yi'e (thank you) for
your review of our request.
Sincerely,
Terry Rambler, Chairman.
______
SALT RIVER PIMA-MARICOPA INDIAN COMMUNITY
resolution number: sr-3744-2020
a resolution to support the nomination of rear admiral michael d.
weahkee for the director of the indian health service at the united
states department of heal th services and human services.
WHEREAS, Article VII, Sections l(c)(4) and (c)(5) of the
Constitution of the Salt River PimaMaricopa Indian Community
(``Constitution'') authorizes the Salt River PimaMaricopa Indian
Community (``Community'') Council to protect the public health and
morals and to provide for the public welfare; and
WHEREAS, Article VII, Section l(h) of the Community Constitution
authorizes the Community to consult, negotiate, contract, conclude and
perform agreements with the federal government; and
WHEREAS, Article VII, Section 1 (j) of the Community Constitution
authorizes the Community to advise and recommend to the United States
Government; and
WHEREAS, Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee, Principal Deputy
Director of the Indian Health Service (!HS) and Assistant Surgeon
General of the United States Public Health Services and the Department
of Health and Human Services has been nominated by President Trump to
be the Director of the Indian Health Service at the Department of
Health and Human Services; and
WHEREAS, RADM Michael D. Weahkee is an enrolled member of the Zuni
Indian Tribe and a veteran of the United States Air Force where he was
a public health specialist; and
WHEREAS, RADM Michael D. Weahkee obtained his Bachelor of Science
in Health Care Management from Southern Illinois University-Carbondale
and later a Master of Health Services Administration and Master of
Business Administration degree from Arizona State University; and
WHEREAS, the Community has had experience working with RADM Michael
D. Weahkee when he was the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Phoenix
Indian Medical Center (PIMC); and
WHEREAS, while the CEO of the PIMC; RADM Michael D. Weahkee worked
diligently to improve health service delivery, expand programs,
understand patient needs, partner with other health care providers
outside the !HS system so additional health services could be provided
to patients; and
WHEREAS, RADM Michael D. Weahkee while working as the PIMC CEO also
sought to maximize the existing limited resources by reengineering
their health systems that resulted in cost savings which were then put
toward providing additional patient care; and
WHEREAS, RADM Michael D. Weahkee prioritized transparency and
communication as the PIMC CEO making monthly visits to the Community to
discuss operations, policies and services; and
WHEREAS, while working as the PIMC CEO, RADM Michael D. Weahkee
created a true partnership with the Community so that needed health
care could be provided to his membership; and
WHEREAS, RADM Michael D. Weahkee as the Principal Deputy Director
supports tribal selfgovernance and has supported the Community in their
efforts to compact the Salt River Clinic, the Northeast Ambulatory Care
Clinic (``NEACC'') construction project; and
WHEREAS, RADM Michael D. Weahkee has demonstrated through his work
as the PIMC CEO and the Principal Deputy Director that he is committed
to improving the lives of American Indians through enhanced health care
services provided by the Indian Health Services.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the Salt River Pima-Maricopa
Indian Community supports the nomination of RADM Michael D. Weahkee as
the Director of Indian Health Services, Department of Health and Human
Services.
BE IT FINALLY RESOLVED that the President or Vice President is
authorized to take all steps reasonably necessary to carry out the
purposes and intentions of this resolution.
CERTIFICATION
Pursuant to the authority contained in Article VII, Section
l(c)(4), l(c)(5), l(h), and lU) of the Constitution of the Salt River
Pima-Maricopa Indian Community (as amended), ratified by the Tribe on
February 28, 1990, and approved by the Secretary of the Interior on
March 19, 1990, the foregoing resolution was adopted this 13th day of
November, 20 I 9, in a duly called meeting of the Community Council at
Salt River, Arizona, at which a quorum of 6 members was present, by a
vote of 6 for; 0 opposed; 0 abstaining; and 3 excused.
______
SAN JUAN COLLEGE
November 15, 2019
It is a true pleasure to write a letter of recommendation that
supports the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of
the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as
Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). I have known RADM
Weahkee for over thirty years. We actually attended high school
together in Aztec, New Mexico. In May of 2018, he was San Juan
College's commencement speaker. I am writing this recommendation from
the perspective of someone who has spent over 20 years working as an
administrator. Therefore, I can speak with authority about his
attributes and extraordinary accomplishments.
I am tremendously impressed with RADM Weahkee's background,
knowledge, and commitment to his endeavors. He is extremely intelligent
and a highly motivated individual. He obtained his Bachelor of Science
in Health Care Management from Southern Illinois University-Carbondale.
He also received a Master's degree in Health Services Administration
and a Master of Business Administration degree from Arizona State
University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has a wealth of experience that uniquely qualifies him
to serve as the Director of the Indian Health Service. He has served at
the local, regional, and national level in multiple capacities. For
instance, he has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting
Director of the Indian Health Services for the past two and a half
years. He administers a nationwide health care delivery system that is
responsible for providing health care to approximately 2.2 million
Native American and Alaska Natives throughout the United States. Within
this role, he oversees an annual operating budget of $6 billion and a
workforce of 15,400 health care professionals. In addition, he has
experience serving as the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief
Operating Officer for Phoenix Indian Medical Center. Moreover, RADM
Weahkee has served in several senior executive level positions at the
Indian Health Service Headquarters in Rockville, Maryland. He is also a
proud veteran of the United States Air Force, where he served as a
military public health specialist.
RADM Weahkee possesses excellent leadership skills. For example,
RADM Weahkee has led the development and execution of a new five-year
strategic plan. He also established and implemented a new Office of
Quality to ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability.
RADM Weahkee is a person of character and conviction. He truly
cares about his constituents and his devoted his life to this vocation.
He has traveled extensively throughout Indian country to witness the
challenges and issues that native communities face and has strived to
address their health concerns.
RADM Weahkee is an amazing individual and has my unqualified
endorsement and recommendation.
Sincerely,
Toni Hopper Pendergrass, Ph.D., President.
______
San Juan Southern Paiute Tribe
October 30, 2019
San Juan Southern Paiute Tribe strongly supports the nomination of
Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and
ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health
Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy
Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half
years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and dedicated
to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social and
spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest
level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Carlene Yellowhair, Tribal President.
______
Sault Ste. Marie Tribe of Chippewa Indians
As the elected Chairperson of the Sault Ste. Marie Tribe of
Chippewa Indians, I am writing on behalf of my Tribe. Last week,
President Trump nominated Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee to
serve as the Director of the Indian Health Service. My Tribe urges you
to support his confirmation.
RADM Weahkee currently serves as the Principal Deputy Director and
as the Acting Director of the Indian Health Service. He is also an
Assistant Surgeon General of the United States Public Health Services
at the Department of Health and Human Services.
For years, RADM Weahkee has worked to improve the Indian Health
Service. Previously, he served as the Executive Officer for the Office
of Clinical and Preventive Services; the Director of the Management
Policy and Internal Control Staff office; and, as the Deputy Director
for Personnel Functions in the Office of Management Services.
He is a member of the Zuni Tribe and grew up as a direct user of
the Indian Health Service. This is important to my Tribe: We know he
has experience as both a user of the Indian Health Service and as an
administrator within the Indian Health Service. This background will
help him meet the needs of Indian Country.
For years, my Tribe has worked with RADM Weahkee. We support his
nomination for Director of the Indian Health Service. We ask that you
support him as well.
If you have any questions or want additional information, please do
not hesitate to contact me or the Legislative Director of the Sault
Ste. Marie Tribe of Chippewa Indians, Mike McCoy.
Respectfully Submitted,
Aaron A. Payment, Chairperson.
______
Seattle Indian Health Board
November 25, 2019
The Seattle Indian Health Board strongly supports the nomination of
Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and
ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health
Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy
Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half
years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and dedicated
to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social and
spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest
level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
The IHS is in need of bold Indigenous leadership that understands
and advocates for tribal and urban Indian healthcare needs. As a Zuni
tribal member with ample experience with the Indian health care system,
RADM Weahkee brings an Indigenous perspective to IHS administration by
contining to advocate for increasing overall funding to the IHS and
supporting Indigenous data tribal sovereignty and autonomy.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Esther Lucero, MPP, CEO;
Abigail Echo-Hawk, MA, Chief Research Officer;
Aren Sparck, MUP, Government Affairs Officer.
______
Southcentral Foundation
November 8, 2019
The Southcentral Foundation strongly supports the nomination of
Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and
ask that you support his confirmation.
Southcentral Foundation (SCF) is the Alaska Native tribal health
organization designated by Cook Inlet Region, Inc. and eleven
Federally-Recognized Tribes--the Aleut Community of St. Paul Island,
lgiugig, lliamna, Kokhanok, McGrath, Newhalen, Nikolai, Nondalton,
Pedro Bay, Telida, and Takotna--to provide healthcare services to
beneficiaries of the Indian Health Service pursuant to a compact with
the United States government under the authority of P.L. 93-638, as
amended, the Indian Self Determination and Education Assistance Act.
SCF provides services to more than 65,000 Alaska Native and
American Indian people living in the Municipality of Anchorage, the
Matanuska-Susitna Borough and 55 rural Alaskan villages. Services
provided by SCF include outpatient medical care, home health care,
dentistry, optometry, psychiatry, mental health counseling, substance
abuse treatment, residential treatment facilities for adolescents and
for women, suicide prevention and domestic violence prevention. We
employ numerous staff, all of whom work in harmony to treat patients
for the best access to quality care.
RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting
Director of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time
he has proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency
and raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of
American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Sincerely,
Katherine Gottlieb, MBA, DPS, LHD, President/CEO.
______
Southern Plains Tribal Health Board
November 27, 2019
The Southern Plains Tribal Health Board (SPTHB) is a non-profit
organization based in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The Health Board was
established in 1972 to provide a unified voice on tribal public health
needs and policy for the 44 federally recognized tribes located in
Oklahoma, Kansas, and Texas. Board membership includes representatives
from the 12 service units in the Indian Health Service (IHS) Oklahoma
City area.
On behalf of the Board, I am writing this letter of support and
recommendation to the United States Senate Committee on Indian Affairs
for RADM Michael Weahkee for the Indian Health Service (IHS) Director.
RADM Weahkee has been serving as Acting Director and Principal
Deputy Director for IHS since June 2017. Before that time, RADM Weahkee
has been employed in various capacities within the IHS system since
December 2007. Through his tenure, RADM Weahkee has exhibited exemplary
work performance with tribes and tribal communities, he continues to
display unique ability, aptitude, and character in his actions and
understanding of the complex issues surrounding Native American health
and wellness. I believe RADM Weahkee will continue to deliver positive
impact to the Indian Health Service roles and responsibilities.
In the changing landscape of healthcare RADM Weahkee has the vision
to direct the Indian Health Service, under the Department of Health and
Human Services with improved leadership throughout Indian Country, by
signaling a united voice to provide increased accountability, defend
quality delivery of healthcare, and navigate standards of care in a
thoughtful and productive way with tribal nations.
RADM Weahkee is the collaborator, leader, listener, and visionary
to deliver culturally appropriate care as expected. SPTHB believes
Tribal sovereignty and self-determination should be respected and
innovative approaches should be implemented. Therefore, we urge this
administration to confirm this nomination, as RADM Weahkee is widely
viewed as committed to dialogue, seeking to implement solutions to the
challenges of health-care access, to bring safe and modern facilities
to serve Indian Country, and deliver adequate provider services with
culturally diverse competencies.
Respectfully,
Mrs. Marty Wafford, Chair of the Board.
______
Saint Louis University School of Medicine
December 4, 2019
I am currently the Director of Interprofessional Education,
Practice, and Research at Saint Louis University School of Medicine.
Prior to joining SLU, starting in 2001, I was the Director of Health
Services for United American Indian Involvement, Inc. an Urban Indian
Health Program in Los Angeles, CA. In that capacity, it was my honor to
serve on the Urban Programs National Diabetes Workgroup, support the
previous IHS Director's response to 0MB inquiry, and secure 5-year
federal funding in the initial round of Diabetes Prevention Program
Community-Based Demonstration Projects. My personal and professional
relationship with RADM Weahkee and my ongoing support for Indian Health
Programs, is the basis of this letter.
I strongly support the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D.
Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support his
confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting
Director of the IHS for the past two and a half years, where he has
consistently demonstrated his capability and dedication to improving
the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual
health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level. His
strength of character, collaborative and inclusive practices, and his
experience in hospital and healthcare administration are fully
expressed in his leadership and behaviors.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona. RADM Weahkee has served in
a variety of different roles within the Indian Health system of care,
including in both the federal and tribal setting. He has served in the
field and at all levels of leadership for IHS, demonstrating his
commitment to representing front-line and community voice while
developing policies and systems to enable and sustain better care and
outcomes.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very
challenging time for Native communities across the country, overseeing
the development and implementation of a new five-year strategic plan
for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has pressed the Agency
forward to address long-standing and unimplemented, external oversight
recommendations from the Government Accountability Office and the HHS
Office of Inspector General. He established and implemented a new
Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to ensure appropriate
management oversight and accountability by the Area Offices and federal
service unit hospitals and health centers. In partnership with the
Administration for Native Americans Commissioner, RADM Weahkee
revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native American
Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the needs and
interests of Indian country.
I fully support the recommendation of RADM Weahkee as Director of
IHS and I am confident he will continue his leadership and tremendous
dedicated efforts in service to lndian Country, the DHHS, and the
Nation to move the Agency forward. Thank you for your consideration of
this endorsement.
Respectfully,
David Pole, Ph.D, MPH.
______
The Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation
November 26, 2019
On behalf of the Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation
(``Colville Tribes''), please consider this letter of support for the
nomination of RADM Michael D. Weahkee to be the Director of the Indian
Health Service (IHS). Mr. Weahkee's tenure in the IHS serving in
various capacities, and his current role as Principal Deputy Director
of the IHS, demonstrate that he is well qualified for this important
position.
Mr. Weahkee is a member of the Pueblo of Zuni and grew up as a
direct user of IHS services. As a direct service tribe, the Colville
Tribes appreciates the importance of the Federal Government's
responsibility to provide quality health care services to our citizens.
We believe that Mr. Weahkee's prior service managing the largest
federally-operated IHS hospital will ensure that the needs of direct
service tribes are considered in IHS decision-making.
In July of this year, Mr. Weahkee visited the Colville Reservation
community of Keller to meet with our tribal leadership and staff
regarding the Colville Tribes' health care needs. Before and since that
visit, Mr. Weahkee has been responsive to our requests for information
and technical assistance on various issues, including the Joint Venture
Construction Program.
We respectfully urge the Committee to swiftly approve Mr. Weahkee's
nomination and advance it to the full U.S. Senate. If you have any
questions, please feel free to contact me.
Sincerely,
Rodney Cawston, CHAIRMAN.
______
The NATIVE Project
December 3, 2019
The NATIVE Project, a non-profit Urban Indian Clinic in Spokane,
WA, strongly supports the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D.
Weahkee as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United
States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee, a
member of the Zuni Indian Tribe, has served as the Principal Deputy
Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half
years. In that time he has proven that he is capable and dedicated to
improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social and
spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest
level.
RADM Weahkee, is a military veteran and is extremely well educated.
He has served in a variety of different roles within the Indian Health
system of care, in both the federal and tribal settings. He has served
in the field, at the service unit and regional office level, as well as
at IHS headquarters at the national level. RADM Weahkee has
successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying time, overseeing
the development and implementation of a new five year strategic plan
for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has pressed the Agency
forward to address long-standing and unimplemented, external oversight
recommendations from the Government Accountability Office and the HHS
Office of Inspector General. He established and implemented a new
Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to ensure appropriate
management oversight and accountability by the Area Offices and federal
service unit hospitals and health centers. In partnership with the
Administration for Native Americans Commissioner, RADM Weahkee
revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native American
Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the needs and
interests of Indian country.
I have personally experienced Acting Director RADM Weahkee's
example of leadership when he and his administrative team visited our
Clinic here in Spokane in June 2019. After operating an Urban Indian
Health Clinic for over 20 years, RADM Weahkee is the first IHS Director
to ever visit our clinic. Staff were excited, impressed and
appreciative that the accomplishments and concerns of the urban Indian
community were acknowledged by a national leader of his caliber. RADM
Weahkee has traveled extensively throughout Indian country to see and
hear firsthand the challenges and issues that native communities face
in addressing the various health concerns that they are confronted
with. He is a savvy communicator and has done a great job connecting
the Indian Health Service providers and patients together is a 21st
century medium. We have appreciated his effective leadership! Thank you
for your strong consideration of this endorsement. Call me if you have
questions.
Respectfully,
Toni Lodge, CEO
______
Tribal Emergency Medicine
December 3, 2019
Tribal Emergency Medicine unequivocally supports the nomination of
Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and
asks that you support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health
Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy
Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half
years. During this time, he has led Indian Health Service through some
very challenging times.
For example, my organization, Tribal EM, provides the nurse, doctor
and advance practice providers at the Pine Ridge and Rosebud Service
Units. During our tenure, RADM Weahkee has made numerous visits to the
Great Plains and has been instrumental in improving the delivery of
care at these facilities. The changes that he championed have been life
changing for members of the tribes and will have a multi-generational
impact.
For example, both the quality and the delivery of care in these
service units has improved dramatically. Both have recently gone
through their Joint Commission and CMS surveys and both service units
did very well. Their success was due, in no small measure to RADM
Weahkee's leadership, vision and direction.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. As I mentioned, he has traveled
extensively throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the
challenges and issues that native communities face in addressing the
various health concerns that they are confronted with. I support RADM
Weahkee's nomination and give him my highest recommendation. For those
of us committed to improving the delivery and quality of care in Indian
Country, RADM Weahkee has been a huge blessing!
Respectfully,
John Shufeldt, MD, JD, MBA, FACEP, CEO
______
Tule River Indian Tribe of California
November 12, 2019
The Tule River Tribal Council of the Tule River Indian Tribe of
California strongly supports the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM)
Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support
his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM
Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director
of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time he has
proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency and
raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of American
Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Neil Peyron, Chairman.
______
Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians
November 20, 2019
The Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Health Board strongly supports
the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni
Indian Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as Director of
the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the
Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past
two and a half years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable
and dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Jamle Azure, Tribal Chairman;
Nathan Davis, District Tribal Councilman;
Patrlck J. Marcellais, Health Board Chairperson.
______
Tucson Indian Center
December 2, 2019
The Tucson Indian Center strongly supports the nomination of Rear
Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask
that you support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health
Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy
Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half
years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and dedicated
to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social and
spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest
level.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Jacob Bernal, Executive Director.
______
United American Indian Involvement, Inc.
November 22, 2019
The United American Indian Involvement, Inc. (UAII) is a 501 c3
nonprofit Urban Indian Health Organization that has been providing
Health and Human Services to the American Indian/Alaska Native
community that resides in the urban Los Angeles area since 1974. UAII
strongly supports the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D.
Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support his
confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM
Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director
of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time he has
proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency and
raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of American
Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Eugene Martinez, MBA, Interim CEO/COO.
______
USET SPF Resolution No. 2020 SPF:011
support for the confirmation of rear admiral michael d. weahkee as
director of the indian health service
WHEREAS, United South and Eastern Tribes Sovereignty Protection
Fund (USET SPF) is an intertribal organization comprised of thirty (30)
federally recognized Tribal Nations; and
WHEREAS, the actions taken by the USET SPF Board of Directors
officially represent the intentions of each member Tribal Nation, as
the Board of Directors comprises delegates from the member Tribal
Nations' leadership; and
WHEREAS, the Indian Health Service (IHS) is obligated to provide
healthcare services to American Indians and Alaska Natives (AI/ANs) in
fulfillment of the federal government's trust responsibility; and
WHEREAS, throughout his career, Rear Admiral Michael D. Weahkee, a
citizen of the Pueblo of Zuni, has been a commendable advocate for AI/
ANs and ensuring our people have access to quality healthcare; and
WHEREAS, beginning in June 2017, Rear Admiral Weahkee served as
Acting IHS Director for a year before assuming his current role as IHS
Principal Deputy Director; and
WHEREAS, on October 22, 2019, Rear Adm. Weahkee was formally
nominated by President Donald J. Trump to be permanent IHS Director;
and
WHEREAS, IHS has lacked permanent leadership since 2015; and
WHEREAS, in December 2010, the United States recognized the rights
of its First Peoples through its support of the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP), whose
provisions and principles support and promote the purposes of this
resolution; therefore, be it
RESOLVED the USET SPF Board of Directors supports the appointment
of Rear Admiral Michael D. Weahkee as permanent Director of the Indian
Health Service; and be if further
RESOLVED the USET SPF Board of Directors requests expeditious
Senate confirmation of Rear Admiral Michael D. Weahkee as permanent
Director of the Indian Health Service.
CERTIFICATION
This resolution was duly passed at the USET SPF Annual Meeting held
on the Sovereign Territory of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians
at which a quorum was present on November 7, 2019.
Chief Kirk E. Francis, Sr., President;
Chief Lynn Malerba, Secretary.
______
Urban Inter-Tribal Center of Texas
November 13, 2019
The Urban Inter-Tribal Center of Texas would like to offer our
support for the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of
the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as
Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served
as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the
past two and a half years, and in that time he has proven that he is
capable and dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical,
mental, social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska
Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Robert Brady Malone MD, MBA, CEO.
______
Veronica A. Moody, MS gt, USAF (Retired)
November 20, 2019
I, Veronica A. Moody strongly support the nomination of Rear
Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask
that you support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health
Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy
Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half
years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and dedicated
to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social and
spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest
level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
I had the pleasure of serving with Michael when we were both
stationed at Offutt, Air Force Base in Nebraska. Michael was always
very knowledgeable and a productive member of our team. As a young
airman, he was well respected as a diligent and thorough food and
public facility inspector was known to have impressive ideas and self-
driven to take on program tasks with impressive results.
I have had the pleasure of following his career after he separated
from the Air Force and had no doubts that he would succeed in any path
he chose to follow. I am proud to have served with him and I believe
his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service is a natural
fit and he will serve in a spectacular capacity in this role. Thank you
for your strong consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Veronica A. Moody, MS gt, USAF (Retired).
______
Walker River Paiute Tribe
November 25, 2019
The Walker River Paiute Tribe strongly supports the nomination of
Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and
ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health
Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy
Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half
years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and dedicated
to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social and
spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest
level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Amber Torres, Chairman.
______
Ilda Aharonian
December 5, 2019
I, Ilda Aharonian, strongly support the nomination of Rear Admiral
(RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you
support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS)
in the United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting
Director of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time
he has proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency
and raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of
American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Ilda Aharonian, Ph.D.
______
AI/AN Health Partners
December 5, 2019
The AI/AN Health Partners, a coalition of health organizations
dedicated to improving health care for American Indians and Alaska
Natives (AI/ANs), strongly supports the nomination of Rear Admiral
(RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe.
RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting
Director of the IHS since 2017, and in that he has proven he is capable
and dedicated to improving the Service and raising the physical,
mental, social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska
Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his Bachelor
of Science in health care management from Southern Illinois University-
Carbondale, and both a Masters of Health Services Administration and
Masters of Business Administration degree from Arizona State University
in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
IHS in both the federal and tribal settings. He has served in the
field, at the service unit and regional office level, as well as at IHS
headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Service forward in a very
trying time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new
five-year strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He
has pressed the IHS to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
He has traveled extensively throughout Indian country to see and
hear firsthand the challenges and issues that native communities face
in addressing the various health concerns that confront them. As a
result, RADM Weahkee has moved the IHS forward in a positive manner
during a short period of time.
We strongly urge the Committee to confirm RADM Weahkee as Director
of the Indian Health Service (IHS).
Thank you for considering our request,
American Association of Colleges of Nursing
American Association of Colleges of Pharmacy
American Optometric Association
Association of American Indian Physicians
Commissioned Officers Association of the U.S. Public Health
Service, Inc
______
Paskenta Band of Nomlaki Indians
November 21, 2019
The Paskenta Band of Nomlaki Indians strongly supports the
nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian
Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the
Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal
Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a
half years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and
dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Andrew Alejandre, Tribal Chairman.
______
Southwest Oklahoma lntertribal Health Board
December 5, 2019
The Southwest Oklahoma Intertribal Health Board passed the attached
resolution supporting the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D.
Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and asking that you support his
confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). I am
available if you or your staff have any questions or if follow up is
needed, and appreciate your consideration for this very important
position for American Indians that needs a permanent director.
resolution fy2020-004
WHEREAS, the Southwest Oklahoma lntertribal Health Board was
organized by constitution and by-laws and is comprised of seven (7)
tribes in southwest Oklahoma that include the following tribes: Apache,
Caddo, Comanche, Delaware, Fort Sill Apache, Kiowa and Wichita; AND
WHEREAS, the Southwest Oklahoma lntertribal Health Board was
established to provide an organized structure and to support in the
development of existing and additional services being provided by the
Lawton Service Unit; to cooperate with and seek the assistance of
various federal and state agencies and other sources in furthering
mutual programs designed to accomplish these purposes; to continuously
promote the improvement of health services for the membership of tribes
in this organization; and to enter into Memorandum of Agreement and
contracts with Indian Health Service and other federal and state
agencies; AND
WHEREAS, the Lawton Service Unit encompasses ten counties in the
southwestern corner of Oklahoma, where 25,000 members of the Caddo,
Comanche, Delaware, Fort Sill Apache, Kiowa, Apache, and Wichita tribes
are concentrated; AND
WHEREAS, I.H.S. has lacked permanent leadership since 2015 and the
United States has a unique and special relationship with AI/ANs and
I.H.S. is obligated to provide health care services to Al/AN in
fulfillment of the federal government's trust; AND
WHEREAS, RADM Michael D. Weahkee, a citizen of the Pueblo of Zuni,
has been nominated by President Trump on October 22, 2019, to be the
permanent I.H.S. Director; AND
WHEREAS, throughout his career, RADM Weahkee has been a commendable
advocate for Al/Ans and ensuring our people have access to quality
healthcare. RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director
and Acting Director ofthe IHS for the past two and a half years, and in
that time, he has proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving
the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual
health of American Indians and Ala ska Natives to the highest level;
AND
WHEREAS, RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air force
and American Indians and Alaska Natives service in the armed forces has
been at a much higher rate than any other ethnicity, and providing the
highest quality health care for our Al/AN veterans is a priority; AND
WHEREAS, in December of 2010, the United States recognized the
rights of its first Peoples through its support of the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP), whose
provisions and principles support and promote the purposes of this
resolution; AND
WHEREAS, although the trust relationship requires the federal
government to provide for the health and welfare of Tribal nations, the
Indian Health Service remains chronically underfunded and AI/ANs suffer
from among the lowest health status nationally; AND
WHEREAS, RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive
manner, and in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled
extensively throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the
challenges and issues that native communities face in addressing the
various health concerns that they are confronted with; AND
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that the tribal leadership of the
Southwest Oklahoma lntertribal Health Board hereby supports the
appointment of RADM Michael D. Weahkee as permanent Director of the
Indian Health Service and request expeditious Senate confirmation as
permanent Director of the Indian Health Service.
CERTIFICATION
The foregoing resolution was adopted by the Southwest Oklahoma
lntertribal Health Board on December 5, 2019, by a vote of 4 for, 0
against and 1 abstaining, a quorum being present.
Lynda Delaune, Secretary
Terri Parton, Chair.
______
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS
December 4, 2019
I strongly support the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D.
Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe and ask that you support his
confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM
Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director
of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and he has proven that he
is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the
physical, mental, social and spiritual health of American Indians and
Alaska Natives to the highest level.
I have known RADM Weahkee for approximately 17 years as a
professional colleague in the Indian healthcare system. RADM Weahkee's
service to American Indian and Alaska Native people is remarkable. He
has served in a variety of roles in the Indian healthcare system
including urban Indian health programs, tribal health programs and the
IHS Federal system. I had the opportunity to work with RADM Weahkee at
the IHS Headquarters and I am confident he has the leadership qualities
and dedication to lead the Agency.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency as Principle Deputy
Director, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five-
year strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee is a Veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his Bachelor
of Science in Health Care Management from Southern Illinois University-
Carbondale, and both a Master of Health Services Administration and
Master of Business Administration from Arizona State University in
Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
David Clay Ward, MS, Office of Tribal Government Relations
Wichita and Affiliated Tribes
December 5, 2019
The Wichita and Affiliated Tribes strongly supports the nomination
of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and
ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health
Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy
Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half
years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and dedicated
to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social and
spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest
level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with.
On a personal note, as a tribal leader who has worked directly with
Admiral Weahkee on the Secretary's Tribal Advisory Committee (STAC),
the Direct Service Tribes Advisory Committee (DST AC) and in various
capacities over the last few years, as a tribal leader I am in support
of his nomination. I offer the following comments in regards to support
of his nomination:
Admiral Weahkee knows the Indian Health Service system.
An outsider to IHS would have to learn the Indian Health
Service system and would probably be less responsive to
resolving issues.
Admiral Weahkee provides stability.
Admiral Weahkee knows the Tribes and the needs of both the
Self-Governance and Direct Service Tribes.
Admiral Weahkee makes himself available to the Tribes.
While he can't always accommodate all of our requests,
Admiral Weahkee is responsive.
Finally, I would also hope that being appointed as the
director that he would be able to have a stronger voice in
working for the needs of our people like on the issues of the
need for advanced appropriations. Sometimes once someone moves
from acting to the actual director or position, they take more
ownership to the position and its success. *The resolution
attached has been retained in the Committee files.*
Thank you for your strong consideration of this endorsement.
Sincerely,
Terri Parton, President.
______
Association of American Indian Physicians (AAIP)
November 20, 2019
The Association of American Indian Physicians (AAIP) strongly
supports the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of
the Zuni Tribe for the office of Director of the Indian Health Service.
Our Executive Board and Policy and Legislation Committee recently
interviewed RADM Weahkee regarding his qualifications for the position
and we were extremely pleased that he met our qualifications.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force where he
served as a public health specialist. He obtained his Bachelor of
Science in health care management from Southern Illinois University-
Carbondale and both a Master of health services administration and
Master of business administration from the Arizona State University in
Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served as Principal Deputy Director and Acting
Director of the IHS since 2017. He has also served in the field at the
service unit and regional office level as well as at IHS headquarters
at the national level. Because of his many years of service in IHS, he
has an intimate knowledge of the health status of American Indians and
Alaska Natives throughout Indian country in the United States. He has
proven that he is capable and dedicated to raising the health status of
American Indians/Alaska Natives to the highest level. He also
demonstrated an excellent knowledge of the complex health problems of
American Indians/Alaska Natives as well as the IHS administrative
structures caring for Indian people throughout the United States.
RADM Weahkee has been overseeing the implementation of a new five
year strategic plan for the IHS. It has been over a decade since the
IHS has had a strategic plan. He has also addressed the unimplemented
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He has also implemented
a new Office of Quality at the IHS headquarters level to ensure
appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area Offices
and federal service unit hospitals and health centers.
He has traveled extensively throughout Indian country and both seen
and listened to the challenges and issues that Indian communities face
in addressing the health concerns that Indian communities deal with.
AAIP feels that RADM Weahkee has moved the IHS in a positive manner in
a short period of time. The Association of American Indian Physicians
strongly urges the Committee on Indian Affairs to confirm RADM Weahkee
as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS).
Thank you for your time and consideration in this manner on behalf
of AAIP members and we hope you consider our request.
Respectfully Yours,
Walter Hollow M.D., President/Chairman of the Board
______
Burrell College of Osteopathic Medicine
November 20, 2019
The Burrell College of Osteopathic Medicine strongly supports the
nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian
Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the
Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal
Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a
half years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and
dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
John L. Hummer, President.
______
The Chippewa Cree Tribe of the Rocky Boy's Reservation
November 18, 2019
The Chippewa Cree Business Committee strongly supports the
nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian
Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the
Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal
Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a
half years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and
dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Harlan Baker, Chairman.
______
Commissioned Officers Association, U.S. Public Health
Service
December 4, 2019
It is my pleasure to support the nomination of RADM Michael D.
Weahkee to become Director of the Indian Health Service. In my capacity
as Executive Director of the non-profit, non-partisan organization that
represents the uniformed officers of the US Public Health Service, I
have gotten to know RADM Weahkee and have worked with him on Native
American healthcare issues for the past five years, dating back to when
he was at the Phoenix (AZ) Indian Medical Center, the largest hospital
in the Indian Health Service.
I know RADM Weahkee to be a capable and qualified administrator who
cares deeply about the state of healthcare for our country's Indian
population. He has been serving for the past two-plus years as
Principal Deputy Director of the Indian Health Service and has done a
superb job of running the agency as Acting Director.
RADM Weahkee is an enrolled member of the Zuni Indian Tribe and has
been assigned to the Indian Health Service as a PHS officer since
entering the US Public Health Service in 1999 as a Lieutenant Junior
Grade. He has always served in positions that called for higher-ranking
officers, and his advancement to the rank of Rear Admiral in the USPHS
is testimony to his extremely capable performance of duty.
RADM Weahkee is passionate about the work of the Indian Health
Service and would be in a better position to realize his vision of
improved delivery of healthcare services to Native Americans if he were
confirmed as Director of the Indian Health Service. I urge that he be
given a favorable recommendation by your committee and that his
nomination be forwarded to the full Senate for consideration.
Respectfully,
Col. James T. Currie, USA (ret.), Executive Director.
______
Hays Health Informatics Consulting, LLC
November 21, 2019
I am writing to add my name to what I believe will be a chorus of
others supporting the nomination of RADM Michael Weahkee to be
confirmed as the Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS). I am
pleased to support RADM Weahkee to fulfill this critical
responsibility.
I am a family physician and retired Commissioned Officer of the
United States Public Health Service (USPHS). I served my entire USPHS
career in the IHS from 1987 to 2014, in multiple locations and roles,
including three years as the acting Director of the IHS Office of
Information Technology (OIT) at IHS Headquarters in Rockville MD. In
that role I reported directly to the Office of the IHS Director, and I
am deeply familiar with the challenges and complexities faced by that
person. I am also familiar with the risks and consequences of not
having the right person in that role.
I worked for IHS OIT from 2002 to 2014, and my path crossed with
RADM Weahkee's at multiple points over those years. In all the years
I've known Michael I've found him to be an officer of innate integrity,
thoughtful, respectful, forward-thinking, and deeply committed to the
mission of IHS. Since my retirement in 2014 I have remained in close
contact with my former colleagues, and I follow with great interest the
events at the agency.
I was pleased to see RADM Weahkee elevated to the Acting Director
and subsequently Principal Deputy Director role a couple of years ago.
It has been gratifying (but not surprising) to observe how he and his
leadership team have worked to address some very serious issues, and
especially the progress he has made to restore trust and confidence on
the part of the Tribes as well as federal staff nationwide. Having him
begin a full term as IHS Director will instill an added sense of
stability and further empower IHS to continue in a positive direction.
As a physician I would like to emphasize that I have no qualms
whatsoever about not selecting a doctor to be the IHS Director. This
role is about leadership, compassion, respect, and above all,
management, which includes a willingness to consult with and learn from
the experts with which he has surrounded himself. Michael has plenty of
outstanding clinicians at his disposal who will ensure that he has the
expert healthcare-specific information he needs as Director.
I urge you and your colleagues of both parties on the Senate
Committee on Indian Affairs to act expeditiously and positively on this
nomination. I thank you for the privilege of expressing my support.
Cordially,
G. Howard Hays, Jr, ME, MD, MSPH, CAPT (ret), USPHS,
Founder/Principal Consultant
______
Glinda Weddle
October 31, 2019
I strongly support the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D.
Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you support his
confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM
Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting Director
of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time he has
proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency and
raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of American
Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Glinda Weddle.
______
The Healing Lodge of the Seven Nations
November 18, 2019
The Healing Lodge of the Seven Nations, a 93-638 Tribal entity, was
established in 1988 to operate a nationally focused tribal residential
45 bed ASAM 3.5 treatment facility providing chronic substance abuse
and addiction, and co-occurring disorder intense clinical care services
for Tribal youth (ages 13 through 17).
The Healing Lodge's Board of Directors comprised of Tribal Council
leaders from the Confederated Tribes of Colville Reservation, Coeur
d'Alene Tribe, Confederated Tribes of Umatilla Indian Reservation,
Kalispel Tribe of Indians, Spokane Tribe of Indians, the Nez Perce
Tribe and Kootenai Tribe of Idaho who dedicate their time to build a
successful and culturally focused evidence based program. A 3 year
study conducted by Harvard Cambridge Institute found 80 percent of the
graduated youth maintained recovery over a three year period utilizing
evidenced based and cultural models.
In June 2019, Rear Admiral Michael D. Weahkee visited the Healing
Lodge to personally learn about the clinical and support services
provided to the youth, the non-profit tribal programs unmet needs, and
future program and facility expansion projects. He was very interested
in the facility especially, the unmet needs resulting from the
escalated utilization of Opioid use in the tribal adolescent
population. It was refreshing to have someone of his stature visit the
treatment center and to truly have an interest in the future of the
Tribes, and their youth!
The Healing Lodge of the Seven Nations which covers Washington,
Oregon and Idaho strongly support the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM)
Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and asks that you support
his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the
United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). RADM
Weahkee has served as the P1incipal Deputy Director and Acting Director
of IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time he has
proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency and
raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of American
Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his Bachelor
of Science in Health Care Management from Southern Illinois University-
Carbondale, and both a Master of Health Services Administration and
Master of Business Administration degrees from Arizona State University
in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the HHS Indian Health Services forward in a
positive manner, and in a relatively sho1i amount of time. He has
traveled extensively throughout Indian country to see and hear
firsthand the challenges and issues that native communities face in
addressing the various health concerns that they are confronted with.
In conclusion, I respectfully thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement. If you have any questions or require
any additional information, please do not hesitate to call upon me at
any time.
Respectfully,
Rebecca Crocker Executive Director.
______
Hopi Tribe of Northeastern Arizona
November 4, 2019
The Hopi Tribe of Northeastern Arizona strongly supports the
nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian
Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the
Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal
Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a
half years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and
dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Timothy L. Nuvangyaoma, Chairman.
______
Hualapai Tribe
October 31, 2019
The Hualapai Tribe strongly supports the nomination of Rear Admiral
(RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask that you
support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS)
in the United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy Director and Acting
Director of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and in that time
he has proven that he is capable and dedicated to improving the Agency
and raising the physical, mental, social and spiritual health of
American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Philbert Watahomigie, Sr., Vice Chairman.
______
Navajo Nation
November 2, 2019
On behalf of the Navajo Nation, we strongly support the nomination
of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee, of the Pueblo of Zuni, and
ask your support of his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health
Service (IHS) under the United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee served as the Principal Deputy Director
and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half years, and
in the past year he has always provided his time to meet with us to
discuss critical issues for our Nation and moved our issues forward
with care to ensure all issues were addressed to the satisfaction of
all involved.
RADM Weahkee is a decorated public servant and veteran of the
United States Air Force. He is the recipient of four IHS National
Director's Awards, three outstanding service medal awards, a
Presidential Unit Citation, and is recognized for other notable career
and military service achievements. He obtained his bachelor of science
in healthcare management degree from Southern Illinois University-
Carbondale, and a master of health services administration and master
of business administration degree from Arizona State University in
Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee's career assignments over the last 20 years are with
IHS. He has aimed at improving the delivery of healthcare services in
Indian Country; consistently hitting the mark of improved service
delivery.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care at the tribal and Federal levels. This
experience is valuable in knowing the health care system needs of
Native Americans. No other qualified Native American has this
experience and this makes RADM Weahkee exceptionally fit for this
important role. We fully support RADM Weahkee's nomination and urge
confirmation as the Director of the Indian Health Service.
Sincerely,
Jonathan Nez, President;
Myron Lizer, Vice-President.
______
Pokagon Band of Potawatomi Indians
November 21, 2019
The Pokagon Band of Potawatomi Indians strongly supports the
nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian
Tribe, and ask that you support his confirmation as Director of the
Indian Health Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal
Deputy Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a
half years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and
dedicated to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with. Thank you for your strong
consideration of this endorsement.
Respectfully,
Matthew Wesaw, Chairman.
______
Pueblo of Sandia
November 14, 2019
The Pueblo of Sandia strongly supports the nomination of Rear
Admiral (RADM) Michael D. Weahkee of the Zuni Indian Tribe, and ask
that you support his confirmation as Director of the Indian Health
Service (IHS) in the United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS). RADM Weahkee has served as the Principal Deputy
Director and Acting Director of the IHS for the past two and a half
years, and in that time he has proven that he is capable and dedicated
to improving the Agency and raising the physical, mental, social and
spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest
level.
RADM Weahkee is a veteran of the United States Air Force, where he
served as a military public health specialist. He obtained his bachelor
of science in health care management degree from Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, and both a master of health services
administration and master of business administration degree from
Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona.
RADM Weahkee has served in a variety of different roles within the
Indian Health system of care, including in both the federal and tribal
setting. He has served in the field, at the service unit and regional
office level, as well as at IHS headquarters at the national level.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led the Agency forward in a very trying
time, overseeing the development and implementation of a new five year
strategic plan for the Agency, the first in over a decade. He has
pressed the Agency forward to address long-standing and unimplemented,
external oversight recommendations from the Government Accountability
Office and the HHS Office of Inspector General. He established and
implemented a new Office of Quality at the IHS Headquarters level, to
ensure appropriate management oversight and accountability by the Area
Offices and federal service unit hospitals and health centers. In
partnership with the Administration for Native Americans Commissioner,
RADM Weahkee revitalized the HHS Intradepartmental Council on Native
American Affairs, to provide a forum internally at HHS to discuss the
needs and interests of Indian country.
RADM Weahkee has moved the Agency forward in a positive manner, and
in a relatively short amount of time. He has traveled extensively
throughout Indian country to see and hear firsthand the challenges and
issues that native communities face in addressing the various health
concerns that they are confronted with.
The following is a list of issues that the Pueblo's Health Center
continues to have with IHS as most relates to Information Technology
(IT):
Tech Support--If and when Health Center needs immediate
assistance with IT related items, Health Center reaches out to
IT with IHS but there tends to be delays and/or direction to
consult with our contracted CAC
Tribal 638 Clinic do not have local domain rights to manage
user accounts and/or computer accounts. Requests are sent but
once again response times are lengthy and/or no response at
all.
For any support, including IT, Federal sites take priority
followed by Urban and then finally Tribal. This of course and
once again, delays such requests and at times our Health Center
gets minimal and/or no support.
Health Center is told they have shares (Tiers I/II/III) left
with IHS but no full details are given to how much and what
those shares consists and/or cover.
Thank you for your strong consideration of this endorsement.
Sincerely,
Isaac Lujan, Governor.
______
Quapaw Nation
November 20, 2019
On behalf of the Quapaw Nation, I am writing to express strong
support for Rear Admiral Michael D. Weahkee to be the next Director of
the Indian Health Service (IHS) in the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services.
Rear Admiral Weahkee is a member of the Zuni Indian Tribe and a
veteran of the United States Air Force. He currently serves as
Principal Deputy Director of the IHS and has previously served in
various capacities in the IHS, including as Executive Officer for the
Office of Clinical and Preventive Services; Director of the Management
Policy and Internal Control Staff office; and as Deputy Director for
Personnel Functions in the Office of Management Services.
As you know all too well, the IHS is a troubled agency and is
struggling to provide adequate care and service to the 2.2 million
American Indians and Alaska Natives it serves. In short, the IHS is in
dire need of reform and strong leadership and Rear Admiral Weahkhee is
the right man at the right moment.
For those reasons, the Quapaw Nation is pleased to support the
nomination of Rear Admiral Weahkee to be the next Director of the IHS,
and urges swift approval of his nomination by the Senate Committee on
Indian Affairs and the full Senate.
Thank you for your consideration of my request.
Sincerely,
John L. Berrey, Chairman.
______
National Indian Health Board
December 6, 2019
On behalf of the National Indian Health Board (NIHB), I write today
in strong support of the nomination of Rear Admiral (RADM) Michael D.
Weahkee to serve as the Director of the Indian Health Service (IHS). In
his current capacity as Principal Deputy Director, RADM Weahkee has
demonstrated solid and capable leadership, determination, and
commitment to honoring the federal Trust responsibility for health and
towards raising the health status of AI/AN Peoples to the highest
level. NIHB is confident that he will demonstrate similar resolve and
fortitude as Director, and will continue to strengthen the government-
to-government relationship between IHS and Tribal Nations.
Established in 1972, NIHB is a national, inter-Tribal organization
that advocates on behalf of all federally-recognized Tribal governments
for the fulfillment of federal Trust and Treaty obligations to deliver
health care and public health services to all AI/AN Tribes and Peoples.
NIHB is governed by a Board of Directors consisting of elected or duly
appointed Tribal representatives from all twelve IHS Areas. In our
capacity as the only national Tribal organization dedicated exclusively
to addressing Tribal health care and public health priorities, NIHB has
had extensive opportunity to work closely with RADM Weahkee and gauge
his qualifications for IHS Director.
RADM Weahkee has successfully led IHS during highly turbulent and
trying periods. For instance, during the most recent 35-day federal
government shutdown--the longest in U.S. history--RADM Weahkee
maintained open communication channels with Tribal governments and
organizations providing timely updates, documenting Tribal challenges
and concerns, and extending available resources to mitigate the
shutdown's impact on AI/AN communities. In this same vein, RADM Weahkee
has traveled extensively throughout Indian Country to meet one-on-one
with Tribal leaders and learn first-hand about the unique obstacles
Tribes face in addressing health disparities to help inform IHS's
strategic priorities. Recently, RADM Weahkee announced that IHS has
made significant progress in securing an exceptional apportionment from
the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to help alleviate the adverse
impacts of continuing resolutions (CR) on the agency's ability to meet
its fiscal obligations to Tribal governments.
In addition, he has proven to be thoughtful and collaborative in
his leadership approach by establishing closer partnerships with other
federal agencies to better leverage resources for Tribes and break down
federal silos. For instance, RADM Weahkee joined with the Commissioner
of the Administration for Native Americans, Jeannie Hovland, to revamp
the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Interdepartmental
Council on Native American Affairs so that HHS agencies are working
more in tandem to address Tribal health priorities.
Further, he has taken important strides to fortify IHS's
relationship with its multiple Tribal advisory committees (TACs), such
as by personally attending TAC convenings to build stronger Tribal
connections, and by ensuring IHS is providing meaningful and timely
responses to TAC recommendations. Similarly, under his leadership, the
quality of IHS-led consultation and listening sessions have improved,
as RADM Weahkee has displayed a great willingness to integrate Tribal
feedback and priorities into IHS's policy development.
Importantly, RADM Weahkee has prioritized addressing many of IHS's
long-standing and destabilizing quality of care issues. Under his
leadership, IHS has acted on recommendations from the Office of
Inspector General and the Government Accountability Office to establish
an Office of Quality within IHS Headquarters to improve oversight and
accountability of IHS Area Offices and facilities. In addition, he
effectively shepherded the development and implementation of a new
five-year strategic plan for the agency--the first in over a decade--
and is actively partnering with Tribes to update the agency's Tribal
consultation policy.
Overall, RADM Weahkee has proven to be an adept and inclusive
leader who has earned the trust and confidence of Tribal Nations. For
these reasons, NIHB strongly supports his confirmation as the next
Director of IHS.
Yours in Health,
Victoria Kitcheyan, Chairperson.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Tom Udall to
Rear Admiral Michael D. Weahkee
Ethics
Question 1. An ethics agreement dated October 5, 2017 revealed you
have oversight authority over two family members--your wife, Dr. Rose
Weahkee, and your brother, Mr. Tim Weahkee. In this agreement, you
agreed to recuse yourself from situations where either family member is
a party and any personnel or financial decisions involving them.
However, your nomination ethics agreement letter signed October 31,
2019, makes no mention of this potential conflict of interest or your
continued recusal from matters related to your wife and brother. If
confirmed, will you continue to recuse yourself from matters relating
to your wife and brother as outlined in your October 5, 2017 recusal?
Answer. Yes, if confirmed I will continue to recuse myself from
matters related to my wife and brother as outlined in my October 5,
2017 recusal.
Question 1a. Do IHS employees know about your recusal and how to
report potential violations?
Answer. A select subset of the 15,400 Indian Health Service (IHS)
employees are aware of my recusal, including all members of IHS senior
staff, our administrative support team, the human resources and program
integrity and ethics staff, and the supervisors of both my spouse and
my brother. The instructions for how to route items of potential
conflict are included within the recusal (see Attachment A) and
potential violations would be reportable to the Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS) Secretary and Office of Inspector General.
Question 1b. Have you informed Tribes and urban Indian
organizations about your recusal and who they should contact with
questions regarding the scope of the recusal or with potential
concerns? And, if not and if confirmed, will you commit to doing so?
Answer. Tribes and Urban Indian Organizations have not been
provided with a copy of the recusal as the issues related to the
recusal are generally internal in scope to the federal government. I am
recused from participating in matters that could potentially
financially benefit my spouse or my brother. This includes matters like
pay raises, selection for promotions, cash awards, etc. I have no
objection to Tribes and urban Indian organizations being made aware of
the recusals. All matters related to my spouse or brother are to be
referred to the IHS Deputy Director, RADM Chris Buchanan, and I am not
to be involved in any discussions pertinent to either of my relatives.
Tribal Sovereignty and Consultation
Question 2. What is your understanding of the U.S. trust and treaty
responsibilities to Indian Tribes--specifically regarding the provision
of healthcare?
Answer. There is a general trust relationship between the United
States and Indian people. United States v. Mitchell, 463 U.S. 206, 225
(1983)). For a specific responsibility (also called duty or obligation)
to exist, Congress must act through statute to require specific duties
of the United States in the administration of Indian resources. The
benefits extended to Indian people based on their status as Indians
have been defined as a political relationship rather than a racial
classification.
Some treaties between the United States government and Indian
tribes call for the provision of medical services, the services of
physician(s), or the provision of hospital(s) for the members of the
signatory tribe(s).
Congress has acted to provide IHS with broad authority to provide
health care services to Indian people. The Snyder Act of 1921 (25
U.S.C.  13) and the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C.  
1601-1685) authorize IHS programs and provide specific legislative
authority for Congress to appropriate funds specifically for the health
care of Indian people. Because of the broad nature of these authorities
and the Congressional appropriations for IHS, IHS does not operate
under a trust responsibility. See, e.g., Lincoln v. Vigil, 508 U.S. 182
(1993). IHS remains committed to carrying out its statutory authorities
in order to elevate the health status of Indian people.
Question 3. If confirmed, will you commit to doing everything in
your authority to ensure that all federal trust and treaty
responsibilities are not only upheld, but strengthened?
Answer. I am committed to carrying out IHS's authorities in order
to elevate the health status of Indian people.
Question 4. If confirmed, will you commit to engaging in meaningful
government-to-government Tribal consultation?
Answer. Yes, if confirmed I commit to engaging in meaningful
government-to-government Tribal consultation.
Question 5. If confirmed, please describe how you will ensure
Tribal views expressed during consultation inform IHS policies and your
own advocacy within the Department of Health and Human Services and the
executive branch as a whole.
Answer. The importance of tribal consultation has been affirmed
through Presidential Memoranda and Executive Order. The IHS conducts a
variety of consultation activities with tribal leaders and
representatives of tribal governments, including national meetings,
regional inter-tribal consultation sessions, individual tribal
delegation meetings, area consultation sessions, and tribal advisory
workgroups. Tribal leaders and representatives also play an important
role in the IHS budget formulation process and setting health
priorities at the national and regional levels.
The increased involvement of tribes in advising and participating
in the decisionmaking process of the agency has resulted in stronger
collaborations between the federal government and tribal governments;
innovations in the management of programs; and important issues being
brought forward for consideration by IHS, the administration, and
congress in a timely fashion. If confirmed, I will faithfully serve as
the principal health advocate for American Indians and Alaska Natives
both within the department and throughout the executive branch of
government, and I will ensure that the viewpoints of tribes are made
known throughout government.
Urban Indian Health
Question 6. In its report accompanying the reauthorization of the
Indian Health Care Improvement Act in 1988, the Committee stated, ``The
responsibility for the provision of health care, arising from treaties
and laws. . .does not end at the boarders of an Indian reservation.''
This is still the policy of the U.S. government. If confirmed, will you
commit to ensuring IHS upholds its trust and treaty responsibilities
for American Indians and Alaska Natives who live in urban areas and
outside of Indian country?
Answer. I am committed to carrying out IHS's authorities in order
to elevate the health status of Indian people.
Question 6a. If confirmed, will you commit to conferring with urban
Native communities?
Answer. Yes, if confirmed I commit to conferring with urban Indian
organizations.
Question 7. What is your view of the Indian Health Service's role
in supporting Urban Indian Organizations?
Answer. The IHS provides a comprehensive health service delivery
system for approximately 2.6 million of the nation's estimated 3.7
million American Indians and Alaska Natives. The 2010 Census reported
78 percent of American Indians and Alaska Natives live in urban areas.
\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The American Indian and Alaska Native Population. U.S. Census
Bureau. Accessed January 3, 2020, at: http://www.census.gov/prod/
cen2010/briefs/c2010br-10.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Indian Health Care Improvement Act (IHCIA), (25 U.S.C.  1602)
declares that ``it is the policy of this Nation. . .to ensure the
highest possible health status for Indians and urban Indians.'' The IHS
provides contracts and grants to 41 urban-centered, nonprofit Urban
Indian Organizations (UIOs) providing health care services at 59
locations in 22 states throughout the United States. The IHS, through
the Office of Urban Indian Health Programs (OUIHP), provides oversight
of the grants and contracts to UIOs, with the purpose of making health
services more accessible to urban Indians. UIOs are evaluated annually
in accordance with the IHCIA requirements; and based on best-practice
standards for delivering safe and high quality health care. The IHS
works in partnership with UIOs to improve the transparency and the
quality of data collected regarding health care services and program
outcomes.
The UIOs define their scopes of services based upon the service
population, health status, and the documented unmet needs of the urban
Indian communities they serve. The 41 programs engage in a variety of
culturally appropriate activities to increase access to quality health
care services for urban Indians. These services range from the
provision of outreach and referral services to the delivery of limited
and comprehensive ambulatory health care as well as residential and
outpatient substance abuse treatment programs.
The IHS also currently awards 33 4-in-1 grants to UIOs. The 4-in-1
grant program provides funding to UIOs to ensure comprehensive,
culturally acceptable personal and public health services are available
and accessible to urban Indians. The grants provide funding for four
health program areas: (1) health promotion and disease prevention
services, (2) immunization services, (3) alcohol and substance abuse
related services, and (4) mental health services. Grantees integrate
cultural interventions and implement practice-based and evidence-based
approaches to meet urban Indian service population needs.
The IHCIA Title V funds are but one source of funding for UIOs.
Most UIOs obtain supplemental resources from other federal, state,
local, and private sources. The IHS has implemented HHS priorities
directed at ensuring accountability and provision of high quality
health services for the urban Indian population served by the IHS.
Based on special provisions for Indians in the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act (PPACA) and the IHCIA, the IHS continues to work
towards the expansion of health care coverage and quality services for
the underinsured and underserved urban Indian population. The primary
area of focus involves aligning with the PPACA health insurance
marketplace to increase the number of urban Indians served, enhance
revenues, and improve quality of care and customer service. This
includes the development of new approaches and the refining of proven
processes for coordinated care services, supports, and networks as
valued and essential services.
The IHCIA, as amended, also requires that the IHS confer with UIOs
to the maximum extent practicable. Confer means engagement in an open
and free exchange of information and opinions leading to mutual
understanding and comprehension and emphasizing trust, respect, and
shared responsibility. The IHS has utilized the confer process to seek
input from UIOs on urban Indian health matters and published a confer
policy in the Indian Health Manual (IHM). \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ IHM, Part 5, Chapter 26, Conferring with Urban Indian
Organizations, available at https://www.ihs.gov/IHM/
index.cfm?module=dsp_ihm_pc_p5c26.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our partnerships and relationships with UIOs are critical to our
success and supports the IHS mission of raising the physical, mental,
social and spiritual health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to
the highest level. Performance of the mission regarding urban Indian
health significantly depends on the efforts of the IHS working in
unison with UIOs on a wide range of issues. These include engaging UIOs
on matters that impact urban Indians and ensuring that the funding and
resources are available to UIOs to provide health care services to
urban Indians.
The OUIHP, working with the IHS Area Offices and other Headquarters
program offices, works in partnership with UIOs to advance urban Indian
health priorities and initiatives. A significant role for the OUIHP is
education about the role of the UIOs and improving the integration of
urban Indian considerations in IHS policies and procedures and across
the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) as well as other
federal agencies. The IHS works to educate and inform partners about
urban Indian health matters, identify challenges that limit access to
health care, and works in partnership with UIOs to support health care
solutions that fit the diverse circumstances of urban Indians and the
tribal communities they serve.
Question 8. What do you believe are some of the major health care
barriers for American Indians and Alaska Natives residing in urban
areas? How do you think IHS can help address the barriers you
identified?
Answer. Urban Indians not only share the same health problems as
the general Indian population, their health problems are exacerbated in
terms of mental and physical hardships because of the lack of family
and traditional cultural environments. Urban Indian youth are at
greater risk for serious mental health and substance abuse problems,
suicide, increased gang activity, teen pregnancy, abuse, and neglect.
Recent studies of the urban Indian population document poor health
status and reveal that lack of adequate health care services are a
serious problem for most families. This is reflected in the 2004
report, ``The Health Status of Urban American Indians and Alaska
Natives: An Analysis of Select Vital Records and Census Data Sources.''
\3\ The report, which was limited to the counties served by Title V
funded UIOs, demonstrated that although progress had been made toward
better health among this population, substantial health disparities
continue to exist when compared to the general population.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Urban Indian Health Institute (March 16, 2004), available at
http://www.uihi.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/
2004healthstatusreport.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The 41 UIOs are an integral part of the Indian health care system
and serve as resources to both tribal and urban communities. Urban
Indians are often invisible in the urban setting and face unique
challenges when accessing health care. A large proportion of urban
Indians live in or near poverty and face multiple barriers such as the
lack of quality and culturally relevant health care services in cities.
UIOs are an important support to urban Indians seeking to maintain
their tribal values and cultures and serve as a safety net for our
urban patients. Social determinants of health play a key role in health
and wellness and UIOs are addressing a range of factors which
contribute to improved health outcomes. While the UIOs are diverse in
geographic area, size, services offered, and funding strategy, they
share a commitment to providing culturally competent health care to a
population that is impacted by socioeconomic disparities, including
lower incomes, higher unemployment, and lower levels of educational
attainment.
Urban Indians present a unique morbidity and mortality profile.
Urban Indian populations suffer disproportionately higher mortality
from certain causes in sharp contrast to mainstream society. Leading
health care conditions for urban Indians are substance abuse, heart
disease, cancer, infant mortality, accidents and external causes,
diabetes, and cerebrovascular disease. \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Indian Health Service, Report to Congress: New Needs Assessment
of the Urban Indian Health Program and the Communities it Services at
10 (Mar. 31, 2016) (hereinafter New Needs Assessment), available at
https://www.ihs.gov/sites/urban/themes/responsive2017/display_objects/
documents/ReportToCongressUrbanNeedsAssessment.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Urban Indian populations are more likely to engage in health risk
behaviors. Urban Indians are more likely to report heavy or binge
drinking than all-race populations and urban Indians are 1.7 times more
likely to smoke cigarettes. Urban Indians more often view themselves in
poor or only fair health status, with 22.6 percent reporting fair/poor
health as compared to 14.7 percent of all races reporting as fair/poor.
\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These unique challenges require a targeted response. I believe that
the IHS can target more of its resources towards the development of
culturally relevant programming that includes traditional Indian
health, social support network development, education regarding trauma-
informed care, etc. Culturally competent care is particularly important
in an urban environment where Indian culture may be absent in the daily
lives of many urban Indians. The UIOs provide an important connection
to Indian culture. Care in a trusted and supportive environment can be
critically important to positive health outcomes. We can also partner
with sister agencies throughout government to support language
preservation, faith-based initiatives and to address other social
determinants of health (lack of stable housing, lack of economic
opportunity, lack of transportation, etc.). The ability of UIOs to
deliver health care services relies on key partnerships with other
federal agencies, as well as states, local governments, insurers, and
foundations that fund UIOs; non-profit organizations that provide
advocacy, timely information, technical assistance, and training; and
Tribes, which in some cases, operate health care programs that may
partner with, receive referrals from UIOs, or provide referrals to
UIOs. IHS can support UIOs in their efforts to address key challenges
for improving and expanding their capacity to provide access to
quality, culturally competent health services for urban Indians.
Substance Abuse and Opioids
Question 9. In September 2018 remarks before the HHS Secretary's
Tribal Advisory Committee, you stated: ``Another challenge we must work
together to overcome is the opioid crisis that is affecting our Tribal
communities. . .As with this plan and all other IHS initiatives around
substance use, collaboration with Tribes is fundamental.'' In what ways
do you feel the federal government could improve its support for
addressing the opioid and substance abuse challenges facing Indian
country?
Answer. The IHS appreciates the Committee's recognition of the
disproportionate impact of the opioid crisis on tribal communities and
willingness to foster ongoing collaborations to leverage available
resources to address the broader substance use crisis facing Indian
country. The invaluable feedback that IHS has received through formal
tribal consultation and urban confer has informed the internal IHS
opioid response and contributed to the creation of a comprehensive
strategic plan to assist tribes with addressing gaps and increasing
access to medication assisted treatment (MAT) services, enhancing harm
reduction efforts, and improving IHS opioid stewardship activities.
Yet, challenges remain.
Tribal communities have expressed the need for dedicated funding
streams to improve local response capacity, expand access to treatment
and recovery services, and to improve substance use prevention efforts;
explicitly tribes have voiced the need for increased budget
appropriations to assist these programming efforts. Additionally, the
IHS acknowledges the recent Administration announcement to increase
funding for states to combat the opioid crisis. The IHS recommends that
states be explicitly instructed to consult with tribal communities on
the use of this funding to ensure that available state resources are
available to assist tribes with addressing local challenges related to
substance use disorders. The IHS has learned through tribal
consultation of the need to expand healthcare infrastructure to improve
aftercare services, increase access to medically assisted
detoxification services, and to improve access to transitional housing
or sober living facilities.
The IHS has appreciated the ongoing collaboration with Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration partners to address the
challenges created by the requirements of 42 CFR Part 2 and the
barriers to increasing access to integrated MAT models in primary care
across IHS, tribal, and urban health programs. IHS is willing to
provide technical assistance upon request should legislative
improvements to 42 CFR Part 2 be considered in the future.
The IHS has also received important feedback from tribal
communities on the opportunity to improve acceptance of traditional
Indian health practices across the federal government and within
states. Federal support for broad awareness of traditional Indian
health practices may further assist tribes with increasing access to
these treatment and prevention interventions.
The IHS also recognizes a need for improved Federal collaboration
between agency and tribes to improve the availability of data and
improve data integrity to create effective public health surveillance
strategies. Available Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, and Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services data sets may be better leveraged to further
understand the impact of substance use on tribal communities.
The IHS recognizes recent federal efforts to direct grant funding
and focus intervention strategies to strengthen families and promote
community wellness. The IHS recommends continued efforts for criminal
justice reforms that reduce child out of home placements (where safe
and appropriate to do so) that can impact long-term psycho-social
wellness.
Question 9a. Under your leadership as Acting Director and Principle
Deputy Director, how has Tribal consultation informed the Service's
development of strategies to effectively address the opioid crisis in
Indian Country?
Answer. IHS received $10 million in fiscal year 2019 funding under
the Special Behavioral Health Pilot Program (SBHPP) for Indians to be
targeted at opioid specific activities. The conference report language
stated that this grant program be developed after tribal consultation.
IHS coordinated tribal consultation and urban confer activities with
the IHS Heroin, Opioid and Pain Efforts (HOPE) Committee and the IHS
Opioid Coordinating Group. The consultation and confer sessions allowed
for feedback on priorities, methodologies, and desired outcomes to be
used in the selection and award process. One face-to-face consultation,
four virtual consultations, and one urban confer session were completed
between June 17, and July 31, 2019. In addition, written comments were
accepted by both email and postal mail through the duration of the
consultation and confer process, which ended on September 3, 2019.
During the formal tribal consultation and urban confer sessions,
the comments received represented a wide range of suggestions and
several themes emerged, including the importance of program
flexibility, which was noted in responses to all questions. Another
major theme that came out of the consultation and confer was the desire
to reduce the evaluation and reporting requirements for grantees.
Additional highlights of the consultation and confer include requests
for the SBHPP to focus on (1) culturally-responsive interventions and
approaches, (2) increasing access to care, (3) funding for housing and
transportation, (4) training and education on opioids and treatment
options, (5) support for use of MAT and Naloxone as options, (6)
competitive grants based on merit of proposals, including urban Indian
organizations, (7) funding at levels high enough to provide services
and impact the community, and (8) a limited set aside for national
management.
The tribal consultation and urban confer on the opioid grant
funding informed the IHS funding plan, with plans to encourage the use
of evidence-based interventions, traditional cultural practices, a
combination of those, and to allow other novel approaches in the design
of an applicant's pilot program. Additionally, in response to requests
from Tribes, evaluation of the grants will be designed with an emphasis
on local evaluation of the pilot program and an effort to reduce the
burden of cross-site/national data collection. To assist Tribes with
carrying out their projects and to ease the reporting burden, IHS will
provide intensive programmatic technical assistance and support to
grantees in developing, implementing and evaluating their pilot
program.
Question 10. According to reports from a number of Tribes, IHS has
not been responsive to requests for opioids data. Many of these Tribes
submitted their request several months ago--even submitting a FOIA
request--but, to date, IHS has not furnished any data. Were you aware
that Tribes are having difficulty obtaining opioid data?
Answer. After discussing with my staff, I am aware that some tribes
and tribal organizations have requested IHS provide opioid data (e.g.,
opioid use disorder to be used when applying for grant funding). In
some cases, IHS is still working to provide the data and in other
cases, IHS may have been unable to provide the data requested due to
privacy law restrictions.
Question 10a. If confirmed, will you commit to working with your
leadership team to ensure Tribes have access to the public health data
they need?
Answer. Yes, if confirmed I commit to working with the IHS
leadership team to help Tribes gain access to the public health data
they need. IHS is committed to assisting tribes and tribal
organizations, when possible, by providing data for decisionmaking and
planning for health services, for use in applying for funding
opportunities, and in response to Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
requests. The IHS Headquarters Privacy Officer reviews requests that
are submitted through the FOIA process to determine how IHS can best
provide the data requested. In some cases, tribes want data that is
protected by the Privacy Act, the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996, and/or 42 CFR Part 2. In some cases, tribes
can use county level opioid data available from their state. IHS is
looking into alternative ways for tribes and tribal organizations to
get needed data including working with the tribal epidemiology centers.
Nominee Questionnaire Clarifications
Question 11. In response to questions A-9-12 and A-14, you directed
the Committee to refer to your CV. Your CV indicates that you worked in
the IHS's Office of Management Services from January, 2010, to
November, 2012. While working with that office, your CV indicates that
you served as the IHS liaison to the Office of the Inspector General,
the Government Accountability Office (GAO), and the Office of Special
Counsel. Please summarize your duties and responsibilities as the IHS
liaison to these three external oversight offices.
Answer. The IHS Liaison to these three external oversight offices,
HHS Office of the Inspector General (OIG), the Office of Special
Counsel (OSC), and the Government Accountability Office (GAO), is the
primary point of contact in the IHS for each of the external
authorities. The primary responsibilities for each Liaison is to:
Build positive relationships and knowledge within the IHS
regarding purpose and process of external authority oversight
activities, and with the external authority officials;
Receive and distribute to appropriate offices notices of new
audits, evaluations, studies and inspections;
Ensure that new engagement notices are promptly communicated
to and understood by program managers and senior leadership;
Coordinate internal staff planning and preparing for
entrance and exit conferences;
Ensure timely internal management of engagements, including
managing timely requests for information, and developing
progress reports and other official agency responses in
consultation with program managers; and
Ensure appropriate staff and senior management clearances of
all agency correspondence.
Question 11a. If confirmed, how would your experience working as
the IHS liaison to these three offices inform your work as IHS
Director?
Answer. I am committed to working positively and cooperatively with
our external authorities, especially with the OIG, OSC and GAO.
Consistent with that commitment, I have made it a priority for all IHS
employees to build and sustain a positive relationship and to be
responsive and cooperative in working with the OIG and the GAO. In
2019, I issued guidance to all IHS employees on the benefits of having
a positive and strong relationship with OIG and GAO in order to reduce
the burden of the audits on the agency, make us aware of what may be
coming in the future, and that auditors may be more responsive to our
concerns.
Question 12. Question A-9 asks you to detail your employment
record. You directed the Committee to refer to your CV. Your CV
indicates that you worked in IHS's Office of Management Services from
January, 2010, to November, 2012, where you served as the IHS liaison
to the GAO. During that period, GAO issued at least three reports on
the Indian Health Service. \6\
\6\ U.S. Gov't Accountability Office, GAO11-767, Indian Health
Service: Increased Oversight Needed to Ensure Accuracy of Data Used for
Estimating Contract Health Service Need (2011). U.S. Gov't
Accountability Office, GAO-12-29, Indian Health Service: Continued
Efforts Needed to Health Strengthen Responses to Sexual Assaults and
Domestic Violence (2011). U.S. Gov't Accountability Office, GAO-12-446,
Indian Health Service: Action Needed to Ensure Equitable Allocation of
Resources for the Contract Health Service Program (2012).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regarding the status of recommendations from GAO-12-446, GAO
reports: ``In October 2017, IHS officials provided information to us,
which was not provided during the course of the original audit work. .
.'' As the IHS liaison to GAO, were you responsible for providing
information to inform GAO's audit work? If so, why was this information
not shared with GAO at the time?
Answer. As the GAO Liaison, I would have been involved in
communicating to GAO the agency's responses. One of the important roles
of an audit liaison is to ensure timely internal management of
engagements, including managing timely requests for information, and
developing progress reports and other official agency responses in
consultation with program managers. The audit liaison is not intended
to be the subject matter expert on the matters under audit, but rather
to have sufficient knowledge of the agency and the audit process to
facilitate information flow and timely agency responses.
GAO works directly with staff throughout the agency during the
course of any audit engagement, and GAO does not always identify the
sources of specific information provided to them in their reports. It
is not clear in the GAO's statement cited in this question, which
information they received later that influenced or changed their
conclusions in these recommendations.
IHS did not withhold information from GAO during the course of this
audit engagement. Rather, IHS provided GAO with information as the
audit progressed, and especially after the audit was completed and IHS
began working to resolve the GAO audit findings and open
recommendations.
Throughout the engagement, IHS explained to GAO that tribal
consultation was an important factor in funding allocation decisions,
and the consultation process for PRC funding allocations supported the
methods currently used, notwithstanding GAO's opinion on the
appropriate way to allocate funds. In 2017, IHS invited the GAO audit
team to attend a tribal/federal workgroup meeting where this matter was
discussed. At this meeting the assertions made by IHS were reinforced
as to the position advocated by tribal representatives on PRC fund
allocations. One aspect of the inflexibility of PRC fund allocations
relates to the fact that a majority of PRC funds are included in Indian
Self-Determination awards, and any reductions in base funding from
previous years for these awards cannot be made unilaterally by IHS, and
they must be agreed to by the tribal organization receiving the awards.
Question 12a. Regarding the status of recommendations from GAO-12-
29, GAO issued five recommendations that it considers ``closed--
implemented.'' Recommendation 1 directs the IHS to clarify how the
agency will support hospitals and staff in fulfilling the IHS sexual
assault policy from the Indian Health Manual. Please provide an update
on any changes or improvements to the IHS's sexual assault policy.
Answer. IHS is committed to addressing the high rates of sexual
violence among American Indians and Alaska Natives. \7\ The IHS Sexual
Assault policy (Indian Health Manual (IHM) Part 3, Chapter 29) was
updated on February 6, 2018. The purpose of this chapter is to
establish the requirements for care following sexual assault at IHS
hospitals, health centers, and health stations (also referred to as
facilities). This policy requires all facilities to provide patients
age 18 and older who present with a report of sexual assault access to
timely, high-quality sexual assault services that are patient-centered
and culturally sensitive using a trauma-informed care approach to
promote healing, minimize trauma, and prevent re-traumatization. IHS
policy and mandated reporting requirements for children age 17 and
under who present to a facility with suspicion of sexual assault and
abuse are outlined in the IHS Child Maltreatment policy (IHM Part 3,
Chapter 36).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Department of Justice. A National Protocol for Sexual Assault
Medical Forensic Examinations: Adults/Adolescents, Second Edition
(April 2013), available at https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/ovw/
241903.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The IHS also funds an annual contract with the International
Association of Forensic Nurses with a budget of approximately $660,000.
The contract supports training of forensic examiners including
pediatric sexual abuse forensic examiners through administration of
four on-line pediatric sexual assault courses per contract year. The
contract also supports clinical skills experiences for IHS pediatric
forensic examiners, whereby providers gain clinical experience
performing pediatric exams in three of our nation's high-volume
pediatric sexual abuse clinics. Similar training opportunities exist
for healthcare professionals attending to adolescent and adult sexual
assault victims. Webinars are offered quarterly for continuing
education credits related to forensic health care subjects like
forensic photography, strangulation, human trafficking, and pediatric
physical abuse. These trainings allow medical professionals to acquire
and maintain the knowledge, skills, and competent clinical forensic
practice to improve the response to domestic and sexual violence in
hospitals, health clinics, and health stations within the Indian health
system. The contract also supports a monthly peer review session in
which forensic examiners collaboratively review responses to recent
pediatric sexual abuse cases with a goal of peer development and
support.
In addition, IHS takes advantage of all opportunities to educate
staff by observing April as Sexual Assault Awareness and Prevention
Month. This national campaign supports IHS efforts to promote awareness
around sexual assault and prevention activities including those that
encourage staff to participate in training, improve responses to sexual
assault, and to prevent future incidences of sexual violence within
tribal and urban Indian communities.
The IHS Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner-Sexual Assault Response Team
(SANE SART) Coordinators are available to provide technical assistance
and support to Sexual Assault Examiners (SAEs), IHS and Tribal
hospitals, clinics, and health stations. SAEs are primarily registered
nurses and advanced practice nurses, but also includes physicians and
physician assistants, with specialized training and clinical experience
in providing forensic examinations of sexual assault victims. SAEs are
part of a coordinated response to sexual assault and therefore often
work closely with law enforcement officers, forensic lab staff, child
protective services, prosecutors, and sexual assault advocates and
crisis programs.
Question 12b. Has IHS done any internal monitoring to ensure all
Service Areas and Units are in compliance with the IHS sexual assault
policy?
Answer. Internal monitoring was completed in 2016. All IHS Areas
submitted policies for facilities in their Areas to the IHS Office of
Clinical and Preventive Services and reviews were provided by the IHS
National Forensic Nurse Consultant and/or in consultation with IHS Area
Chief Medical Officers. Further, resources were provided to each IHS
Area to assist with consultative services to map out responses to
sexual assault to ensure compliance with portions of the IHS Sexual
Assault policy (IHM Part 3, Chapter 29) and technical assistance
through the IHS National Forensic Nurse Consultant and partnership with
the International Association of Forensic Nurses.
To ensure ongoing compliance, the IHS Office of Quality (OQ)
Division of Quality Assurance maintains an external accreditation and
certification designation database of all IHS facilities. Facilities
that are accredited have adhered to all IHS policies and accreditation
requirements, these include that patients have the right to be free
from neglect, exploitation, and verbal, mental, physical and sexual
abuse. The OQ also offers ongoing technical assistance to ensure
continued survey readiness, which includes maintaining compliance with
accreditation requirements and IHS policies. For facilities that are
not accredited, the OQ provides technical assistance for survey
readiness and shares best practices with facilities and governing
boards to reach accreditation status.
Question 12c. Do you believe IHS has sufficient resources to comply
with its sexual assault policy?
Answer. The Domestic Violence Prevention Program (DVPP) funding has
been critical for the IHS in providing training and resources to
tribes, tribal organizations, urban Indian organizations, and federal
facilities as they address high rates of sexual violence among the
American Indian and Alaska Native population. Yes, continued support
for DVPP funding and increased resources will support IHS efforts to
assess and ensure compliance with the IHS Sexual Assault policy (IHM
Part 3, Chapter 29). Increased resources will provide for the expansion
of priority populations and efforts that address the direct correlation
between high rates of domestic violence, sexual abuse, substance abuse,
and missing and murdered indigenous women and girls. Specifically,
these funds will strengthen patient care by improving forensic health
care services with additional forensic examiners, staff training, and
equipment and enhancements to the IHS electronic health records system
to improve documentation and identification of patients at risk for
sexual abuse and exploitation.
Question 12d. If confirmed, will you commit to (I.) reviewing the
Service's sexual assault policy to determine if any updates are needed;
and (II.) ensuring IHS facilities have the proper resources and
training to fully implement the IHS sexual assault policy?
Answer. Yes, if confirmed I commit to ensure the IHS Sexual Assault
policy is reviewed for needed updates and that proper resources and
training go toward full implementation of the IHS Sexual Assault
policy.
Question 12e. Regarding the status of recommendations from GAO-12-
29, GAO issued five recommendations that it considers ``closed--
implemented.'' Recommendation 2 directs the IHS to Develop a policy for
responding to incidents of child sexual abuse consistent with protocols
developed by the Department of Justice. In its response, IHS indicted
it had developed a child maltreatment policy, which is in draft form
until a National Protocol for Pediatric Sexual Abuse Medical Forensic
Examinations is finalized. IHS further indicated that it would align
the IHS child maltreatment policy with the National Protocol. As the
IHS liaison to GAO, were you responsible for coordinating with GAO on
closing this recommendation?
Answer. As the GAO Liaison, I would have been involved in
communicating to GAO the agency's responses. One of the important roles
of an audit liaison is to ensure timely internal management of
engagements, including managing timely requests for information, and
developing progress reports and other official agency responses in
consultation with program managers. The audit liaison is not intended
to be the subject matter expert on the matters under audit, but rather
to have sufficient knowledge of the agency and the audit process to
facilitate information flow and timely agency responses.
Question 12f. Did IHS ever finalize its child maltreatment policy?
And, if not, why not?
Answer. The IHS Child Maltreatment policy was released in September
2019 (IHM Part 3, Chapter 36). The purpose of this chapter is to
establish the requirements for identifying and responding to suspected
child maltreatment and for children age 17 and under who present with
suspicion of sexual assault and abuse including mandated reporting
requirements. In addition, the IHS has strengthened our response to
child abuse in several ways including agency-wide policies have been
created or strengthened in order to better guide staff in expectations
surrounding mandated reporting, qualifications required of forensic
examiners, recognition of child maltreatment, treatment and response to
concerns of child maltreatment including sexual abuse, and required
annual training.
Question 12g. If IHS did finalize its child maltreatment policy,
did it provide any training to federal IHS employees on this policy?
Answer. The IHS Child Maltreatment policy was released in September
2019 (IHM Part 3, Chapter 36). Training requirements for this policy
are outlined for all staff including specific trainings topics for
clinical staff and medical forensic staff caring for pediatric
patients. IHS is currently developing this training for staff.
In addition, IHS released the Protecting Children from Sexual Abuse
by Health Care Providers policy (IHM Part 3, Chapter 20) in February
2019. This additional guidance clearly defines professional boundaries
and reporting requirements of all employees if child abuse is suspected
or witnessed. IHS developed a mandatory employee training for this
policy under the review and guidance of IHS clinical subject matter
experts. The training includes information on indicators of abuse and
warning signs, organizational safeguards used to ensure patient safety,
and the process for reporting suspected sexual abuse.
Question 12h. Does the scope of this policy (either draft or final)
cover incidents like those associated with the patient abuse of former
IHS pediatrician Dr. Stanley Patrick Weber?
Answer. Yes, the IHS Child Maltreatment policy (IHM Part 3, Chapter
36) ``Reporting Requirements'' section states the following:
It is IHS policy that all staff must report suspected child
maltreatment immediately, and in all cases within 24 hours, to
appropriate law enforcement or child protective services.
Facility policy identifies under what circumstances to report,
the type of information to report, to whom they should report,
the reporting procedures, and the timelines for making a
report. All staff are responsible for knowing and complying
with the reporting requirements. Facility policy should ensure
universal awareness of these requirements among all staff and
should identify appropriate local agencies who will receive
child maltreatment reports.
In addition, IHS released the Protecting Children from Sexual Abuse
by Health Care Providers policy (IHM Part 3, Chapter 20) in February
2019. This additional guidance clearly defines professional boundaries
and reporting requirements of all employees if child abuse is suspected
or witnessed. IHS developed a mandatory employee training for this
policy under the review and guidance of IHS clinical subject matter
experts. The training includes information on indicators of abuse and
warning signs, organizational safeguards used to ensure patient safety,
and the process for reporting suspected sexual abuse.
Question 12i. Will the audit IHS contracted for review of
circumstances surrounding the Weber abuse cases examine management and
employee compliance with this child maltreatment policy?
Answer. The contract is specifically scoped to perform a
retrospective review of actions related to Dr. Weber. There is not a
separate focus from the audit on compliance with the new (September
2019) Child Maltreatment policy (IHM Part 3, Chapter 36). To ensure
ongoing compliance with all policies, the IHS Office of Quality (OQ)
Division of Quality Assurance maintains an external accreditation and
certification designation database of all IHS facilities. Facilities
that are accredited have adhered to all IHS policies and accreditation
requirements, these include the new child maltreatment policy. The OQ
also offers ongoing technical assistance to ensure continued survey
readiness, which includes maintaining compliance with accreditation
requirements and IHS policies. For facilities that are not accredited,
the OQ provides technical assistance for survey readiness and shares
best practices with facilities and governing boards to reach
accreditation status.
Question 13. Question A-13 contained five subparts (a-e), but you
only responded to three subparts (1-c). Please review the questionnaire
form and submit answers to all five subparts as listed below. List all
offices with a political party which you have held or any public office
for which you have been a candidate.
Answer. I have not held an office with a political party or been a
candidate for a public office.
Question 13a. List all memberships held in or political
registrations with any political parties during the last 10 years.
Answer. Approximately from 1988-2006, I was registered to vote as a
Republican and from approximately 2006-2012, I was registered to vote
as a Democrat. From approximately 2012 to present I have been
registered to vote as an Independent.
Question 13b. List all political offices or election committees
during the last 10 years.
Answer. I have not held a political office or been a member of an
election committee during the last ten years.
Question 13c. Itemize all political contributions to any
individual, campaign organization, political party, political action
committee, or similar entity of $500 or more for the past 10 years.
Answer. Although not included in the scope of this request, since
it is less than the $500 threshold identified, I have made four $100
contributions to U.S. Senator Kyrsten Sinema (Arizona), who is my home
state Senator and a fellow Arizona State University alumnus.
Question 13d. Current political party registration, if any.
Answer. I am currently registered as an Independent.
Question 14. In your original response to question A-13, you stated
that you have not made any political contributions totaling $500 or
more for the past ten years. Review of the Federal Elections Committee
website confirmed this information, but also showed that you have made
six $100 donations since February 2019--including four $100 donations
in February, March, April and May to ActBlue. Please explain these
donations.
Answer. I confirm that I have made only four $100 political
contributions in support of U.S. Senator Kyrsten Sinema (Arizona). Upon
review of the Federal Elections Commission website report (see
Attachment B), I believe that the contributions identified on June 2,
2019 and May 5, 2019 are duplicate entries of the contributions made on
May 30, 2019 and April 30, 2019 respectively. I verified this by
accessing the ActBlue website and downloading my contribution history
(see Attachment C). I researched ActBlue and based on that research, I
believe ActBlue is a resource for campaigns to use for raising
political donations to campaigns. I technically have not contributed
directly to ActBlue, rather I have contributed to Senator Sinema four
times and I believe the Senator's office has used the ActBlue resource
for collection of those contributions.
Question 15. Question A-15 asks you to ``list the titles,
publishers, and dates of books, articles, reports, or other published
materials which you have written or published under your name.'' You
listed two items an editorial in the Journal of the American Medical
Association and an op-ed in Indian Country Today. Please confirm that
these are the only two published writings (as defined by the scope of
the question) that you have authored.
Answer. I confirm that I have only authored two published writings.
Question 16. Question A-16 asks you to ``list the date, location,
audience, and topic of any formal speeches relevant to the position for
which you have been nominated that you have delivered during the last 5
years.'' It also direct you ``for those speeches that you have
transcripts or copies of, provide the Committee with two copies as an
addendum to this questionnaire.'' In response, you provided a link to
review speeches made by the IHS director on the IHS website and you
noted that you have served as Acting Director and Principal Deputy
Director since June, 19, 2017--a period which covers only the last
approximately 2.5 years. Please confirm that you have made no formal
speeches relevant to the position for which you have been nominated
within the last five years but prior to June 19, 2017.
Answer. Before June 19, 2017, I made no formal speeches relevant to
the position of IHS Director. In addition, I am submitting speeches
(see Attachments D, E, and F) that I have given since June 19, 2017,
while serving as the Acting IHS Director and Principal Deputy Director
that may not have been included on the IHS website previously
referenced.
Question 17. In response to question A-17, you stated, ``I led the
team that reopened the Rosebud Indian Hospital emergency department
after it was closed in December of 2015.'' However, a recently
published Wall Street Journal article indicated that the Rosebud
operating rooms remain unopened--one of several goals you established
for your reform efforts at Rosebud. \8\ This closure is ongoing despite
renovation efforts and has cost the IHS hundreds of thousands of
dollars in air ambulance fees, referred care bills, and salaries for
IHS surgeons who could not operate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Anna Wilde Mathews & Christopher Weaver, Six CEOs and No
Operating Room: The Impossible Job of Fixing the Indian Health Service,
Wall Street Journal, Dec. 10, 2019, https://www.wsj.com/articles/six-
ceos-and-no-operating-room-the-impossible-job-of-fixing-the-indian-
health-service-11575993216.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At the hearing, I discussed the temporary closure of the ACL
Hospital emergency room in November and asked for your commitment to
keeping IHS emergency and urgent care departments open. When do you
estimate the Rosebud operating rooms will reopen?
Answer. The IHS Strategic Plan, Goal 1 is ``To ensure that
comprehensive, culturally appropriate personal and public health
services are available and accessible to American Indian and Alaska
Native people.'' To help us meet this goal, each IHS Service Unit has a
defined scope of services that includes the types and ages of patients
served, the hours of operation, staffing, the types of services
provided, and the goals or plans to improve quality of service. In the
case of hospital emergency departments, urgent care clinics, or
operating rooms, whether in Rosebud, Acoma-Canoncito-Laguna (ACL), or
anywhere in the IHS system of care, IHS must ensure these services are
the best fit for the scope of service for the population. Where the
services are a best fit, we will work to reestablish or maintain them.
Where they are not the best fit, we work to find the best fit of
services, defining which services are to be provided by IHS, tribes, or
other partners through Purchased/Referred Care options.
At this time, we do not have an estimate on the potential reopening
of the operating room at Rosebud Hospital. Any decision to reopen
services must be made based on multiple factors, including first and
foremost patient quality and safety.
Question 17a. Please provide a summary of all renovation related
expenses related to the Rosebud hospital's operating rooms incurred by
IHS since you were stationed at the facility in May 2016.
Answer. IHS has made significant investments in the surgery
department at the Rosebud Service Unit. Some of the larger projects
that were completed include:
New flooring for the entire operating room department
New casework
New operating room lights
New operating room anesthesia booms
New operating room tables
Sterilization reconfiguration
Endoscopy room reconfiguration
Sterilization equipment repairs
New nurse call installation
IHS has spent $1.3 million on this department, with operating
department facility projects totaling $525,884 and a further $788,794
on medical equipment.
Question 17b. Please provide an estimate of air ambulance fees,
referred care bills, and surgeon salaries paid by the IHS as a result
of the closure of the Rosebud operating room and the temporary closure
of the ACL hospital.
Answer. At the Rosebud Hospital, IHS cannot identify any remaining
surgeons who received salaries from September 2016 onward. IHS cannot
determine from our existing records which referred care bills were for
surgery that would have otherwise been conducted at Rosebud Hospital as
opposed to by outside providers. The Rosebud Hospital operating room
would have had a modest capacity regardless and would have referred
some emergency surgeries. Further, it would be difficult to determine
based on our records which diagnoses resulted in a surgical procedure.
For the Acoma-Canoncito-Laguna (ACL) Hospital, to date the
Purchased/Referred Care department issued $2,664.00 to cover the costs
resulting from the temporary closure of the emergency room not funded
by alternate resources (i.e., Medicare, Medicaid, private insurance).
Question 17c. Has IHS reviewed any contracts awarded for renovation
of the Rosebud operating rooms for compliance failures? And, if so, has
IHS taken any actions related to any contractor compliance failures
uncovered by its review?
Answer. Any deficiencies that were identified during construction
were corrected as discovered. To the best of my knowledge, the projects
were completed in compliance with required standards.
Question 17d. If confirmed, will you commit to ensuring that--(i.)
IHS contract awards contain strong compliance mechanisms as laid out in
the Federal Acquisition Regulation; and (ii.) All such contract
compliance mechanisms are enforced?
Answer. Yes, if confirmed I commit to ensuring IHS contract awards
contain strong compliance mechanisms as provided in the Federal
Acquisition Regulation and all contract compliance mechanisms are
enforced.
Question 18. In response to question D-2, you indicated that you
pled nolo contender/no contest to a February 2012 non-moving citation
for attempting to drive under the influence in Baltimore, MD. Our CV,
which you submitted as part of your response to questions A-9-12 and A-
14, indicates that IHS transferred you to serve as Chief Operating
Officer for the Phoenix Indian Medical Center in November, 2012. A
recent report received by the Committee suggests that these two events
are linked. Please summarize the circumstances the led to your transfer
in November, 2012.
Answer. These two events are not linked in any way. I applied for
the publicly advertised position of Chief Operating Officer at the
Phoenix Indian Medical Center, and competed for the position against
several other qualified Indian preference candidates. The vetting
process included an initial interview with a panel composed of senior
hospital officials, tribal leaders and the Phoenix Area Director, and a
second interview with only the Area Director and Chief Executive
Officer (CEO). I pursued this position, which was a lateral transfer at
the GS-15/O-6 billet level, to position myself to be more competitive
for the Phoenix Indian Medical Center, CEO position (Senior Executive
Service/flag grade), should it become available in the coming years.
The CEO position became available a year later and I applied and was
successful in being selected to serve in that position.
Question 18a. To the best of your knowledge, can you confirm
whether or not the February 2012 citation played any role in the
decision to transfer you in November, 2012.
Answer. The decision to transfer was my own, see response to
question 18.a. above.
Question 19. Question F-1 asks you to explain how your previous
professional experiences and education qualify you for the IHS Director
position. You responded that, among other things, you are qualified due
to your tenure serving in an acting capacity. What is your
understanding of the limits on your authority as Principal Deputy
Director and Acting Director, compared to the authority of a Senate-
confirmed Director?
Answer. On September 25, 2018, the HHS Secretary delegated to me
all of the delegable functions and duties of the IHS Director except
those that by statute or regulation must be performed by the Director.
HHS has not identified any non-delegable functions/duties in this
regard.
Question 20. In response to question F-3, you indicated one of your
immediate goals upon confirmation would be converting all IHS hospitals
to an appropriate facility type. You stated, ``Currently, the majority
of IHS hospitals are classified by CMS as acute care hospitals. Due to
the low volume of inpatients at many of our sites, some facilities do
not meet the criteria for being classified as acute care hospitals and
should be reclassified as either critical access hospitals or as
ambulatory health care facilities (outpatient).'' Have you consulted
with Tribes or conferred with urban Indian organizations regarding this
proposal?
Answer. Local level consultation with the impacted tribes has been
underway for quite some time. This consultation is being led by the
appropriate Area Directors upon my request.
Question 20a. Has anyone at IHS evaluated what impact these types
of reclassifications might have on each IHS Service Area, especially in
regards to their individual Purchase-Referred Care budgets?
Answer. Evaluation of the facility type changes has been examined
thoroughly, to include not only potential impacts on the scope of
services provided within the facilities and Purchased/Referred Care
program implications, but also potential impacts on the facility cost
reports and the national all-inclusive rate formula calculations. In
many cases, facilities will receive more third party reimbursement and
they will be able to target their limited resources to better meet the
needs of patients.
Question 20b. How would this proposal interact with Tribal
initiatives--like the regional specialty referral center idea put
forward for IHS consideration by the Northwest Portland Area Indian
Health Board?
Answer. The list of facilities to be converted is based on
inpatient workload data and is limited to those facilities currently
categorized as ``hospitals.'' The conversion of existing facilities to
an appropriate facility type is a Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS) requirement, and in fact, we are in receipt of letters
from CMS requiring that these changes be made in order to comply with
conditions of participation regarding hospital definitions for an
inpatient facility. The majority of these facilities have been
operating with extremely limited inpatient capacity for decades, and
the conversions to an appropriate facility type should have been
completed years ago.
If Congress would like to support tribal initiatives, like the
Northwest Portland Area Indian Health Board specialty referral center
demonstration project, I would be happy to support that effort. This
will require that Congress provide the funding and language in our
appropriation to support the initiative.
Question 21. In response to question F-12(b) relating to the steps
Congress should consider taking if a department/agency fails to achieve
its performance goals, you stated, ``I believe that step one should be
Congress to review whether the Agency is appropriately resourced to
fulfill the goals and objectives assigned to it.'' Do you believe the
IHS is appropriately resourced to fulfill its goals and objectives?
Answer. No, not at the level that our patients, tribes, urban
Indian organizations, and other stakeholders would deem
``appropriate.'' The question then becomes, ``what level of care is
appropriate?'' In my opinion, the measurement should be morbidity and
mortality statistics. When there is no disparity between the rates of
death and disease of American Indians and Alaska Natives, in comparison
to the general U.S. population, then we can say that the IHS is
appropriately resourced.
Question 22. In response to question F-16, you propose a number of
legislative actions related to the IHS for Congress to consider--
including expressing your support for moving IHS to an advance
appropriations cycle, a proposal reflected in two bills I have
sponsored this Congress (S. 229 the Indian Programs Advance
Appropriations Act and S. 2541 the Indian Health Service Advance
Appropriations Act). Have you consulted with Tribes or conferred with
urban Indian organizations regarding these proposals?
Answer. The vast majority of the proposals included in the list of
legislative actions were developed specifically as a result of
consulting with Tribes and conferring with urban Indian organizations.
The exact language included in the legislative action requests have not
yet been shared with Tribes and urban Indian organizations, however the
concepts and goals are in alignment with the interests of Tribes and
urban Indian organizations.
Question 22a. Did you discuss these legislative proposals with the
HHS or the Administration before submitting them to the Committee?
Answer. Yes, all of the legislative actions included on the list
have been discussed with both HHS and OMB officials, and my responses
to the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs were reviewed and cleared
prior to submission.
Question 22b. If confirmed, do you plan to push for inclusion of
your proposals included in the Administration's budget requests?
Answer. Yes, absolutely. If confirmed I plan to push for these
proposals to be included in the Administration's budget requests.