- MONETARY POLICY AND THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
MONETARY POLICY AND
THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JULY 18, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services
Serial No. 115-110
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
31-509 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES
JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina,
MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Vice Chairman
Member
PETER T. KING, New York
CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California
NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL POSEY, Florida
MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan
STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin
DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
AL GREEN, Texas
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina
KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
ANDY BARR, Kentucky
JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania
BILL FOSTER, Illinois
LUKE MESSER, Indiana
DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine
JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
MIA LOVE, Utah
DENNY HECK, Washington
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas
JUAN VARGAS, California
TOM EMMER, Minnesota
JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
RUBEN KIHUEN, Nevada
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
TED BUDD, North Carolina
DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana
Shannon McGahn, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hearing held on:
July 18, 2018................................................
1
Appendix:
July 18, 2018................................................
63
WITNESSES
Wednesday, July 18, 2018
Powell, Hon. Jerome H., Chairman, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.........................................
5
APPENDIX
Prepared statements:
Powell, Hon. Jerome H........................................
64
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
Powell, Hon. Jerome H.:
Written responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representatives Beatty, Gottheimer, Huizenga, Messer,
Sinema, Sherman, and Stivers...............................
136
MONETARY POLICY AND
THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY
----------
Wednesday, July 18, 2018
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jeb Hensarling
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hensarling, McHenry, Royce, Lucas,
Pearce, Posey, Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Duffy, Stivers, Hultgren,
Ross, Pittenger, Wagner, Barr, Rothfus, Tipton, Williams,
Poliquin, Love, Hill, Emmer, Zeldin, Trott, Loudermilk, Mooney,
MacArthur, Davidson, Budd, Kustoff, Tenney, Hollingsworth,
Waters, Maloney, Sherman, Clay, Scott, Green, Cleaver, Moore,
Ellison, Perlmutter, Himes, Foster, Kildee, Delaney, Sinema,
Beatty, Heck, Vargas, Gottheimer, and Crist.
Chairman Hensarling. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a recess
of the committee at any time. And all members will have 5
legislative days within which to submit extraneous materials to
the Chair for inclusion in the record.
This hearing is for the purpose of receiving the semiannual
testimony of the Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System on monetary policy and the state of the economy.
I now recognize myself for 3-1/2 minutes to give an opening
statement.
As we meet today, thanks to the fiscal policies of the
Trump Administration and this Congress, many Americans are
seeing the strongest economy of their lifetime. Most
importantly, 3 percent average economic growth is back, 90
percent of Americans are seeing bigger paychecks, and in the
last quarter real disposable income increased a very strong 3.4
percent, and unemployment remains near a 50-year low.
But the economy may be challenged in significant ways if
either we find ourselves in a protracted global trade war or
the unconventional monetary policy tools of the Fed are not
carefully and skillfully wound down in transition to normalcy.
In February, during or last Humphrey-Hawkins hearing, I
questioned whether the Fed would ever return to a monetary
policy balance sheet after a decade of accumulating and
maintaining, in contrast, a macroprudential balance sheet. And
my concern remains, because less than a year into the Fed's
balance sheet wind-down some FOMC (Federal Open Market
Committee) members are already calling to slow down or end the
process.
We were told by the Fed that letting the roll-off schedule
run for 3 or 4 years would be less exciting than watching paint
dry. But as we meet today, we face the prospect that maybe the
paint stays wet.
In other words, we seem to be faced with an increasing
prospect of a balance sheet that may never return to a more
conventional size or composition.
I believe this is problematic. An unconventional balance
sheet may well threaten ultimately the integrity and
independence of the Feds's conduct of monetary policy by
enabling competing activities that lie outside its mandate for
stable prices and full employment. This matter must be reviewed
carefully.
Additionally, I have governance concerns. I would note
today that only three individuals, as a practical matter, are
actually empowered to set U.S. monetary policy.
This is a matter of concern. We know that interest rates on
reserve deposits have now supplanted open market operations of
the FOMC in playing the lead role in conducting monetary
policy, given that the Board of Governors can administer
interest rates on reserve deposits without any input from the
FOMC or any district bank president. This means three
individuals--or, to be more precise, two, given a majority
vote--set monetary policy in the U.S.
I certainly don't believe this is currently being abused,
but I do believe, as a matter of public policy, the full FOMC
should vote on where to set interest rates on reserve deposits.
And furthermore, I would call upon the Senate to expeditiously
confirm the Federal Reserve Board Governors that the President
has long since nominated.
Finally, many members, including myself, share a concern
about the apparent inconsistency of a 2 percent inflation
target with the goal of price stability. A 2 percent inflation
target means that every dollar a couple sets aside at a child's
birth for her college education will have lost approximately 30
percent of its purchasing power by the time the first tuition
bill arrives.
I understand that other central banks do this. I understand
this may be good policy. But if so, Congress should decide
this, because Section 2A of the Federal Reserve Act mandates,
quote, ``stable prices.'' And last I looked up the word
``stable'' in the dictionary it means quote, unquote,
``fixed,'' quote, unquote, ``not changing,'' or, quote, unquote
``permanent.'' And yet we see even some advocating a policy
rate target that allows for even greater swings than the
current 2 percent inflation target.
Chairman Powell, we welcome you and we look forward to
hearing more about these issues, and we look forward to a
prudent path to normalization where interest rates are once
again market based and credit is allocated to its most
efficient use.
I now recognize the Ranking Member of the committee, the
gentlelady from California, for 3 minutes for an opening
statement.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, Chairman Powell.
Mr. Chairman, I am very concerned about the impact of the
reckless economic policies of Donald Trump on hardworking
Americans, vulnerable families, and our Nation's economy. This
President has started a trade war that is already harming
American consumers and companies.
For example, Whirlpool, based in Michigan has seen its
share price drop over 15 percent as a result of Trump's tariffs
on steel and aluminum. Washing machines and dryer prices have
increased 20 percent. According to The Wall Street Journal, the
mayor of Clyde, Ohio, where Whirlpool has a plant, commented on
the tariffs saying, I quote, ``People's anxiety level is higher
because nobody knows what is going on,'' quote, unquote.
The tax scam that the Congressional Republicans and
President Trump pushed through, explodes the deficit and raises
taxes on 86 million American families to help out big
corporations and very wealthy individuals. But most of these
corporations are not using the windfall to pay better wages to
their employees. Instead, they are buying back their own stock
to boost share prices and enrich their CEOs. And in the end,
this massive misguided giveaway will be paid for by future
generations of taxpayers.
In addition, the Trump Administration's latest budget
proposal makes deep cuts to important healthcare, nutritional
assistance, housing and community development programs, and
would be detrimental to families, veterans, seniors, and
persons with disabilities.
In all, the Trump Administration's policies are deeply
harmful and threaten the hard-earned economic gains put in
motion during the Obama Administration. As a result of
Democratic policies and the policies of the Federal Reserve, we
are now experiencing the longest stretch of private sector job
growth on record, but with these harmful economic policies
Trump is putting all of that progress at risk.
So I am interested in Chairman Powell's views on these
matters, especially the long-term effect of Trump's damaging
economic policies and what tools, if any, the Federal Reserve
has to prevent a possible recession that could be triggered by
the policies of this Administration.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr.
Barr, the Chairman of the Monetary Policy and Trade
Subcommittee, for 1-1/2 minutes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Powell, thank you for testifying today.
As Chairman Hensarling has already stated, the economy is
strong and the data supports this statement. Americans have
more money in their paychecks thanks to tax reform, job
creation is strong, unemployment is near a 50-year low, and
many Americans who left the workforce during the financial
crisis are reentering it.
While overall the economic outlook of America is bright,
there are a few items that we need to carefully watch. One is
uncertainty surrounding U.S. trade policy which impacts key
Kentucky industry such as bourbon, agriculture, and auto
manufacturing. Another is the legacy of the Fed's
unconventional monetary policies and bloated asset sheet that
continues to distort credit allocation. A third is a flattening
yield curve that some economists warn could signal a downturn.
And a final risk is out-of-date regulation, such as the G-SIB
surcharge calculation that puts American banks at a
disadvantage relative to their international competitors.
Chairman Powell, thank you for your service at the Federal
Reserve, and I look forward to hearing from you today about
these and other important topics.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Wisconsin, Ms.
Moore, the Ranking Member of the Monetary Policy and Trade
Subcommittee, for 1 minute.
Ms. Moore. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, it is lovely to see you again.
I am going to paraphrase and channel Ben Franklin here:
Dodd-Frank gave America a stable economic system if we can keep
it.
I fear your greatest challenges in the future will be
directly related to the actions of Republican policymakers and
our President. Ruinous trickle-down tax cuts, adopting their
policies that drive debt and income inequality, and of course
the Wells Fargo model, will saddle regular Americans with
fourth-place payday loans to pay it all back.
Destabilizing financial deregulation and unqualified
nominees like Kathy Kraninger to head the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, capricious trade wars, Harley in my
district, farmers in my State bracing for ruin, fiscal
mismanagement, low grade scams, and incompetence all seem to be
hallmarks of Mr. Trump.
But, as we discuss Esther 4:14, you have been called for
such a time as this. God bless you.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman form Michigan, Mr.
Kildee, the vice Ranking Member, for 1 minute.
Mr. Kildee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for yielding.
Chairman Powell, thank you for being here.
I lead an initiative in Congress entitled The Future of
America's Cities and Towns. Its purpose is to fuel a national
conversation around the economic health of our country's older
industrial cities and towns, places like my hometown of Flint,
that have not fully recovered from the Great Recession.
Even with the job growth and economic recovery we have
seen, it is uneven. In economic terms there is no average
American anymore. A whole cohort of communities across the
country continue to experience the kind of stress that
threatens their sustainability as communities and the fiscal
solvency of their municipalities.
I believe we have to have a much more serious and
thoughtful conversation about how we support these places and
the millions of people who live there. Many of the regional
banks, such as the Boston, Cleveland, and Chicago banks, have
taken an interest in working to improve the fiscal health of
these places within their jurisdiction. And so I would be
interested in hearing your thoughts on how the Fed can help
these places.
Monetary policy is by nature a broad tool for economic
growth. We must have a particular focus on creating more
economic opportunity for those families and those communities
that continue to struggle.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your indulgence.
Chairman Hensarling. Today we welcome back to the committee
for his second appearance Governor Powell, Chairman of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Governor
Powell has previously testified for this committee, so I
believe he needs no further introduction.
Without objection, the witness' written statement will be
made part of the record.
Chairman Powell, you are now recognized for your testimony.
Welcome.
STATEMENT OF THE HON. JEROME H. POWELL
Mr. Powell. Thank you very much, and good morning, Chairman
Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, and other members of the
committee here today. I am happy to present the Federal
Reserve's semiannual Monetary Policy Report to Congress.
Let me start by saying that my colleagues and I strongly
support the goals that Congress has set for us for monetary
policy: Maximum employment and price stability.
We also support clear and open communication about the
policies we undertake to achieve these goals. We owe you and
the general public clear explanations of what we are doing and
why we are doing it. Monetary policy affects everyone and
should be a mystery to no one.
For the past 3 years we have been gradually returning
interest rates and the Fed's securities holdings to more normal
levels as the economy strengthens. And we believe this is the
best way we can help set conditions in which Americans who want
a job can find one and in which inflation remains low and
stable.
I will review the current economic situation and outlook
and then turn to monetary policy.
Since I last testified here in February, the job market has
continued to strengthen and inflation has moved up. In the most
recent data, inflation was a little above 2 percent, the level
that the Federal Open Market Committee thinks will best achieve
our price stability and employment objectives over the longer
run. The latest figure was boosted by a significant increase in
gasoline and other energy prices.
An average of 215,000 net new jobs were created each month
this year in the first half of the year. That number is
somewhat higher than the monthly average for 2017. It is also a
good deal higher than the average number of people who enter
the workforce each month on net.
The unemployment rate edged down one-tenth of a percent
over the first half of the year to 4.0 percent in June, which
is near the lowest level of the past two decades.
In addition, the share of the population that either has a
job or has looked for one in the past month, what we call the
labor force participation rate, has not changed much since late
2013, and this development is another sign of labor market
strength.
Part of what has kept that participation rate stable is
that more working-age people have started looking for a job,
which has helped make up for the large number of baby boomers
who are retiring and leaving the workforce.
Another piece of good news is that the robust conditions in
the labor market are being felt by many different groups. For
example, the unemployment rates for African Americans and
Hispanics have fallen sharply over the past few years and are
now near their lowest levels since the Bureau of Labor
Statistics began reporting data for these groups in 1972.
Groups with higher unemployment rates have tended to
benefit the most as the job market has strengthened. But
jobless rates for these groups are still higher than those for
Whites. And while three-quarters of Whites responded in a
recent Federal Reserve survey that they were doing at least OK
financially in 2017, only two-thirds of African Americans and
Hispanics responded that way.
Incoming data show that alongside the strong job market,
the U.S. economy has grown at a solid pace so far this year.
The value of goods and services produced in the economy, or
GDP, rose at a modest annual rate of 2 percent in the first
quarter after adjusting for inflation. However, the latest data
suggested that economic growth in second quarter was
considerably stronger than in the first.
And this solid pace of growth so far this year is based on
several factors. Robust job gains, rising after-tax incomes,
and optimism among households have lifted consumer spending in
recent months. Investment by businesses has continued to grow
at a healthy rate. Good economic performance in other countries
has supported U.S. exports and manufacturing. And while housing
construction has not increased this year, it is up noticeably
from where it stood a few years ago.
I will turn now to inflation. After several years in which
inflation ran below our 2 percent objective, the recent data
are encouraging. The price index for personal consumption
expenditures, or PCE inflation, as we call it, which is an
overall measure of prices paid by consumers, increased 2.3
percent over the 12 months ending in May, and that number is up
from 1.5 percent a year ago.
Overall inflation increased partly because of higher oil
prices, which caused a sharp rise in gasoline and other energy
prices paid by consumers.
Because energy prices move up and down a great deal, we
also look at core inflation. Core inflation excludes energy and
food prices and is generally a better indicator of future
overall inflation.
Core inflation was 2.0 percent for the 12 months ending in
May, compared with 1.5 percent a year ago. We will continue to
keep a close eye on inflation with a goal of keeping it near 2
percent.
Looking ahead, my colleagues on the FOMC and I expect that
with appropriate monetary policy the job market will remain
strong and inflation will stay near 2 percent over the next
several years.
This judgment reflects several factors. First, interest
rates and financial conditions more broadly remain favorable to
growth. Second, our financial system is much stronger than
before the crisis and is in a good position to meet the credit
needs of households and businesses. Third, Federal tax and
spending policies will likely continue to support the
expansion. And fourth, the outlook for economic growth abroad
remains solid, despite greater uncertainties in several parts
of the world.
Now, what I have just described is what we see as the most
likely path for the economy. Of course, economic outcomes that
we actually experience often turn out to be a good deal
stronger or weaker than those in our best forecast. For
example, it is difficult to predict the ultimate outcome of
current discussions over trade policy, as well as the size and
timing of economic effects of the recent changes in fiscal
policy.
Overall, we see the risk of the economy unexpectedly
weakening as roughly balanced with the possibility of the
economy growing faster than we currently anticipate.
Over the first half of 2018 the FOMC has continued to
gradually reduce monetary policy accommodation. In other words,
we have continued to dial back the extra boost that was needed
to help the economy recover from the financial crisis and the
recession.
Specifically, we raised the target range for the Federal
funds rate by 1/4 percentage point at both our March and June
meetings, bringing the target today to its current range of 1-
3/4 percent to 2 percent.
In addition, last October we started gradually reducing our
holdings of Treasury and mortgage-backed securities, and that
process has been running quite smoothly. Our policies reflect
the strong performance of the economy and are intended to help
make sure that continues.
The payment of interest on balances held by banks in their
accounts at the Federal Reserve has played a key role in
carrying out these policies, as the current Monetary Policy
Report explains in some detail. Payment of interest on these
balances is our principal tool for keeping the Federal funds
rate in the FOMC's target range. This tool has made it possible
for us to gradually return interest rates to a more normal
level without disrupting financial markets and the economy.
As I mentioned, after many years of running below target,
our longer-run objective of 2 percent inflation has recently
moved close to that level, and our challenge will be to keep it
there. Many factors affect inflation. Some of them are
temporary and others longer lasting. Inflation will at times be
above 2 percent and at other times below. And we say that the 2
percent objective is symmetric because the FOMC would be
concerned if inflation were running persistently above or below
that 2 percent objective.
The unemployment rate is low and expected to fall further.
Americans who want jobs have a good chance of finding them.
Moreover, wages are growing a little faster than they did a few
years ago.
That said, they are still not rising as fast as in the
years before the crisis. One explanation could be that
productivity growth has been low in recent years. On a brighter
note, though, moderate wage growth also tells us that the job
market is not causing high inflation.
With a strong job market, inflation close to our objective,
and the risks to the outlook roughly balanced, the FOMC
believes that for now the best way forward is to keep gradually
raising the Federal funds rate. We are aware that on the one
hand raising interest rates too slowly may lead to high
inflation or financial market excesses. On the other hand, if
we raise rates too rapidly the economy could weaken and
inflation could persistently run below our objective.
The committee will continue to weigh a wide range of
relevant information when deciding what monetary policy will be
appropriate. As always, our actions will depend on the economic
outlook, which may change as we receive new data.
For guideposts on appropriate policy, the FOMC routinely
looks at monetary policy rules that recommend a level for the
Federal funds rate based on the current rates of inflation and
unemployment. The July Monetary Policy Report gives an update
on monetary policy rules and their role in our policy
discussions. I continue to find these rules helpful, although
using them requires careful judgment.
Thank you very much, and I will look forward to our
conversation.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Powell can be found on page
64 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hensarling. Thank you, Chairman Powell.
The Chair now yields to himself 5 minutes for questions.
I don't believe, Chairman Powell, there was a discussion
about this on the Senate side yesterday. I didn't hear much
about it in your testimony. But I still seek greater
specificity on the current goals for the wind-down of the
balance sheet.
It is my current understanding that it is the goal, with
respect to the pace, that this wind-down will take about 3 to 4
years, that ultimately the size of the balance sheet, as of
today, the target is 2 to 2.5 trillion. And with respect to
composition, primarily Treasury's, but some MBS (mortgage-
backed security).
Is my understanding correct? Is that the current goal of
the Fed?
Mr. Powell. So the plan is to return the balance sheet over
time to a mainly Treasury balance sheet. I have provided
estimates, others have provided estimates, of how long that
with take. They are fairly uncertain. But my estimate has been
3 or 4 years.
What will guide the time at which we will ultimately stop
shrinking the balance sheet will really be a function--and the
ultimate size of the balance sheet--will really be a function
of the public's demand for our liabilities.
During quantitative easing that was really about assets. In
the long run what matters is the public's demand for currency,
which has grown very strongly for the last few years, and also
the public's demand for reserves. And in an era where we
require the banks to have lots of high quality liquid assets,
reserves are the ultimate high quality liquidity asset.
So I think we are going to be finding out how big that
demand is for those two liabilities, and also some others. I
think there are estimates. We don't have a target range, for
example.
Chairman Hensarling. OK. So you really don't know.
Mr. Powell. That is right.
Chairman Hensarling. Obviously, we all acknowledge there
will be a greater demand for reserves, but I still would
anticipate that in the 2 to 2.5 trillion that might actually
exceed demand.
So I guess, Chairman Powell, my next question is, is it a
goal of the Fed--so I understand you want to keep IOER
(interest rate on excess reserves), that particularly today
this is how monetary policy is determined. But do you see a
day, is it the goal of the Federal Reserve to again have open
market operations, the FOMC, primarily drive monetary policy?
So I guess this is really the debate between the floor and
the corridor. Currently we are using the floor. But is that the
ultimate goal? Is this a permanent tool? Or will we see a
future where IOER sets the floor, the FOMC sets the higher end,
and let the market determine the interest rate in between that
floor and ceiling? What is the goal of the Fed?
Mr. Powell. The committee has not made a decision on
whether in the longer run will it go back to a corridor system
or stay in what we have now, which is a floor system.
Chairman Hensarling. When might the Fed contemplate this?
Mr. Powell. We will be returning to that question, I would
say fairly soon. It is something we have talked about
periodically at various FOMC meetings. And my thinking is that
we will return to that discussion in a serious way in the
relatively near future.
Chairman Hensarling. Well, one thing I would have you
consider, Chairman Powell, as the Board of Governors takes a
look at this, is ultimately the potential risk to the Fed's
independence of having such an unconventional-size balance
sheet.
I would say regrettably, Congress raided a relatively small
fund of the Federal Reserve to fund a transportation bill. I
tried to fight that. I wasn't successful. It has been raided
twice. So I have joined in with my colleagues.
We also know now that the Fed funds the Bureau of Consumer
Financial Protection. Both of these have nothing to do with
monetary policy. I could foresee a day with a large, large
balance sheet out there, and with the potential of either
municipalities of States on the brink of insolvency, having
Congress decide the Fed needs to buy their bonds and prop them
up.
I can also see one day, an infrastructure bill coming down
the pike, with no good way to pay for it, and there is a big
pot of money that the Fed has, maybe the Fed should be directed
to buy these bonds. And I think we are seeing some of this,
frankly, across the pond when I look at the Swiss central bank
or the ECB.
So I am just curious, as you think about the size of your
balance sheet, do you ever consider its impact on your
independence?
Mr. Powell. We do think about those things. And we have
said that the balance sheet will return to a size that is no
larger than it needs to be for us to effect monetary policy in
our chosen framework.
Chairman Hensarling. Well, I just assure you, Mr. Chairman,
if there is a big pot of money out there, this Congress might
find a way to get its hands on it. So you might consider that
as you consider the size of your balance sheet.
The time of the Chair has long since expired. The Chair now
recognizes the Ranking Member.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chair Powell, while I have heard you state repeatedly that
it is too soon to tell whether the economic efforts of the
recent implementation of tariffs will be either positive or
negative, there are already serious indications that we are
headed for trouble.
In the most recent June FOMC meeting minutes, several
participants noted that their district business contacts had
expressed concern about the adverse effects of tariffs and
other proposed trade restrictions on future investment activity
and that they were not planning any new investments to increase
capacity.
Mid Continent Nail, America's largest nail manufacturer,
based in Missouri, has already laid off 60 workers and expects
to go out of business by Labor Day. Harley-Davidson, based in
Wisconsin, is moving jobs overseas to Europe to avoid tariffs
on its exports.
Whirlpool, based in Michigan, has seen its share price drop
over 15 percent as a result of Trump's tariffs on steel and
aluminum. Washing machine and dryer prices have increased 20
percent in the past 3 months as a result, the steepest rise in
the past 12 years, according to the Department of Labor.
These tariffs are affecting the price of everything from
bicycles to washers to automobiles. In addition to these
immediate effects, to your point, there may be delayed negative
effect on the economy as well. While the U.S. is taking a
protectionist stance toward trade policy, the rest of the world
is moving forward on trade without us.
What long-term economic effects can we expect to see if
these tariffs continue to escalate to the point of a trade war?
Do you expect the economic effects of a trade war to be felt
more acutely in certain regions of the U.S.? And furthermore,
is the Fed well suited to respond to a recession caused by a
trade war? If not, what can be done?
Mr. Powell. I should start by quickly reminding all of us,
including me, that we stay in our lane at the Fed, and when we
talk about things like fiscal policy and trade policy that are
not assigned to us, we try to stay at a high level, a principle
level.
But answering your question, if this process leads to a
world of higher tariffs on a wide range of goods and services
that are traded and those are sustained for a longer period of
time--in other words, if it results in a more protectionist
world, that will be bad for our economy. And it will be bad for
other economies, too. It will be bad for the world economy.
That is not what the Administration says they are trying to
achieve. It isn't up to us to criticize their policies in this
activity.
But the evidence is clear that countries that remain open
to trade have higher productivity, they have higher incomes.
Not every group is affected positively by trade. There are
groups that are hurt by trade. And I think all countries have
learned that they need to do a better job of addressing the
needs of those populations, but not through trade barriers and
tariffs of that kind.
Ms. Waters. While certainly the Fed does not have direct
responsibility for trade and for tariffs, were you consulted at
all when the tariff decisions were made?
Mr. Powell. No, we play no role in the Administration's
discussions on these. Like I imagine just about everyone here,
we hear from our extensive network of business contacts a
rising chorus of concern.
As you pointed out, lots and lots of individual companies
have been harmed by this. We don't see it in the aggregate
numbers yet because it is a $20 trillion economy and these
things take time to show up. But we hear many, many stories of
companies that are concerned and are now beginning to make
investment decisions--or not make them--because of this.
Ms. Waters. Have you had any action at all in relationship
to the Chamber of Commerce? Have they talked with you? Have
they sought your opinion? Have you talked with them? What do
you know about the Chamber of Commerce position on tariffs?
Mr. Powell. Well, I saw that they took a very strong public
position against tariffs. We try to have good relations and
strong relations with the Chamber. I haven't personally
discussed their position on trade, but I know what it is.
Ms. Waters. Do you know what specifically they were
concerned about as it relates to tariffs in a particular part
of country, agriculture, et cetera?
Mr. Powell. I shouldn't speak for them, but I think it is
really a general thing. The bottom line is a more protectionist
economy is an economy that is less competitive, it is less
productive. We know that. This is the torch we have been
carrying around the world for 75 years.
So it is not a good thing, if that is where this goes. We
don't know ultimately yet where this will lead. The
Administration says they want lower tariffs, and that would be
good for the economy, if we achieve that.
Ms. Waters. Well, thank you very much.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr.
Barr, Chair of the Monetary Policy and Trade Subcommittee.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Powell, welcome back to the committee.
Some economists argue that a flattening of the yield curve
is an indication that an economy is headed for a recession.
Obviously, with the strong data that we are seeing, we don't
see any indication of a recession in the near-term.
But I asked you this question 6 months ago in your last
report, and I asked you, given the flattening of the yield
curve and the risk potentially that short-term rates might
exceed long-term rates, whether there would be any plans within
the normalization strategy to accelerate the roll-off of
longer-term assets more quickly to counteract the flattening of
the yield curve? I believe you indicated that there were no
such plans 6 months ago.
I just wanted to ask you, given the fact that that yield
curve has flattened even further in the interim, since we last
met, is there any discussion within the FOMC to alter or
accelerate the balance sheet reduction program in contemplation
of this flattening yield curve?
Mr. Powell. Thank you.
No, there is not. We very carefully developed and
socialized to the public the balance sheet reduction, balance
sheet normalization plan. It is working smoothly. We are not
thinking really about changing it, except in the conditions
that we have identified, which would be a meaningful downturn.
Mr. Barr. If that is the case, what are the Fed's plans
with respect to that flattening yield curve? And what risk does
that pose to the economy?
Mr. Powell. Maybe let me tell you how I think about the
yield curve.
We know why the short end of the yield curve is moving up.
It is because essentially out to 2 years or so really the
market is pricing in its expectations of what the Fed will do,
plus or minus maybe a little bit of a term premium when you get
out to 2 years. So we know why the short end is moving up.
The real question is, what is the story with long rates? So
the long rate, like take the 10-year Treasury, you have to
decompose that and ask what is in it.
And I think the whole point of the yield curve conversation
is that you can decompose that, and in that, whatever the long-
term rate is, 2.85 percent this morning, 10-year--what is in
there is a term premium. But there is also the market's
estimate of the long-run neutral rate. And so it is telling you
something and we are listening.
But it involves many other things. You have to do a
decomposition to pull that out. And then that tells you what
the stance of monetary policy is. So whether a policy is
accommodative or whether it is restrictive. And that is the
important question, not the shape of the yield curve.
Mr. Barr. Chairman, would you agree that the oversized
balance sheet is putting downward pressure on those long-term
interest rates, continues to put downward pressure?
Mr. Powell. Yes, but to a diminishing degree.
Mr. Barr. Let me switch gears to IOER. For decades now the
Board of Governors has administered interest rates on reserves,
not for the intended purpose of fairly compensating commercial
banks for required deposits at Federal Reserve banks, but
rather as a monetary policy rate.
Given the fact that IOER is now your principal tool for
interest rate setting, would it not be better if IOER was set
by the FOMC, a much more diverse body that includes not only
the Governors, but also the five voting district bank
presidents, as opposed to just the Board of Governors?
Mr. Powell. I guess I would--I think of it this way. The
FOMC sets the target range for the Federal funds rate. IOER is
just a tool to make sure that the Federal funds rate trades in
the range that has been set by the FOMC. So it is really just a
tool to follow through on the much more important decision
which is made by the FOMC.
Mr. Barr. Well, thank you. This committee and the Congress
is considering a proposal to transfer that responsibility of
IOER to the FOMC, the larger, more diverse group, and we
continue to engage you on that.
Let me finally conclude with a question about trade. I
agree with your assessment that free trade and low tariffs
result in better economic performance as opposed to a trade war
or high tariffs.
How important is it for the Administration to quickly
resolve its trade and tariff negotiations? And what are the
risks of a protracted period of increasing tariffs?
Mr. Powell. Again, wanting not to be an adviser or in any
way a participant in these discussions, which are really up to
the Administration, uncertainty is one of those things where
businesses--there was a lot of momentum in the economy earlier
this year. I wouldn't want to see uncertainty lead people to
start putting off decisions, and that would be the risk of a
long, protracted discussion.
Mr. Barr. Thank you for your answers.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Wisconsin, Ms.
Moore, Ranking Member the Monetary Policy and Trade
Subcommittee.
Ms. Moore. Thank you so much Mr. Chairman.
Again, welcome back, Mr. Chairman.
You talk a lot about productivity, and indeed economists
keep talking about an aging population, the boomers, and that
is impacting productivity, and how lagging productivity is an
ongoing drag on economic growth.
I an wondering if you think that having a comprehensive
immigration policy would help increase productivity?
Mr. Powell. Immigration is another one of those policies
that is high up on the list of things that are not assigned to
us, but I can--I can still--so I am going to try to stay in our
lane.
But I do think to the extent these issues connect to the
health of the economy in the long run, then we have an
obligation to speak to that.
So you think about potential growth in the United States,
you can really boil it down to how fast is the labor force
growing and how much is output per hour growing. That is it,
that is all you have.
Ms. Moore. Our CRS does anticipate that over the next
decade or so it could increase our economy by a trillion
dollars to get these people out of the shadows.
You talk in your remarks about the lower unemployment rates
for African Americans and Hispanics. That is something we are
all celebrating. But I swear to you, I know a lot of African
Americans, I am related to them, I don't know many that don't
have two jobs in order to make it. I know some who have
bachelor's degrees, and yet they are forced to live with
roommates because they can't sustain themselves.
So what we have found is that while there might be lower
unemployment, wages have actually decreased, despite the tax
cuts, which claimed that there were going to be $4,000 for
everybody, we know we got these one-time-only bonuses.
Wages have decreased and income equality has increased. And
I am wondering what your projection is for flat or lowered
wages despite increased unemployment.
Mr. Powell. We look at a wide range of wage and
compensation indicators, and pretty consistently across the
board, if you look back at where they were 5 years ago and look
back where they are now, they have all moved up. They used to
be right around 2 percent increase per year. Now they are
around 3 percent. We think this is a good thing.
Ms. Moore. So African Americans, their wages are
increasing?
Mr. Powell. Yes. I think it is pretty broad at this point
in different--
Ms. Moore. And I would surely like to see these data,
because other economists have said that it has actually
decreased. All right. Thank you.
I am wondering--I know you aren't going to ask any
questions about the tax cut, so I'll let you off--I am
wondering, though, about the big tax cut, I have to ask, the
big tax cut that we just provided and it has increased income
inequality.
I am just wondering what your thoughts are and projections
about how sustainable that is when 80 percent of these tax cuts
have gone for shareholder type buybacks versus increase in
wages or capital improvements. I am wondering what do you think
going forward, what impact that will have on economic growth.
Mr. Powell. U.S. Fiscal policy has been on an unsustainable
path for some time. It continues to be unsustainable.
Ms. Moore. Higher debt?
Mr. Powell. Yes. The debt is going up and I think it is
growing faster than the economy. We need to get the economy
growing faster than the debt, it comes down to that, and we are
not doing that. It is something we should be working on now. We
should all be working on that together.
Ms. Moore. Do you think that shareholder buybacks is a
healthy indicator of healthy prospect for growth?
Mr. Powell. I think when a company decides to buy back
stock, they are saying that we have more cash than we can put
to work for our shareholders, that is the capital markets
working. That money doesn't go away, of course, it goes into
people who then can spend it or--
Ms. Moore. This is more money for them to use to chase
yield. Don't you think that the chasing of yield creates
bubbles and that is one of big problems that we had in 2008, is
money chasing yield?
Mr. Powell. I think we certainly can find ourselves in a
situation where we are seeing financial bubbles. We watch that
very closely. Don't see that now, but it is a key risk that we
monitor very carefully.
Ms. Moore. And I thank you so much, sir.
Mr. Powell. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Luetkemeyer, Chairman of our Financial Institutions
Subcommittee.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, Chairman Powell.
Yesterday we had a hearing with our Financial Institutions
Subcommittee, and I asked the question of Acting Comptroller of
the Currency, Keith Noreika, about the implementation about S.
2155, and specifically whether or not the statutory language
around the $250 billion threshold for SIFI (systemically
important financial institution) designation was clear. Mr.
Noreika said that the language and Congressional intent were
pretty straightforward.
And so my question to you is, would you agree with your
former colleague that the language is pretty clear, no
ambiguity there, that you know exactly what should be done with
those banks under 250 with regards to SIFI activity and
testing?
Mr. Powell. I think that it is very clear and I think that
the language gives us the authority that we need.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. OK. So now we know what we should be
doing. How long would you anticipate it is going to take to
implement the statute with regards to 2155?
Mr. Powell. So with regards to that particular provision,
we are thinking already about exactly the framework we are
going to publish for comment and receive public comment on that
will allow us to identify systemic risk or risks to safety and
soundness among banks below 250.
Some of the aspects of 2155 were already out of door. We
published a document on Friday of July Fourth week which talked
about many things that we are doing. We have a big job to
implement 2155 and we are going at it very hard.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you very much. And it is nice to
know that--or it should be noted anyway--that those banks under
250 are not significantly important financial institutions from
the standpoint of endangering the economy. That is what a SIFI
is supposed to be, a bank that would endanger--while they are
nice size banks, they are not something that is going to
endanger the economy and therefore they fall under a different
regulatory regime. So we thank you for that.
With regards to another issue I brought up yesterday,
former Governor Dan Tarullo said in his farewell address that
stress testing programs should be moved into the normal
examination cycle. And I agree with that proposition and said
while I don't underestimate the importance of stress tests,
those tests should be run by regulators. Banks are doing this
right now on a regular basis with regulatory oversight.
Would you agree with Governor Tarullo that we need to
assimilate those exams, the stress testing things into the
regular examination cycle, or do you want to retain those as a
separate type of testing that the banks are going to be putting
out information for and modeling?
Mr. Powell. I believe he was talking about the qualitative
aspect, so we are looking to return the qualitative part of the
test over time to the regular examination cycle. And we are
looking for the right way and time to do that.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Well, it seemed to me, just to throw ideas
out, that it would seem to me if the Fed would have several
different models and then they would go into the bank, take the
information from it, throw it into those models, to see once if
there is an area within the bank's business model that is of
concern, that could be pointed out by the various models and
update those models on an annual basis or whatever it would
take.
It seems to me like now the stress testing is a game of
``gotcha.'' The models are not disclosed until the very last
instance. And then are the models going to actually be useful?
So I would hope that you would think along those lines,
that you could assimilate it into part of the examination
process, take the information and put it into several different
models to see once if there is a weakness somewhere in the
bank's business model. Does that make sense?
Mr. Powell. Yes. We are working hard to make the
quantitative side of the test and the qualitative side more
transparent to the public generally and to the firms, and we
think that is a key innovation. We have a proposal out on that.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. And one of the things also with regards to
international banks, I have had some visits from our friends
across the pond recently. And so while I am a staunch advocate
for capital, I am also concerned about this notion that
arbitrarily parking capital around the globe creates a safer
financial system.
The Fed started this trend with FBO rule, something I
pointed out to Chair Yellen during her tenure. Now Europe is
following suit with the immediate parent undertaking rule,
which will hit the U.S. and ultimately U.K. banks. It seems as
though we are finding ourselves in a global back and forth here
with regards to capital. Would you agree with that? Or what are
your comments?
Mr. Powell. I think we feel like our intermediate holding
company regulation is working. It has settled down now and it
is working. We have been consulted as Europe has looked at
something similar to that. And I think the last time I checked
we felt that our concerns were being reasonably well addressed.
I will look back, though, to make sure that is right.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. One of the questions I got yesterday from
a group of politicians from Europe, was with regards to
equivalency. And I am not a big fan of that from the standpoint
of with the equivalency rules and regulations, somebody wins
and somebody loses. I am fearful that we are going to lose in
that situation. So just to comment.
Thank you very much for being here.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Cleaver, Ranking Member of our Housing and Insurance
Subcommittee.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for being here, Mr. Chairman.
Last week we were here having a conversation with Secretary
Mnuchin, and when I raised issues, they related to the fact
that I represent a rural part of the State of Missouri.
I had a townhall meeting in Higginsville, Missouri, 2 weeks
ago and brought in the Canadian consul general to talk with the
farmers in my district. Standing room crowd. Nobody in there
supported what was going on.
Some of the farmers were questioning whether they should
allow the beans to just stay in the fields this year, because,
as you probably know, the price is continuing to fall since the
tariffs were implemented.
First of all, I am concerned about whether or not the harm
could spread and do damage to the economy. I know you were
asked a similar question earlier, but it stands to reason that
if the soybean crop is damaged, as it apparently is, there has
to be a rippling effect.
And I am wondering, right now we are just talking mainly
about some farm products from my State. I think China buys $60
billion a year in soybeans, just in soybeans, $60 billion from
us, from the United States.
If you just deal with the $60 billion, is there cause to be
concerned about the damage that other parts of the economy
could experience?
Mr. Powell. The answer would be yes. You are just beginning
to see the retaliatory tariffs come into place, they are only
just beginning. And so we hear a few reports here and there
about this company and that company. The agricultural patch is
clearly very seriously affected, but it is just beginning. So I
think you want to be careful to walk on this path because it
may not be so easy to get off it.
Mr. Cleaver. I have a large rural part of my district, and
then I have the largest city in the State, Kansas City, in my
district. So I have talked about my farm problem. When I was
mayor of Kansas City, I was successful in bringing Harley-
Davidson to Kansas City, they built a plant, went up to 1,000
employees. We made an investment as a city. Of course, we are
now facing the possibility of an empty building.
But the steel tariffs are going to also have a rippling
effect. The SmootHawley Act is credited with making the
Depression even worse. But I am just wondering if you are not
going to answer this question, I understand it, so it is almost
a statement, I have to say it.
So I think when decisions like this are made they probably
should be made with the Legislative Branch of the Government
because the issues are too significant for one human being on
the planet. I don't care if it is a Democrat or Republican or a
member of the Oakland Raiders. We are talking about the world
economy being impacted and only one person has something to
say.
Frankly, Congress hasn't spoken on issues like this since
1930. We have just been frozen out of the process on an issue
that can impact the entire world.
Thank you for listening to me.
And I would also--just like to yield back, Mr. Chairman--I
would also like to express appreciation that you speak English.
When I was first elected to this committee a lot of people from
the Fed didn't speak English.
Mr. Powell. Thanks.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair takes note that the Chairman
of the Fed speaks English.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Huizenga, Chairman of our Capital Markets Subcommittee.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chair Powell, good to see you again.
And I think my friend from Missouri is very pleased for
English versus economese or economistism or whatever you want
to tag it with. But this clearly is some complicated stuff.
I have a number of issues I want to hit on very briefly.
And one of them is just a simple thing, something that we had
talked about with the FEC, the FORM Act bill that I had
proposed previously. We had a provision that we had put in
there that each Federal Reserve Board Governor should be able
to hire up to two senior staff members. And just wondering if
you could maybe briefly comment on that or whether you have
looked at that.
Mr. Powell. I think it is a good idea. Don't need
legislation on it. That is now the rule.
Mr. Huizenga. All right. Well, good, we are making progress
already.
As Chair of the Monetary Policy and Trade Subcommittee, I
had worked on monetary policy and the effects of that. Now as
Chair of the Capital Markets Subcommittee, we still see a lot
of that tie-in in the world economy and the health of what is
going on.
I have real concerns about the Volcker rule situation. Last
month the Fed, along with the other four Federal agencies,
something that Mr. Quarles had called the five-headed hydra at
one point. Had put some proposed rule changes in there.
And my understanding is that the goal of the new rule is to
simplify the regime and make it easier on the regulators, as
well as the regulated institutions, to identify proprietary
trading while allowing banks to continue providing important
market-making activities.
How do these reforms address the Volcker rule so that
compliance can be streamlined, rules clarified, and markets
actually made more efficient?
Mr. Powell. I think for the smaller institutions we will be
streamlining quite a lot.
Let me say, this rule is out for comment and we are very,
very open to better ideas, how to do this better. But we want
to stay faithful to Congress' intent, which is, these
institutions, particularly the largest ones, should not have
big proprietary trading businesses, shouldn't be doing
proprietary trading as a business line.
Mr. Huizenga. I look forward to continuing to explore how
the Fed and FOMC will be properly tailoring the Volcker rule.
However, I have been hearing some complaints from some
companies that the proposed rule, as introduced, has a new
concept of using accounting rules to identify prop trading,
which were not included in the original Volcker rule. I have
been told that this could actually result in more activities
getting caught up in the Volcker regime than there are pulled
in today.
Can you please tell me how that result, to simplify the
rule, appears to make it actually a little more cumbersome and
complex? Again, my understanding is a new metrics regime could
result in a roughly 50 percent increase in metrics reporting by
the banks subject to the rule.
Mr. Powell. That is not the intent at all. And I assume we
are going to see those comments through the comment process,
and believe me, we will give them careful consideration.
Mr. Huizenga. OK. And we are wide-ranging and far afield
here on a number of issues.
My next issue, on page 39 in your report you had your chart
about the rules. You mentioned this on page 5 of your
testimony. You gave an update on monetary rule. This is a quote
from your July Monetary Policy Report, gives an update on
monetary policy rules and their role in our policy discussions.
I understand you have a series of rules that you reference
as you are moving forward, including the Taylor rule, the
adjusted, the Taylor rule as it is.
What is the balanced approach rule? I am not familiar with
that. The balanced approach rule would have called for the most
negative interest rates during the downturn. Could you unpack
that a little bit?
Mr. Powell. So each of the rules have an estimate of the
neutral rate inflation, they have how far you are away from
your inflation target and how far you are away from your
unemployment target or your slack target.
What the balance rule does is, it doubles the coefficient
on the slack target. So in this case unemployment. So the
weighting is doubled. That is all it is.
Mr. Huizenga. And then real quickly, Chairman Barr had
talked about the yield curve flattening. And I am wondering if
there could be a circumstance when what might be good for the
Federal Government, lower interest rates long term as we deal
with our national debt load payments, frankly, might that not
necessarily be beneficial for the overall economy?
Mr. Powell. We are concerned with carrying out the mandate
you have given us, which is maximum employment, stable prices,
financial stability. We are not concerned with fiscal.
Mr. Huizenga. Do you have discretion as to whether to sell
short-term versus long-term?
Mr. Powell. Sure.
Mr. Huizenga. OK. And if you sell long--
Mr. Powell. So we are not selling anything. We don't sell
any assets. We let them mature.
Mr. Huizenga. OK. I will have to follow up with some
written on that, because I am curious, if you did sell those
long terms could the long-term rate go up.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Connecticut,
Mr. Himes.
Mr. Himes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Powell, welcome. It is a pleasure for me to have
this opportunity to chat with you. It is something I hope we
can do on an ongoing basis in the future.
I want to use my 5 minutes to ask you about two specific
risks and for your elaboration thereon. The first one is
related to financial stability and stability in the overall
financial system. I watched carefully the conversation you had
with Senators Warren and Brown about capital.
I am actually interested in hearing you for a couple of
minutes, because I do have two questions, elaborate on risks
that we might not see coming, that aren't conventional capital
risks.
So my concern of course is that we tend to get hit by the
bullets that we don't see, and while we are focused on Volcker
rule or capital, what happens, what comes upon us out of
nowhere. These things tend to come with a speed and severity
that we don't predict.
So what keeps you up at night that is not conventional
capital ratio type issues? Is it student loans? Is it
proprietary trading? Is it ETFs? Elaborate for me, if you
would, on things that concern you with respect to stability in
the banking system in particular.
Mr. Powell. The clear answer to me from that would be cyber
risk. We have spent 10 years building up capital, helping the
banks be much more conscious of their risks, building up
liquidity, stress testing all those things. And we have a
really good playbook there. I think we carefully monitor all of
the things that you mentioned, although some of them are worth
talking about as well right now.
But the thing that is really hard, is the idea of a
successful cyber attack. And we work hard on having a plan for
that. The Administration plays a leading role in that. That
would be the big one.
I think if you turn to traditional financial stability, we
think that risks are at the normal/moderate level. You see some
high asset prices. You don't see high leverage among households
or among banks. You do see a little bit of high leverage in
nonfinancial corporates, and that is something we are watching
very carefully. But again, nothing really is flashing red in
our observation of it in the financial market.
Mr. Himes. Let me ask you to elaborate. You said there are
some worth talking about, and then you highlighted asset
prices. Which category of assets in particular were you?
Mr. Powell. Just generally, you have had 10 years, almost
10 years of low interest rates and we are in the process of
normalizing policy. Bond prices are high, equity prices--
broadly speaking, commercial real estate prices are in the
upper range, generally elevated. I wouldn't use the bubble word
here, but I would say that many financial asset prices are
elevated above their normal ranges and we will have to see.
Mr. Himes. With respect to cybersecurity, which is where
you started, what would you recommend to this body that we do
as you do your reviews and whatnot, within the banking
industry, what should Congress do to assist in the process of
addressing cybersecurity risk?
Mr. Powell. I would say as much as possible, and then
double it.
So we do a great deal and it is about making sure the banks
have basic plans in mind. A lot of it is just basic cyber
hygiene and making sure that your systems, you are implementing
the latest things that come out.
So--and I think planning for failure too is very important.
That is what we do. We do everything we can to prevent a
failure, but then you have to ask yourselves, OK, what would we
do if there were a successful cyber attack. You have to have a
plan for that too. So those are the things we are working on.
Mr. Himes. OK. Let me ask you another category of risk that
is maybe a little bit more sensitive. But like so many people,
I scrutinize the words in this report--my words, not yours--
very bullish on the economy. Careful on inflation. You note
that inflation has moved up. Our challenge will be to keep it
there.
I am reflecting on where we have been in the last 10 years
in that regard. We saw a pretty substantial fiscal stimulus in
2009.
My friends on the other side of the aisle completely
rejected Keynesian economics at the time and said that wasn't
going to work. They then had an epiphany and embraced Keynesian
economics around a $2 trillion deficit-financed fiscal tax cut
at a time in which the economy was growing robustly. It has
been a long time since I studied economics, but stimulus in the
face of a robust economy concerns me from the angle of
inflation.
You say that the 2 percent objective is symmetric in the
sense of your concern. How would you divide the probability
that we see upward trending inflation versus downward trending
inflation going forward from this point?
Mr. Powell. I would say it is roughly balanced. I think
maybe slightly more worried about lower inflation still. But I
think, for a long time, inflation was below target and we were
pushing it. We have now just about reached a symmetric 2
percent objective, so it is very close. And I think from this
point forward the risks are roughly balanced.
Mr. Himes. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. McHenry, Vice Chair of the committee.
Mr. McHenry. Well, Chair Powell, thank you for being here.
I want to shift to cryptocurrency, which is a bit of your
monetary policy hat, but also a bit of your regulatory hat. And
I want to get your thinking along the lines of cryptocurrency.
So the Bank of International Settlements just released a
report saying that cryptocurrencies were, quote: ``a poor
substitute for the solid institutional backing of money.''
You have stated publicly that cryptocurrencies are
currently not big enough yet to matter, or something along
those lines. I would submit the report by the Bank of
International Settlements misses the mark of the potential of
blockchain, the potential of crypto, more broadly, but there is
a great deal of interest in your views and Central Bank's views
more broadly on cryptocurrency.
So can you just outline to me your thinking on
cryptocurrency?
Mr. Powell. Sure. So, first, I would say I think the
question I was asked that you are referring to was, do
cryptocurrencies currently present a serious financial
stability threat. And my answer was they are not big enough to
do that yet.
Mr. McHenry. Sure.
Mr. Powell. That is really what I was saying, not that they
are not a longer term thing. So they are very challenging
because cryptocurrencies are great if you are trying to hide
money or if you are trying to launder money. So we have to be
very conscious of that. I think there are also significant
investor risks.
Investors, relatively unsophisticated investors, see the
asset going up in price and they think, this is great, I will
buy this. In fact, there is no promise behind that. It is not
really a currency. It doesn't really have any intrinsic value.
So I think there are investor or consumer protection issues as
well.
Another thing I will say is that we are not looking at
this, at the Fed, as something that we should be doing, that
the Fed would do a digital currency. That is not something we
are looking at.
So mainly, I have concerns. If you think about what
currencies do, they are supposed to be a means of payment and a
store of value, basically. And cryptocurrencies, they are not
really used very much in payment. Typically, people sell their
cryptocurrencies and then pay in dollars.
In terms of a store value, look at the volatility. And it
is just not there.
Mr. McHenry. Well, has there been discussion with other G7
central banks along the lines of cryptocurrency?
Mr. Powell. It comes up a lot, yes. I am only just starting
to go to G7 meetings, but it comes up quite a bit in
international forums of various kinds.
There is a broad concern that the public needs to be well
informed about this, again, the money laundering and terrorist
financing and all of that is a big risk.
Mr. McHenry. It is a big risk, but is there any conclusion
that you are hearing or is it just a broad concern?
Mr. Powell. Well, I think the BIS report and others have
called out these risks and called on the appropriate regulatory
bodies to address them.
We don't have jurisdiction over cryptocurrency. We have
jurisdiction over banks. And so we know in their activities
with cryptocurrency companies and cryptocurrency, we can
address that. The SEC can address the investor protection
aspects of it.
Mr. McHenry. But you don't see this as impairing your
ability to act on monetary policy just given the current shape
and scope of the size of the market?
Mr. Powell. Really not at all today.
Mr. McHenry. OK. We currently have some level of framework
around regulation of cryptocurrency. You have a money service
license at the State level. In our 50 States, they all have
some requirement. So there is a great look into that
conversion, the movement of cash into cryptocurrency or out of
cryptocurrency back into cash. We have some element of
regulation of the CFTC and the SEC. So there is some broad
framework of it, but not a concerted effort by the Federal
Government to understand what is happening in cryptocurrency.
Do you have any staff resources devoted to figuring out
cryptocurrency or following cryptocurrency?
Mr. Powell. Yes. So we have looked at it carefully. I spoke
about it. Other Governors have spoken about it, Reserve Bank
presidents. Certainly, we have work going on. But, again, we
just don't have regulatory authority to deal with it, so I
think that is the key thing, is to be looking at the places
where there is that regulatory authority.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Vargas.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
First of all, I would like to thank you for one thing that
is obvious, and that is that you haven't gotten yourself in
trouble. You have been a great public servant, and I really
appreciate that.
Mr. Powell. Thank you.
Mr. Vargas. Unfortunately, you shouldn't have to say that
these days, but you really do, with what we have seen recently.
I do want to ask a little more about cryptocurrency,
however. You talked about terrorism and you also talked about
hiding money.
I had a bill here with a colleague of mine on the other
side exactly on that point. And I would like you to go a little
deeper on that.
You said it is not an issue yet because it is not large
enough, but it does seem to be growing. And you said you also
have jurisdiction, you have jurisdiction over the banks. Should
you have jurisdiction here, cryptocurrency?
Mr. Powell. That is a deep question. We are not seeking it.
Mr. Vargas. But should you?
Mr. Powell. I am not going to say yes today. We are not
looking to--it is right in the middle of the SEC's turf, the
investor protection aspects of it. I think, Treasury and FinCen
and other people have--I think it should be well regulated. I
don't really see us as probably the right group to do that.
Mr. Vargas. But it seems to me right now, that no one seems
to have quite a hold on it either. It seems to be this
amorphous blob that is moving around. You talk to the SEC and
they, at the same time, kick the ball around also.
Shouldn't there be a more concerted effort to try to figure
out who is in charge here of cryptocurrency? Because I think
that there are lots of opportunities here for, not only
terrorism, but also for drug trafficking, sexual exploitation,
human trafficking. You said terrorism, but all sorts of bad
actors can use this. And I don't think that we have a good hold
on it yet.
Mr. Powell. I think it is a good idea to focus on getting
the regulation at the Federal level of this right. Again, we
are not seeking that at the Fed. And I know Treasury has done
some thinking on this. This would be an area where they would
have the lead to identify the right regulatory structure. They
may have already published something on this. I am not sure.
Mr. Vargas. In fact, part of the bill asks them to speed
that up and to report back to us.
I do want to ask you also about the issue of wage
increases. You said that there has been some movement upwards,
2 percent, 3 percent. I think you said 3 percent, so it is
beating inflation. But the question was then specifically on
people of color, African Americans and Latinos. You said you
had some breakout numbers for those.
Mr. Powell. Not handy, I don't. I can get those for you.
Mr. Vargas. OK. I would be interested in that, because I
see the same situation in California where you have people that
have been underemployed working very, very hard, two and three
jobs, and they continue to say that they haven't seen that wage
increase yet.
We have seen, for sure--I think you are correct about the
unemployment go down, but we haven't seen yet, certainly not in
my district in any measurable way, the increases in wages.
Mr. Powell. Wages in general have been somewhat slow in
moving up and as the labor market has tightened. We understand
that really matters to people, people's lives a lot.
Mr. Vargas. Yes.
Mr. Powell. And we do see the moving up in the aggregate,
but I will be happy to supply.
Mr. Vargas. You said there was an issue of productivity,
because maybe this time the reason the rates haven't increased
as much is because of productivity. Could you talk about that
for a second?
Mr. Powell. Sure. So over a long period of time, wages
really can't forever go up faster than productivity.
Productivity is slow, but there is a reason for that. And
that is, after the financial crisis--there are many reasons for
it--after the financial crisis, though, companies didn't invest
much because there was no need to or there wasn't demand, the
economy was weak. And so weak investment casts a shadow over
productivity growth for a number of years.
So we are still--investment has now popped up. Investment
was strong in 2017. That continues in 2018. That is really
important, and we are glad to see it, but it may take some time
to show up in higher productivity. It is not because people
aren't working harder. It is because you need those information
technology and other tools to be more productive.
Mr. Vargas. And again, with the last moments that I have, I
just want to thank you again. The way you have comported
yourself, the way you have been open to talking to people, the
confidence that we have in you. I think the American people
really need, at the moment, someone like yourself that we can
look up to and say you are not involved in any scandal, you are
not involved in any other thing out there that would lose
confidence. It is just the opposite. And I want to appreciate
that and thank you for that.
Mr. Powell. Thank you, sir. I will try to live up to that.
Mr. Vargas. I hope you do.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Duffy, Chairman of our Housing and Insurance Subcommittee.
Mr. Duffy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Powell. Some of my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle have discussed harmful economic
policies. Some in their opening statements, specifically.
So if you look at the harmful economic policies that have
taken hold over the last year and a half, so President Trump
has worked hard to streamline and reduce regulation. We had a
historic tax cut. We have tried to rebuild our military. We
have pushed for American energy independence.
When you take together all of, I would quote, ``those
harmful economic policies, what has that actually done for the
African-American unemployment rate in America?''
Mr. Powell. As I mentioned, I think--
Mr. Duffy. Is it going up?
Mr. Powell. It is going down significantly.
Mr. Duffy. Say that one more time. What has happened to
African-American unemployment?
Mr. Powell. It is come down quite a bit.
Mr. Duffy. It is come down quite a bit.
How about the Hispanic unemployment rate? Has that gone up
under these harmful economic policies?
Mr. Powell. It has come down quite a bit.
Mr. Duffy. It has come down quite a bit.
So is it fair to say these policies actually aren't
harmful? They are actually growing the economy. They are
putting people back to work.
Is that a fair assessment, Mr. Powell?
Mr. Powell. It is fair to say that the unemployment rates
are very low and a lot of things go into that.
Mr. Duffy. So you wouldn't say today that it has anything
to do with regulation or tax?
Mr. Powell. I am reluctant to get into the credit
assignment game. It is really not up to us. I can report on the
economy, but I do think that--
Mr. Duffy. But you report on the economy and you look at
all the different factors that come into play in the economy.
Mr. Powell. Yes.
Mr. Duffy. So have these factors had anything to do with
the growth that you have seen in this economy?
Mr. Powell. So I attribute declining unemployment to
positive surveys among businesses, really they feel good about
the business climate.
Mr. Duffy. Why do they feel better about their businesses,
Mr. Chairman? Because they get to keep a little more of their
money? Is that possible, maybe?
How about if instead of having to navigate government rules
and regulations, they actually get to focus on running their
business. Could that attribute to the positive view they have
on the economy and their businesses?
Mr. Powell. I think you have seen very positive business
confidence surveys.
Mr. Duffy. So I will take it that you are not going to
answer my question. I understand the position and what you
said.
I want to talk to you about trade. I am a free trader like
you are. I think free trade is great for our economy. But I
also think that if you don't have fair trade, if you have deals
with places like China where you have American companies that
invest millions or billions of dollars in their technology and
you do business with China and they steal it from you, and/or
they subsidize their companies that come and do business in
America where we have, for the most part, free trade ourselves,
where we actually can't--they have barriers to American-
produced goods, how long does that relationship last where our
economy is open and theirs is closed? Does that set us up for a
long-term successful economy as it relates to China?
Mr. Powell. I strongly agree with you that trade needs to
be fair as well as free.
Mr. Duffy. Is it fair now?
Mr. Powell. Well, I think--so if you look at the rules-
based post-war system, it has consistently resulted in lower
and lower trade barriers.
Mr. Duffy. No. Our relationship with China, is it a fair
trade--do we have a fair trade relationship with China?
Mr. Powell. I think it is very clear that some countries,
and China in particular, have less open trading systems than we
would like.
Mr. Duffy. It is not fair.
Mr. Powell. And it is inappropriate for us to address that.
Mr. Duffy. And so do you think it is easier to deal with
China 15 years from now when their economy is that much larger
and stronger or maybe their military is larger and stronger
than it is today?
Mr. Powell. That is really a judgment for the people who
have responsibility for trade.
Mr. Duffy. I would agree with that.
I am going to quickly turn to the President's America First
policy. Do you agree with that?
Mr. Powell. Maybe you could be more specific.
Mr. Duffy. Do you think we should put American interest
first? Do you think we should look out for the global interest
or American interest?
Mr. Powell. We work under a statute that has us focused on
maximum employment and stable prices here in America.
Mr. Duffy. Maximum employment for Americans, not for the
globe.
Mr. Powell. Here in America.
Mr. Duffy. So we are looking out for Americans.
Mr. Powell. Of course, we live in a global economy where
the global economy affects that.
Mr. Duffy. That is true. But we go to the global economy,
but always how it affects our own--
Mr. Powell. Entirely domestic. Our goals are entirely
domestic.
Mr. Duffy. Do you believe the U.S. insurance companies are
well capitalized and solvent today?
Mr. Powell. Yes.
Mr. Duffy. Do you believe that our system of regulating
American insurers has worked well over the last 150 years?
Mr. Powell. I can speak to the last decade or so, and I
would say yes.
Mr. Duffy. Pretty good, huh?
Mr. Powell. Yes.
Mr. Duffy. So would you agree that we should not enter into
any international agreement or standards that would undermine
our U.S. insurance regulatory system, State-based model?
Mr. Powell. Yes, I would.
Mr. Duffy. Great. My time is up. I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. I commend the gentleman from Wisconsin and the
Chair of the Fed for their comments about insurance. And I will
probably disagree with many other things.
Thank you once again for returning where you will be
independent and accountable, tall and short, the Fed plays an
interesting role.
First as to cryptocurrencies. You and we should have the
courage to ban them. As an investment, they are an investment
with no investor protection, and they take the animal spirits,
the willingness to invest, divert them from the real economy,
and instead engage in what is basically gambling. Many
jurisdictions support gambling only if there is local taxation,
but cryptocurrencies don't pay gambling taxes.
As a medium of exchange, cryptocurrencies offer no
advantages over regular currencies, unless you are a terrorist,
a narcotics dealer, or a tax evader. There is no positive role
for us for cryptocurrencies.
A lot of discussion in here about who deserves credit for
the good economy. Let me point out, since Dodd-Frank, 17
million jobs have been created; 15 million of them under Obama,
2 million under Trump. That is 15 million, 2 million. That's
the right ratio.
Now, the Trump Administration claims credit for the last 3
months of the Obama Presidency, but Obama was actually
president until January 2017, but his policies remained in
force all through 2017. Dodd-Frank, Janet Yellen's balance
sheet, and Obama tax policies were in force until the beginning
of this year. And in fact, the Fed policies and the securities
regulation remained pretty much unchanged since the Obama
Administration.
The chairman of this committee urges you to abandon all of
the unconventional tools, while taking credit for the good
economy that is in part a result of your unconventional tools.
I would say keep your balance sheet as big as it was when
we achieved the economic growth that is so good that Democrats
and Republicans are fighting over who gets credit, and
certainly do not cut your balance sheet until Chairman
Hensarling tells you how he is going to increase taxes to
replace the $80 billion of profit you gave us last year because
you had a big balance sheet.
The Chair talks about the inflation rate, the Chair of this
committee. You ought to have a goal of 2-1/2 percent, not 2
percent. The law that we passed in 1978 draws a 3 percent
objective or maximum for inflation and for unemployment. So
unemployment is still too high and inflation is too low, and if
we have a looser economic policy, maybe we will get somewhat
higher inflation and the labor shortage necessary to increase
wages.
He puts forward the idea that somebody would save for their
daughter's college education by putting money aside in a
mattress where its value would decline by 30 percent by the
time his young girl got to college.
I would say if you are smart enough to save for college
education once your daughter is born, you are probably smart
enough to invest the money in something that grows faster than
inflation.
As to trade, my party suffers from Trump derangement
syndrome which is, whatever Trump does, we have to be the
opposite.
The fact is China launched this trade war against us in the
year 2000, right after two-thirds of Democrats voted against
giving China most favored nation status. We were right then; we
shouldn't change now.
There are those who say that trade deficits don't have a
harm. They lead to hollowed-out manufacturing, which leads to
manufacturing towns where you have opioids, alcoholism, and
votes for Donald Trump. Three terrible scourges that hit the
Midwest.
As to your testimony, Mr. Chairman, you say that wages are
growing a little faster than they did a few years ago. That is
nominal wages. Real wages, if anything, have stagnated over the
last year, depending upon your measure of inflation. One more
reason for a looser monetary policy, faster economic growth.
And believe it or not, I have a question, that is, LIBOR
was tainted by scandal. You have the alternative reference
rates committee. Most of the LIBOR referenced debt is
derivatives, but what really matters to people is mortgages.
And what are you going to do to make sure that the new
benchmark doesn't increase mortgage bargaining costs or disrupt
the mortgage market? That is the one question.
Mr. Powell. That is a great question. So you are right,
many, many mortgages reference LIBOR. LIBOR is a rate that is
under a lot of pressure. It may not be there in 3 or 4 years,
so there is a big move to find a good backup. We have
identified a backup, and it is not designed to represent an
increase at all in people's mortgage costs. Rather, it is
designed to represent just a more sustainable rate that will
always be there and less volatile and more predictable, more
reliable.
Mr. Sherman. And it will be as good for mortgages as it is
for derivatives?
Mr. Powell. Yes.
Mr. Sherman. Good.
Mr. Barr. [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Missouri, the
Chair of the Oversight and Investigation Subcommittee, Mrs.
Wagner.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you. I thank the Chair. And welcome,
Chairman Powell.
In comments that you made shortly after being sworn in as
Chairman of the Federal Reserve, you noted that you were
committed to, and I quote: ``explaining what we are doing and
why we are doing it, and will continue to pursue ways to
improve transparency both in monetary policy and in
regulation.''
Sir, how much value do you place on being as open and
transparent as possible so that, not only Congress, but the
American people understand the decisions the Fed is making, why
they are making those decisions? I am just interested in what
that kind of transparency and openness looks like.
Mr. Powell. I think it is our obligation to explain
ourselves. What we do is very important, sometimes not well
understood. And it is really on us to explain what we are doing
with financial regulation and monetary policy.
We have this precious grant of independence. We have to
earn it by being accountable, and the way we do that is through
lots and lots of transparency. I see myself as following in the
footsteps of three prior chairmen who worked on this:
Greenspan, Bernanke, and Yellen.
Mrs. Wagner. When you say transparency, what are we talking
about in a specific fashion?
Mr. Powell. So we doubled the number of press conferences.
Mrs. Wagner. OK.
Mr. Powell. I will have a press conference after every FOMC
meeting. That is, in monetary policy, that is a way for me to
get out and talk about what the committee did at each meeting
and communicate to the public in a comprehensible way.
I have also focused very much on communicating in terms
that people can understand generally, not just economists.
There is a very small professional audience that understands
what we do very, very well--economists on Wall Street. And I
think the rest of the country needs to be let in on this too,
and I am trying very hard to do that.
Mrs. Wagner. I absolutely agree, especially in this era
where we have a savings crisis and people need to understand
the movements that you make as Fed Chair, how it relates to
monetary policy and how it affects them and how they invest for
their future.
So I absolutely applaud your efforts in terms of press
conferences, but also trying to shape the vernacular so that
everyday low- and middle-income investors and savers in this
country can understand what your policy actually means to them
personally.
In 2012, the Fed dealt with a leak of confidential
information relating to the deliberation of the Federal Open
Market Committee, FOMC. Access to that information is valuable
to markets and investors because the Fed does not make clear
what it is likely to do in the future.
The committee believes that a monetary policy rule would
provide the public transparency into future monetary policy
decisions and eliminate the value of leaks.
Again, you have talked a lot about being transparent, and
we have discussed it here previously, but you are the new boss.
And what is going to change on the issue of securing some of
that confidential information and transparency to prevent this
going forward? And then also, when will the board improve its
internal governance, so episodes like these don't repeat
themselves, sir?
Mr. Powell. We take the confidentiality of our
deliberations very, very seriously as you, I am sure, know and
would imagine. We remind every person who has access to FOMC
information, including all the participants, but also all the
staff every year have to review those rules, have to signify
that they understand, have read them, and are bound by them.
So we do all of the things we can humanly think of to make
sure that people understand their obligations to
confidentiality. And I think--
Mrs. Wagner. If I could interrupt, sir, as Chairman of the
Oversight and Investigation Committee, we have looked into this
specific leak. We have had difficulty receiving specific
information about your internal governance and exactly how it
is that we make sure these episodes don't repeat themselves.
I would like your brief comments on that, and also want to
work with you to make sure that we are receiving the
information in our role of oversight and investigation into
these kinds of matters.
Mr. Powell. I will be happy to take that offline and talk
to you about it.
I don't know what you are referring to about information
you can't get. Obviously, there is a lot of confidential
information that we don't release that we try to protect, but
in terms of our procedures and the kinds of things that we do,
I would think that is the kind of thing we--
Mrs. Wagner. Specific to improvements of internal
governance, I believe, so--
Mr. Powell. OK.
Mrs. Wagner. I thank you. I look forward to following up
with you.
Mr. Chair, I yield back the remainder of my time.
Mr. Barr. [presiding]. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Powell, welcome back again. And I want to thank
you for spending some private time with me. We had a wonderful
discussion and covered a lot of territory when you were here
last.
But I watched your testimony over in the Senate yesterday,
and I want to clarify something with you. You talked about the
regional banks, those banks that are between $100 billion and
$200 billion in range. And you talked about Senate bill 2155,
which I supported very strongly, and we got good support on, in
terms of the banking regulations.
But in Senate bill 2155, we gave you, the Fed, substantial
authority through rulemaking to tailor regulations for these
mid-sized banks, for these important regional banks.
And I watched the testimony, and you reassured the Senators
that the Fed wasn't going to just flip the switch off on a
bunch of the enhanced prudential standards, but instead would
diligently work through a thoughtful and careful rulemaking.
And I was very pleased to hear that.
But I want to get some clarifying information from you.
Because Georgia, as you may know, is the home of a couple of
these very important regional banks: Regents Bank and SunTrust
Bank.
And the question is, do you envision the end product of
this thoughtful and diligent rulemaking process to be a set of
enhanced prudential regulations to the SIFI banks that is
drastically different than those of the G-SIBs or the global
banks?
Mr. Powell. I anticipate that we will begin by identifying
and then putting out for comment a framework that we will use
to assess financial stability and safety and soundness risks of
those institutions from $250 billion down to $100 billion. And
then we will take comment on that and then we will go ahead and
move forward with a framework.
And I anticipate that many of the factors that are used to
identify the SIFIs will be used in this context as well. We are
still working on exactly how to think about it. We have great
flexibility under the law, which we appreciate, and we will be
coming forward with something on this pretty quickly, I think.
Mr. Scott. Do you see any problem areas that these mid-size
banks or regional banks might have to be concerned about? Or do
you see a clear field here?
Mr. Powell. Well, I guess I would just say we are going to
go ahead and do what the law asks us to do. I don't see why
anyone should be concerned about that.
Mr. Scott. Good. Wonderful. That is good to hear. Those
banks, all our banks are very important. But we have so many
different sizes, we have to make sure there is a level playing
field for all of them.
Now, let me ask you this question. One of your fellow
Cabinet members was here, the Treasury Secretary. And we got
into discussion on the trade situation. So I want to ask you a
question that I asked him, and I am hoping I will get a
different answer.
And that is this: Are we or are we not in a trade war?
Mr. Powell. Let me say, of course, as an independent
regulatory head, I am not a member of the Cabinet. And also, I
am not at an independent agency that has any authority over
trade, so--
Mr. Scott. Yes, but the reason this is so important, you
may not be a member of the Cabinet, but let's face it, Chairman
Powell, when you sneeze, Wall Street gets pneumonia.
Mr. Powell. It is better than the other way around.
So on this, we do have responsibility for the economy, and
to the extent we see--
Mr. Scott. But my timing is coming up, I need an answer.
Are we or are we not in a trade war?
Mr. Powell. It is just not for me to say. Sorry.
Mr. Scott. Well, Mr. Powell, you are our anchor. You are,
as the head of the Federal Reserve, the fulcrum of our economic
system. And on top of that, I talked with you, and you are a
very learned intelligent person, and you do have a very
important opinion that the people of this Nation will want to
hear from you. Are we are or are we not in a trade war?
Mr. Barr. [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now will recognize the gentleman from Oklahoma,
Mr. Lucas.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Powell, you are my fourth Chairman of the Federal
Reserve that I have had the opportunity to interact with as a
member of this committee. And I have over time come to
appreciate that the best use of my time perhaps is to focus on
more specific issues since my friends are very broad sometimes
in their inquiries of you.
So I would like to ask you about the recent proposal the
Fed released with other agencies regarding the Volcker rule.
And while a great deal of attention has been paid to
proprietary trading restrictions, I would like to focus on the
manner in which banks have been restricted from making long-
term investments in small businesses, startups, merging growth
sectors as a result of the covered funds provisions.
I can understand that the agencies want to ensure that
banks cannot evade the trading restrictions of the Volcker rule
through certain private funds, but I am concerned that the
agency's interpretation of the restrictions on investing in
funds that facilitate capital formation has resulted in
prohibitions on an activity that we want banks to engage in,
such as making long-term investments in American companies to
help them grow.
These restrictions cut off as a source of capital where
they are both needed and important to economic growth. And I
will note that the venture capital groups also share my
reservations, and Comptroller Otting testified last month that
bank lending provided key funding to small businesses by
investing in these funds.
Do you have any plans to modify the scope of the
restrictions on banks' long-term investments in covered funds
so that the banks are able to serve as an important source of
capital to these funds?
Mr. Powell. We put out that proposal and we are very eager
to hear comments on that. I think we are bound by what the
statute says, but within that, we don't see it as an activity
that typically threatens safety and soundness. We would be
willing to do whatever we can within the statutory language and
intent to accommodate that activity.
Mr. Lucas. I am going to define that as a very positive
answer. And in the respect for my colleagues, yield back the
balance of my time, Mr. Chairman, while I am ahead.
Mr. Barr. [presiding]. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Green.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the Ranking
Member as well, and welcome the Chair back to the committee.
I want to thank you for this effort that you are making to
talk to Members of Congress. I think it is important for you to
hear from us, and I appreciate greatly your outreach. Also
appreciative that you have made some reference to African-
American unemployment in your statement for the record. I think
that is important as well.
And like many, I salute the notion that African-American
unemployment is low, comparatively speaking. But I still am
concerned about the historic position that it continually
occupies in that of being twice that of White unemployment,
generally speaking. Sometimes a little bit less, sometimes a
little bit more. And to this end, you and I will continue our
interaction about this to see if there are some things we may
be able to do collectively to have an impact.
I want to move quickly to something related to the United
State of Texas and tariffs. Texas is the 10th largest economy
in the world. And based on GDP, it is, of course, our Nation's
top exporter. In Texas, we export 42 billion in goods to China,
second only to Mexico. Half of the U.S. cotton exported to
China comes from Texas.
While you have not captioned it, you have not styled it as
a trade war, I assume that you would say there is a dispute.
And this trade dispute is having an impact on people in Texas.
But I would like for you to give your thoughts on how it will
impact middle class Americans, if you would.
Mr. Powell. Sure. So I think as it relates to China, it is
appropriate to address the problems with China's trading regime
as well. That is a very appropriate thing for the U.S. to do,
and we have been doing it for a long time and I think it is
something to carry on.
Again, we are not in charge of trade, but I think it is
hard to know exactly where this process goes. If it goes to a
place where we lower trade barriers elsewhere and U.S. trade
barriers go down, then it might be worth paying a little bit of
a short-term price to get to that better place.
Lower trade barriers, lower tariffs help our economy over
time. They make for a better, more productive economy, higher
incomes. They don't help every single group, and we need to do
a better job of addressing the groups that are not helped by
trade.
I think if you go more broadly in a more protectionist
direction over time, for a sustained period, that is bad for
our economy. That will mean lower incomes and lower
productivity and I just hope it doesn't go in that direction.
But I think it is hard to say where it goes from here.
Mr. Green. Well, we do have Canada and European allies
engaged in the dispute currently, so it is a little bit bigger
than China. To what extent it will grow is, I suppose, to be
seen. But given that it seems to be consuming other nations as
well, how, again, will this impact middle class people,
assuming that we continue along the path that we are going?
Mr. Powell. I think an open trading system worldwide with
low barriers is good generally. It creates rising incomes for
middle class people and all different kinds of people,
generally. Not every group is helped, though, and we know that
for factory workers who lost their job over the years. And I
think we need to do a better job of addressing those issues.
Mr. Green. So is it fair to say that persons who have been
traditionally among those who are unemployed at a higher rate,
that they will be impacted adversely to a greater extent?
Mr. Powell. I think that is probably right. I think the
groups who are more at the margins of the labor force, at the
lower end of the labor force in terms of compensation, things
like that, who get hit the hardest in a downturn. So
unemployment goes up the most for those people. And I think
they tend to be the ones who are hardest hit by downturns,
generally.
Mr. Green. And for the record, I would simply add that it
appears that African Americans would probably be a part of that
group. And I thank you for nodding.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Barr. [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Stivers, from Ohio.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for being
here, Mr. Chair. We appreciate your ability to be very
accessible to all of us. I know you were in my office. You have
been in a lot of our offices. I appreciate that.
This hearing today is about the state of the economy and
monetary policy. And if you could just give me some true or
false's here, we will give a quick summary to people.
Is it true or false, economic growth is 3.1 percent, the
best in over 20 years?
Mr. Powell. I didn't know where you have 3.1 percent, but
it was 2 percent in the first quarter. It is going to be way
higher than that next quarter.
Mr. Stivers. This quarter that is projected to be 3.1
percent? Or around that?
Mr. Powell. It is going to be higher than that.
Mr. Stivers. OK. Higher than that.
Mr. Powell. Projected to be higher than that.
Mr. Stivers. All right. So good economic growth, true?
Mr. Powell. Yes. True.
Mr. Stivers. Low unemployment, below 4 percent?
Mr. Powell. It is at 4 percent today, projected to go
lower.
Mr. Stivers. OK. Around 4 percent.
Wage growth is increasing?
Mr. Powell. Has increased.
Mr. Stivers. Has increased. And we have stable prices?
Mr. Powell. We are close to our stable price mandate.
Mr. Stivers. Close to our stable prices.
So as you think about the full employment mandate that you
have, the Fed has historically used the unemployment rate. And
over the last 10 years, what we have seen, although it is
picked up a little bit lately, is a decline in the labor
participation rate.
Don't you think that would be a better proxy for you to use
when you compare the United States to the U.K. or Japan? Their
labor participation rate is 5 to 7 points higher than ours
among working-age people.
Mr. Powell. We say in our longer run statement of
principles in monetary policy strategy that we actually look at
a broad range of indicators to define maximum employment. And
it is many, many measures of unemployment. It also includes
labor force participation.
I would strongly agree with you that is a very important
area of focus for us and I believe for you as well. It is an
area where the United States has fallen behind other advanced
economies, and it is an area where we need to do better.
Mr. Stivers. I think we need to transition there. There are
lot of people left behind. And whether they are looking for
work or not, we need to figure out how to get them moving
toward the American dream. And I appreciate you being willing
to look at that.
Quickly on the Volcker rule, I just want to speak for
middle America. We have a lot of banks in my district, medium-
size banks, little banks. They are precluded from investing in
our economy. They can loan to our economy, but they can't
invest in our economy. The preponderance of the wealth that is
invested in private equity and other things is on the coasts.
If we were to--and I know it would require a statutory
change--if we were to allow some of that investment to happen,
but separately capitalize those funds at the banks so they
can't just come to the Fed funds window--that is the concern, I
get it, and why the Volcker rule is there--it would really help
middle America.
I'm not asking to you comment on it, but I would love to
work with you on that issue.
Mr. Powell. Great. We will do that.
Mr. Stivers. Quickly, a follow up from Mr. Himes on cyber
policy. With regard to the thing that keeps you up at night the
most, I think everybody you regulate inside the financial
system has incentives that are aligned with behavior that
works. Because the customer is limited to a $50 loss, the
financial institutions have skin in the game.
The problem is many other people in the cyber system,
retailers and others, offload their financial risks while they
have reputational risks to others, and it has become a
jurisdictional fight between our committee and Energy and
Commerce. I believe we need to change that.
And I think the way to do it is to use cyber insurance the
way we used workers' compensation insurance in the 1900s to
improve worker safety. If we gave safe harbors for certain
coverages and made sure the payouts aligned the incentives, I
think you would be able to price a system, but you would have a
dynamic system instead of naming standards and having them
being out of date the next day. So we look forward to working
with you on that.
I don't expect you to comment on that either since I am
just throwing it at you right now, but I think it is a
different way that maybe can break through our jurisdictional
problem inside Congress. But I agree with you, it is one of the
biggest threats that we have right now.
And quickly, one last thing, and this is a question that I
do want you to address. Because there have been some comments
on the committee about stock buybacks and how they don't do
anything. But, I think it is important that we note that when a
company decides to buy back stock, that money doesn't just
disappear into the wallets of wealthy people; it goes to work
inside the corporation. It is their way of saying this is a
better way to put our money at work.
But when you look at stock ownership, many people in the
middle class have 401(k)s, and that money gets a better return
for them as well as every other stockholder.
So I guess the point is--and you have answered it a couple
times, but just to be more clear, do you believe that stock
buybacks can help the economy and the middle class, including
401(k) stockholders?
Mr. Powell. I see stock buybacks as a way for companies to
allocate funds that they don't need in their own business
through the capital markets to those who do need them.
Mr. Barr. [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Barr. [presiding]. Thank you. And just as an
announcement, the chairman has requested a brief break at noon.
So we will recognize the gentleman from Minnesota and then take
a recess for a few minutes.
And now we recognize the gentleman from Minnesota, Mr.
Ellison.
Mr. Ellison. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. How are you doing?
Mr. Powell. Great, thanks. How are you?
Mr. Ellison. So there has been a little bit of discussion
about whether or not real wages have gone up or going down. But
I am just looking at what was reported by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics yesterday. They said that the median weekly earnings
of the Nation's 116 million full-time wage salaried workers
rose 2 percent on the year, but inflation was up 2.7 percent
over the same time period. That says to me that the median
full-time wages have actually been falling in real terms for
the past three quarters.
Would you agree with my analysis?
Mr. Powell. Yes, as far as it goes.
Mr. Ellison. OK. So thank you. And I appreciate that,
because that allows me to ask what I really want to know, which
is why in such low unemployment do we have wages either
stagnant or even declining a little bit over the last three
quarters? And I will just give you a minute or two to try to
give me some understanding--all of us.
And it is not a setup question. It is a real question,
because you would expect, with this level of low unemployment,
we would see wages go up, but they are not.
So what some of your observations as to why that is
happening?
Mr. Powell. So if you look at a range of wages. Of course,
there are four or five main ones, but there are many, many
others, and they have differences. None of them is exactly
right. And if you look at them, they have overall moved up from
around 2 percent to pretty close to 3 percent now. That is
good. We like to see--
Mr. Ellison. Nominally.
Mr. Powell. This is nominal. Yes, this is nominal. It is
reported in nominal, not real.
So that is a good thing. We like to see that moving up. I
have said before, and I still think you would have expected,
when unemployment moves from 10 percent to 4 percent, you might
have expected a little bit more in the way of increases.
On the other hand, inflation has been--employers are
looking at this through the lens of how much are prices going
up. And the answer has been, inflation has been low. And also,
how much more output am I getting? In other words, people
should earn inflation plus productivity. Both of those have
been low, through no fault of any worker.
Mr. Ellison. Now, Mr. Chairman, I hate this process because
it makes me interrupt you.
Mr. Powell. I am sorry.
Mr. Ellison. And I appreciate what you are sharing, so I
didn't want to do that, but I think it has something to do with
anti-competitive practices that we see across various sectors.
For example, many of us have a piece of legislation to ban
something called no-poaching agreements.
Do you know what a no-poaching agreement is?
Mr. Powell. I do, yes.
Mr. Ellison. Could you describe in about 30 seconds for the
folks listening what a no-poaching agreement is?
Mr. Powell. So, for example, you work at a fast-food
outlet. As a condition of getting that job, you have to promise
not to take a job at another fast-food outlet. It is probably
unenforceable, but a worker working at a fast-food outlet
doesn't have the means to go to court and might not know to go
to court. So it is a way of restraining competition. And there
is really nothing good to be said about it.
Mr. Ellison. Right. And to me, I think that Congress needs
to be aggressive about this. Because if we are truly believing
in free-market economics, the free market is being strained by
these anti-competitive practices. This ought to be a bipartisan
thing where we are together saying that if--you cannot, Mr.
Employer or Ms. Employer, have an agreement between yourselves
that you will not hire each other's employees if they go to you
looking for a better wage or have a noncompete clause.
Mr. Powell. I think just shining a light on it helps. By
the way, you may have seen some of the big fast-food companies
announce they won't do that anymore.
Mr. Ellison. Well, because some Democratic attorneys
general went after them, and they said, OK, we won't do it,
because they know they are going to be held accountable.
But deeper than that I think is the fact that we have
highly concentrated markets these days. Can you talk about
market concentration in this particular economy?
It seems like every industry you look at has highly
concentrated markets. Look, for example, Amazon, how they are a
dominating online retailer. If you look at search engines, look
at what Amazon is doing. It could even be beer or pizza or
chicken or whatever it is. It seems like the other side of a
monopoly is a monopsony, with limited number of buyers of
labor, which makes it easier for them to simply hold wages
down.
I wonder what you think about that.
Mr. Powell. It is true that we do see measures of
concentration going up, but I think that the tech companies
that come out and invent a new business, they are a special
case. And it is hard to know how to think about that in terms
of the traditional antitrust in other ways. It is not something
I feel like there are really clear answers on yet.
Mr. Ellison. Would you consider having the research
department at the Fed talk about concentrated markets and the
impact on wages and the fact that they are growing very slow in
an unexpected way?
Mr. Powell. We will look into that.
Mr. Ellison. Thank you.
Mr. Barr. [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
And pursuant to the announcement just made, the committee
stands in recess, subject to the call of the Chair. The Chair
anticipates that we will reconvene in 10 minutes.
[Whereupon, at 11:57 a.m., the committee was recessed,
subject to the call of the Chair.]
Mr. Barr. [presiding]. The committee will come to order.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, the
gentleman of the Foreign Affairs Committee, Mr. Royce, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And let me ask this, Chairman Powell. Housing financial
reform remains the great undone work of the financial crisis,
and you have previously called for reform stating that we need
to move to a system that attracts ample amounts of private
capital to stand between housing sector credit risk and the
taxpayers.
A nationalized mortgage market is an unsustainable status
quo, obviously, from a moral hazard perspective on this thing.
And sadly, the situation we find ourselves in today was a
predictable one.
In 2003, I introduced legislation, and again in 2005, which
would have reigned in the GSEs, allowing them to be regulated
at that time for systemic risk. Then Fed Chairman Greenspan
backed the amendment, but it was not enough to overcome the
outsized political pressure brought by the GSEs themselves.
To be fair, you said last summer that this was not a normal
issue on which the Fed would comment, but that we were in a now
or never moment for reform, as there is not a current risk with
a healthy economy now in the housing system. How long with this
now or never moment last? And what are the consequences of
inaction on this?
Mr. Powell. I think now continues to be a good time to move
forward on this. It is one of the big pieces of unfinished
business from the crisis. It is unsustainable to have
effectively the U.S. housing finance system on the government's
books for the long run and it's not healthy.
I don't know how much long--we are going to need to address
this. I assume we will at some point, and I would just say the
sooner the better.
Mr. Royce. Let me ask you another question on this front.
Chairman Greenspan often commented on the role of the GSEs in
our economy. In 2004, in testimony before the Senate, he said:
Concerns about systemic risk are appropriately focused on
large, highly leveraged financial institutions such as the
GSEs. To fend off possible future systemic difficulties, which
we assess as likely if the GSE expansion continues unabated,
preventative actions are required sooner, rather than later.
Those were his words in 2004; ominous words no doubt.
Today, pressure is being brought on the Administration to
release the GSEs out of conservatorship. Although I oppose this
move, absent Congressional action, I am hopeful that if this
were to occur, there is no doubt today that Fannie and Freddie,
given their size and role in the housing market, would be
regulated as systemically important.
Do you share this view?
Mr. Powell. I--so the form in which this reform takes place
will, of course, be up to you, not to us, and it is not in our
lane. I would say I would really hope that these institutions
would not be systemically important at some point. I would
think when you figure out a process where they can be moved off
the balance sheet, the idea would be that they would not
present systemic risk, ideally.
Mr. Royce. Let me move to another question, Chairman
Powell. Earlier this year, this committee passed legislation
that would reverse the previous SEC rule requiring that certain
money market funds float the NAV. I certainly remember when the
Federal Reserve fund broke the buck in 2008--I remember where I
was when that occurred--and the massive backstop the U.S.
taxpayers provided to restart the entire market as a result of
this and other factors.
The fact is that the value of the underlying assets of
those products fluctuate. They go up and down. As I said in
opposition to the bill at the time, if we learned anything from
the financial crisis, it should be that the price should
reflect risk. While understanding this is the primary
jurisdiction of the SEC and Chairman Clayton has already
expressed his concerns, I was hoping, as a member of the FSOC
and as someone uniquely positioned to comment on macro
financial stability, that you could comment on any concerns
with this potential move.
Mr. Powell. I very much share your concerns. This was one
of the many critical weaknesses identified in our financial
system during the crisis. We worked hard to address it, I think
successfully, to some extent. And I would not like to see that
undone.
Mr. Royce. Chairman Powell, I am out of time. Thank you
very much.
Mr. Barr. [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Foster.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chair Powell, the last time that you were here, I discussed
with you a policy of countervailing currency purchases as a
response when a country has been determined to be a currency
manipulator. I believe that my staff has transferred to your
staff the ideas from the Peterson Institute on the specifics of
how countervailing currency intervention may be an appropriate
response. But I am actually more concerned now about the
currency manipulation than I have been.
Obviously, President Trump has recklessly now begun a trade
war with many of our trading partners, particularly with China.
I think many of the countries that are on their currency
manipulation watch list that gets reported every so often by
Treasury have been either hit or threatened by tariffs. Some of
these countries are going to run out of gas in terms of the
products that they can impose retaliatory tariffs on, at which
point I think it is quite likely that they will resume currency
manipulation that they have done in the past.
And China is probably top of my list on this, because they
have--they will run out of gas fairly quickly. And the damage
that has been done in the past by Chinese currency manipulation
is enormous and one that many of my constituents have felt in
their businesses.
And so I think it is more pressing than now that we
actually have a response in place, ready to go, if and when any
one of those countries, in particular China, resumes currency
manipulation. Countervailing currency manipulation is something
that can be done. I think it is an appropriate response and it
can be done.
And so I was wondering, has Treasury contacted you in any
way with our suggestions that we have given to them on
getting--having this take place? Because, obviously, a
significant response would be a joint project between Treasury
and the Federal Reserve.
Mr. Powell. The currency issues are entirely up to
Treasury. I don't know whether they have technically consulted
with us about it or not. It is the first time hearing about it.
Mr. Foster. OK. Well, anyway, so I encourage you to look
into this. If you find that there is any legislative
impediments to that, I believe the suggestion from the Peterson
Institute is that if this goes forward, it would be a joint
effort where the currency purchases would be jointly done by
Treasury and the Fed.
Mr. Powell. We would just be implementing their decisions,
though. We wouldn't be making those decisions.
Mr. Foster. Correct. But it is something that I hope that
we are prepared for, because the risk of anything of a
resumption of significant currency manipulation has certainly
gone up because of the Republican tariffs. And so I just want
to flag that for you.
Second, there has been some discussion in the previous
testimony about wage growth and so on, and this plot that's up
here. Did you see the article in The Wall Street Journal a
couple of days ago about how inflation is eating up workers'
wage increases? Yes. And this is essentially the plot from that
showing that while workers wages were out--during the Obama
era, workers wages were modestly outstripping inflation; that
is no longer true in the Trump era that things like the massive
tax cut for the wealthy and the deficit spending have driven
inflation more than they have driven wages. As a result, for
wage earners, the situation has not improved. That is in great
contrast to the situation for CEOs and so on who have seen
their compensation go up way faster than inflation.
And so there was an announcement by the Federal Reserve, I
guess a month or so ago, that the historic milestone of
household net worth exceeding $100 trillion, which I think it
was a very interesting milestone in the recovery itself from, I
believe, around $55-or $60 trillion during the deficit of the
crisis. And so it is a real milestone, but that is an aggregate
number.
And so one of the things we are seeing more and more is a
divergence between average numbers when you average in the
results of the very wealthy with numbers like this, which is
the wages for wage earners where the situation is very
different. What I would like to urge you to do is when you
report, for example, household net worth, to report it not only
as an aggregate but as quintiles or top 1 percent, top 10
percent, and to report this on a quarterly basis the same way
you report the aggregate number. I think it would really
illuminate a lot of where our economy is going. And I would
like to see that in the next report and future reports, if that
is possible.
Mr. Powell. I will look into that.
Mr. Foster. All right. Well, thanks much.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Mexico, Mr.
Pearce, Chairman of our Terrorism and Illicit Finance
Subcommittee.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate you being here today and your
leadership on the economic front for the country. So you had
given testimony yesterday or whenever to the Senate about the
effect of opioids and the labor force participation rate. Can
you walk through that briefly for me?
Mr. Powell. Yes. Well, labor force participation by prime
age males has been declining for 60 years. It has been
declining for females for maybe the last 15, 20 years in the
United States. We stand out compared to other countries. So
many things that happened in the economy are global. This is
really something that we have.
A significant number of those in their prime working years
who are not in the labor force, close to half I think in that
one estimate was 44 percent, are taking painkillers of some
kind, which is the opioid crisis to some extent. So there are
many, many people who are out there in their prime working
years, not in the labor force. We would all be better off if
they were in the labor force, including them. And part of the
reason they are not is the drug issue.
Mr. Pearce. The problem is especially egregious in much of
New Mexico, and so we passed a series of bills here that are
directed at beginning to stem that problem. Have you looked
much at the legislation that we have passed through the House,
anything that stands out as being especially effective in your
ideas or the ideas of the committee?
Mr. Powell. I haven't looked at it carefully. I did see
that, but I will be happy to go back and look.
Mr. Pearce. OK, yes. Now, for New Mexico, we have a little
bit of an aging population and we also have a lower income
population. That all argues for less complexity in the
investments. And so, typically, they would like safe
investments, but then the interest rate is always at such a low
rate that it is driving unsophisticated investors into
sophisticated items seeking rates of return.
Any ideas how it can help out our seniors who typically
fall into that category? I am thinking about my mom. The last
few years of her life, she just wanted not to lose money and
just to have it safe. And yet we are seeing a lot of seniors
chasing rates of return and getting into very unsafe things,
then they lose their nest egg. So how is the Reserve looking at
that?
Mr. Powell.
We are not responsible for investor
protection, but we are responsible--
Mr. Pearce. No, it is the rate of return. It is the rate of
return on simple investments. The rate of return on passbook
savings or money markets, that is the question.
Mr. Powell. Right. We have kept rates low for a long time,
and we think that has had a very positive effect on the
economy. It has boosted employment, it has boosted activity. I
think it has definitely been tough for seniors who are really
relying on their passbook savings, for example, for interest.
But overall for the economy, it has been a good thing. Rates
are going up now, to reflect the strength of the economy. So
that should be helping some.
Mr. Pearce. Yes. As we talk about the labor force
participation rates, we are also noting a lot of skilled
atrophy. People who have been on different public assistance
programs for some time actually don't have much skills.
So as the President talks, he talks about the
apprenticeship programs. Have you all taken a close look at how
the apprenticeship programs could be directed at the people who
have been out of the labor force, not the people in the high
schools, but the people who have been on the sidelines for some
time? Are there any studies available to us on the
effectiveness of those programs?
Mr. Powell. Yes. We have an excellent group of labor
economists, and that has been a particular focus. So we would
be delighted to supply that to you, discuss it with you or your
staff. We would be happy to work with you on that.
Mr. Pearce. The energy economy that you reference in your
report a couple of times is one that is playing out in the
southeast part of New Mexico. Some of the largest finds in most
productive wells being drilled are occurring right there. The
pipeline capacity is becoming a chokepoint and then also the
refining capabilities. So we are suggesting building a refinery
in New Mexico and asking for White House help to get the
permits done. All of that would help us to become energy self-
sufficient.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman is expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Ohio, Mrs.
Beatty.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Ranking Member.
And thank you, Chairman Powell. Good to see you again. I
just have a couple of quick questions I am going to try to get
through. Mr. Chairman, I brought the Federal Reserve
supervision and examination of the insurance savings and loan
holding companies up previously with Federal Reserve Governor
Quarles. And my staff brought this topic up with the Fed staff
on several occasions.
Since the economic crisis, the number of insurance and
saving and loan holding companies has dwindled from some 30 to
just 11, according to the Fed's 2017 annual report. I have two
of these insurance companies in my district which employ
thousands of people. And one of them just announced that they
are closing their depository institution.
While I understand that there are several business reasons
for an insurance savings and loan holding company to close
their own depository institution, there is little doubt that
one of the factors why they are closing them down is due to the
burdensome and inefficient supervisory regime by the Federal
Reserve. I have worked with my colleague on the other side of
the aisle, Mr. Rothfus, to introduce legislation that would
force the Federal Reserve to tailor their bank centric
regulations to those to insurance companies, which are wholly
different from banks. While I think there should be some cost
of admission for an insurance company to own a depository
institution, I don't think that cost should be so high that it
makes no financial sense to own one, which is where I think
that we are headed.
Do you think that this problem that these insurance
companies are closing their banks, that this is part of the
reason, or is it the Federal Reserve's desire for no insurance
companies to own a depository institution?
Mr. Powell. It is certainly not our desire to drive anybody
out of owning a bank who can legally own a bank. I think in the
case of depository institutions that are owned by insurance
companies, our interest is in the safety and soundness of that
depository institution. So we work very carefully not to
duplicate the insurance regulatory work that the State
insurance supervisors capably do, but we have a role to play as
the holding company supervisor as it relates to the depository
institution. And that is what we care about. That is really all
we care about.
I think my recollection--these companies are getting out of
owning depository institutions mostly for business reasons as
opposed to for regulatory reasons. In any case, we are
committed to doing that as efficiently as we can and--
Mrs. Beatty. Are you familiar with our legislation?
Mr. Powell. Yes, I am.
Mrs. Beatty. Is it something that will be helpful, or do
you have an opinion?
Mr. Powell. We have raised concerns. The concern that we
raised is that we would be effectively out of the business of
supervision at the holding company. We would promulgate
standards, but they would supervised by the insurance
supervisor. And the insurance supervisors, they do a fine job
of supervising insurance, but they are not prudential
regulators of banks. And we think if you are going to own a
bank, you should be subject to regulations by a prudential
regulator of banks, which would be us in this case.
Mrs. Beatty. But you would be at least willing to see if we
could tweak it or work together?
Mr. Powell. Absolutely, absolutely.
Mrs. Beatty. OK, thank you. On another good note, let me
also say thank you for being very responsive to our letters to
you from the Congressional Black Caucus and from you on
diversity. I really appreciate that.
As you will probably recall, we have had several
conversations about the Beatty rule that is patterned after the
Rooney rule. If you are looking for minorities and, more
specifically, African Americans to serve on the Federal
Reserve, then you have to put them on the list. You have to
include them in the room.
So while we weren't necessarily overjoyed with the last
appointment, I am pleased that Mr. Bostic is there, and just
hoping as more openings come, that you will keep that in the
back of your mind.
Last, I have an odd question. I was on my way back to
Washington, I stopped in a restaurant, and a gentleman came up
to me and chased me down, and said, I know that Mr. Powell's
going to be coming before your committee, would you ask him
this question. We are going to paraphrase it because my team
wasn't quite sure what he was asking and he stated it more as a
fact. But I think what the constituent was asking me, and he
stated it more as a fact than a question, but he essentially
wanted me to ask you whether or not you believe the Federal
Reserve's monetary policies exacerbates the wealth inequality
in our country.
I think for some reason he felt that organizations who
receive the interest payments on our national debt is
destroying the middle class.
Mr. Powell. No, we don't think monetary policy is
exacerbating inequality. We think, in fact, it is helping those
who didn't have jobs get jobs. So those are the people who need
those jobs.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you very much. And I yield.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Ross.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Powell, thank you for being here. Your
predecessor, for whom I have a great deal of respect, I know
struggled for some time with regard to the impact of the
quantitative easing, the low interest rates, the high
unemployment. And I see that, based on your report today, the
outlook is much brighter and doing much better.
I echo the concerns of my colleague, Mr. Pearce, because I
have a great deal of retirees in my community and they want to
start seeing some return on their investment, of course,
instead of having to keep dipping into the principle of their
savings.
Chairman Powell, it has been more than 9 months since the
Federal Reserve had its first official Vice Chair for
supervision sworn in. Prior to Vice Chair Quarles taking
office, the responsibilities of his position were unofficially
shared between former Fed officials to such an extent that it
was never really sure who was in charge of regulatory affairs
at the Federal Reserve. As a consequence, it felt to many of us
in Congress that the divide between the Federal Reserve's
regulatory responsibilities and those related to monetary
policy wasn't as explicit as it should have been. Further,
there seemed to be a high risk that Federal Reserve regulations
were not being given the necessary oversight and evaluations.
There were more and more regulations coming out.
And now with the position filled by Vice Chair Quarles, I
would like to hear if things have changed at the Federal
Reserve. Do you find that having a Vice Chair for supervision
has allowed you to focus more on monetary policy the side of
the Federal Reserve's work? In other words, does it help
prevent inappropriate overlap of the Fed's roles now that you
have distinguished supervisory roles in the Fed?
Mr. Powell. Let me say it is great to have Vice Chair
Quarles in his role. And I know he was confirmed yesterday into
his underlying Governor term. He is terrific. I worked with him
25 years ago, so he has been great.
We think of the roles as pretty complimentary actually. We
think that, essentially, the financial system, more broadly,
and the banking system is the transmission channel for monetary
policy. So we think we learned a lot about what is going on in
the economy and also about how monetary policy is getting out
into the economy by virtue of the fact that we are in
supervision.
We do have a separate division that takes care of all that,
and Vice Chair Quarles as the Vice Chair has particular
authorities under the statute to recommend policies to the
Board. I hope I am getting to your question.
Mr. Ross. Yes. But as I mentioned, I think the past 10
years, as a result of financial crisis, we have seen new
regulatory schemes being imposed. And it seems to me that now
would be an appropriate time for the regulators to take a step
back and conduct a holistic review of the impact of these
regulations. And I believe that having Vice Chairman of
supervision renders this holistic view more appropriate at this
time.
Do you think now would be a good time for such a review?
Mr. Powell. It is a good time. In fact, we are doing that.
We are committed to sustaining the important post-crisis
regulatory reforms, higher capital, higher liquidity, stress
testing, resolution. We are also committed to looking at
everything that we have done in the last 10 years and making
sure that it is right sized and effective.
Mr. Ross. Has your review revealed any duplicative or
burdensome regulations that could probably be done away with at
this point?
Mr. Powell. Yes. I think we are finding quite a lot to do,
mainly as it relates to smaller and medium-sized institutions,
which I think there is quite a lot of good work that we can do
on that front.
Mr. Ross. And also part of your report you note that
residential investment has leveled off for the first 5 months
this year. And that is a little disappointing to me, because I
think that is a leading indicator force in terms of residential
investment.
When I go home to central Florida, I can see skyrocketing
demand for homes, but for some reason developers just can't
keep up. One of the things that you have talked about, and I
think that Mr. Pearce talked about also, is the, quote, ``tight
supply of skilled labor.''
Can you expand on that? How long have we been approaching
this tight supply of skilled labor?
My concern is this, is that we have a great tailwind behind
us right now. We have a 4 percent GDP. We have lower
unemployment than we have had in a long time. We have more
capital than we have seen before, but yet if we are not going
to have the economic recovery because we don't have a labor
market, what is in store for us? And how can we best address
this labor market shortage that is facing us?
Mr. Powell. It is a real challenge. Plumbers, carpenters,
electricians in short supply. A lot of people left the industry
after the crash. Now there is a need. And also, it is very hard
to get lots. It is difficult. The zoning and everything is
quite difficult.
Mr. Ross. The training programs?
Mr. Powell. They are also facing high materials prices.
Mr. Ross. Which is a component of it too. But even if we--
we have to have the labor is what I am getting at. And even if
we have to import the labor, we need the skilled labor.
Mr. Powell. I think you are right. There is a good question
about how the economy will absorb all of this momentum, and I
think the tools to expand the labor force are really not ours,
they are really yours.
Mr. Ross. I agree. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Pittenger.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Chairman Powell, for being with us. I really
want to commend you for taking the initiative to provide time
to be with members and allow those discussions to occur. I
think it is very helpful for us.
Mr. Chairman, as I understand, it is your directive to
promote stable prices. Some of your policy committee members
have expressed interest in replacing the current inflation
target with different target measures that would provide even
greater variability. Given that, would you help me just better
understand the difference between price stability and stable
prices?
Mr. Powell. I think they mean the same thing. I wouldn't
say there is a big difference there.
Mr. Pittenger. Good. Well, thank you. That clarification
helps.
In this year's monetary policy report, you state that the
labor force participation rate has been in decline for decades.
And has seen a recent increase among prime age individuals.
Despite the factors that continue to cause the decline
persisting, you have said that the continuation of increases
seen over the past few years is possible if favorable labor
market conditions continue as well.
Have you seen these favorable labor markets, at least more
recently, remain or even show increases since the passing of
the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act?
Mr. Powell. We do see the labor market continuing to
strengthen. And as you point out, labor-first participation by
prime age males and females has kicked up in the last couple of
years. That is a great thing to see. We really hope those gains
are sustained against a longer run trend of decline. But we
hope that this is a great chance for people to get back in the
labor market and we hope stay there.
Mr. Pittenger. Would you draw any correlationship between
the Tax Cut and Jobs Act bill and that dimension?
Mr. Powell. I think that there are a variety of things
contributing to this. Certainly, the business tax cuts are
helping support activity, and the individual tax cuts too.
Mr. Pittenger. How has the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act affected
your current monetary policy?
Mr. Powell. It is hard to single out an effect. We really
look at many, many different things. The economy's strong and
we are on a path of gradually raising rates, and I think that
reflects all of the things that are going on, including the
changes in fiscal policy.
Mr. Pittenger. Yes, sir. With the new tariffs coming from
both at home and abroad, some businesses are shying away from
both capital and labor force investments. The report States
that exports had increased in the second quarter, led by
agricultural exports. Do you see this changing, especially in
light of the retaliatory tariffs on numerous agricultural
products from Canada and the European Union?
Mr. Powell. I think there is a lot of uncertainty about how
this round of discussions between us and essentially all of our
major trading partners will come out. I think if it does wind
up in a lot of reciprocal tariffs, then it would certainly
affect our exporting industries, including in a big way, U.S.
agriculture. So it is a risk.
Mr. Pittenger. Yes, sir. You previously stated that the
U.S. financial system is substantially more resilient than the
decade before the financial crisis. Should there be a trade
war, what tools do you have, to move quickly to ensure this
continued resiliency in economic growth?
Mr. Powell. I think the financial system is well
capitalized and so much more strong and resilient in so many
ways that it is there in a position so that it can resist or be
resilient against shocks of various kinds, and that would
include changes to trade policy that became disrupted. Our
monetary policy tool we can always use to--it really relates to
demand. So if demand weakens, then we can support demand.
The harder issue is you could be seeing higher prices
because of tariffs at the same time you are seeing lower
economic activity. And potentially, that would imply higher
inflation. A mirror increase in tariffs wouldn't mean
necessarily higher future inflation, but if it did have that
implication, it could be very challenging for policy.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you. My time has expired.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Rothfus.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome,
Chairman.
I want to talk a little bit about the automatic SIFI
designation being set at $250 billion in S. 2155. This was an
important change that right sized the regulatory burden for a
significant number of small and medium-sized institutions.
In setting the threshold at $250 billion, however, we
grouped large regional banks together with banks that have
assets in excess of $1 trillion. These institutions do not only
differ from each other in terms of size, they also differ in
their levels of risk and complexity, as well as their capital
structure and their business mix.
Would you agree with that assessment that there is a
distinction between those large regional banks and those other
banks?
Mr. Powell. Very much so. Not just size, activities as
well.
Mr. Rothfus. Given this distinction, how will the Fed be
tailoring regulations for banks above the $250 billion
threshold?
Mr. Powell. Working on a framework now. Some ways away from
publishing it, but it will take into account a range of
factors, including size will be one, but also many others, such
as complexity, interconnectedness, the nature of their
activities, all those. We will take in a wide range of factors.
The bill gives us a great deal of flexibility to identify the
appropriate factors, and we are just in the process of doing
that. We are going to put that out for comment and listen
carefully to public reaction too.
Mr. Rothfus. Any timeframe yet on when that might happen,
comment period?
Mr. Powell. I can't be precise. I will just tell you we are
working hard on it right now.
Mr. Rothfus. When Secretary Mnuchin testified before this
committee, I asked him about an issue that many of us on this
committee have expressed concerns about: Nonbank SIFI
designations. I have advocated for an activities-based approach
to addressing systemic risk. I was pleased to hear that
Secretary Mnuchin also supported adopting this approach and
that the FSOC was moving in that direction. Do you support an
activities-based approach?
Mr. Powell. Yes. I think that makes sense.
Mr. Rothfus. What would be the status of FSOC's
implementation of that approach?
Mr. Powell. Really a question for the Secretary, but I
think that is more how we are looking at things these days, is
looking at activities, as well as we can always look at
institutions when it is appropriate. But for now, we are
looking at a lot of activities.
Mr. Rothfus. If I could talk a little bit about the yield
curve. The inversion of the yield curve is typically viewed as
a sign of a coming recession. The yield curve is currently
flattening and this has attracted a lot of attention.
In a recent post, Minneapolis Fed president Neel Kashkari
wrote, quote: ``This suggests that there is little reason to
raise rates much further. Invert the yield curve and put the
brakes on the economy and risk that it does, in fact, trigger a
recession.''
Do you agree with this view?
Mr. Powell. I don't see any evidence that a recession is
imminent. We are not forecasting a recession. And so I don't
really think we see a recession coming.
Mr. Rothfus. Do you have an opinion on how strong of a
signal the yield curve inversion is?
Mr. Powell. So the inversion of the yield curve has been--
just as an empirical matter it has been associated with
downturns in the past. But I would just say the real point is
the yield curve inverts--we know why short-term rates go up,
because basically they are looking at the Fed's expected rate
path. The real question is what is going on with longer term
rates. And if you back out the term premium and look at that,
then it is really an assessment in the market of what the
neutral longer term rate is, what it will be. So if, in fact,
monetary policy is higher than that, then that means that
policy is tight. You are actually tightening policy.
So the yield curve is simply a way to identify what is
really the important thing, which is where is current policy
and where is expected policy relative to neutral. So I prefer
to look directly at the question at hand. And you think about
the yield curve as giving you evidence on that, so the yield
curve is not inverted now. It is still at a positive slope and
it is something that we will watch. All of us have a little bit
different ways of thinking about it. That is how I think about
it. Something we are looking at carefully.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you. When you last testified before this
committee, we discussed the importance of monetary policy
independence and potential risks to that independence posed by
both our national debt and the Feds outsized balance sheet.
Would swapping mortgaged-backed securities holdings for
treasuries help to mitigate some of the political risks that
follow for monetary policies becoming credit policies?
Mr. Powell. I don't see our MBS holdings as--they are
dwindling over time now. They are in normalization mode. I
don't see them as presenting a particularly salient
independence risk to us right now.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you, Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Maine, Mr.
Poliquin.
Mr. Poliquin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
Thank you, Chair Powell, for being here. You have been
here, sir, for almost 3 hours with a 10-minute break, and you
look like you need a vacation. I want to remind you that Maine,
that I represent, is vacation land. You don't even need air
conditioning up there. And I am sure you and your family would
enjoy it. If you want to go up there, just give us a call, we
will send you in the right direction.
Sir, the past couple of years, the economy has been getting
stronger and stronger, and you mention in your testimony that
the national unemployment rate has been about the lowest it has
been in 20 years. Up in Maine, we have also good news. The
unemployment rate is roughly 2.8 percent. It has been the
lowest in about 50 years, and folks are making more money and
they are able to change jobs if they don't like the one they
have. And some of our young workers are able to come back to
the State, where in the past, they haven't been able to. And
our confidence with our consumers and our small businesses is
all very strong.
Now, if you look at the prior 7 to 8 years, the exact
opposite was going on. Unemployment rates were very high.
Confidence was low. Taxes and regulations were high, and we had
a real problem everywhere.
Now, my point to you, sir, if you would agree with me, that
this strong economy we have now is not by accident. It didn't
fall out of sky. There is something that had to be done to
correct this. Would you agree with me that making it easier for
businesses to grow and hire more people and pay them more
through lower taxes and fewer regulations, more predictable
regulatory environment, has helped the economy?
Mr. Powell. Yes. I guess I would just say in principle that
regulation should be balanced.
Mr. Poliquin. Sure.
Mr. Powell. And it should be fair and that will support--
Mr. Poliquin. Anybody that is running a business--and I
come from that part of the world, sir--would agree with that.
And I appreciate--I know you don't want to dig into policy that
we do here and I understand that.
One of my concerns, my major concern, Mr. Powell, is how do
we keep this going? How do we keep this going for our families
in Maine and elsewhere?
I look back at the last few recessions. In 2001, we had a
bubble in the dot.com sector of the tech stocks and that caused
a recession. The terrorist attacks of 9/11 caused a mild
recession after that. That is an external event that we can't
control here anyway. And then in the 2008 to 2012 Great
Recession, again, a real estate bubble in part brought on by
financial instruments that dealt with the real estate market
brought that on.
So I think we can both conclude that what happens in the
capital markets, what happens in the financial sector has a
huge impact on what happens on Main Street when it comes to a
growing economy or the other way around.
Now, here is my concern, Mr. Powell, and I would love to
have your response to this. During the past 10 years--for most
of the past 10 years, interest rates have been very low, in
some cases at zero, unusually low. And that has caused a rising
financial sector, whether it be the equity market or the fixed
income market. So I am looking and I am saying, here we have
the Chair of the Fed before the committee of jurisdiction in
the House. What advice can you give to Congress, Mr. Powell, to
make sure that we keep this strong economy going? What should
we make sure we do not do?
Mr. Powell. Well, let me say we strongly share a goal to
keep this expansion going, and we think that continuing to
gradually raise rates for now is the right way to do that. As I
think we discussed when we were together, I think it is
important to address things like we talked about earlier,
things like labor force participation, things like education
and training. We need people. We need more people who can fill
these jobs that are going to be coming open.
My concerns are really about the supply side at this point.
We are close to full employment, maybe not quite there. But it
is the issues like labor force participation and job training
and addressing the people who are out of the labor force, get
them back in.
Mr. Poliquin. There are some folks that think we ought to
raise taxes and go back to where we were before. Is that a good
idea?
Mr. Powell. I am not going to give you advice on fiscal
policy. Sorry.
Mr. Poliquin. OK. The national debt--I am pivoting a little
bit, Mr. Powell--is about $21 trillion. It is horrible. The
interest on that debt now is approaching roughly $300 billion
per year, which is about 1-1/2 times what we spend to care for
our 7 million veterans every year in this country. At what
point do you think the debt service payments, the interest on
that debt becomes a problem for our economy?
Mr. Powell. It is hard to identify a particular point. I
would just say we have been on an unsustainable fiscal path for
some time and the theory is we should be addressing it when the
economy is strong.
Mr. Poliquin. Do you agree with me that a balanced budget
amendment for the Constitution is a good idea to force
Washington to spend within its means and start paying down our
debt, sir?
Mr. Powell. No, I do not.
Mr. Poliquin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back my
time.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Minnesota, Mr.
Emmer.
Mr. Emmer. Thank you, sir. Mr. Chairman, it is again a
pleasure to have you here and have an opportunity to hear you
and speak with you.
For starters, I would just like to make a brief comment
about tailoring regulations. You mentioned the importance of
taking a tailored approach to financial regulation when you
appeared before our committee in February, but that was
actually prior to the passage of the Economic Growth,
Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act.
Eliminating the one-size-fits-all regulatory mindset for
small community financial institutions is obviously important.
However, S. 2155 was explicit in its requirement that Federal
regulators shall tailor enhanced prudential standards for all
financial institutions based on their risk instead of asset
size. This is a very important issue, and I hope that we can
keep an open and constructive dialog on this issue in the weeks
and months ahead.
Again, for us it is the issue of risk versus asset size.
And I see you are nodding, so hopefully that means we are going
to keep a constructive dialog.
Mr. Powell. Look forward to that.
Mr. Emmer. Moving on, Chairman Powell, your committee
initiated a balance sheet roll-off less than a year ago,
October 2017. During your--shortly thereafter, during your
confirmation hearing, you testified the balance sheet
reductions would likely stay in place for, quote, ``about 3 or
4 years.''
I understand, however, that now, some FOMC members are
already calling for an early end to what has been a seemingly
slow balance sheet normalization schedule. Are you considering
a premature end to your balance sheet roll-off program?
Mr. Powell. No, but let's be clear. We have always said
that there is significant uncertainty about how long it will
take. Ultimately, the balance sheet will be no larger than it
needs to be for us to conduct monetary policy and will consist
primarily of Treasury securities. And its ultimate size in the
long run will be driven by the market's demand and the people,
public's demand for our liabilities, principally currency and
reserves.
So we are learning, along with everybody else, as the
balance sheet shrinks, as to what the new normal will be. And I
have to say there is a significant amount of uncertainty. We
will learn a lot. The markets are moving their estimates up,
but I don't think we are going to know for some time exactly
what that equilibrium size will be. It will be much bigger,
though, than it was before the crisis, because the public
wants--currency and circulation more than doubled since 2008,
well more than doubled, and reserves have gone up substantially
because they are a highly desirable liquid asset for banks.
Mr. Emmer. All right. But at this point, there is no plan
to prematurely end the roll-off?
Mr. Powell. Certainly not prematurely, no.
Mr. Emmer. All right. The European Central Bank is
reportedly convinced that the region's economy is strong enough
to withdraw some of its crisis-era support. Our economy, by
contrast, has been humming for more than a year. If the EU is
lifting off from its unconventional stance, should we be
slowing or stopping return to fundamentals? And would doing so
leave us stuck with a balance sheet that remains conflicted
between monetary and macro prudential policy?
Mr. Powell. We are much more significantly down the road in
the normalization process. The European Central Bank has said
that they would stop asset purchases, assuming certain
conditions are met by the end of year, and would not begin to
raise interest rates until at least the end of the summer of
2019. So they are some years behind our process. We have been
raising interest rates since December 2015. Our balance sheet
has been shrinking, as you pointed out, since last October.
And I think our path is working very well. We think the
gradual rate increases are right, just about right. And we
think the balance sheet normalization process is working very
smoothly.
Mr. Emmer. Has your committee devised a strategy for how
and when to change the balance sheet roll-off schedule? I am
taking you down this road because I understand your answer
earlier is there is a lot of uncertainty and we learn as we go.
But what is the strategy here or is it just that general, that
we are going to see how this goes and we are going to leave
ourselves the flexibility to jump in and change things?
Mr. Powell. We said we would continue the program as
announced, unless there were--and we will get the exact terms,
but it is really a significant economic downturn requiring a
meaningful reduction in interest rates, words close to but not
exactly that.
Mr. Emmer. I don't know if you will have time, but I do
want to ask this. Do you think, Mr. Chairman, that market
participants have the transparency they need to make productive
investments in our economy? And what data would persuade your
committee to speed up, slow down, or even stop?
Mr. Powell. A significant downturn in the economy required
meaningful reduction in the interest rates. I think the markets
understand it very well.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Washington, Mr.
Heck.
Mr. Heck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, sir, for
being here.
So for over a year now, I have been helping to lead a task
force trying to understand why home prices and rents, frankly,
are soaring all over the country. And it turns out the answer
is pretty simple: We are not building enough housing units,
period. I looked this morning, and as it turns out, new home
starts are lower than when you started at Treasury under the
first President Bush. And a lot of time has passed and the
population has grown considerably. Fewer home starts than way
back then.
So prices are rising because of the simple fact that we are
missing millions of homes and we have too many people bidding
for too few homes. And we are trying to understand why
construction isn't happening and what can be done about it. We
feel pretty strongly about this because homeownership is still
an integral part of the American Dream and, frankly, it is the
number one source of retirement security for most Americans.
But it also strikes me that it is pretty important to your
work, sir.
Now, in my mind, I have a simple model. When the economy
goes bad, you all cut rates, and that means that more people
buy more automobiles and more homes, and the workers in those
industries work longer hours and get more wages, and it creates
a virtuous cycle of economic growth. But what happens if home
construction doesn't or can't respond?
The weakness in housing in this last recovery was clearly a
reason why it was at historic, some would say anemic levels.
And if home construction continues to be broken, and there is
every bit of evidence that it is, I am wondering what that
means for the next recession and what your response can and
should be. Does it mean you have to cut interest rates even
more aggressively to get the economic response? Because it
didn't seem to work out very well that way this time.
Mr. Powell. So you are right, those back in the day, it was
nothing to see--well, it was common to see 2 million housing
starts in a year and more. And we don't see that now. And part
of that is just the population's growing a lot less, like a lot
more slowly now, much, much slower than it was, so there is
less demand.
And I am sure you talked to a lot of home builders and
their representatives in your work, and what they say now is it
is really supply side constraints. They can't find
electricians, plumbers, carpenters. Also, it is hard to get
zoning, it is hard to get lots. Very difficult to do that. They
are yelling loudly about materials prices, lumber in
particular. And so that is what they are doing is they are
building fewer homes and the prices are going up more quickly.
We don't really have the tools to deal with that.
In terms of the importance of housing, though, the economy
is so much bigger than it was before and housing is smaller
than it was before. So it is a less important driver of
economic activity at the aggregate level. It is still
tremendously important for individuals. It is still part of the
American Dream and part of what young families and folks want
to have.
But I don't think it has--it doesn't have--it is not the
single most important factor driving monetary policy right now.
I think these issues are really issues out in the labor market
that we don't directly affect.
Mr. Heck. So would you agree, however, that historically,
housing construction has played a much more important role in
economic recovery?
Mr. Powell. It was a far bigger part of the economy and it
was also--can be very cyclical. So yes. You go back to the
seventies and eighties, it was, first in first out, first in
the recession, first out.
Mr. Heck. And before, during recoveries--and if you do the
math on what the increase in GDP growth would be, if we simply
had a housing market that was in balance, then it wouldn't be
too hard to calculate a material increase in GDP growth. Would
you agree with that?
Mr. Powell. It would be bigger. If housing starts were 50
percent higher or something, yes, that would be meaningful, for
sure.
Mr. Heck. So some of what you said, not only do I agree
with, but our study concludes as well, which is that these
other inputs, land, labor, lending, lumber, or materials, are
the key drivers here. But the takeaway I have from you today is
that those inputs and whatever limitations and challenges that
they are presenting is holding back housing construction may,
in fact, be immune to interest rate reduction and so we better
get to work on those factors.
Mr. Powell. Well said.
Mr. Heck. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Hensarling. Time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Hultgren.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Chairman Hensarling.
Chair Powell, welcome. Glad you are here. I would echo much
of what my colleagues have said on both sides of the aisle of
our gratitude for your openness and willingness to meet with us
and hear from us, and that is so affirming. So thank you very
much and I appreciate your work.
I have shared some very specific concerns with you about
how our current risk-based and leverage-based capital rules are
damaging to liquidity and the listed options markets. Title 7
of Dodd-Frank requires central clearing for derivatives in case
of options. This service is generally provided by bank clearing
members. The Financial Services Committee reported a bill, with
unanimous support, which recently passed the House directing
bank regulators to adjust the capital rules. However, as I
understand it, no change in law is necessary for the Fed to
provide targeted capital relief.
I wonder if you have thought any further about how the Fed
can address this issue in an expeditious manner. And do you
believe SA-CCR can be implemented within the next 8 to 12
months? I understand that there is not even a proposal out for
comment yet, but we have an issue in the options markets right
now.
Mr. Powell. We think SA-CCR is a good policy, and we are
working on a rule on it now. And I hope it can get out before 8
or 12 months. I will go back to the office and check in. But it
is a priority. I know there is actual drafting going on and
negotiation between agencies, so it will happen.
Mr. Hultgren. That is perfect. That is what we want to
hear. I think you can see from even just the action yesterday
and in the last couple weeks of very strong bipartisan support
to make sure that these markets work well.
I sent a letter to financial regulators with responsibility
for the Volcker rule back just a couple weeks ago, July 6,
requesting that they reconsider the definition of covered
funds. That definition currently excludes venture capital. As
my letter states, the Congressional Record clearly
demonstrates, through a colloquy between Senator Boxer and then
Chairman Franks, that investing in venture capital was never
intended to be prohibited by the Volcker rule when section 619
was drafted by Congress. This prohibition restricts access to
capital for startup companies.
I wonder, do you believe the Volcker rule should be amended
in a way that ends this prohibition on investment and venture
capital? And have you discussed this issue with your peers at
the other financial regulators? Any thoughts on odds that there
could be change made here?
Mr. Powell. I am not directly handling those discussions
now, but, we put a draft out for comment, and we are hearing on
this point a lot, I believe. Although, I guess the comment
period, the comments haven't really come in yet. The comment
period hasn't started running yet because we haven't published
the notice.
But our idea is that these activities are not ones
generally that threaten safety and soundness. So consistent
with the letter and intent of the law, we want to allow what
flexibility there is and we look forward to getting input on
how we can do that.
Mr. Hultgren. Great. Thanks. I recently sent your office a
letter that I hope will draw your attention to the growing
issue of wire fraud. This is something that we have heard
testimony on in the Financial Services Committee last year.
In general, since reviewing my letter, I wonder if you have
any ideas for how to prevent wire fraud. And have you
considered any recommendations, maybe some that I have made, of
having financial institutions apply a payee matching system
when initiating a wire transfer?
Mr. Powell. So we appreciate your letter. I was looking at
it again this morning, as a matter of fact, and we are putting
together a nice response. Some of the data in your letter is
quite alarming. So I appreciate your bringing that to our
attention.
Mr. Hultgren. Great.
Mr. Powell. So we will come back to you with something in
detail.
Mr. Hultgren. That is great. Thank you so much.
If there is anything else you need from us or that we can
be helpful with, again, I think it is something that is so
important for that confidence, especially in home purchases and
things that are being abused right now.
Last question, last minute here, and a lot of my colleagues
on both sides have talked about this, but over the last 18
months, by almost every measure, we have had a very strong
economy and taken appropriate actions to allow this momentum to
continue. We have seen a boost in consumer and business
confidence following the recent tax cuts and continued
regulatory relief efforts.
That said, there are certainly issues that Congress must
continue to address, like better training of our labor forces
to meet labor demands of our expanding modern economy. I
wonder, do you have concerns that protectionist trade measures
may generate headwinds that counteract the recent stimulus
provided by Congress and the Administration? And do you believe
a trade deficit is somehow a measure of whether the U.S. is
winning or losing in the global economy? In other words, do you
believe trade is a zero sum game?
Mr. Powell. We have these discussions going on with
basically all of our major trading partners, NAFTA, the EU,
China. And we are not responsible for those. We are not even a
participant. We are not consulted in any way. But it would be
good if they resulted in lower tariffs broadly. If they
resulted in higher tariffs, higher trade barriers, then that
will be a bad thing for our economy, for our workers, and for
incomes.
Mr. Hultgren. Thanks, Chair. I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair wishes to inform all members that I will be
excusing the witness at 1:30. I anticipate clearing four more
members. Currently in the queue are Mr. Gottheimer, Mr.
Loudermilk, Mr. Davidson, and Mr. Budd.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Gottheimer.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Powell, thank you for being here today.
Our economy is entering a phase of increasing technological
disruption, including automation through artificial
intelligence. These factors are expected to eventually increase
our productivity, but also to significantly affect our
workplace.
McKinsey recently issued a report on automation and jobs
that projects 16 million to 54 million Americans will have to
find new occupations by 2030, depending on how quickly
technology is adopted.
If you take the taxi industry as an example, the use of
ride-sharing apps has devalued assets like taxi medallions and
transformed that industry. And it has pushed some drivers out
and brought new entrants in. And as tech companies strive for
more automation and leverage artificial intelligence, more
drivers will likely be pushed out or transitioned.
AI and automation will have the same effect on other
spaces, like trucking and trading and a host of other
industries. And I believe in tech, and I obviously don't
believe we should become Luddites. We need to look toward the
future and constantly innovate. It is a big competitive
advantage for our country, and obviously our foreign
competitors are doing the same.
I believe our government needs fiscal and monetary policy
to ease the transition, or at least be aware of it and
understand what we need to do in this process. And the Fed's
monetary policy is obviously a blunt tool, but given your dual
mandate, are you monitoring automation's impact on productivity
and our labor? And what tools are you considering in this
transition, sir?
Mr. Powell. We look very carefully at those issues. We have
great researchers at the Fed. We don't have a lot of tools to
deal with it, but they do present really challenging issues for
us in the future and now.
Mr. Gottheimer. Are there things that you believe that
Congress should be considering to help minimize the effects of
these transitions or make sure we are prepared as a workforce?
Mr. Powell. I think when I graduated from college, I think
there was this sense that people would find a career and find
an employer, and many of them would spend 30 years with that
employer. I think that is not the world we are in so much
anymore, not that some people won't do that.
So I really think the idea that education ends when you get
out of college or grad school, we need to be thinking a lot
about midcareer training and education so people can go on and
have another leg to their careers rather than being let out to
pasture at age 40.
So I think that is a key thing we need to be doing, and
Congress can certainly play a role there.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you, sir.
And just to switch topics slightly, and I appreciate your
response there, on the housing front, I wanted to speak to you
about the market a bit, specifically, the change we have seen
in the Federal Housing Administration's (FHA) insured loans,
but also the market as a whole.
The mortgage market is now dominated by nonbank lenders.
They are upwards of 75 percent of FHA loans. Prior to the
housing crisis, in that frothy era, this number was flipped on
its head. Banks made up more than 75 percent, if not more, of
the housing market.
What risks do you think this presents as the credit cycle
turns? That is my first question, if you don't mind.
Mr. Powell. So in housing now, we do see that most of the
borrowers now have much higher credit scores, so it is a very
different market. The question is, was that line drawn at the
right place?
But it is clear that most of the people who have access to
mortgage credit now are people with fairly high credit scores,
so it is quite different. And that is where the household
borrowing is, again, from people who are well off.
Mr. Gottheimer. So you think if there is a downturn, we are
better prepared for it?
Mr. Powell. We are better prepared for it, yes.
Mr. Gottheimer. Are there things that you think, as you
look at this, that Congress should be doing to get banks back
into the mortgage market more to ensure lending during economic
downturns looking forward there?
Mr. Powell. Well, I think a good question for Congress is--
and it is not one for us, but for you--is coming out of the
crisis the one place where we really changed credit
availability was in mortgages, and that had to be done because
we know that mortgage credit was--people were making loans that
they may not have understood, but that really shouldn't have
been made, lots and lots of those.
So, the question is, was that made at the right level? Are
there still, at the margin--and there has been some work done
on this--there are probably significant numbers of creditworthy
borrowers who are not getting access to mortgage credit. And I
would think part of it is that the banks know that they made
these terrible mistakes and paid great prices for it, and so do
the households.
Still, I think it is worth looking at that. It is not too
soon to be looking at that.
Mr. Gottheimer. I think you are right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your time.
Mr. Powell. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes now the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Loudermilk.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Powell, thank you for spending the time with us
today.
I actually want to circle back to something that Chairman
Luetkemeyer raised earlier today. And since that was probably a
couple hours ago, refresh.
He was talking about the banks that fall between the $150
and $250 billion in assets, and how after the 18-month period,
they are relieved from SIFI regulation. After that the law
allows the Fed the ability to restore the regulations if the
bank chose to be a systemic risk.
Regarding current conditions, recent CCAR (Comprehensive
Capital Analysis and Review) results and GSIB surcharge risk
data show, that banks with less than $250 billion do not
present a systemic risk at this time. And I, as well as many
others, believe that there should be exemption from the SIFI
regulation for those.
So I want to follow up, that when you testified back in
February, I had asked similar questions. And you had said that
banks under $250 billion are more engaged in traditional
banking and less complex and generally do not pose a systemic
risk to the economy.
So my first question is, am I correct in assuming that
since the CCAR results further confirm your view, that these
firms don't pose a systemic risk at this time?
Mr. Powell. It is interesting, as a general matter, yes,
actually one of the eight SIFIs has less than $250 billion in
assets and is still a SIFI. One of them does because of the
nature of its activity.
So we look at a range of things. I would stand by what I
said, though. Under 250, these are institutions which generally
are simpler, they are less complex, and they are engaged in
traditional banking activities. So they are different from the
very large ones that deserve and get the higher scrutiny.
Mr. Loudermilk. OK. Well, I appreciate that.
And at yesterday's hearing you discussed a thorough
rulemaking process, that you are going to make sure that these
firms are strictly reviewed before receiving regulatory relief.
On that topic, some bankers who I have spoken with are
concerned that your staff wants to tailor the regulations or
partially apply them to firms that are not systemically risky.
If this is true--which would be somewhat troubling--I think
data and evidence should determine the outcome. Can you confirm
that firms that don't pose a systemic risk will be exempt from
the SIFI regulations?
Mr. Powell. We are going to do exactly what the bill orders
us to do, which is publish a framework for how we are going to
think about risk to financial stability and safety and
soundness. This is the language of the bill. We are going to
put that out as soon as we can possibly get it thought through.
We are going to get comment on it. And then we are going to go
forward from there.
And we very much take to heart the letter and spirit of the
bill, and we will look forward to getting input when we finally
propose something, I hope soon.
Mr. Loudermilk. So am I right to interpret that we are
going to let the data determine the outcome?
Mr. Powell. Yes, we are in the process now of identifying
the factors that we will think about. The bill gives us a lot
of flexibility, identifies some factors, and gives us other
flexibility.
We are going to publish a framework that says how we are
going to look at activities and institutions below 250, and
then we are going to hear back from the world about how we did
and how we should think about these things.
And it is a process that the statute orders us to
undertake, and that is what we are doing.
Mr. Loudermilk. So is it conceivable that--or maybe it
isn't--is it, I guess, possible that you have a regional bank,
let's say $150 billion or so, that may have partial regulation
of SIFI? Or is it going to be either they are systemically
risky or not?
Mr. Powell. I really haven't faced that question yet. We
have always tailored, even when the limit was 50, we always
tailored the application of the so-called enhanced prudential
standards under 165. We tailored those a lot in the prior
world. So we will obviously do that, too. And we will certainly
continue to do that.
Mr. Loudermilk. OK. And probably don't have time to get
into my last question, so I will submit it to the record. And I
will yield back the rest of my time to maybe allow somebody
else to get in before the hard time.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Davidson.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman, thanks for your testimony. Thanks for the work
you are doing there. And I look forward to the Senate giving
you some more colleagues soon hopefully.
You have spoken a fair bit about trade. A lot of our
colleagues are concerned about trade and the impact that bad
trade practices have had on our economy. Frankly, some concern
about the tactics that have been employed to engage in that.
I wanted to see if I have your quote right. ``Trade is
really the business of Congress, and Congress has delegated
some of that to the Executive Branch.''
Do you think it would be a positive development from the
economy's perspective to have collaboration across the entire
cross section of the economy that Congress represents?
Mr. Powell. I think this is really--Congress--the
Constitution gives this to you, authority, and you have over
time delegated some of it to the Executive Branch. But it is
your authority.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you. And we are working to reclaim it
with the Global Trade Accountability Act, H.R. 5281. We are
always looking for cosponsors. And this leaves the authority in
the President's hands to negotiate, but similar to the REINS
Act, gives authority to Congress to review. And I think it
would promote a more collaborative process than Peter Navarro
has recommended and, in fact, persuaded folks to implement.
Do you think that if we had practices that were more
targeted in the effect that we could be able to focus on bad
things then? Let's just phrase it the other way. Do you think
uniform action across all countries in all sectors is
potentially more disruptive to the economy than targeted
actions?
Mr. Powell. Mr. Davidson, we don't have this authority.
This is authority that--
Mr. Davidson. Correct. I am just asking about the impact on
the economy, macroeconomically.
Mr. Powell. I think on issues like fiscal policy, trade
policy, immigration policy that can affect the economy, I think
we have a role there because we are responsible for the
economy, but I think we need to stay at a higher level of
principle. And what I am comfortable saying is that a more
protectionist approach to trade, if it is sustained over a
period of time, has not historically been good for economies.
It has meant lower incomes, less opportunity for workers.
Mr. Davidson. On the economic principle of trade, it is the
called trade because it is reciprocal in the sense both parties
benefit in trade. Do you see trade as a zero-sum game?
Mr. Powell. No. I do think that trade needs to be fair as
well as free, and I think it is very appropriate to have an
internationally agreed set of rules, and when anybody breaks
those rules, they have to face the other countries in that
setting and change their policies. I think that is a healthy
way to go. I don't think a bilateral trade deficit is a good
measure of trade between countries, though.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you very much.
One of the things we have also dwelled on is workforce
participation. And one of the big barriers to the growth rate
in the economy is workforce participation.
Without alluding to specific policy--and I don't want to
put you in that spot--we have tried to make some reforms on
bills.
Most notably, recently, the farm bill, which is really only
about 20 percent about farming, a very incremental change to
expect that working-age adults, 18 to 59, able-bodied, no
dependent kids at home, not in an economically depressed area,
a couple other qualifiers, that in order to continue to receive
support through food stamps, that they would work.
Would this, in your mind, policy tools that motivate people
to participate be effective at workforce participation?
Mr. Powell. I can't really take a position on that. I will
say that there is not a lot you could do that would be more
constructive than to find ways to support labor force
participation that will work on a bipartisan basis and can be
enacted. It is tremendously important.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you for that. Thank you.
And so cryptocurrency is a big thing. And so without
talking about specific things in our policy, we are working
with Basel on a number of fronts. And some concern, we always
protect our sovereignty in that. Where do you see Basel going
with respect to cryptocurrency?
Because essentially, the concern there is that even if the
U.S. creates a better regulatory framework than we have today,
there is still arbitrage in markets.
So there is a desire to have some regulatory framework. Is
Basel addressing that, particularly with respect to
cryptocurrency?
Mr. Powell. I think anybody who owns--if a bank owns
cryptocurrency, then it will be subject to capital. It will
have to hold capital against that. I guess a good question is,
should it be more than the normal level of capital, because it
is a risky asset?
Mr. Davidson. Right. So to the extent that it is an asset,
it would be treated, if it is a commodity, treated as if it is
a commodity. If it is truly a currency, it would be treated as
a currency based on its amount of volatility as a currency. For
example, the pound sterling is probably a different reserve
currency than the Thai baht.
Mr. Powell. Yes. And I don't know that we--so it is not
mainly a bank capital issue. Of course, I think the regulatory
issues facing cryptocurrencies are big and broad and go way
beyond banking.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you. My time has expired.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair will recognize one more member and then we will
dismiss the witness and adjourn.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Budd.
Mr. Budd. Thank you, Chairman Hensarling.
Chairman Powell, again, welcome back. It is always good to
be with you. I appreciate you being here today.
So I want to start off with Volcker. I think a lot of us
can at least appreciate the intent behind Volcker, which is to
reduce risky activities in banks, in particular high risk prop
trading, and that potentially makes sense.
However, it seems to be odd results that under the current
rule activities such as providing capital and loans to growth
and startup companies, activities that we should be encouraging
banks to engage in, are materially limited as a result of that
rule.
Your recent NPR is open-ended on covered funds and does not
provide a lot of guidance about where the Fed may intend to go.
Yet, these funds can be critical sources of capital for
companies looking to grow their businesses. And the prohibition
on funds is fairly broad and even includes restrictions on
venture capital funds.
So, Chairman Powell, is there a way for the Fed to simplify
the covered funds regime to help smaller companies obtain
greater access to capital?
Mr. Powell. And we are looking for ways to simplify Volcker
in ways that are faithful to the language and intent of the
statute, and that is one particular provision. And we look
forward to getting constructive comments on how we may do that
better.
Mr. Budd. So you are just waiting through the NPR period,
then, on that?
Mr. Powell. Yes, we are really looking for input here on--
this is a notice of proposed rulemaking. We want a lot of
input. Our job is to implement Congress' wish, and that is the
Volcker rule, but we want to use such flexibility as we have
that doesn't undermine safety and soundness. And there would
clearly be some flexibility around the issue you are talking
about.
Mr. Budd. Thank you. I want to switch topics to the ongoing
negotiation of new international capital standards, or ICS.
First, I want to thank you for such a quick and thorough
response to questions I had after we met last time. We don't
always get quick responses, but you did, so thank you. We are
genuinely grateful.
And the following question, sir, it was originally intended
for Vice Chairman Quarles, but a letter he sent back to my
office on this question we received just yesterday and chose
not to respond at this portion. So hopefully, I will pitch it
to you for an answer.
Governor Daniel Tarullo stated in a speech at the National
Association of Insurance Commissioners' International Insurance
Forum--this is May 20 of 2016--he said, quote:
``There are, as you all know, a lot of ideas out there as
to how we should construct the capital requirements we will
apply to insurance companies. Some, such as variations on the
Solvency II approach used in the European Union, strike us as
unpromising.
``Evaluation frameworks for insurance liabilities adopted
in Solvency II differ starkly from U.S. GAAP and may introduce
excessive volatility. Such an approach would also be
inconsistent with our preferred or strong preference for
building a predominantly standardized risk-based capital rule
that enables comparisons across firms without excessive
reliance on internal models.''
``Finally''--this is a mouthful, isn't it--``Finally, it
appears that Solvency II could be quite pro-cyclical.''
So do you agree with what Governor Tarullo said there?
Mr. Powell. It makes sense to me. I have to admit I don't
recall that speech and what issue he was talking about there.
Mr. Budd. About Solvency II, being used by the EU, being
pro-cyclical rather than countercyclical.
Mr. Powell. I would want to check with our insurance
capital experts. But, yes, I do believe that, I think that
reflects our view.
Mr. Budd. Good. Can you give us any explanation as to why
the Federal Reserve staff participating in the Kuala Lumpur
negotiations agreed to accede to the Europeans at the IAIS to
mandate that the financial reporting for the referenced ICS be
done using a Solvency II approach--what we just talked about--
Solvency II approach, and not something more suitable for the
U.S. insurance industry, like GAAP or statutory accounting?
Mr. Powell. I will have to check up on this. I don't have
this kind of detail.
Mr. Budd. Pretty in the weeds, but I appreciate you
thinking through it. And if we could give that back. Thank you.
And finally, do you agree with Governor Tarullo that a
Solvency II accounting approach introduces excessive volatility
into the U.S. insurance markets? And if so, how do you plan on
remedying this at the next IAIS negotiations on ICS?
Mr. Powell. I am really going to have to go--
Mr. Budd. We just delved further into these weeds.
Well, if we could get a response it would be great, at
another time.
Thank you so much, again, for your time.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Powell. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
I would like to thank Chairman Powell for his testimony
today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
I would ask Chairman Powell that you respond as promptly as
you are able.
This hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:28 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
July 18, 2018
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]