- AMERICA'S WATER INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS AND CHALLENGES: FEDERAL PANEL
[Senate Hearing 115-443]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-443
AMERICA'S WATER INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS
AND CHALLENGES: FEDERAL PANEL
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON
ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JANUARY 17, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-567PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming, Chairman
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
JONI ERNST, Iowa
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
RICHARD SHELBY, Alabama
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
Richard M. Russell, Majority Staff Director
Gabrielle Batkin, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
JANUARY 17, 2018
OPENING STATEMENTS
Barrasso, Hon. John, U.S. Senator from the State of Wyoming......
1
Carper, Hon. Thomas R., U.S. Senator from the State of Delaware..
2
WITNESSES
Ryan Fisher, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Army
(Civil Works) And Acting Assistant Secretary of the Army (Civil
Work), United States Department of the Army....................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
6
Response to an additional question from Senator Barrasso.....
9
Responses to additional questions from:
Senator Carper...........................................
10
Senator Moran............................................
23
Senator Sanders..........................................
25
Senator Whitehouse.......................................
26
Lieutenant General Todd T. Semonite, Commanding General and Chief
of Engineers, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.....................
31
Responses to additional questions from:
Senator Barrasso.........................................
33
Senator Carper...........................................
33
Response to an additional question from Senator Sanders......
47
Responses to additional questions from:
Senator Rico.............................................
48
Senator Whitehouse.......................................
48
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL
Statement of the American Society of Civil Engineers.............
85
AMERICA'S WATER INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS AND CHALLENGES: FEDERAL PANEL
----------
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 17, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Environment and Public Works,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m. in
room 406, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. John Barrasso
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Senators Barrasso, Carper, Inhofe, Capito,
Boozman, Wicker, Fischer, Moran, Rounds, Ernst, Sullivan,
Shelby, Cardin, Sanders, Whitehouse, Merkley, Gillibrand,
Booker, Markey, Duckworth, and Van Hollen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN BARRASSO,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING
Senator Barrasso. Good morning. I call this hearing to
order.
Today we are holding our second hearing in as many weeks
highlighting the importance of water infrastructure and of
passing a new Water Resource Development Act, or WRDA, in 2018.
WRDA is a bill that authorizes projects and funding for the
Army Corps of Engineers Civil Works Program.
Last week, the Committee heard testimony from a variety of
private sector stakeholders representing inland waterways,
ports, rural areas, as well as those promoting ecosystem
restoration projects. Their testimony provided further evidence
that it is critical that Congress keep with the tradition of
biennial WRDA consideration and passing such legislation this
year.
Today we will hear from the Federal officials on how we can
best address water infrastructure needs and challenges in any
WRDA legislation. The Senate Environment and Public Works
Committee has oversight over much of the Corps' mission in
water infrastructure, including locks, dams, flood migration,
inland waterways, and ports. This hearing provides us an
opportunity to hear from the Army and the Corps on what they
perceive as the best solutions to the needs and challenges
facing important water infrastructure projects spread all
across America.
As I said at least week's hearing, unlike other contentious
issues, historically, Republican and Democratic members of this
Committee have been able to work together to pass WRDA
legislation. I also noted last week that this legislation
impacts every member of this Committee's diverse
constituencies.
To illustrate, Congress must prioritize the prevention of
flooding and the modernization of our Nation's levees, which
protect people's lives and their livelihoods across the
Country. We can't allow a repeat of the circumstances that led
to the flooding in Worland, Wyoming and the evacuation of 80
citizens when the Big Horn River flooded due to ice jams.
We must also not lose sight of western States' water supply
and consumption needs. My constituents in Wyoming, as well as
others, are well too familiar with the challenges associated
with providing long-term water supply and storage.
Let's not forget that sediment buildups continue to
decrease the storage capacity of western reservoirs. An
adequate and reliable water supply is necessary if western and
rural communities and their economies are going to continue
growing.
The Corps and the Bureau of Reclamation should continue
sharing related information and work together in the hopes of
solving these water supply problems.
To reiterate, we all have an important interest in
maintaining the Nation's water infrastructure. Let us commit
ourselves and our resources toward legislating a bipartisan
WRDA bill in 2018. Too much is at risk for us to abdicate this
responsibility of ensuring the public's safety, as well as
ensuring the flow of goods, commodities, and raw materials
through our inland waterways and ports.
I will now turn to the Ranking Member for his testimony.
Senator Carper.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. THOMAS R. CARPER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF DELAWARE
Senator Carper. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, it is great to see you both and we thank you.
You will be working extra hard until we get Val confirmed to
help you out a little bit. But thank you so much for being here
and for your good work and your service.
This is the second of two hearings, as we know, and one of
the great things about hearings on WRDA is this is something we
can work on together. It is not so much a red State, blue
State, it is not so much Democrat or Republican; it is just
important stuff. And we realize that and we have a good history
of that thanks to Senator Inhofe and Barbara Boxer and others
before them.
When I first heard the term WRDA, I said, what is that? I
am not a big fan of acronyms. I like this one. But WRDA is
another one of those funny sounding acronyms that we all use
too often in Washington. While it might sound funny, the truth
is what is incorporated into a WRDA bill has a huge effect,
oversized effect on the daily lives of a lot of us and our
constituents.
For instance, Members of Congress, perhaps like those of us
here today, talk about critical dredging. That may sound
boring, but if a ship is trying to get into this Country
carrying fruit, carrying vegetables, carrying meat, carrying
seafood, a number of other foodstuffs, and our ports are unable
to be reachable, that means prices at the grocery store might
go up. And if prices at the grocery store rise, families who
might already be struggling to put food on their table will
have to figure out how to stretch their budget just a little
bit further.
For most of all people among us, that ship being able to
reach its port isn't just a policy decision here in Washington,
which is what we focus more on, but could be the difference
between a hungry child or a healthier child.
Last week we discussed how more than 99 percent of the U.S.
overseas trade volume moves through coastal channels that the
Army Corps of Engineers maintains. I think that is amazing. I
heard that number and I was amazed. Think about it, 99 percent.
Additionally, the Corps' inland waterways and locks form a
freight network, think of it as a water highway, connecting
waterways and ports, and providing direct access to
international markets. They also serve as critical
infrastructure for the U.S. military, as we know.
But the Corps does more than just conduct navigation
projects. The agency is also involved in flood risk management,
environmental restoration, among others. Navigation, however,
makes up the most significant portion of the Corps' authorized
work. Unless the Country experiences flood events, navigation
work is the most visible activity in the Corps' portfolio on a
day-to-day basis.
Unfortunately, as we all know, Federal funding for new
project construction and major rehabilitation has steadily
declined. Corps activities have shifted to operations, to
maintenance, and rehabilitation of existing infrastructure,
while a backlog of deferred maintenance has continued to grow
ever since. As a result, much of the Corps' infrastructure is
now exceeding its useful lifespan.
Our waterways are the backbone of our economy, and the
Corps is often an invisible agency keeping much of it together
with limited resources. New estimates that my staff received
after last week's hearing reveal that the Corps' overall
construction backlog is now in the neighborhood of $96 billion
worth of projects. If provided, this money would only address
current needs; it does not include any of the funds that are
needed for future investments.
We had a chart we used last week from the American
Association of Port Authorities, a beautiful chart, but a
little busy, a little busy. This one is a little less busy. But
it illustrates, I think, very well what I am about to say, and
that is, according to the American Association of Port
Authorities, in port infrastructure alone, our Country is
expected to need over $65 billion in investment over the next
decade to ensure a nurturing environment for U.S. job creation
and economic growth.
As we heard last week, the American Society of Civil
Engineers infrastructure report card tells an even more
unsettling story. With dams, levees, and inland waterways
receiving a grade of D, as in deplorable, their report card
estimates that $162 billion of investment is needed in these
types of infrastructure, 162.
As I said last week, with an annual budget that hovers
around $4.6 billion, the Corps has a seemingly impossible math
problem to overcome. Or maybe we have a seemingly impossible
problem to overcome, and that is actually being willing to
spend money for the things that we need, actually truly need. I
like to say if a thing is worth having, they are worth paying
for.
This Committee has worked hard on a bipartisan basis in
recent years to return to the practice of developing WRDA bills
in a timely manner. I am encouraged that we will continue that
tradition in 2018 so that the ports, channels, waterways, and
flood management initiatives on which so many States,
businesses, and Americans depend can keep moving ever more
goods and people without interruption.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses, both of you.
It is great to see you again. I look forward to hear your plan
to overcome the more than $100 billion problem and enable us to
invest in our future. It will be interesting to see how you do
it on $4.5 billion a year.
We must work in a bipartisan, bicameral fashion with the
Administration to really address these concerns, build a
consensus on a path forward in a smart, cost-efficient way. I
would conclude by repeating what I said before: if things are
worth having, they are worth paying for. This is worth having.
Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Carper.
In just a moment we will hear from our two witnesses: Ryan
Fisher, the Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Army
for Civil Works and Acting Assistant Secretary of the Army for
the United States Department of Army, as well as Lieutenant
General Todd Semonite, who is the Chief of Engineers and
Commanding General of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Before we get to the opening statements, I would like to
first welcome Mr. Fisher, who recently took over as the Acting
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works in November
2017. While it is critical that we confirm a permanent
Assistant Secretary as soon as possible, there is important
work that needs to be done in the meantime, and we appreciate
you filling in today and testifying before this Committee.
I would also like to welcome back to the Committee
Lieutenant General Semonite, who last testified before this
Committee at a Transportation Infrastructure Subcommittee
hearing last May regarding the economic benefits that water
resources have for local communities and for State economies,
as well as the national economy.
So, I welcome you both here today and remind you that the
full version of your written testimony will be made part of the
official hearing record. Please keep your statements to 5
minutes so that we may have time for questions. Look forward to
hearing from you.
Senator Carper. Mr. Chairman, could I just say one thing?
Senator Barrasso. Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. The Finance Committee is meeting right now.
We are having a markup on a couple of key nominees, and I am
going to have to slip out probably close to 10:30. I will be
back, but I don't want to be disrespectful, it is just I wear a
couple of different hats around here, like you do. Thanks so
much.
Senator Inhofe. Mr. Chairman, let me also say that there
are nine members of this Committee that are also on the
Commerce Committee, and it seems like we are always meeting at
the same time, so you are going to see us disappearing and
reappearing during the course of this hearing.
Senator Barrasso. Mr. Fisher, please proceed.
STATEMENT OF RYAN FISHER, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY
OF THE ARMY (CIVIL WORKS) AND ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE
ARMY (CIVIL WORK), UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
Mr. Fisher. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Carper,
members of the Committee, I am honored to testify before you
today on the water infrastructure needs and challenges facing
the Nation. I am joined today by Lieutenant General Todd
Semonite, Chief of Engineers. He will also provide a short
opening statement.
As the Chairman mentioned, I was sworn in as the Principal
Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works in
November and am currently serving as the Acting Assistant
Secretary as well, and I very much look forward to working with
this Committee as you move toward a possible WRDA bill.
The Corps of Engineers has played a significant role in the
development of the Nation's water resources. The Civil Works
program of the Corps has three main missions: commercial
navigation, flood and storm damage reduction, and aquatic
ecosystem restoration. In this regard, the Corps work with our
Nation's coastal ports to maintain their channels, operates and
maintains the inland waterways, supports State and local flood
risk reduction efforts, works to restore significant aquatic
ecosystems, and operates and maintains multipurpose dams and
the reservoirs that are behind those. Additionally, the Corps
is one of the top Federal providers of recreation in this
Country.
The Corps constructed much of its civil works
infrastructure in the first half of the 20th century, so, as
you can imagine, the Corps dedicates a significant amount of
its resources to maintain those key features of this
infrastructure.
My office is working with the Administration as it
continues to work on policy and administrative changes that can
improve infrastructure delivery to the Nation, and Lieutenant
General Semonite can elaborate a few examples where the Corps
is making improvements within its regulatory program, as well
as how it assists others in granting permission to modify
existing civil works projects.
The way that we use our water resources can affect the
Nation's economy, its environment, and public safety. The Army
and the Corps stand ready to help in addressing the water
resource challenges of the 21st century, and I look forward to
working with you on this very important issue, and again I
thank you for the opportunity to appear here and testify today.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fisher follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Mr. Fisher.
General Semonite.
STATEMENT OF LIEUTENANT GENERAL TODD T. SEMONITE, COMMANDING
GENERAL AND CHIEF OF ENGINEERS, U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS
General Semonite. Chairman Barrasso, Ranking Member Carper,
and distinguished members of the Committee, it is my pleasure
to be here today, accompanied by Mr. Fisher, to provide
testimony on the significance of the Water Resources
Development Act, which provides the United States Army Corps of
Engineers valuable authorities to implement the broad Civil
Works program.
As Mr. Fisher mentioned, the Corps has played a significant
role in the development of the Nation's water resources. This
infrastructure is a vital component of our national economy,
enabling the low-cost shipment of goods through our coastal
ports and on the inland waterways, reducing the flood risk to
communities and businesses, and restoring aquatic ecosystems.
I have been in command of the Corps now for just over a
year and a half, and I continue to be amazed by the breadth and
complexity of the Civil Works program, as well as the expertise
and dedication of the professionals that work in our
organization. It is my belief that the credibility of the Corps
is measured by our ability to deliver results that are on time,
on budget, and of exceptional quality. In order to achieve
these standards, the Corps continues to evaluate itself on how
we can best accomplish these outcomes. To be most effective at
delivering the Nation's water infrastructure needs, the Corps
must become more efficient and consider new ways to prioritize,
finance, and incentivize investments in water resource
infrastructure.
The Corps has sought to review and apply a wide array of
authorities provided in recent Water Resource Development Acts
in a diligent manner. We are rapidly approaching completion and
communication of an implementation guidance for both the 2014
and the 2016 Acts. Our team has endeavored to make substantial
improvements in tracking and accelerating this progress, and,
looking ahead, I believe that we can continue to improve our
methodologies.
The Corps is also working to develop policy and
administrative advancements that can improve infrastructure
delivery. More specifically, we are looking internally at our
policies, regulations, organizations, and procedures in order
to identify opportunities for increased efficiency and
effectiveness. These efforts include reducing redundancy and
delegating authority to decisionmaking to the most practical
and appropriate level. Several examples include streamlining
the review process for potential modifications to Civil Works
projects and seeking improvements to the execution of the
regulatory program.
The Corps is fully committed to addressing the water
resource challenges of the 21st century and seeks to evaluate
opportunities to be more efficient and effective in the
delivery of the Civil Works program. We recognize the
significance of infrastructure investment to the Nation's
economy and we look forward to working with this Committee as
it develops a Water Resource Development Act for 2018.
Thank you for allowing me the time today to address the
Committee.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Well, thank you very much to both of you
for your testimony. We have a number of members here with lots
of interest and will ask about certain projects that are going
on.
I would like to start. General Semonite, rural communities
in Wyoming affected by ice jam flooding, the city of Worland
that you are very familiar with, they are anxious to see
projects built under the Ice Jam Prevention and Mitigation
Pilot Program authorized by Section 1150 in the WIIN Act. Could
you just give us an update of the status of the Corps'
implementation of this Ice Jam Prevention and Mitigation Pilot
Program?
General Semonite. Yes, sir. So, right now we have four
pilots that we are working. One of these is an active pilot. It
is in Mile City, Montana and it goes back to fully look at some
innovative approaches to be able to do ice jams. Worland,
Wyoming is clearly one of the ones that we want to continue to
keep working. We are pending new start approval and funding
right now, but we have received a request from a letter to be
able to put this in the CAP data base and continue to work this
out.
There is a third one in Platte River, Nebraska and a fourth
one in Yellowstone River, Montana to be able to continue to
find, I think, innovative ways. And you and I have talked about
this in the past. We have to be able to figure out how can we
use some of these emerging technologies to be able to try to
bring down this disaster response.
I have also personally talked to my Cold Regions Laboratory
in Hanover, New Hampshire on ways that they can do this,
innovative approaches, and continue to infuse those in there.
We are certainly willing to do up to ten of these pilots. Right
now we have only really seen four different communities that
are interested. There is a cost share to this, so that is where
the communities have to be able to find available funds. But we
are committed to continue to make progress in this ice jam
initiative to be able to bring down that risk.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you.
Mr. Fisher, since the General mentioned the CAP, the
Continuing Authorities Program, I just want to ask you a little
bit about that, because, as this is carried out by the Corps,
it is vital to many rural communities. In particular, one of
its several authorities concerns flood risk management
challenges. What are your plans to help ensure that flood risk
management projects that are backlogged in the CAP program
queue are studied and billed in an efficient manner? And is
there anything Congress can do to help the program succeed?
Mr. Fisher. So, yes, sir, the backlog is real, as was
mentioned earlier, and it applies to every program, CAP
included. I believe you are referencing the Section 205 flood
risk program. The Administration, we are open to everything,
basically. We have seen opportunities for contributed funds
agreements, where non-Federal interests can contribute money
toward construction, or even operation and maintenance in some
cases. There is a lot of discussion, obviously, of the P3
public-private partnerships that this Administration is open to
pursuing, as well. But as you mentioned, yes, $96 billion
backlog and a budget that is roughly $5 billion, $6 billion a
year, that is very real and the Administration looks forward to
working with this Committee to find innovative ways to bolster
that CAP program and other programs as well.
Senator Barrasso. General Semonite, rural communities still
face challenges associated with providing long-term water
supply and storage. Federal water storage facilities out west
continue to lose existing space as a result of sediment
buildup. This is a major problem for western States' economies
where there are rapidly growing populations enlarging energy
industries, agriculture operations.
In 2016, Section 1115 of the Water Infrastructure
Improvements for the Nation Act was enacted to help address
this problem by creating the pilot programs to enable removal
of sediment in Corps and Bureau of Reclamation reservoirs. Can
you give us a little status on how things are going there?
General Semonite. Yes, sir. And we are worried about
sediment buildup. I mean, the Nation has spent a lot of money
building some of these structures. We want to make sure, first
of all, we are optimizing that capacity. The more sediment goes
in, obviously, the less water you can keep in there or the less
flood control capacity. On the other hand, that continues to
put pressure on the backside of these dams. Wherever we can
mitigate that, we want to do it. We need to do it in an
environmentally sensitive way. And the particular WRDA you are
talking about does allow us to look at 10 different pilots to
be able to go back and look at how can we remove sediment from
behind dams. To be honest with you, though, we have not found
partners right now that necessarily want to go into those
pilots. So, we want to continue to stay open to that.
One of the things we do want to do, though, is look at
those technologies. We have an environmental advisory board. We
bring in some of the best from academia that are out in the
Nation. I met with them in the Everglades last week, and some
of the technologies we have seen in some areas where they are
actually taking sediment, pumping it right over that structure
and letting nature put that sediment back down in there. Now,
we have to think about the environmental parts of that, but
this might not be where you have to come in and dredge out the
back of that dam and then find a way of getting rid of it; but
how can you use regional sediment management to somehow let
nature refresh where that sediment needs to go, and then you
are really solving two problems with one.
So, this is some of the innovative stuff we have to do to
find out. Don't just do it the old way, just the expensive way;
how can we think out of the box and still do it so it is
environmentally friendly.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you.
Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. Question, if I could, for Mr. Fisher. Have
you ever been to Delaware?
Mr. Fisher. Sir, I have not, not in this capacity.
Senator Carper. Have you ever been to Maryland?
Mr. Fisher. Yes.
[Laughter.]
Senator Carper. Well, you have been to Delmarva, but not to
the Del portion of Delmarva.
We are proud of our beaches. We have, the last time I
checked, more five-star beaches in Delaware, believe it or not,
than, I think, maybe any other State. And there is some pretty
good competition around us, so that is pretty good talking
stuff.
Senator Cardin has a lot of interest in beach nourishment
and beach replenishment, and certainly so do a lot of States up
and down the East Coast. But for us in our State, we have maybe
even more interest in the construction of a dune system that
actually helps protect our beaches, not just our beaches, from
loss down to Ocean City line, the Maryland line, but a dune
system that protects not just our boardwalks, not just our
businesses in the coastal towns, not just the folks who live
there, our infrastructure, roads, highways, bridges, water,
sewer, but all the above. And what we found out in the money
that we spend in dune protection for our coastal towns, the
cost of that is not cheap, but the cost of that is small
compared to the cost of replacing one major hotel. So, it is
really cost-effective.
I don't know that we do as good a job as we ought to be
able to do on cost-benefit ratio, but here is my question. And
if you can't answer this one right off the top of your head,
then I will ask you to do it for the record. But it is
important to us and it is important certainly to other States
up and down the East Coast. But beach nourishment projects tend
not to compete well in benefit-cost ratio analysis, which,
compared to larger projects like ports. We have a great
interest in ports as well, like the Port of Wilmington. How
should we update or how could we update the benefit-cost ratio
to incorporate more value from these types of projects into the
assessment?
Mr. Fisher. Certainly. And I probably will have to do some
research on this and get back to you with a fuller answer. BCR,
as you know, is about maximizing return on investment; it is an
opportunity cost calculation, and we certainly want to be
looking at all the benefits of those dune projects and that
sort of thing to make sure we are calculating all those
effectively. But, yes, I will commit to providing you further
information as I further research and briefed on that topic.
Thank you.
Senator Carper. We look forward to that soon. Thank you.
General Semonite, you want to make a quick comment on that?
General Semonite. Sure.
Senator Carper. Let me just say again Delaware has a love
affair with the Army Corps of Engineers. We just love the folks
who work out of your Philadelphia office and just value very
much the wonderful work they do not just for us, but up and
down the Delmarva. Thank you.
General Semonite. Sir, to address your issue, and I think a
theme that I would want to stress today is that just as you
said up front, $96 billion of construction backlog, this
Country can't afford that, so we have to find innovative ways
of having some of the stakeholders put some skin in the game.
And if they are able to do that and somehow we can change the
benefit-cost ratio to a point where now their project is able
to see funding, then I think we have incentivized a lot of
these people to be able to take some of that burden off the
Federal Government. Right now, the processes don't necessarily
allow, if somebody were to give money in, to be able to add
more to their cost share or to put more money in from that
particular area. You would like to think that those would
compete better to be able to bring down the Federal bill and
also make those things more viable.
So I think as we work with the Committee, is it benefit-
cost ratio or remaining benefit-cost ratio, it goes back to how
OMB scores these, and how can somehow we find a way of changing
some of this to a degree relatively a metric-based process to
put a little bit more common sense back into how we use the
Federal dollar.
Senator Carper. Earlier in my time, in fact, when I was
Governor, the Federal Government put up a very large portion of
these projects on our coast. The State share was raised, as you
know, a few years ago. States now pay more than one-third of
the cost of most of these projects, which is, I think,
appropriate. I think it is appropriate.
I have a question now, if I could, for both Mr. Fisher and
General Semonite. In past budget cycles, my staff and I have
worked to find out why Delaware projects were not included in
the President's budget. A big one that was included was the
dredging of the Delaware River Channel and Delaware Bay
Channel, which is important for a number of our States,
including New Jersey and PA. But on more than one occasion it
appears that a given project was somehow mistakenly deleted or
omitted during the Administration's budget develop and review
process, including the Office of Management and Budget. We find
this Administration black box to be a problem and a disservice
to the American people. How do we create a more transparent and
collaborative process to ensure that local and regional
priorities do receive funding?
As you know, while Corps projects have a large national
value, many times they primarily impact the local economy or
the local health and safety, and it seems this gets lost in the
current budgeting process. Any ideas on how we might address
this? Thank you.
Mr. Fisher. Well, we certainly want to be working with all
the relevant cost share partners and stakeholders on projects,
be it in Delaware or anywhere.
Senator Carper. I like that, Delaware or anywhere.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Fisher. But, no, this Administration, in the budget
process, obviously, the Fiscal Year 2019 budget is being
developed now, and, with limited resources, we want to make
sure that we are targeting taxpayer funds where they are most
needed, using risk-informed decisions to target that funding.
Senator Carper. All right, thank you.
General Semonite. Sir, I think the word you used,
transparent, we are committed to continue to be up-front and
open, and to be able to make sure we are having this dialog.
So, you talk about what is a national project, what is a local
project. Wilmington Harbor right now is a great example. They
are looking to try to have a new access channel, so we assigned
an MOA to try to figure out how can we continue to be able to
coach them through how to make their project viable and to be
able to compete. So that is where we want to make sure we are
up-front. What are some of the trap lines? What are some of the
lessons learned we have learned? And then at some given point
the best thing we can do in the Corps is to give Mr. Fisher and
you our recommendations of where the best use of that Federal
dollar is.
Now, if it doesn't meet the cut line, then that is
something we have to go back and look at. But I think when it
goes to that, whether it is harbor deepening or some of these
other infrastructure projects, the value back to the Nation
here is unbelievable, and we have to be able to champion some
of those the best we can.
Senator Carper. All right. Thanks so much.
Senator Barrasso. Senator Inhofe.
Senator Inhofe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Fisher, following Senator Carper's lead, have you
ever been to Oklahoma?
Mr. Fisher. I have not, sir.
Senator Inhofe. All right. Well, we may have to correct
that, because we have some specific problems in Oklahoma that
we have been working with the Corps, and I think we have sent
letters to the Corps and OMB on the importance of prioritizing
new start programs, some of our levee system that we have.
Senator Boozman and I are very much concerned also about some
of the problems we have with our best kept secret, and that is
that my State of Oklahoma houses the most inland port in
America, and we do have ships, barges coming up and down. But
Senator Boozman and I are very much concerned about the
condition of the locks and the dams, and we have been talking
about that for a long period of time, and I would hope that we
would be able to address this as we look at the Fiscal Year
2019 budget, as well as the Fiscal Year 2018 work plan. So just
keep that in mind, and any comments you want to make about that
at a later time would be fine.
In the WRDA bill in 2007, that was 10 years ago, I authored
Section 3134, creating an innovative program for lakes within
Oklahoma and elsewhere in America. This had been a contentious
subject for a long time and we have had quotes from various
people that have been in the Corps for a long period of time
saying we are not in the recreational business, we are not
going to be involved in that. However, they are involved.
Anyway, just to make sure there is no question about that, I
added language at that time, 10 years ago, and we actually, in
the WIIN Act, more recently, removed the sunset provision to
ensure that lake development innovation can be pursued by the
Corps and used in other districts, too.
While we have seen a couple of truly great developments,
and we have in Oklahoma, we have, unfortunately, been told that
Congress did not provide the Corps with any additional
authorities needed to actually be innovative.
Now, General Semonite, do you agree with that statement?
General Semonite. Sir, you know----
Senator Inhofe. It was made on behalf of the Corps. A quick
answer is fine.
General Semonite. We definitely want to be as innovative as
we can. I am not convinced that there is a funding piece there,
though, that I can necessarily put my arms around.
Senator Inhofe. OK. Now, this is what I am going to ask you
to do, because I can't find out what it is that we didn't do to
give you the authority to do it, so I would like to maybe get a
report from you or someone you can have address this subject,
say, in the next week or so. Let us know what are the obstacles
out there, because I can't find them.
Second, the city of Bartlesville, Oklahoma currently has
three water storage contracts at a particular lake and the most
recent contract was secured at a rate of $67.38 per acre foot.
Now, that was the quote that we got, and it has been activated,
from the Corps of Engineers.
Now, it is a growing city. They have problems over there
and they have actually increased their use by 100 percent, and
they really can't do much more. However, they just tried to get
another quote from the Tulsa District Corps of Engineers, and
that quote was $1,997 per acre foot. Now, it has gone up from
$16 to $2,000 an acre foot, and obviously that is something
that can't be provided.
Now, my office initiated a dialog between the district and
the city to find a compromise. It is my understanding that the
district will be reaching out to the division and headquarters
in order to do so. The Water Supply Act of 1958 directs the
Corps to cooperate with States and local interests in
developing water supplies in conjunction with Federal water
projects.
Now, the problem that we had with the district office is
that this is out of our jurisdiction; we are going to have to
go up the ladder. Well, today we are going up the ladder; that
is you. And we would like to have your--are you familiar with
this problem in that particular city?
General Semonite. Sir, I am not familiar other than the
last 24 hours. There was a GAO report that talked about Corps
pricing. And I hate to say it, but the way that the rules were
established several years ago, that pricing is different when
it comes to State-to-State and city-to-city. Depends on how
much did the project cost, when was it built, what were the
authorized----
Senator Inhofe. That is the GAO----
General Semonite. That is the GAO report. So, the Tulsa
District has provided a proposal to our Southwestern Division
as of the last couple days. I will take a look at it. I will
get back with you. I agree with you, you can't have that level
of an increase, $67 to $1,900. Something sounds wrong there.
Sounds to me like we have our hands tied with how we charge
water supply rates based on the project's original construction
cost, the year of the agreement, inflation, etcetera.
Senator Inhofe. OK.
General Semonite. So there is some formula that we are
probably caught into, and we have to figure out how to get
relief from that.
Senator Inhofe. OK, my time has expired, but you know that
GAO has stated in this report that they didn't get the ample
information from the Corps to be able to make these
determinations.
General Semonite. Then I will solve that, sir.
Senator Inhofe. All right. Very good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Senator Booker.
Senator Booker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you both for your commitment to our
Country. As you can hear from the passion of the folks, such
important projects for our communities are often the difference
between security and safety and destruction or worse in some
senses.
I want to focus in about the Rahway River Flood Control
Project. This is an extremely high priority for tens of
thousands of people in my constituents who live in the impacted
area, which happens to be some of the most populated counties
in my State. I want to reiterate that the storms in November
2007, Hurricane Irene, 2011 damaged hundreds and hundreds of
homes and cost businesses over $100 million due to the flood
damage. I cannot overState the importance to my constituents
and the risks that they face from flooding from the Rahway
River and the importance of finding a way forward on this
incredible project. I know you are familiar with it, probably
pretty intimately, at least I hope so.
There is so much concern at the end of the day that we will
have studied this a lot, for over a decade, and little gets
done. There is rising skepticism among some of my local
leaders, cynicism that we are facing now. And I know that we
can work together to overcome that skepticism, that cynicism,
and you all have shown to me in the past your incredible
creativity and engineering expertise, and I know that if we
cooperate together with the local leaders that we can get this
done and move forward.
So my first question, Lieutenant General, is I understand
that there are ongoing discussions with the Corps that may be
willing to both extend the 3x3x3 Rules, which I know you are
familiar with, and continue the elevation of the project by
doing a detailed geotechnical study of the Orange River
Reservoir Dam. Can you confirm that, sir?
General Semonite. Senator, I can confirm that we are very
involved with this. We do have the authority to extend the
waiver, and we have extended a waiver to be able to make that
study go longer. The other thing is we are very worried about
the safety of that. This is a State dam, not a Federal dam, and
some of the proposals that were asked for was to be able to do
something that we don't think, in good engineering science, you
can just go in and do. They were going to make some more outlet
structures.
We want to work with the State to find a solution, but the
actual recommended solution from the State we don't think is
engineeringly viable. So, this is where we want to work with
the locals to be able to figure out how we can get a better
solution, continue the study to be able to figure out what
options are out there, and then the question is how can we
continue to make sure that it does compete for funding, if in
fact we see the need out there.
But we are very concerned about the importance of that
particular dam and we are committed to work with the State to
try to find a solution, but it might not be the solution that
the locals want. It is a very tight, constricted area and it is
a very complicated dam. We know this one well, so we need to be
able to really come up with a solution that is probably going
to take a different engineering solution.
Senator Booker. No, I appreciate that. I think the
commitment of being willing to extend the 3x3x3, that is huge,
and your willingness to be creative in working with the locals
to come up with a solution that works on both sides, that kind
of passion is important. That kind of commitment is important
to me.
General Semonite. Yes, Senator. And the cost of this is
going to be out of the box. This is a very narrow area, so you
are going to probably have to make the footprint bigger, so I
am just saying it is not going to be an easy fix. But we are
committed to find as much innovative solutions as we can, or at
least be able to somehow put other mitigating effects in place
to be able to bring down the risk to the local people that are
there.
Senator Booker. That, I appreciate. For Senator Menendez
and I this is such a top priority because, as you know, New
Jersey is the most densely populated State in terms of
population, and this is one of our most densely populated areas
in a densely populated State, so I am really grateful for that
commitment; it means a lot to me.
I want to, with my last minute here, really quick. The
Federal flood risk management standard, you know that that has
been changed, and after what we are seeing about a lot of the
flooding and the challenges facing Texas and the Virgin Islands
and Puerto Rico, the rule that was repealed would simply ensure
that federally funded projects in a floodplain, such as roads,
bridges, hospitals, infrastructure are built to withstand
extreme weather and flooding that is often driven by some of
the impacts we are seeing of climate change. So as the Federal
Government is allocating tens of billions of dollars to help
these communities to rebuild, I think it is essential that we
make sound investments that will withstand the extreme weather.
So, the simple question I have really quick is as the Army
Corps continues to work to help communities rebuild from
natural disasters, how important do you think it is to have
strong flood risk management standards that take into account
climate science and the sea level rise that is happening?
General Semonite. Senator, I think it is very important. We
are right in the middle of doing Puerto Rico and the Virgins
right now, when you talk about resiliency there, so we have a
lot of experience. But it does go back to we can't afford to
continue to build products that are not going to be able to
take care of what nature could throw at us. So, we have to be
able to put that in accordance with the current authorities we
have and to be able to continue to think of the deep fight.
When we do plans and we do projects, we factor in how is that
going to react when it comes to climate change or sea level
rise.
Senator Booker. Thank you very much, sir. Appreciate your
comments.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Booker.
Senator Fischer.
Senator Fischer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Fisher and General, for being here
today.
As I have mentioned many times before in this Committee,
Nebraska operates a very unique system with our 23 natural
resource districts, which are based on river basin boundaries
rather than county lines. Our NRDs are governed by locally
elected boards, enabling them to be effective in addressing
local water concerns. Many times the NRDs are the local
partners for a lot of the Corps-related projects.
However, due to the Corps' inability to operate in a time-
efficient manner, these local partners are faced with
astronomical costs and delayed projects. For example, one NRD
has been working for the past 8 years to secure a 408 permit to
begin construction of the Missouri River levees that protect
Offutt Air Force Base, and currently this NRD has spent nearly
$5 million to secure this permit. Even more concerning is that
the NRD has worked with six different permit review teams from
the Omaha District Corps office. After eight very painful years
and millions of dollars spent, the original levee design has
changed very little. Consequently, the permitting process has
added very little safety or resiliency value to the project.
The delay in acquiring the 408 permit has undoubtedly added
millions of dollars to the construction costs of the project,
but, more importantly, it has placed Offutt Air Force Base, its
personnel, private citizens, private and public property, and
billions of dollars in infrastructure at an unnecessary risk
because the levees are not yet rehabilitated.
General, I will ask you first. In your professional
experience, is this delay acceptable? And will you commit to me
today to expedite approval of the 408 permit for this project?
General Semonite. Senator, I will, not just for that
project. What we have done in the last year, and I said this in
my opening statement, I hate to say it, but over the last
hundreds of years we have migrated a lot of stuff to
Washington, DC. that probably didn't need to come here. The
real true technical experts, a lot of times, are the local
districts and those divisions. So, a 408 process, it got to the
point where it was so backlogged that this caused us to be able
to look at ourselves and say how can we delegate in power this
down to the generals and the colonels that we hire to do this
job. So, since I have talked to you last, the 408 program has
completely been delegated back to the division and the
district; there will be no 408 approvals in Washington, DC.
I don't know the exact process on the Offutt one, but I
will find out, ma'am.
Senator Fischer. But, sir, my issue here is with the
district office, it is with the district office that has had
six different permit review teams, that has spent 8 years in
reviewing this project that has cost local taxpayers $5
million. And we can't get this done for Offutt Air Force Base,
which is home to the 55th Wing, which is home to STRATCOM, to
build levees to protect this base. That is my issue, sir, it is
with the local district.
General Semonite. OK, so, ma'am, I have to find out. I
don't know exactly this deal. Most of the time the districts do
have to send it up the chain. It starts at the district, but it
had to come to Corps Headquarters, so we have delegated it
down. We know Offutt very well; we are building STRATCOM's
headquarters. We are very committed to the Air Force contingent
back at Offutt, so I will find out what the status of this
permit is. And unless there is something that we are doing that
is either not in the realm of engineering science, there should
be no reason why we can't find a solution to that permit. I
don't know the details, so I can't promise you we will approve
it, but we will certainly get rapid resolution.
It goes back to this whole streamlining thing. We should
not have to take years to be able to resolve permits.
Senator Fischer. And I would appreciate that, because it
affects the base, it affects national security, it affects our
local communities. So, I would appreciate hearing from you soon
on that, sir. Thank you.
Mr. Fisher, how do you believe the Administration can
assure us that the Corps is operating effectively and
efficiently so that projects can be budgeted for completion and
finished to provide for the public health and safety of the
communities and citizens that these projects were designed to
protect?
Mr. Fisher. Sure. Thank you. As has been discussed today by
various members and myself, we recognize the construction
backlog, and this Administration certainly wants to look at the
innovative ways that the General has mentioned, contributed
funds, other partnerships that, when we authorize something in
a WRDA bill, that we can ultimately get to a completed project
on those things.
Senator Fischer. Well, thank you. And I would ask if you
will commit to me that the Corps is going to review Section 408
permitting process and determine if it is needed for flood
control projects. And once the Corps has made this
determination, will you provide an update to this Committee?
Mr. Fisher. Yes, I can commit to that, working with the
General on the 408 process and filing any report and
communication that is needed.
Senator Fischer. Thank you. I look forward to hearing from
both of you.
Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Senator Cardin.
Senator Cardin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Fisher, thank you for your testimony,
particularly looking for innovative ways. We all recognize that
the backlog and resources are a mismatch here, and we have to
find ways to move forward on very important projects for our
communities and for our economy.
General Semonite, I appreciate very much your leadership in
so many ways working with us. I will just mention what Senator
Carper mentioned on beach renourishment. We talked about
adapting to the realities of climate. The beach renourishments
have saved millions and millions of dollars in property losses
and has been our first offense against these storms. So, there
are many reasons why we are pleased that we have been able to
keep, actually we are a little ahead of schedule on the beach
renourishments on the Atlantic coast of Delmarva, so thank you
very much for your help in all of that.
I want to talk about one of the highest priorities in
Maryland. You are not going to be surprised that I am going to
mention Mid Bay. But I want to go back to Poplar Island, which
was innovative at the time. We had never had a project that
would be a location for dredge material, but would also be an
environmental restoration where we would have a win-win
situation that would not only allow us to move forward with
dredging that was desperately needed for the economics of the
shipping lanes, but also give us a plus for the community,
which helped their local economy as well. So, it was a win-win
situation and Poplar Island has been very, very successful
thanks to the courage of Congress to authorize this and the
Corps to move forward with it.
The challenge is that we now need a second location, and
Mid Bay is the second location within the Chesapeake Bay for
the location of dredge materials. It has been authorized by
Congress in 2014, so we are on schedule.
Just to followup on Senator Fischer's point about time, we
need to be fully operational by 2029, and, in order to meet
that date, we can't lose any of the dates moving forward. And
we are concerned because it has not been budgeted for the first
phase of preconstruction engineering, which is a matter of
concern to all of us.
So my question to you is will you work with this Committee
to do whatever we need to do within the next WRDA authorization
to make sure Mid Bay stays on schedule? We understand funding
issues, but stays on schedule from the point of view of
congressional authorization?
General Semonite. Sir, I will talk a little bit about the
project and I will let Mr. Fisher talk perhaps about the
funding and the future commitments.
First of all, you and I met here a couple months ago. We
had to get a revalidation on that done. The dredge material
management plan has been approved since you and I met. We do
have now the report. I will sign by the 31st of January
basically a revised report that goes back to Mr. Fisher that
validates that particular thing.
I think for all of the members in the Committee, I am
concerned about dredge material management, and we, as we
continue in this Nation to deepen harbors or to keep these
harbors maintained, that material management is getting harder
and harder to deal with. And if we don't think of innovative
ways like Poplar Island and Mid Bay to be able to find
environmentally sensitive ways of doing it, we are going to end
up shutting down some of these harbors, and we can't afford
that to happen. I was the guy that briefed Mid Bay back in
2007, when we came in here to say that this was a good project.
So, right now, what will happen is that report that I will
sign will go to Mr. Fisher. It has to be cleared by OMB. If
that happens and Mr. Fisher has the ability to be able to put
PED money against it without any additional authority, he has
that under his control. So, we think that from a Corps
perspective we are on plan to continue with the process.
And I will let Mr. Fisher talk about any of the funding
commitments.
Mr. Fisher. So, yes, we certainly want to work, when it
gets to my desk, for there to be no surprises. I want to be
able to work hand-in-hand with the General so that when it does
come to our office we can expedite and help the project move
forward and meet those 2029 and other milestones and deadlines
you referenced.
General Semonite. I think, Senator Cardin, the other thing
is we are using Mid Bay and Poplar Island as ways around the
whole Nation that we should be doing some of this. We are
looking at an option right now in the Upper Mississippi River.
We have some other options we are working out in California.
This ability to be able to find an ecological restoration, but
done on dredge material, is a smart way to go. We did the same
thing in New York Harbor and Jamaica Bay, so it is the way. The
Corps has to think out of the box to solve two problems with
one.
Senator Cardin. Well, General, I very much appreciate your
leadership on these types of projects.
Mr. Secretary, I just urge you that in the OMB-type
bureaucracies, these types of programs are not well understood,
and unless we have an advocate, it can be delayed, and when it
is delayed it looks like it could become an earmark in Congress
rather than an authorized program by Congress. We have those
hurdles we have to overcome. So, all I am suggesting is to stay
on schedule, and I appreciate your willingness to do everything
we can to stay on schedule. It does require us to be innovative
to make sure that the formal requirements have been met so that
the funding can continue and we don't run into a process
obstacle from OMB, so we need your help.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Cardin.
Senator Ernst.
Senator Ernst. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Gentlemen, thank you for being here today.
General Semonite, always good to see you. I am sure you
know the topic that I am going to bring up this morning, the
Cedar Rapids Flood Mitigation Project.
Mr. Fisher, you and the General have both made references
to value back to the Nation when it comes to the benefit-cost
ratio. But when you talk about value back to the Nation, I
think when you are referring to the BCR, you often, or what
that brings to mind is the fact that those places with higher
property values are worth much more to our Nation than the
rural areas where property values are lower. And, since 2008,
Cedar Rapids has experienced two major floods that have cost
the city billions, billions of dollars in damages and lost
economic activity.
Despite being authorized in WRRDA 2014 and mentioned for
prioritization in 2016, the project has not received any
Federal funding due to the low benefit-cost ratio that results
from the city's relatively low property values. The Cedar
Rapids Flood Project is $600 million in total; the Federal cost
share of that is only $73 million. So, the city is bearing the
brunt of that project, while the Federal Government would have
$73 million to contribute.
Now, going back to the BCR, the metric, as currently
calculated, is very problematic. The lives and livelihoods of
the people in Cedar Rapids are just as important as those of
individuals who reside in those coastal areas with higher
property values. A solution is needed to ensure that all areas
of the Country have a fair shot when competing for these
important Corps projects.
So, General Semonite, we have talked about this before. I
am going to refer back to the December confirmation of R.D.
James, the President's nominee to be Assistant Secretary of the
Army for Civil Works. He committed to working with me and OMB
to modify the BCR metrics in a timely manner, and I am going to
quote his words: ``It's not right that there's people in this
Country who will never ever get any type of water
infrastructure project under the current BCR analysis.''
Do you agree with Mr. James's assertion, and do you also
agree that the metrics need to be changed?
General Semonite. Ma'am, I personally do agree that the
metrics need to be changed. We can't do one-size-fits-all or
one-metric-fits-all. Your specific area is one where the local
people out there saved lives because they were very, very
aggressive in getting that flood fighting done, and we were
lucky, to a degree, that somebody didn't get hurt out there.
But I think we have to go back in and take a look at this. I am
not convinced, though, that under the current metric we are
going to see the light of day on this one. So, this is where we
have to do something different, either change the metric or go
back and somehow reformulate the project to be able to figure
out how can we get the cost down and maybe bring the risk down.
I had a meeting with my guys yesterday to say we have to be
able to figure out how to solve this somehow. Just plugging
through and beating our head against the wall on this one is
not going to make progress, so we either have to change the
metric or go back in and actually say is there some way that we
can redesign it to come into a benefit-cost ratio that is in
line with current OMB metrics.
Senator Ernst. I appreciate that, and I will hold you to
that because we do have to make progress on this. We have been
through a number of flood events there and we will probably
have another flood event before we get this solved.
In Fiscal Year 2017, five projects received funding under
the human safety exception, five, human safety exception, which
gives the Corps discretion to fund projects with low BCRs if it
deems there is a significant risk to human safety. Four of the
five projects were in California. Four of five. And in a
December 2016 letter to me, the Corps indicated that the
decisions are determined on a case-by-case basis.
Can you shed some light on this process, because, as we
have discussed in this Committee before, there does seem to be
a black hole of decisionmaking? Can you talk to me about the
process and how those decisions are arrived?
General Semonite. So, ma'am, I am not exactly an expert on
this, but I did talk to Mr. Fisher yesterday. I think we both
have to take a look at this process and go back, especially on
that particular project, is there the ability to be able to
apply this human exemption back on that particular project and
revisit that decision, if nothing else, based on some of the
other ones we have learned, and based on the fact that I don't
necessarily see this thing happening the normal way. So, unless
we are innovative in thinking what other tool in our kit bag
can we use to get it authorized, then I don't see it happening,
so this is where I think we both have to take a hard look at
it.
You and I have talked several times on this. I would love
to come back and say here is the realm of what, if anything,
the Committee needs to do to have this one see the light of
day.
Senator Ernst. We will have you back, sir. You are welcome
in my office any time, and I look forward to having those
discussions.
General Semonite. Thanks, ma'am.
Senator Ernst. Thank you very much.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Ernst.
Senator Whitehouse.
Senator Whitehouse. Thank you, Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you very much for being here. We look
forward to working with you as we do our next WRDA bill. And
although this is not always a bipartisan Committee in the area
of interest to you, it is a bipartisan Committee, and I hope
you take advantage of that fact.
One of the predicaments that coastal States like mine face
is the sea level rising along our shores. NOAA has recently
increased its predictions for global sea level rise and, in
certain areas, particularly in my State, because of the way the
ocean flows and works, that actually gets amplified a little
bit further.
Let me ask you first if the Army Corps has any quarrel or
dispute with those NOAA sea level rise projections.
General Semonite. Sir, I am not sure that I am smart enough
to know on how they apply to Rhode Island right now. I don't
think, fundamentally, we have any----
Senator Whitehouse. Well, we will take care of that for
you. We have very good people working on it.
General Semonite. And, sir, I will ask the New England
District as well so that we can take a look. I know you are
specifically concerned about----
Senator Whitehouse. Do you have any quarrel or dispute with
the NOAA general sea level rise findings that they have
proposed?
General Semonite. No, sir.
Senator Whitehouse. So, you will be taking that information
into account in your planning of coastal projects?
General Semonite. We take that, along with any other
technical information that is out there, sir. Our expectation
is to make sure we are using the best science available.
Senator Whitehouse. And particularly where you are dealing
with long-lived projects, it is important, is it not, to
understand the conditions that those projects will be facing
all the way through their useful life, and not just at the
point of completion of the construction?
General Semonite. Fox Point is a great example of that,
sir.
Senator Whitehouse. Yes. We are probably going to have to
rebuild all that at some point fairly soon, and we have people
in Rhode Island starting to look at how we wall off the city of
Providence from much heightened storms.
We have an additional problem, which is that the FEMA
projections for coastal flooding have, over and over, been
proved very badly wrong. In Houston and in Florida they just
had some pretty harsh experience of what the flooding actually
looked like compared to what FEMA maps had predicted. In Rhode
Island we have very good work that has been done at the local
level looking into how FEMA got its maps done with huge
anomalies like multi-foot discrepancies on either side of one
of the transects that gets done, which is obviously impossible
in nature, and yet was obviously satisfying to the contractors
who did this work for FEMA.
So, I think we have two problems. One, as Members of
Congress, we need to make sure that FEMA's mapping gets up to
speed and that communities are not being asked to rely on false
information and bad mapping estimates. But the second thing is
we have you to work with. And to the extent that you, in your
projections, are relying on those same FEMA maps, and not
trying to improve or supplement them, your work faces the same
problem that we face.
How are you addressing this problem of FEMA's erroneous
coastal flood mapping?
General Semonite. Sir, I probably don't have a good answer
for that on the fact that I don't think we lean just on FEMA. I
think we look at the rest of that science out there. NOAA is
another very, very reliable source. I don't think we are 100
percent reliable on FEMA. We take that information and
obviously there are going to be different interpretations of
it, but if you need to, I will certainly come back and give you
a better answer specifically with Rhode Island. But right now I
think when it goes back to you have two things you addressed.
One is future projects we have to look at, how do we make sure
we wrap sea level rise and climate change into that; and then
the other one existing infrastructure. That barrier is a 1958
barrier, so a lot has changed in the last 50 years. How do we
make sure----
Senator Whitehouse. What used to be adequate is not
adequate.
General Semonite. And then is there a modification we can
make? Do we need to figure out how to study it? But you are
right on the point. We have to be able to figure the
requirement and the risk before we can start putting an
engineering solution in.
Senator Whitehouse. I am down to 30 seconds, so let me ask
my last question, which is that in your Fiscal Year 2018
budget, the Army Corps of Engineers designates $1.32 billion
for what the Army Corps describes as inland projects. And the
Fiscal Year 2018 budget defines $46 million in proposed
expenditure for what it defines as coastal projects. That is a
30:1 ratio favoring inland projects over coastal projects.
Should that be the case? And particularly should that be the
case in the light of the dramatic changes that coastal States
are seeing?
Mr. Fisher. Yes, Senator, I will take that question.
Senator Whitehouse. Because we are on the losing end of
30:1 in Rhode Island.
Mr. Fisher. Right. I understand that. I appreciate the
concern. The budget amount, Fiscal Year 2018 budget amount is
appropriate given the President's fiscal priorities and the
Corps of Engineers' Civil Works responsibilities, and the need
to reduce the Federal deficit, as well. But I appreciate the
concern. I will certainly look into that discrepancy between
inland versus coastal and look forward to working with you and
this Committee further on that and what the rationale behind
that might be.
Senator Whitehouse. Thank you. Thirty to 1 seems like a
lot, particularly given what is happening along our coasts.
Thank you, sir.
Senator Barrasso. Senator Shelby.
Senator Shelby. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Fisher, thank you. We are hoping before long you
will only have one hat to wear, because it is difficult to wear
two, but you are doing a good job of it. But I know that you
are in the policy area; I know what your job is, to approve
things. I don't know if you have been to Alabama or not, but I
know you are aware of our problems down there in Mobile and
what we are trying to do, and that is what counts. But I know
the General has; he has spent a lot of time in the Mobile area
and he knows, so I want to address some of my questions to him.
General, we have been through this before and I have talked
with you about this, but bring us up to date on your view of
where we are going, where we are as far as deepening the Port
of Mobile from 45 feet, say, to 50 feet, and also widening it,
because a lot of us believe that is a game-changer down there.
General Semonite. Senator, I think you are the one that
said your top 10 priorities are Mobile Harbor.
Senator Shelby. No. 1.
General Semonite. Yes, sir. So, we certainly understand
that. There is a lot of potential in Mobile Harbor, as there
are in a lot of these other coastal ports that continue to help
the Nation's economy. Right now we are right in the middle of a
GRR, a re-evaluation report. As you and I have talked, I would
love to be able to get that done earlier. Our current estimate
is to have that done by November 19, which will then set that
up for Mr. Fisher to be able to approve PED money, which is
that design, which means that theoretically you could continue
to see a lot of progress going.
I would love to try to push that to the left. I will talk
to the district commander and see what we can do to accelerate
that. On the other hand, because we want to make sure we have a
good project, I would rather get it done right and have all of
the right stuff, than try to do it too fast.
Senator Shelby. We want you to do it right.
General Semonite. So, we are committed to meet that
November 19 date. If there is ever a time where I think we can
cheat that to the left and do it the right way, we will
certainly do that.
Senator Shelby. In your judgment, what will deepening a
port from 45 feet to 50 feet do for the port itself, as far
as----
General Semonite. Well, one of the things is that
businesses are going to go where they are going to be able to
get the best return on value and they are going to make the
most money, so they have to come into a port these days and be
what we call light-loaded. In other words, if they can't use
the full 100 percent optimization of that particular ship, then
that means that port is less viable. They are going to go
somewhere else. And we are deepening a lot of ports certainly
in the Gulf and in the East Coast. So that means that at some
point you are going to find that businesses would be more
likely to come to Mobile if they can get that extra 5 feet of
depth.
Now, I think the other part of that is that we also have to
make sure that our commitment back to protecting the
environment is done right, and Mobile Harbor, sir, you need to
know, is one of the case studies of the right way to do that.
We are using that dredge material management and we are taking
that to either put in to be able to recreate wetlands on the
east side of the bay or even to put that back on one of the----
Senator Shelby. In the Dauphin Island area.
General Semonite. The Dauphin Island, as well. And there
are some differing opinions as to the deepening of the harbor
with respect to perhaps erosion on Dauphin Harbor. We aren't
necessarily in agreement with that particular opinion. We think
you can effectively deepen Mobile Harbor without causing undue
environmental damage.
Senator Shelby. Well, we appreciate your work there, and
also Secretary Fisher's. I am going to continue to work with
you because, as you said, this is my No. 1 priority, and I
believe it is the No. 1 priority for the region there. Thank
you.
General Semonite. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Barrasso. Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Fisher, General Semonite, good to be with you today. I
just have a couple questions following up on some of the issues
Senator Cardin raised.
General Semonite, you have been in a number of meetings on
that issue with respect to the Mid Chesapeake Bay project,
which is essential for creating an ecosystem with the dredge
material from the channel to keep the Port of Baltimore
competitive. And my understanding is that both of you said that
you would get the predesign funding ready so that we could also
get to the construction funding within the current
authorization window, is that correct?
Mr. Fisher. I don't believe we committed to the PED
funding; it was certainly mentioned and we will certainly take
a look at it as that moves from General Semonite's office to
mine, absolutely.
General Semonite. Senator, just a quick update. The
material management plan has been done since we talked last.
Right now, I will sign a validation of that particular project
by the 31st of January and give it to Mr. Fisher. It does have
to clear OMB. Senator Cardin and I just talked about that, but
the bottom line is, once that clears, then it is the
Secretary's decision to go ahead and put PED. But we don't need
any additional authority so we can start right into the
planning and design.
Senator Van Hollen. So you can move forward with that
aspect of it before you get the authorization.
General Semonite. It does have to clear OMB, as I
understand it.
Senator Van Hollen. I just want to make sure I understand
the timeline and which budget submission we are talking about
here. So, this ultimately has to be in the President's budget
submission, is that correct?
Mr. Fisher. Yes, the PED funding would need to be in that
submission. And like the General mentioned, I will certainly
commit to working with OMB so that they are aware of this and
they are getting everything they need from the Corps and my
office as well.
Senator Van Hollen. OK. Have you had any conversations with
OMB about this project? Either of you gentlemen.
Mr. Fisher. To date, no, I have not.
General Semonite. I have not, sir, not on that one.
Senator Van Hollen. OK. If I could just ask a broader
question with respect to the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund. I
don't know what input, if any, either of you have on those
issues. Is that something you are very involved with, the
expenditure of those funds?
Mr. Fisher. Yes. We budget for those, yes.
Senator Van Hollen. So my question is, given the current
backlog, I believe it is about $56 billion in backlog in the
Harbor Maintenance Fund and $3.24 billion in the Operation and
Maintenance Fund, the $56 billion being the shortfall in the
construction and $3.2 billion in the Operation and Maintenance
Fund. Do you believe that the Congress should direct more of
the funds from that account into harbor maintenance at this
point in time in order to make sure that we have the dredging
that we need to make sure our ports are competitive?
Mr. Fisher. I would say that while additional funds can
certainly be expended for critical dredging and maintenance of
coastal harbors and channels, the current budget, the Fiscal
Year 2018 budget proposed by the President is the appropriate
amount given the President's fiscal priorities and the
responsibilities of the Corps' Civil Works program. But I do
look forward to working further with you and this Committee to
find innovative ways to use that trust fund and get the most
out of it.
Senator Van Hollen. Well, do you agree with the assessment
that there is a $56 billion backlog in construction projects in
harbor maintenance?
Mr. Fisher. I don't know the number, sir, but I am very
aware that there is a backlog.
Senator Van Hollen. And the purpose of these fees that go
into a fund are for harbor maintenance, isn't that the case?
Mr. Fisher. Yes.
Senator Van Hollen. So how would you justify diverting
funds that were raised for that specific purpose from people
who were essentially paying a user fee, how can you justify
diverting those funds for other purposes within the budget?
Mr. Fisher. Sir, I don't believe we would try to justify
that. We want to be able to use the funds for that purpose
which they were intended.
Senator Van Hollen. So you would support an effort to make
sure that more of the funds that are raised into the Harbor
Maintenance Fund go for that purpose, is that correct?
Mr. Fisher. Yes.
Senator Van Hollen. OK. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Senator Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to
take a second to echo what Senator Inhofe said earlier about
the importance of the McClellan-Kerr Waterway for not only the
State of Arkansas and the State of Oklahoma, but the entire
region and the whole system put together.
Lieutenant General Semonite, certainly, I agree with you, I
think all of us agree with you that we simply don't have enough
appropriations to properly address America's crumbling water
infrastructure, and infrastructure in general. Because of our
debt and deficit, though, we are certainly in need of
innovative funding mechanisms. One of the tools that the Corps
has at its disposal is the WIFIA program that was established
in WRRDA 2014. While the USEPA, Environmental Protection
Agency, has published guidance, received appropriations, and
issued a request for projects to begin implementing the EPA
WIFIA program, the Corps WIFIA program has no published
guidance or Federal funding. The final WIFIA authorization of
appropriations for the Corps and the EPA is 2019. The WIFIA
program has great leveraging power to make taxpayer money go
further, while also incentivizing the private sector to get
involved in public-private partnerships, the P3s that we are
hearing so much about right now.
Can you tell me does the Corps not view the WIFIA program
as a viable option to address infrastructure? Also, what steps
has the Corps taking to get the WIFIA program off the ground,
if any?
I will take either one of you. Mr. Secretary?
Mr. Fisher. This is probably going to be one of these
questions I have to get back to you on. I need to get a fuller
brief. I know that the Corps has a lot of federally owned and
operated projects. When you take a look at how WIFIA applies in
that instance, as well as what you reference, P3s, we need to
determine what actions are going to be required to foster that
public-private partnership investment as well. So, if I can, I
will have to come back to you on that.
Senator Boozman. It didn't sound like it is a priority.
General Semonite. Senator, one of the things that we are
doing, and it goes both for P3 and WIFIA, is that we have to
make sure we have that policy. The House did pass guidance that
the Corps should slow down on any P3s, actually banned us from
doing P3s, other than Fargo-Moorhead, which is a project in
North Dakota, until we establish policy. And we certainly
understand we have to have some degree of policy. We are, right
now, drafting that WIFIA policy inside of our headquarters. We
will get with the Secretary to work through that. I do think we
have to continue to work down this road because, as you said,
we have to find innovative ways of doing that.
And I think this is something that both the Secretary and I
could come back to give you, to the Committee or you
personally, an update of where we are going; what are the
milestones, what do we hope to achieve, when are we going to
get it done.
Senator Boozman. No, I understand. The House also, in 2014,
passed the WIFIA program, and earlier you talked about on time,
on budget; and there is a huge lag here. And that is one of the
problems that we have with the bureaucracy, is this kind of
thing.
In WRRDA 2014 and the Act of 2016, Congress attempted to
advance projects by allowing non-Federal entities to fund
projects by expanding reimbursement opportunities and credit.
In December 2016, the GAO reported that non-Federal sponsors
are leading $4 billion in Corps-related studies and projects.
From that $4 billion, the Federal Government has reimbursed
$400 million to cover some of the Federal costs related to
those projects.
Lieutenant General Semonite, what can non-Federal entities
expect from the Federal Government regarding credit and
reimbursement opportunities? Also, what else can the Federal
Government do to incentivize non-Federal entities to get
involved in more projects?
General Semonite. So, I will answer it in two ways. One is
that we do have a relatively robust program for non-Federal
sponsors to be able to put money in, and we call those either
contributed funds or accelerated funds or advanced funds, and
there are different rules on each type of those three. But that
way, if a stakeholder wants to go faster, they can put in their
money. And a lot of times they will advance those moneys up
front so we can start that project, get it going, and then give
them credit down the road. And that program works pretty well
and we have streamlined our ability to receive funds, and you
have given us some extra flexibility to be able to do that.
I think the other thing we have to look at is it goes back
to this point of if a stakeholder is ready to put more funds
in, then, like I said earlier, that should make that benefit-
cost ratio revised, because the actual cost to the Federal
Government is now much less. And if you have a project that is
close, if it is 2 to 2.3 or something and somewhere there is
that extra money put in, that would advise that mass, so now
you are going to be able to get that across an OMB metric. And
although I think the metric ought to be changed, if in fact it
is not, at least it shows if a stakeholder puts skin in the
game and puts money and contributions in, now, then, that will
incentivize the process and be able to get those projects
approved.
So, I think this is goes back to this benefit-cost ratio
versus revised benefit-cost ratio, and you and I have talked
about this in the past, sir; how do we continue to work with
OMB to find some innovative ways to be able to really bring
down the burden on the Federal Government.
Senator Boozman. Thank you very much, and we do appreciate
your hard work.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Boozman.
Senator Capito.
Senator Capito. Thank you all for your testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I was going to ask you about the WIFIA program, but my
colleague from Arkansas did a good job in talking about that,
and hopefully we will get some further information. Certainly,
as we look at an infrastructure package coming in from the
President, there has been a lot of talk about modeling things
after TIFIA, which is what WIFIA was modeled after. But if, for
some reason, there are obstacles there, I think we need to make
sure that we know exactly what they are and how to avoid those
in terms of a vibrant infrastructure package.
I am from West Virginia. We have the Mon River locks and
the Ohio River locks, obviously, I would suppose, some of the
oldest locks and dams in the Country, particularly on the
commercial side. And we have seen over the years how one large
project like Olmsted can crowd out all of the other projects.
So I guess, just briefly, what is the status of that project?
And, in the future, do you see or how do we prevent a high
profile, say, port project crowding out all of the other
projects, because there is so much need, and how do you
prioritize that as you are moving through to avoid this kind of
situation in the future?
General Semonite. So, the Olmsted project is going very
well. We are on plan to be able to continue to bring that to
closure here in the next year. I think that that will allow
some additional investment in other construction accounts in
the years out there.
One of the challenges, and maybe one of the successes, and
the Committee has done quite well at it, if in fact there is a
special, I will call it a bin of projects, how do you somehow,
as opposed to having everything rack and stack, ma'am, against
the overall bin, how do you carve out some?
A good example is refuge harbors. Right now there is a
certain bin that we put a certain amount of money into on small
harbors that would never compete well against a large harbor.
So, if there are some special categories that we could then
carve out to be able to make sure they do compete within that
sub-bin, I think that is a pretty good model to be able to say
big projects are going to compete on their own. But where we
really do have equities out in some of these niche capabilities
that just can't compete because of the benefit-cost ratio, we
ought to look at that. And it really goes back to this idea you
have given us a lot of tools. Have we used those to the best of
our advantage to figure out every single way we can try to get
some of these projects approved? It doesn't mean more money,
necessarily, but it means that they will be able to compete
better against the existing funds that are available.
Senator Capito. I would say, too, for the areas most
affected of the smaller projects, the impacts can be as great,
maybe not economic impacts as measurable, but ability to grow,
live, and prosper in a certain region certainly are critical to
having those infrastructure. And a lot of times you can get a
bigger bang for your buck, too, because they are less
expensive.
General Semonite. Sure.
Senator Capito. You know, I think one thing that was a
great thing that we did in the last WRDA bill, I think it was
the WRDA bill, when the revenue from diesel fuel went up and
Congress increased that tax from 20 cents a gallon to 29 cents
a gallon. Now, I can tell you I have been in Congress for
probably longer than some other people would want me to be, but
I can count on one hand how many people have come in my office
and said we will help pay for this. You know, they weren't
looking for the Federal Government to actually be the be-all
and the end-all, but we will take this is so important to us,
it is such an economic driver for us that raising the tax on
something we use every day as a critical part of our expenses
is something that we need to do and we are willing to do.
So, I think if we can look for other ways to do that, you
know, in general, in the infrastructure package I think would
probably be a good idea.
Streamlining of the regulatory process, do you have a
dashboard now where you have all your different agencies
weighing in, or would that concept be good for you as we move
forward in some of these larger projects, where the
stakeholders can find out exactly where they are, when they
are, and how they expect to get where they want to be, whether
it is you, EPA, Fish and Wildlife, Forest Service? You can
imagine how confusing it is for all of the different agencies
to figure out, particularly on the NEPA review issue.
General Semonite. So, Senator, I did talk in the beginning.
We are beginning to streamlining these, and a lot of that does
go back to delegating that authority down to a level that has
the capacity and the competency to be able to do that, so we
are seeing progress there.
We have a series of different dashboards. I would like to
think that they are responsive back out to the public. But we
are doing about 80,000 permits now, so you can come back
onboard, see the status out there. Sometimes, though, if it is
not responsive enough, we want to be able to have them call
into the district to find out what is out there. Sometimes the
applicant doesn't put in all the right things, so they might
think they have supplied everything; we might still be waiting
on something; and that is where the dialog has to go back.
I think we have to continue to look at more innovative ways
from an IT perspective of how can we be more transparent and be
able to be more responsive back out there. So, I am not sure
exactly, if in fact we are meeting the need. If not, I will
certainly try to change what we have to do. But we are
committed to trying to give responsive feedback to permit
applicants so they know what the status of their permits are.
Senator Capito. Well, just anecdotally, because I have you
in front of me, I would like to say that the Huntington Corps
and the Pittsburgh Corps are great to work with; they have been
very responsive with our office, and I would just like to give
them a pat on the back. Thank you.
General Semonite. Thanks, ma'am.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Capito.
Senator Gillibrand.
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Semonite, I am concerned about the progress of the
Hudson-Raritan Estuary Ecosystem Restoration Study that is
currently being undertaken by the Army Corps. This
comprehensive study will result in environmental restoration
projects across the New York-New Jersey region. Section 1322 of
the 2006 Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation Act
directed the Army Corps to expedite completion of this study.
However, it continues to be delayed due to bureaucratic hurdles
and restrictive Army Corps policies that make it difficult to
complete large, complex studies such as this.
Will the Army Corps prioritize completing this study as
soon as possible?
General Semonite. Senator, we will. I would like to come
and probably have our guys lay that out for you and be able to
make sure we give you more detail on exactly what some of the
challenges are there, but we are committed to that study. It is
an important area. There is risk there, without a doubt, and we
do want to continue to be as aggressive as we can in bringing
this study to closure.
Senator Gillibrand. Concerns have been raised to my office
that completing the Hudson-Raritan Feasibility Study has been
made difficult by the Army Corps' 3x3x3 Rule, which requires
feasibility studies to be completed in 3 years, cost up to $3
million, and involve all three levels of Corps review
throughout the study process.
What flexibility does the Army Corps have to adapt study
requirements for large, complete projects, like the Hudson-
Raritan study, that cannot conform to the restrictions of the
3x3x3 Rule because of their size and scope?
General Semonite. So, Senator, like all rules, we put that
in effect to try to be aggressive, to try to be able to bring
down our timelines, find out ways of being more economical
studies and doing them quicker. Unfortunately, some of these
large studies do have to take more than $3 million and more
than 3 years, so we have a process. The 2-star general sitting
behind me, he is the guy that approves that authority to be
able to waive that, so we certainly have the authority to have
some of these more complicated studies like that go longer, and
we certainly have no problem doing that because we want to do
that science right and get it done appropriately.
Senator Gillibrand. So, do you believe you have the
flexibility you need to ensure that these types of studies
which have Federal funding and a non-Federal partner are not
unnecessarily delayed due to arbitrary bureaucratic
constraints?
General Semonite. I certainly think I have all that
flexibility. If I find out later that something is wrong on
this particular one, I will get back with you, ma'am, but right
now I don't think we have our hands tied at all.
Senator Gillibrand. Great.
I am also troubled by the pace of recovery for Puerto Rico
and, in particular, the length of time it has taken to restore
power. In particular, I have heard horror stories about the
situation on the Island of Vieques and the dire situation that
exists there due to, in large part, the lack of electricity.
What is the current status of the Army Corps' work
overseeing the restoration of the power grid on the Island of
Vieques?
General Semonite. So, Senator, I have taken five trips to
Puerto Rico in the last 7 weeks. I know Puerto Rico very, very
well. We have about 2,000 people down there working through
Christmas, working through the holidays. Today we have about 80
percent of the load restored. That is not necessarily people;
that is the load on how much has historically been out there.
Just Puerto Rico alone, a very, very quick data point,
62,000 power poles; 3,100 miles of cable. That all had to be
brought in. The problem was this was after Texas got hit,
Florida got hit, and the Virgin Islands got hit. So, the demand
on the electrical system to be able to provide that material,
it took us a while to do that.
Right now, our goal is to get 50 percent by the end of
November. We met that goal. Seventy-five percent by the end of
January. We are at 80 percent today and it is only the 17th of
January. I committed to the Governor to try to get 95 percent
of that power up by the end of February, but, Senator,
unfortunately, there are some parts, on top of those mountains,
where there are 5 or 10 houses way down at the top of the
ridgeline. The electricity for those 5 houses on the side of a
cliff. So, it could be as late as May for the last 5 percent. I
want to make sure I clarify because I don't want to over-
promise. I would much rather deliver this as fast as we could.
But we are all in to fixing the grid in Puerto Rico. This is
normally not a Corps of Engineers mission, but we are honored
to step up to be able to try to get it, and we are 100 percent
committed to get electricity on as fast as possible.
I tell the Governor every single day you have a right to be
frustrated down there because everybody deserves power, but it
is not because the Corps of Engineers is not going as fast as
we possibly can.
Senator Gillibrand. Have you been able to build in any
resiliency, or are you just doing patchwork?
General Semonite. So, the way that the Stafford Act is
there is response and then there is recovery, so basically we
are going back in with all new materials and we are putting it
to code and to standard. I hate to say it, some of the lines we
are replacing actually had two or three storms' worth of
damage, but they were just leaning over, so all the trees fell
on top of the lines, all the lines come out. So now we are
putting all of it back up. We, by the Stafford Act, are putting
it back up to the original standard unless we have FEMA's
flexibility in some areas to be able to make it more resilient.
But that is something where the guidance we have gotten from
Mr. Long is to be able to basically rebuild the existing
standard, but with new equipment to code. That alone will give
us more resiliency.
Senator Gillibrand. We have been trying to amend those
rules so that, actually, you can build in resiliency.
General Semonite. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Gillibrand. Because it is kind of absurd to say,
oh, well, it was built in 1970; we are just going to put it
back to 1970 standards. Like that is a waste of money. So, I
urge you to ask Congress for the ability to, when you do do
these projects, build them to state-of-the-art with resiliency
enhanced so we are not there after the next storm. We have a
bipartisan bill to do that. We are hoping to be able to get
votes on that bill, but that is the kind of work I would like
you to aspire to do in the future.
General Semonite. Yes, Senator. We have testified several
times and we certainly are more than willing to do that if we
have the flexibility. Good example, what kind of pole do you
put in? If we can put in a stronger pole, but still underneath
the authorities we have, we certainly want to do that.
Senator Gillibrand. And you have not been able to do that
for Puerto Rico?
General Semonite. We have when it comes to materials. We
have better materials in there. And, like I said, a lot of
areas where they were built, it was never built to code. This
is an antiquated system. I did the grid in Iraq in 2004. Parts
of Puerto Rico were worse than what I saw in Iraq in 2004.
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you, sir.
Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Gillibrand.
Senator Wicker.
Senator Wicker. Mr. Chairman, let me just note for the
record how much I appreciate Senator Gillibrand mentioning the
Island of Vieques and the situation in Puerto Rico.
And, General, I don't have a question about that, but those
listening should understand that there is bipartisan support
for doing as much as we can as quickly as possible to alleviate
the suffering there.
You know, this is about America's water infrastructure
needs and challenges, and, you know, I don't know how well it
is understood among the public, until we have a disaster, how
important our Nation's infrastructure is and how vital the
Corps of Engineers is until you have an event, and then we
wonder why it hasn't all been taken care of beforehand. And I
particularly would direct our witnesses' attention to the
Mississippi River Tributaries Program, which has been around
since 1928 and is still not completed after all these years.
If you read or go back and re-read the book ``Rising Tide''
by John Barry and understand the absolute devastation that took
place to our Country, that rose all the way up to a president
of the United States and a secretary of commerce and millions
and millions of people, until you go back and remember what
could happen if we didn't have the Corps there, if we didn't
have programs like the MR&T project, we don't fully understand
this.
Some people out in the Country like to call this pork
barrel or talk about projects as if they are somebody's pet
project or pet program. This MR&T program and the other
infrastructure that we have all around the Country is just
vital to people's lives, to our ability to earn a living and to
recover from those disasters that we know are coming.
You know, I am told that there is a 54:1 benefit-to-cost
ratio for what we have done so far in the Mississippi River and
Tributaries Project. We have invested over $14 billion, a lot
of money, but we have prevented over $800 billion in damages.
Lieutenant General, those figures are pretty accurate,
aren't they?
General Semonite. Sir, you are exactly right. I mean, this
is about 88 percent done. We have continued to put about $350
million into this, but there is still more work to get done.
And I have been down to that project several times and the
investment of proactive up-front certainly pays dividends when
it comes to a storm coming back through, the ability to
alleviate risk.
Senator Wicker. These are real benefits, real disasters,
real damages that haven't happened to people because we are
able to do this. And yet we have this annual fight; it doesn't
matter if it is a Republican administration or a Democratic
administration. In 2015, the administration requested $245
million; the appropriators and the Congress ratifying upped
that to $302 million. In 2016, the administration came in, and
this was the Obama administration, $225 million requested; the
Congress upped that to $345 million. 2017 request, $220
million; that appropriation turned out to be raised from 220 to
$368 million. And the request this year is $253 million. We
will have to increase that. It makes us look like spendthrifts.
I am not on the committee anymore, I was back in another
day and another job I had, but it just seems to me that I am
not even going to ask you, Mr. Fisher, to justify this, because
I think it would be unfair to you. Let me just say that this
investment that we have made, that the Lieutenant General spoke
about, that has gotten us to the point of 88 percent and saved
all these lives and all this heartache, is really money that we
have appropriated over and above what administration after
administration after administration has been requesting.
I will just leave that statement out there. I will let you
comment, if you would like.
Also, let me just say we have to fix this Mat Sinking Unit
problem, and it has to come out of O&M.
General, if we do what we need to do on the Mat Sinking
Unit, it is going to take quite a chunk out of O&M, is that
correct?
General Semonite. It is, Senator. About 4 months ago I was
on that Mat Sinking Unit working one of those machines, you
know, tying the mats together. That is an antiquated system. It
looks like something that came off a farm back in 1952.
Senator Wicker. And it keeps the levees from washing away.
General Semonite. Yes, sir, it does. But, on the other
hand, you can't just continue to keep putting Band-Aids on it.
So, we have a long-term plan, a funding schedule. I mean, it is
in the order of $20 million to $30 million a year, but we
would, at least myself personally, would continue to recommend
to the Committee to keep funding in that so we can continue to
keep that critical--we have to replace this thing. So that is
what that funding schedule does, is continue to get the new
unit back up and running and getting it onboard. We are in the
design right now, which is good. We have some money this year,
we are doing a prototype, but we see great value in a
replacement for the Mat Sinking Unit.
Senator Wicker. Well, you know, Mr. Chairman, I have gone
way over. It is not really a very sexy topic, but when the
water is up and the soil starts churning on the other side of
that levee. and you start worrying about the levee failing, it
gets pretty serious to millions and millions of Americans.
Thank you for your indulgence, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Wicker.
Senator Markey.
Senator Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
Welcome. Thank you both for your service.
General, the Sagamore and the Bourne Bridges are the only
two roads connecting Cape Cod to Massachusetts. I don't have to
tell you that at all. But, regrettably, these two 80-year-old
bridges, which are crucial evacuation routes since it is the
only way off, are structurally deficient. The Corps of
Engineers maintains the bridges and is currently conducting a
study to evaluate whether they need to be replaced.
General, as an agency charged with reducing risks from
disaster, how does the Corps of Engineers rehabilitate bridges
that serve an essential public safety and commercial function,
and would it be helpful if Congress created an authority that
dedicates Federal funding for the replacement or restoration of
these types of assets and then allows the Corps to divest the
bridges to be able to able and willing non-Federal partners?
General Semonite. Senator, I strongly agree with you that
we have to do something different on bridging. We have 897
bridges. Some of these are small ones across like the
intercoastal waterway. But those two you talked about, and I
was on those 4 months ago, as well as about five gigantic
bridges we have in Pennsylvania, are big, big bills. Right now,
per bridge, each one of those, if we rehab it, it is going to
be $300 million; if we replace it, it is going to be about $400
million. So, you are talking about an $800 million deficit.
Now, the question is does the Federal Government need to be
able to keep bridges in our inventory. I would recommend that
we have to go down this path of finding a way to divest those.
It would be great if the State came in and took those over, but
the State is probably going to say we will only do that once
you bring them up to a given standard.
So, we want to work with the Committee to try to find ways,
and it goes back to critical infrastructure and water. If we
can figure out how to somehow bring down some of the bills that
we have for these old bridges, then we are able to use that
same money, assuming Congress keeps appropriating that, into
other areas that might be a better return investment back for
the Nation.
Senator Markey. And I agree with you, and that is why
Federal money is so important; we have that leverage going into
a negotiation on an issue like that.
General Semonite. And early on I said what about innovative
approaches. This goes back to where is a local or State
interest to be able to step up to take some of these things
over. We just have a lot of inventory in the Federal
Government. I would love to see some of this divested back into
locals that maybe can take care of it and budget for it better
than we can.
Senator Markey. Thank you, sir.
I have always supported environmentally responsible
shoreline protection projects where sand is pumped onto beaches
to protect against storm surge and coastal erosion, but when
the Town of Sandwich, Massachusetts attempted to use sand from
the Federal Cape Cod Canal that otherwise would be dumped in
the ocean to protect their community, Federal requirements
became a major obstacle. The U.S. Army Corps required the
homeowners to provide easement, ceding away their coastal
property line forever, even though the sand from this
beneficial use project would only remain on the beach for 5
years. Ultimately, the town was unable to use Federal funding
for this essential shoreline protection project, which, to me,
makes no sense at all.
So, General, should we explore opportunities to make the
Corps project requirements more flexible for these beneficial
use of dredge material projects? Shouldn't we find better ways
to ensure that these requirements are not preventing the Corps
from using quality sediment for beach nourishment and aquatic
restoration?
General Semonite. So, Senator, I am a big fan of
considering dredge material as a resource as regional sediment
management. There is a lot of places that we can put this type
sand to do exactly what you are talking about. There is current
policy, though, that if in fact we use beach renourishment,
then at some given point there are local homeowners'
association there and access back to that beach.
I am not specifically aware of the project in Sandwich. I
would like to think that somewhere we could have figured out a
solution somewhere, but, if nothing else, we will certainly
find out and I will talk to the New England District and figure
out what happened and how can we somehow figure out, without
perhaps challenging the policy that is a national policy, how
could we have found a better way to use that sand. Taking it
out to the ocean, sir, is a waste of a good resource.
Senator Markey. It is a waste of a good resource, and
saying you have to give up permanent in order to get something
that only lasts for 5 years is something that ultimately, then,
reach stalemate, so that is not good.
Finally, if I may, for some communities in Massachusetts,
Wellfleet, Plymouth, New Bedford, Essex, Gloucester,
Newburyport, the waterways are filling up with so much sand
that vessels cannot reliably and safely pass, which harms
commerce, recreation, and safety. Many of these waterways are
federally owned, and it is the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers'
responsibility to dredge these waterways, and that is why I
believe that we should use all of the resources in the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund for these important dredging projects,
instead of raiding that pot of vital funding for deficit
reduction, as we are doing now. And I hope that we can address
this issue in the upcoming water resources bill.
Maybe, if you could, General, just give us a few comments
on that issue in terms of the resources you need in order to
get the job done in communities like Wellfleet and others that
I just mentioned.
General Semonite. Sir, I will just hit on the current
dredging. We clearly have a lot more requirements right now
than we have funds, so we do have to prioritize; and we have a
relatively deliberate formula as to where can we dredge and
where we can't. I will let Mr. Fisher address the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund, but we definitely have requirements
that exceed our capabilities, and that means in some areas we
have not been able to dredge, and some of those rivers have
almost gone into a caretaker status because we have not been
able to do what we need to do to protect the Federal waterways.
Mr. Fisher. Sir, I would just add I am very aware of the
balance, the large balance in the Trust Fund, as you mentioned,
and we certainly want to make sure that those fees that are
collected are targeted to the improvements they were intended
to be.
Senator Markey. Because these communities are really under
stress. And it is a nationwide issue, so the more that we can
work on that project maybe in the infrastructure bill, I think
the better off we would be for the economy of our Country, as
well, for the growth that is possible, because you are dealing
with these central issues.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Senator Markey.
Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. Not every member of our Committee, in their
comments and questions, have raised the issue of our failure to
appropriate the dollars that are needed to enable the Army
Corps of Engineers to do your job. It is not even close. It is
not even close.
I mentioned the estimates of the American Association of
Port Authorities. The underfunding in port infrastructure alone
cited by them, I guess last year, $65 billion in investment
over the next 10 years. Actually, if we are interested in a
nurturing environment, includes the work that we do in
infrastructure on our rivers, ports, levees, so forth. Sixty-
five billion dollars over the next decade they say is needed.
And our friends over at the American Society of Civil
Engineers, their infrastructure report card, which just came
out, tells an even more unsettling story; not $65 billion, but
their report card estimated, I think, about $162 billion in
investments that are needed in dams, levees, inland waterways,
and so forth. A hundred and sixty-two billion.
And what do we do in response to this? I think we have a
budget for the Army Corps of Engineers that hovers just under
$5 billion. And we are looking at these kinds of needs. We know
that we need them. We know that if we invest money in these
ways, it will actually grow our economy, strengthen our
economy, make us safer and smarter. And we are considering a
budget. I don't know if we are going to actually pass a real
budget this week or another some kind of short-term funding
resolution, but the Administration is asking for, I want to
say, tens of billions of dollars more money for defense
spending. The U.S. already spends more, Mr. Chairman, I am
told, then the next 10 nations combined, and we are going to
add to that. We are going to be spending more than the next 12
nations combined.
The President just signed legislation into law last month
that reduces revenues for running the Government by $1.5
trillion to $2 trillion over the next 10 years, and we sit all
around here today bemoaning the fact that the Army Corps
doesn't have the money they need, doesn't have the resources
they need. Well, there is a good reason why not: we are not
providing it. We are not providing it. In this case the
Administration is not asking for it and we are not providing
money. I think it is shameful. I think it is shameful.
We ask you and the folks that work for you to do more than
any humans could actually do. Maybe no one else feels a sense
of shame on this Committee. I do. The old comic strip
character, Pogo, we see the problem, and it is us. We are a big
part of the problem.
I want to come back to Puerto Rico. General Semonite, you
and I have talked about Puerto Rico before. I appreciate what
you said in response to Senator Gillibrand's question. We think
of Puerto Rico as Puerto Rico. This is north, this is south,
this is east, and this is west, and most of the generating
capacity for electricity is in the south, as I recall. Most of
the generating capacity is down here to the south. Not all of
it, but a lot of it is diesel. They bring it up from Venezuela
and places like that in the south. They spend, I think, and the
General can correct me if I am wrong, 27 cents per kilowatt
hour in our State, so we spend maybe a quarter of that. And yet
somehow they are supposed to be able to compete economically.
The question about rebuilding to code and that sort of
thing, I was largely encouraged by what you said on that, but I
think if you have most of the generating capacity for
electricity down here in the south and most of the people live
up here in the north, and in between you have mountains, and we
are spending a fair amount of money trying to get the
electricity from the south to the north, why don't we bring
down some liquid natural gas in big ships from the north, which
would be the U.S., and build some new generating capacity? It
would bring down the cost of electricity dramatically and the
folks in Puerto Rico could actually cleanup their air and their
environment as well.
And I know this is not all on the Army Corps, the
Department of Energy has requirements here and expectations
here, but my dad used to say use some common sense. That would
be, in my judgment, using some common sense.
But for folks in Puerto Rico who are still struggling, I am
glad that we are still concerned. We want them to know that we
are still concerned. I hope to talk to Governor Rosello
tomorrow about this. But for the work that has been done on
their behalf in some cases, without a lot of thanks, we want to
say thanks to those people who have been helping and the
businesses that have been helped.
The last thing I want to mention, if I could, Mr. Chairman,
I mentioned earlier in my statement, Mr. Fisher and General,
that the people of Delaware have had just a wonderful
relationship for years with the Philadelphia Office of the Army
Corps of Engineers. We have been very, very grateful for the
work that they do and their responsiveness.
My staff tells me that sometimes they experience
frustration in being able to obtain timely information from the
Corps Headquarters staff and other regions. Maybe you don't
have the folks or maybe you are just not aware of this, but I
said give me an example, and they could give me several
examples. They have written them down here. I am not going to
take the time now, I am out of time, to go through them, but I
just want to flag it and I will follow with a QFR, question for
the record, and I will actually give you some specifics here.
But that is it for me, folks, and we thank you for being
here.
Ryan, when I became Governor of Delaware, they asked me, if
I had a magic wand, what would I do with my magic wand. I had
just been elected; hadn't even been sworn in. They said what
would you like to use with a magic wand, and I was with Mike
Castle. He had been Governor; he was just about to become a
Congressman. We were just trading places; I had been a
Congressman and was about to become Governor. And I said, if I
had a magic wand as a new Governor, I think I would like to
have a magic wand that would enable me to make sure that every
kid growing up in my State has at least one good nurturing,
mentoring, caring parent with high expectations for that child,
at least one. Hopefully two, but at least one.
I was inaugurated as Governor a couple weeks later and I
got in my office, opened up my desk where I looked for the
magic wand, but didn't find it. Didn't find it. And we have
done a whole lot of things in 8 years to try to make sure that
we are doing what we need to do to strengthen families. That
was what we did for 8 years, strengthened families; basic
building block of our society.
You are new. When you go look in your office drawer and you
are looking around for a magic wand, you probably could use one
that would cough up about $200 billion in infrastructure
improvements over the next decade. That would be about $20
billion a year. I don't know that we can do that, but, Mr.
Chairman, we have to do better than this. We have to do better
than this if we are serious. I am serious; I know you are as
well. We have to do better than this.
General Semonite. Senator Carper, if I could just make one
comment. You said earlier about how is the Committee doing on
funding. I just want to make sure that both of you understand
our appreciation for the delt that you do give us. Regardless
of what comes in the budget, that extra money, we distribute
that through the workplan. It is not billions and billions and
billions of dollars, but I will tell you what, we go very, very
hard to make sure we are finding the best ways to use that; and
that extra money, last year it was about $1.2 billion, it pays
an awful lot of dividends back into some of these projects, so
I personally want to thank you for that extra commitment.
Senator Carper. You are welcome. Thank you.
Senator Barrasso. And, General, if you can't find a magic
wand, we are hoping that you can find some scissors to cut
through some of the government red tape that I hear about from
communities, as well, trying to solve these problems.
Is there anything that you need in terms of potential
statutory authorities that could help improve the Corps' and
local communities' ability to complete work on water resource
infrastructure in a more efficient and maybe cost-effective
way? Anything you can think of we can do for you?
General Semonite. Senator, I will be honest with you. I
have never been in a Senator's or Representative's office where
they haven't offered that same thing; what can we do to give
you some advice. We are certainly looking at how we can do it.
We have done a lot of work in the last couple months of
figuring out what are some of those things we can ask for you.
I think the single biggest issue is probably that benefit-cost
ratio. How can we somehow get some degree of relief there? And
you and I talked about this last year. How do we make sure that
that money is going to the right place even if in fact the
arbitrary metric doesn't necessarily apply? So, I think that is
where we have to look at some innovative solutions. And, again,
we aren't looking at the pot is going to necessarily get any
bigger, but how can we make sure some of those projects that
are very, very viable at least compete better for funding.
Senator Barrasso. And following up with a final question
for Mr. Fisher, just in terms of ability to complete projects,
as opposed to partially built projects and lengthy
constructions that drag on and on, I am interested in learning
your view on how the Corps can work to help ensure the projects
included in any potential WRDA bill are built to completion
using kind of efficient funding streams to provide for much of
the project funds up-front, rather than every year trying to
get additional funding. Anything that you have, any thoughts on
that?
Mr. Fisher. I think it would be similar to my answer at the
opening of the hearing about the CAP 205 program you
referenced. We want to keep using those contributed funds
authorities that are out there. We want to look at public-
private partnerships and non-Federal investment in these things
as a way to innovatively move these projects from WRDA to
completion.
Senator Barrasso. It doesn't look like there are any more
questions today, to be asked today, but, as Senator Carper
said, he may put in some written questions. Other members may
put in some additional questions for the record, so the hearing
record is going to remain open for 2 weeks.
But I want to thank both of you for being here for your
testimony and for your time.
The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:51 p.m. the Committee was adjourned.]
[Additional material submitted for the record follows.]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]