- PRIVATE SECTOR AND GOVERNMENT CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES TO PROMOTE THE CYBERSECURITY AND RESILIENCY OF OUR NATION'S CRITICAL ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE
[Senate Hearing 115-506]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-506
PRIVATE SECTOR AND GOVERNMENT
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES TO
PROMOTE THE CYBERSECURITY AND
RESILIENCY OF OUR NATION'S
CRITICAL ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MARCH 1, 2018
__________
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
29-767
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska, Chairman
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
RON WYDEN, Oregon
MIKE LEE, Utah
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
STEVE DAINES, Montana
JOE MANCHIN III, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
Brian Hughes, Staff Director
Patrick J. McCormick III, Chief Counsel
Brianne Miller, Senior Professional Staff Member and Energy Policy
Advisor
Mary Louise Wagner, Democratic Staff Director
Sam E. Fowler, Democratic Chief Counsel
David Gillers, Democratic Senior Counsel
Scott McKee, Democratic Professional Staff Member
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa, Chairman and a U.S. Senator from Alaska....
1
Cantwell, Hon. Maria, Ranking Member and a U.S. Senator from
Washington.....................................................
3
Duckworth, Hon. Tammy, a U.S. Senator from Illinois..............
5
WITNESSES
Walker, Hon. Bruce J., Assistant Secretary, Office of Electricity
Delivery and Energy Reliability, U.S. Department of Energy.....
6
Matheson, Hon. Jim, Chief Executive Officer, National Rural
Electric Cooperative Association...............................
17
Endicott-Popovsky, Dr. Barbara, Executive Director, Center for
Information Assurance and Cybersecurity, University of
Washington.....................................................
30
Sanders, Dr. William H., Donald Biggar Willett Professor of
Engineering, and Head, Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign........
59
Lee, Robert M., Chief Executive Officer and Co-Founder, Dragos,
Inc............................................................
67
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
Cantwell, Hon. Maria:
Opening Statement............................................
3
Duckworth, Hon. Tammy:
Opening Statement............................................
5
Endicott-Popovsky, Dr. Barbara:
Opening Statement............................................
30
Written Testimony............................................
32
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
167
Lee, Robert M.:
Opening Statement............................................
67
Written Testimony............................................
70
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
205
Matheson, Hon. Jim:
Opening Statement............................................
17
Written Testimony............................................
19
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
164
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa:
Opening Statement............................................
1
Sanders, Dr. William H.:
Opening Statement............................................
59
Written Testimony............................................
61
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
202
Walker, Hon. Bruce J.:
Opening Statement............................................
6
Written Testimony............................................
9
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
154
PRIVATE SECTOR AND GOVERNMENT CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES TO
PROMOTE THE CYBERSECURITY AND RESILIENCY OF OUR NATION'S
CRITICAL ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE
----------
THURSDAY, MARCH 1, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:00 a.m. in
Room SD-366, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lisa
Murkowski, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LISA MURKOWSKI,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA
The Chairman. Good morning, everyone. The Committee will
come to order as we begin our hearing on the cybersecurity and
resiliency of our critical energy infrastructure.
Cyberattacks are a well-documented and continuing threat.
Every day we seem to hear of yet another incident.
Increasingly, it appears that the bad actors are nation-states
and sophisticated entities, such as organized crime or terror
groups. These attacks are across-the-board and not limited, of
course, to energy infrastructure.
Just last week, according to the news reports out there,
U.S. intelligence identified efforts by Russian military spies
to attack computers used by Olympic officials during this
year's games. Reportedly, their goal was to make it look as if
North Koreans were leading the cyberattack. Acts of cyber
intrusion such as these can jeopardize diplomatic relations and
could have more serious repercussions.
Just a couple days ago, the Director of the Division of
Elections in my home State of Alaska again informed the public
that Russian cyber actors made a failed attempt to access the
Division's public website prior to the 2016 election.
Apparently they merely scanned the state's system so this was
not a `breaking and entering' scenario, but it clearly
underscores the persistence of the problem.
Here in the United States, the energy sector is clearly a
high value target for cyberattacks. Earlier this month
Entergy's security monitoring system detected a cyber intrusion
on the company's corporate network. Thankfully, the intrusion
was on the corporate side and did not affect energy delivery or
reliability, but again, bad actors will test any available
avenue in an attempt to infiltrate energy networks.
Our Committee has spent a lot of time, many hours,
examining the threats to energy infrastructure. We have learned
about the potential challenges of increased digitalization of
the energy sector and opportunities to improve cybersecurity by
engineering in protections and developing strong cybersecurity
protocols.
We have repeatedly heard how protection of our nation's
critical assets is a shared responsibility, with federal, state
and private sector partners working together to improve cyber
defenses and sharpen responses to cyberattacks. We know there
is more work to be done to improve that collaborative work. We
are alert to the danger that ``shared responsibility'' can, in
practice, be the hardest responsibility to consistently and
accountably discharge.
Now we have also legislated to help address the
cybersecurity problem. In the Energy Policy Act of 2005,
Congress imposed mandatory reliability standards, including
cyber standards, on the electric industry. And today we will
hear testimony that these standards have led to meaningful
improvements. The electric sector is still the only sector that
has such stringent requirements, but we will also hear that
keeping the nation safe from major cyber threats goes well
beyond regulation.
Last Congress, in the FAST Act, we enacted provisions
authored by this Committee to codify the Department of Energy
as the sector-specific agency for the energy sector and we
provided the Secretary with the authority to address grid-
related emergencies, including cyberattacks. We also sought to
facilitate greater information sharing by protecting sensitive
information from disclosure. I am pleased to report that public
and private sector efforts not only to identify threats and
share information but also to improve the capabilities for
detecting and responding, are intensifying.
So the question this morning is, ``What do we do next?''
What should the Federal Government do, or refrain from doing,
to meet this dynamic and evolving threat? And how can the
government help improve the cyber resiliency of critical energy
infrastructure if a threat becomes a reality?
Mr. Walker's testimony states that Secretary Perry is
establishing a distinct ``Office of Cybersecurity, Energy
Security, and Emergency Response.'' This new office, which will
be known by the acronym C.E.S.E.R.--we are already referring to
it I guess as Caesar, big shoes here.
[Laughter.]
But much of CESER's lineage is from the Department's
current office, the Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy
Reliability, which was established after the 2003 Northeast
Power Blackout.
Mr. Walker, we appreciate the Department's attention to
this important topic and certainly look forward to learning
more about this new office and how you intend it operate and
function.
Protecting our nation's energy infrastructure, we all
agree, is critical to maintaining so much of the American way
of life. We must determine what the next appropriate steps will
be to further identify and prevent cyber intrusions and
increase resiliency in the event of an attack. Those solutions
may not require more regulation, but rather more common sense
and cooperation.
I appreciate the expert witnesses that we have before us
today, that you have made time to be before the Committee. I
will introduce them after Senator Cantwell's opening comments,
but we appreciate you being here.
Senator Cantwell.
STATEMENT OF HON. MARIA CANTWELL,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WASHINGTON
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for
holding this important hearing. I am sure that the Chair has
probably grown weary of how many times I bring up
cybersecurity.
[Laughter.]
Both in our negotiations on an energy bill, now almost two
years ago, the need to be more expeditious about the process,
and my continued concern about it from the perspective of one
of the greatest threats facing our nation.
So I am delighted to have the panelists before us today to
focus on what our nation needs to do to be more expeditious in
our agenda on cybersecurity.
Obviously, cybersecurity, as it impacts our energy
infrastructure, is one of the key issues for this Committee. We
used to say that we were worried about foreign entities
entering our airspace, our shipping lanes, or any kind of
unwanted provocations. Now they come in the form of
cyberattacks.
So make no mistake, our nation's energy infrastructure is
under that attack from Russians and other state actors. We
know, according to the Ukrainians, Russia took out part of the
Ukraine electricity grid in 2015 and 2016 through cyber means.
WIRED magazine, at the time, chillingly suggested that the
entire nation of the Ukraine was becoming a Russia test lab for
cyber war.
As one of our witnesses will say today--Dragos has said
that the Russian government has devised a cyber weapon that has
the potential to be one of the most disruptive yet against our
electricity system. So we look forward to hearing more on that.
In the last year, the Washington Post reported that Russian
government hackers were behind cyber intrusions into a nuclear
power plant's business system. We know from our own northwest
lab that the firewall that protects much of our information,
they have communications of something like 25,000 a day,
cyberattacks against that system.
We know what is happening and, as the Chair mentioned, we
know that the Administration has set up a cyber office which we
appreciate but we want the Administration to be much more
aggressive.
We have been pushing for over a year now asking for a
threat assessment to our electricity grid. I think it was June
22, 2017, that we wrote the White House asking them to perform
a required assessment on protecting the grid from cyberattacks.
I know, Mr. Walker, you are here today and you will try to
enlighten us on the work that you have been doing in your short
period of time, which is a lot given the Puerto Rico situation,
so we appreciate that. Nonetheless, we want the Department of
Energy to respond to this letter of a year ago asking them what
we are doing to protect the reliability of our electricity grid
from Russian hacking. This was sent by many U.S. Senators and
we have yet to have a response.
Why is this so important? We saw just this morning the
German government was hacked by Russian actors. According to
the German Interior Ministry, we can confirm that the Federal
Office of Information Security and Intelligence Services were
part of a cyber hack.
So this issue is not going away. It is only growing in
incredible importance. We don't want to have an Administration
asleep at the computer terminal while we are sitting here
worrying about American business and government interests and
national security interests being attacked by state-owned
actors.
I also hope that we can see, as we specifically asked
Secretary Perry during his confirmation hearing, that the
Administration will support a robust infrastructure investment
as it relates to cybersecurity. I know he told the Committee at
the time that he believed that we should do that and we want to
see in this next budget legislation, that commitment. I know
that the Chair and I had a chance to talk to the President at
an infrastructure discussion a couple weeks ago, and we
emphasized how much energy infrastructure needed to be part of
a national infrastructure investment bill. So now is the time
for action.
We also discussed, and the Chair and I have in legislation,
a clear focus on how important workforce is to a critical
energy infrastructure for the future, including cybersecurity.
Our state, the State of Washington, has been a leader in
developing a cyber workforce training, and I would like to
welcome Professor Barbara Endicott-Popovsky to testify today.
She is the Executive Director at the Center for Information
Assurances and Cybersecurity at the University of Washington, a
national leader in pioneering cyber education.
We were able to have a forum there recently to see how
business, education and the cybersecurity community was coming
together to try to focus on cybersecurity solutions. She has
been shaping cybersecurity education policy and has authored
more than 100 peer-
reviewed articles. So we welcome what you have to say today on
this issue.
She recognizes, as I do, that one of the biggest challenges
to the nation's cyber preparedness is a skilled workforce and
that by 2020 IBM estimates that there will be 1.5 million
unfilled cybersecurity positions across all industries. That is
mind boggling, mind boggling, to think about but not hard to
imagine given that we live in an information age and how
connected everything is going to be and how every layer will
also need security and reinforcement.
I hope that today's hearing will help illuminate for us how
much investment we really need to make to make that part of our
energy infrastructure work cost-effectively.
We know that some of the challenges that we face is getting
that curriculum well established and also making sure that
different aspects of the cybersecurity challenge are addressed
everywhere from two-year degrees to PhDs. I do think the
Department of Energy has a role to play here in defining for
individuals interested in this area, the partnerships that will
be necessary to skill that workforce in a timely fashion.
All in all, Madam Chair, thank you so much for the hearing
today. Thank you for the attention to this issue. I know you
and I keep hoping that there will be some cybersecurity
legislation that moves through the Full Congress as it has
already moved through the Senate. So, maybe, I don't know if
the third time is the charm, but hopefully we will be able to
use these very important events that have transpired across the
entire world to get our colleagues to see the urgency of the
situation.
So again, thank you for the hearing.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cantwell, and thank you
for your persistent push on the cybersecurity piece of it.
As you mention, we think we have a good, strong, bipartisan
bill. We would like to see that be more than just a bill. We
would like to see it be law and to put in place some of these
protections that we have been working on so hard, but I greatly
appreciate your continued focus on this.
We have a good, strong panel with us this morning. Again,
welcome.
We have our Assistant Secretary for the Department of
Energy, Mr. Bruce Walker. It is good to have you back before
us.
We are also joined by former Congressman Jim Matheson.
Congressman Matheson represented Utah from 2001 to 2015. He is
now the CEO of the National Rural Electric Cooperative
Association (NRECA). It is good to have you before the
Committee.
Dr. Barbara Endicott-Popovsky with the Center for
Information Assurance and Cybersecurity at the University of
Washington has just been introduced by Senator Cantwell. We are
very pleased that you could join us this morning.
Dr. William Sanders is from the University of Illinois, and
I will let Senator Duckworth introduce him.
But let me also welcome Mr. Robert Lee, who is the CEO of
Dragos Incorporated. It is good to have you with the Committee.
Senator Duckworth, if you would like to introduce your fine
constituent.
STATEMENT OF HON. TAMMY DUCKWORTH,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ILLINOIS
Senator Duckworth. Thank you, Chairwoman Murkowski.
I would like to extend a very warm welcome to Dr. Sanders,
who is joining us from the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign. They have some great farm-to-table restaurants
there, by the way.
I am proud that the University of Illinois was one of the
very first universities to recognize the importance of ensuring
that cybersecurity and cyber resiliency of our energy
infrastructure.
Dr. Sanders serves as the head of the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering and is an expert on
computing and critical infrastructure, such as the power grid.
Over the past several decades, Dr. Sanders has published
over 270 technical papers in these areas and received the 2016
IEEE Innovation and Societal Infrastructure Award.
He has used his expertise to assist the government's
efforts to make the grid more secure and resilient. This work
includes leading an initiative of the Department of Energy and
the Department of Homeland Security on building a better, more
secure and resilient power grid.
Dr. Sanders, I am thrilled that you are able to join us
today. I think your voice will be a very valuable one to
today's discussion.
We all know that future battles will increasingly exist in
cyberspace and that cybersecurity is a critical aspect of our
national security, and I look forward to hearing your testimony
and your recommendations concerning this very important issue.
Welcome.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Again, thank you all.
I would ask that you try to keep your comments to about
five minutes. Your full statements will be included as part of
the record.
I will note for colleagues that we are scheduled to have
votes. I think it is 11:45 when we have a series of three votes
that are set up. My intention this morning is to try to move as
quickly as we can so that we can get in as many questions as we
can to this fine group of experts.
Assistant Secretary Walker, if you would like to lead off.
Thank you.
STATEMENT OF HON. BRUCE J. WALKER, ASSISTANT SECRETARY, OFFICE
OF ELECTRICITY DELIVERY AND ENERGY RELIABILITY, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF ENERGY
Mr. Walker. Thank you. Good morning.
Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Cantwell, and
distinguished members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to discuss the continuing cybersecurity threats
facing our national energy infrastructure and the Department of
Energy's role in protecting it.
Establishing a resilient energy infrastructure is a top
priority of the Secretary and a major focus of the Department;
hence, our focus on cybersecurity is paramount.
Our national security and economy depend on the
availability of a reliable and resilient energy infrastructure.
The mission of the Office of Delivery and Energy Reliability,
OE, is to strengthen, transform and improve the resiliency of
energy infrastructure to ensure access to reliable and secure
sources of energy.
The Secretary and DOE are committed to working with our
public and private sector partners to protect the nation's
critical energy infrastructure from physical security events,
natural and man-made disasters and cybersecurity threats.
To demonstrate our focus on the aforementioned mission, the
Secretary announced last month he's establishing an Office of
Cybersecurity, Energy Security and Emergency Response, better
known as CESER. This organization change will strengthen the
Department's role as the energy sector-specific agency for
cybersecurity thereby supporting our national security
responsibilities.
The creation of this office will build upon what we do
today, significantly increase the Department's focus on energy
infrastructure protection and will enable more coordinating
preparedness and response to physical and cyber threats as well
as natural disasters. Furthermore, the CESER Office will play
an essential role in coordinating government and industry
efforts to address these energy sector threats.
The President has requested slightly more than $95 million
in FY2019 for CESER with a focus on early stage R&D activities,
working with our national labs to improve cybersecurity and
resilience, to harden and evolve critical grid infrastructure.
These activities will develop the next generation of
cybersecurity control systems, components and devices,
including enhancing our ability to share time-critical data
with industry to detect, prevent and recover from cyber events.
Our national intelligence agencies have noted the
increasing number and sophistication of cyber threats. Our
adversaries understand the energy sector is a valuable target
because of the assets that the sector controls, including our
defense critical energy infrastructure.
DOE's role in energy sector cybersecurity was codified by
Congress under the FAST Act. That legislation designated DOE as
the sector-specific agency for cybersecurity. As a result, the
Secretary of Energy is authorized upon the declaration of a
grid security emergency by the President to issue emergency
orders to protect or restore critical electric infrastructure
or defense critical electric infrastructure.
In order to properly plan for this type of occurrence, it
is critical that we continue to work closely with our energy,
industry and federal agency partners. In the energy sector, the
core of critical infrastructure partners consists of the
Electricity Subsector Coordinating Council, the Oil and Natural
Gas Subsector Coordinating Council and the Energy Government
Coordinating Council.
The Energy Government Coordinating Council is led by CESER
and DHS and it is where the interagency partners, states and
international partners come together to discuss the important
security and resilience issues for the energy sector.
Collectively, we all work together under DHS' Critical
Infrastructure Partnered Advisory Council which provides a
mechanism for industry and government coordination.
As a part of the Comprehensive Energy Cybersecurity
Resiliency Strategy, the Department of Energy, working with our
industry partners, is focusing cyber support efforts to enhance
visibility and situational awareness of operational networks,
increase alignment of cybersecurity preparedness and planning
across local, state and federal levels and leveraging the
expertise of our national labs to drive cybersecurity
innovation.
In conclusion, cyber threats continue to evolve and DOE is
working diligently to eliminate and mitigate the potential
consequences of these threats. Establishing the CESER Office is
a result of our laser-focused attention to cyber and physical
security.
Our long-term vision is significant and will positively
impact our national security. The establishment of this office
will be the first step in the transformational change necessary
to meet the ever-changing cyber landscape highlighted by our
national intelligence agencies.
Finally, I would like to highlight that the risk of
physical and cyber threats is continuingly exacerbated by a set
of circumstances that are increasingly interdependent of the
various energy systems throughout the nation. This
significantly increases our overall risk due to the increased
number of penetration points that can significantly impact
national security and economy.
As always, I appreciate the opportunity to appear before
this Committee to discuss cybersecurity in the energy sector
and I applaud your leadership.
I look forward to working with you and your respective
staffs to continue to address cyber and physical security
challenges.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walker follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Secretary Walker.
Congressman Matheson, welcome.
STATEMENT OF HON. JIM MATHESON, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
NATIONAL RURAL ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE ASSOCIATION
Mr. Matheson. Good morning, Chairman Murkowski and Ranking
Member Cantwell, members of the Committee. I appreciate the
invitation to testify before you on what is a very important
topic.
I'm testifying today on behalf of more than 900 electric
cooperatives who are working together to protect our U.S.
electricity system from cyber threats. I just returned last
night from the NRECA annual meeting with our membership and we
also had a TechAdvantage conference, and I'm happy to share
with you that cybersecurity was a significant topic of
discussion of both of those meetings.
We had several breakout sessions on cybersecurity to share
information with our members about the latest in policy and
technology, and our members shared with each other examples of
what they are doing to keep their systems secure. That peer-to-
peer learning is a hallmark of the electric cooperative
program.
Protecting the nation's complex interconnected electric
power system while ensuring reliable, secure and affordable
electricity has always been a top priority for electric co-ops
and, quite frankly, for the entire electric power industry.
Maintaining the resilience and security of the electric grid
requires a flexible approach that draws upon a variety of
tools, resources and options.
As threats and threat actors continue to evolve, so must
the industry's capability to defend against them. The
possibility of a cybersecurity attack affecting grid operations
is something for which the electric sector has been preparing
for years.
These preparations are built on the need for a flexible
approach and they include implementing security standards and
technologies to protect systems, forging close partnerships to
identify threats and solutions and to respond to incidents,
engaging in active information sharing about threats and
vulnerabilities, participating in industry and cross sector
disaster planning exercises such as DOE's clear path and the
North American Electric Reliability Corporation's Grid X
biannual exercise. We also partner with DOE, the National Labs
and other federal agencies on cybersecurity research to improve
tools and resources needed by the industry to address these
threats.
Protecting the electric grid from threats that could affect
national security and public safety is a responsibility shared
by both the government and the electric power sector. As we
continue working together to protect the electric system from
cyber threats, there are a couple of areas that can benefit
these partnerships and the sector that I'd like to highlight in
these comments.
First, these efforts can be enhanced through continued
cybersecurity research and development, including support for
developing resources for small and medium-sized utilities. The
Rural Electric Cooperative Association is active in
cybersecurity research programs and initiatives supported by
the DOE's Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy
Reliability. Strong research and development programs are
essential to developing new technologies to keep pace with the
rapidly changing cybersecurity threats that our industry faces.
The DOE is our industry's primary source for federal funding to
develop cybersecurity tools and resources.
Currently, one of the most valuable research programs for
electric cooperatives is the funding partnership between DOE
and the Rural Electric Co-ops, called the Rural Cooperative
Cybersecurity Capabilities Program, or we call it RC3 for
short. This partnership is specifically focused on addressing
the unique cybersecurity needs of small and mid-sized
distribution utilities. And in addition to developing
cybersecurity resources and tools appropriate for these
utilities, we have provided cybersecurity training to more than
150 of our members through the RC3 program.
The second area I'd mention in these comments is the need
to continue improving information sharing between the
government and electric utilities. In some circumstances, there
are situations where the government possesses information on
intelligence on a particular threat or vulnerability that could
be timely and actionable for the industry. We support efforts
aimed at increasing electric cooperatives access to this type
of information thereby helping us to do an even better job of
protecting the grid. The FAST Act and Cyber Information Sharing
Act from last Congress were excellent and appreciated steps in
this direction.
Information sharing, of course, is a bidirectional issue
and assurances that sensitive information shared from industry
to government will be properly protected and free of liability
concerns when shared in good faith is also necessary. In
addition, the government also holds information on terrorist
activities. A voluntary process that allows utilities to have
the FBI perform enhanced background investigation screening for
critical employees in our industry could go a long way in
helping to address some of the potential insider threat
concerns.
So again, thank you for inviting me to testify today. We
look forward to working with Congress on these issues and
continuing in our successful partnerships with the DOE and
other federal agencies.
I'm happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Matheson follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Congressman Matheson.
Dr. Endicott-Popovsky, welcome.
STATEMENT OF DR. BARBARA ENDICOTT-POPOVSKY, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
CENTER FOR INFORMATION ASSURANCE AND CYBERSECURITY, UNIVERSITY
OF WASHINGTON
Dr. Endicott-Popovsky. Thank you.
Good morning, Chairman Murkowski and Ranking Member Maria
Cantwell and distinguished members of the Committee. I want to
thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today about
examining cybersecurity in our nation's critical energy
infrastructure.
My name is Dr. Barbara Endicott-Popovsky. I'm the Executive
Director of the Center for Information Assurance and
Cybersecurity at the University of Washington, and we are an
NSA Center of Academic Excellence in cybersecurity as well as a
regional resource center for dissemination of best practices.
We convene industry, government and military around shared
problems, but to provide context for my remarks, we're driven
by four major ideas.
First of all, in cyberspace everyone is your neighbor. This
is going to require new ways of thinking about partnerships
with military, industry and government.
Secondly, cybersecurity involves rules and tools. While it
came from technology, there are still humans in the system and
there's no firewall for stupid. So, it's going to require
policies, procedures, awareness training that's going to really
deal with that human element.
Thirdly, all of this is exacerbated by not enough talent.
And I can't emphasize that enough. This is a systemic problem,
and it is not going to be fixed with a Band-Aid. This is going
to be equivalent to the moon shot project that we had back in
the Kennedy era. Now, we were able to do it back then. We
should be able to pull the resources together to do it now, but
this is a serious problem.
And besides that, cybersecurity is becoming a profession
and I want to caution the Committee about balkanizing the field
with its own definitions and its own educational procedures.
There are differences, infrastructure to infrastructure, yes.
I would refer the Committee to work that was done by the
FCC CSRIC that was designed to look at how they could leverage
existing NIST and NSA, DHS, work that's been done on
cybersecurity educational standards and I think you'll find
that much is already there, but there will be a delta.
How did we get here? Certainly, cyberattacks are daunting.
We're living through digital transformation. That's what's
going on. And we're still clinging to mental models from the
physical world and the information world that simply don't
work. Cross sector collaboration, for example, is something we
talk about, but it's not easily done because all sectors have
their own missions. It's very difficult to get everyone on the
same page.
However, there's one thing we can all agree on. There is no
cyber fire department. There is no cyber 911. In a cyber
disaster the DoD is prepared to protect its own networks and
maintain its mission, but who is there on the civilian side and
the private sector side? No one.
This vacuum is a national security threat. And toward this
end H.R. 3712 has been proposed by our delegation that deals
with proliferating the Cyber Civil Support teams across the
country which is going to require extensive education of the
National Guard so that they're prepared to do what's necessary
in the event of an attack.
The case of cyber war is a case of mutually assured
destruction. Make no mistake. At some point, we're going to
need the equivalent of the Kennedy and Khrushchev red phone and
nuclear disarmament talks, but getting everybody to agree on
enforcement is going to be a problem and I'm not sure that
nation-states right now have an appetite for stepping up to the
table. But this will have to happen so we don't mistake each
other. This is a tragedy of the commons where a shared resource
is used individually by users to the detriment of the whole and
to the ruination, perhaps, of the whole.
In addressing the talent deficit, this is a problem across
all sectors and, in particular, with utilities. We need to be
mindful that industry is competing for the same talent and
their salaries are much higher. So I suggest that we consider
ways to incentivize students to go to work for utilities
through, perhaps, funded scholarship programs. The bottom line,
again, is that this is no easy fix. This is no Band-Aid. We
need commitment over the long haul to really develop what's
necessary to transform our educational processes so that we
prepare people adequately and quickly to do what's necessary to
protect our vital infrastructure.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Endicott-Popovsky follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Doctor.
Dr. Sanders, welcome.
STATEMENT OF DR. WILLIAM H. SANDERS, DONALD BIGGAR WILLETT
PROFESSOR OF ENGINEERING, AND HEAD, DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL
AND COMPUTER ENGINEERING, UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-
CHAMPAIGN
Dr. Sanders. Good morning, Chairwoman Murkowski, Ranking
Member Cantwell and distinguished members of the Committee.
Thank you for inviting me to speak today.
My name is Bill Sanders, and I'm the Head of the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. As was also said earlier when I
was introduced, I've led or co-lead major centers funded by the
Department of Energy, the Department of Homeland Defense and
the National Science Foundation for the last 12 years working
in this area.
I want to focus my comments today on cyber resiliency.
Resiliency is a fundamental concept that differs from
traditional metrics, such as reliability or cybersecurity. In
the context of electric power, resiliency is not just about
being able to lessen the likelihood an outage will occur, but
it's about managing and coping with outage events when they do
occur.
With resiliency, we attempt, to the greatest extent
possible, to avoid a blackout, but understand and accept it may
not be possible to totally avoid its occurrence. Thus, we work
to respond as quickly as possible to the event when it occurs,
preserving critical and individual societal services during the
period of degraded operation and over time striving for full
recovery and enhanced robustness.
An important new concern for the resiliency of this is the
cyber portion of the grid and how it affects overall grid
resiliency. The electric power system has become increasingly
reliant on its cyber infrastructure to deliver electricity to
consumers. A compromise of power grid control systems or other
portions of the grid cyber infrastructure can have serious
consequences ranging from a simple disruption of service with
no damage to the physical components to permanent damage to
hardware that can have long lasting effects on the performance
of the system. Any consideration of improved power grid
resiliency requires consideration of ways to make the grid
cyber infrastructure resilient.
Over the last decade, much attention has rightly been
placed on grid cybersecurity, but much less has been placed on
grid cyber resiliency. It's now, however, becoming very
apparent that protection alone by cybersecurity is not
sufficient and it can never be made perfect.
Given the relentless attacks and the challenges of
prevention, successful cyber penetrations are inevitable and
there's evidence in increases of the rates of penetration.
The resiliency goals for the cyber infrastructure thus
require a clear understanding of the interaction between the
cyber and conventional physical portions of the grid and how
impairments on either side, cyber or physical, could impact the
other.
Specific guidance about cyber resiliency research that is
critically needed comes from a consensus study published in
July 2017 by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering
and Medicine, entitled, Enhancing the Resilience of the
Nation's Electricity System.
As one of the co-authors on this report, I helped craft
seven overarching recommendations. Overarching recommendation
number five is particularly relevant to the concept of cyber
resilience. I'll paraphrase. The Department of Energy, together
with the Department of Homeland Security, academic research
teams, national labs and the private sector should carry out a
program of research, development and demonstration activities
to develop and deploy capabilities for the continuous
collection of diverse, both cyber and physical sensor data,
diffusion of sensor data with other intelligence information,
visualization techniques, analytics, restoration techniques and
the creation of post-event rules. In summary, the cyber threat
to grid resiliency is real. The time to act is now.
It is critical that the Committee understand the following:
Number one, grid resiliency is different from cybersecurity
and requires a fundamentally new approach.
Two, protection as a cybersecurity mechanism alone is not
sufficient and can never be made perfect. The grid can only be
resilient if its cyber infrastructure is also resilient. So,
research and development are critically needed to provide
assured mechanisms to ensure cyber resiliency.
Three, six capabilities--continuous data collection, the
fusion of sensor data, visualization, analytics, restoration
and post-event tools--are critical to creating an effective
strategy for cyber resiliency. Those capabilities can only be
achieved if academia, industry and government work closely
together in a focused research and development program.
And finally, Congress should continue to fund and increase
funding to the Department of Energy and other government
agencies to advance this research and development.
Thank you very much. I would be happy to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Sanders follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Sanders.
Mr. Lee, welcome to the Committee.
STATEMENT OF ROBERT M. LEE, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND CO-
FOUNDER, DRAGOS, INC.
Mr. Lee. Chairwoman Murkowski, Ranking Member Cantwell and
members of the Committee, thank you for providing me the
opportunity to present before you today.
I want to briefly explain my background which informs the
testimony I bring before you. I started my career at the United
States Air Force Academy, was commissioned and then took a
position as a cyber warfare operations officer tasked out to
the National Security Agency (NSA).
While at the NSA I was tasked with building a mission to
identify new nation-state threats breaking into environments.
It was there that I built and led a first-of-its-kind mission
looking at the nation-states breaking into industrial
environments. I did so with the hypothesis that we would find
the new threats, and we did. It was there I came to understand
that there was a significant collection bias in the U.S.
intelligence community and in the larger information security
community. That means, as we typically prioritize and report on
things where we collect and can see, but we're blind to the
environments that we're not collecting like industrial control
networks.
I left to build Dragos to gain insights and develop
technology to help people.
Over the last three years, we've seen these type of attacks
take place: The Ukraine power grid attack of 2015, I was one of
the lead investigators there to solve the first-ever
cyberattack that could halt grid operations; the Ukraine attack
of 2016, where my firm and I helped identify and analyze
CRASHOVERRIDE--the software that was purposely built to disrupt
electric grids; and, in 2017 in the Middle East a more
concerning thing to me is that a first piece of malware that
was developed to specifically target human life was deployed.
So with my experience in the military and intelligence
community, training the world's defenders and leading the
world's best against the world's worst, I want to highlight a
few points for you today.
First, as scary as all this sounds, our infrastructure is
extremely resilient today. We have to do more, but I do want to
note that there's a lot of good work happening in the
community. My team often strives for nuance in our analysis and
reporting on the threats, but we have observed a disservice to
the community over the last couple decades, even the most
casual phishing email deployed to a corporate network of a
nuclear power plant gets headlines about cyberattacks taking
down infrastructure and killing people. This is not accurate.
These scenarios presented are often nonsense and full of hype
and unintended misinformation, but the threats are real.
Today, my firm released three reports detailing the
industrial threats of vulnerabilities and our lessons learned
and response. We detailed five such threat activity groups or
teams specifically targeting industrial control networks. This
is in addition to the much larger number of teams that are
targeting the corporate networks of infrastructure companies
but this specific trend is worrying.
Equally important though, we must be careful of
technologies and approaches which sound like silver bullets and
they sound too good to be true. These approaches are often
referred to in the industry as buzzwords making immense
traction and buzz and attention when used in conversations and
they do have an application, but they're obviously and usually
extended far past that application. And the context of
cybersecurity, block chain, machine speed, automated response
and artificial intelligence are three such examples that are
thrown around frequently as a panacea for our problems when
they are simply not.
On to my second point today which is the role of
regulation. The NERC CIP standards are often highly discussed
topics, but it is undeniable that the efforts in the community
to comply with these standards have made the North American
bulk electric system the most resilient and well defended in
the world. However, regulations serve as a base level of
security. They're obviously on the trailing end of what is
going on and they, in no way, can regulate the human adversary.
Malware and vulnerabilities are not our threats, the human
adversary is our threat.
For that, we must take an approach that also appreciates
the workforce development that's required. I recommend for a
period of three to four years that no new regulations be
imposed under NERC--it would allow companies to catch up with
current regulations as well as identify the threat landscape
before them and come up with their own best practices for the
type of innovation that we need for industrial-specific
networks.
On my third point my recommendations for DOE's CESER.
First, provide multi-year funding and greater operational
support to efforts that are prioritized to make foundational
changes to the fundamental risk. Consequence-driven, cyber-
informed engineering is one of those programs that's been
highlighted that I think very kindly of. It is in no way going
to fix everything, but it is foundational and so, our grid
security.
Second, CESER should serve as the key team focused on deed
duplicating efforts in the DOE and their labs by being keenly
aware of what is already taking place in the private sector.
There is never malice or intentional overlap, but at the speed
and rate of innovation in the private sector as well as the
sheer volume, overlap can take place that has unintentional
overlaps and competitive issues will emerge.
Third, with a stated mission of focusing on addressing
emerging threats, realize and appreciate the best insights and
intelligence on threats or in the community and the companies
that are being targeted. The private sector companies, like
Dragos, as well as the community members like the electric
ISAC, the downstream natural ISAC and the others, have a keen
insight in that threat landscape today and partnering with
teams like CESER will ensure that they do not recreate efforts,
but that we all achieve the same goal of providing security to
our infrastructure.
I sincerely want to thank the Committee for providing me
the opportunity to testify today and will welcome any questions
and additional information to help support the safety of our
families, communities and each other.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lee follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Lee.
Thank you all. We appreciate your testimony this morning.
We will begin with a round of questions.
Senator Cassidy has to go preside in another Committee, so
I am going to defer my questions, and you may proceed.
Senator Cassidy. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Walker, there is a book, Black Swan, by Nicholas Taleb,
and one of his premises is that the more complex organizations
become, the more vulnerable they become to a black swan event,
that which is two standard deviations beyond the norm but just
totally brings things down--think the financial crisis of 2007.
Part of your testimony spoke of the interrelatedness of all
of our systems. I never pronounce it correctly, MISO or meso,
but that network which takes electrons all throughout the
middle part of our country. Do we have such increasingly
complex energy systems that we are prone to that black swan
event, you see where I am going with this?
Mr. Walker. Yes sir, and thank you for the question,
Senator.
I believe that, as I did mention in my testimony, the
interdependencies that are resulting through the retirement of
many fuel-shored coal and nuclear plants that are being
replaced with natural gas plants, has placed a significant
interdependency of the electric generation system upon the
infrastructure that supplies and supports the gas
infrastructure throughout the United States.
And to that end, I have been working with the labs to
actually do a single point of failure analysis of the gas
infrastructure system in order to understand the overall impact
on the generation components that are impacted on the
electricity system.
Senator Cassidy. I hear what you are saying, but the basis
of my question is should we fear this interdependency?
Mr. Walker. I believe we need to understand the
interdependency which is why the first goal of my department is
the building of a North American, fully integrated model that
highlights the interdependencies and is able to do an n-1-1-1
analysis to demonstrate what the interdependencies are and
therefore define the complexities to determine what the
mathematical, the two-standard deviation impact is away from a
secure network.
Senator Cassidy. I am not sure you are answering my
question because it does seem as if within that you acknowledge
that we should fear, but you are just trying to prepare us as
much as possible to insulate that highly complex system from
that two-standard deviation event.
Mr. Walker. I guess I don't fear it. I need to understand
it.
Senator Cassidy. Got it.
Mr. Walker. And my----
Senator Cassidy. Okay.
If I don't get this quite right, ma'am, but Dr. Endicott-
Popovsky, I occasionally stutter, so I apologize.
You said everybody is our neighbor, but Mr. Lee said that
really we are reasonably, I don't want to misquote or overstate
but, secure within the energy sector. But if everybody is our
neighbor and we have an Internet of Things and somebody's
little modulator on their thermostat back home, can that sneak
all the way in and disrupt our grid? And what if that
thermostat is in Spain or Mexico or China, can it similarly do
it because from what you said they are our neighbor?
Dr. Endicott-Popovsky. When I spoke about everybody is your
neighbor in the online world and in cyberspace, I'm speaking in
a high level, metaphorically. And theoretically what you're
talking about is possible.
Certainly what the gentleman from Dragos was talking about
with the adversaries that we face, there are individuals out
there that are spending overtime and double time to figure out
just those kinds of scenarios. And we should make no mistake,
we have allowed, in my opinion, our valuables to sit on a table
in the kitchen with our back door open without thinking about
what that invites.
And so----
Senator Cassidy. Now, that is a little bit contra to what
you said, Mr. Lee, in which you said, don't sit on laurels, but
we are not as quite as incredibly, you know, our valuables are
not necessarily on the table, at least when it comes to the
energy grid.
Would you accept that or----
Mr. Lee. So, I would not disagree that we are
interconnected in a way that opens up new risk, but I think my,
sort of, point was the fact that every single thing that occurs
gets messed with headlines that everybody is going to die. And
I think that does a disservice to the amount of work that the
energy community has put into our infrastructure----
Senator Cassidy. Then that brings me to Dr. Sanders'
comment in which you suggest that we are not having this.
Implied in your conclusion was that we are not having this
academia, industry, government working group to find solutions,
are we not?
Dr. Sanders. So, we are having that. There are, actually
funded by the Office of Electricity (OE), there are efforts
going on that are combining together academics, industry people
and government. Some of the nice programs that have been run by
OE, so-called industry projects----
Senator Cassidy. I am almost out of time so I gather that
we are, you just, perhaps, have more of it.
Dr. Sanders. We are doing it. We need more of it----
Senator Cassidy. Last thing.
Ma'am, you have raised working group and I had, somehow, in
the back of my mind in Washington State that you all had a
bill. I don't know if it was implemented, that you would allow
computer programming to be used as a substitute for a foreign
language requirement in your primary and secondary school. Do I
remember that? And if so, was it implemented? And if so, what
are the results?
Dr. Endicott-Popovsky. I will get back to you with that
answer. I recall that that was proposed, but I will get back
with you, sir, with that answer.
[The answer to Senator Cassidy's question appears on page
152 at the end of the hearing.]
Senator Cassidy. Sounds great. It just sounds great to me
because no one who ever studied French in school ever learned
French, on the other hand, in fact, I am not sure they know
where France is.
[Laughter.]
But if they learned how to use even Excel or Python,
wouldn't we be better off?
Dr. Endicott-Popovsky. I agree that we need to be looking
from an educational perspective down into the K-12 arena,
absolutely.
Senator Cassidy. Okay.
Madam Chair, I thank you for deferring.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cassidy.
Senator Manchin.
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I would just like to say also that Latin was not much
experienced later either.
[Laughter.]
I am thinking I had two years in high school and still
can't speak a word of it.
Thank you, Madam Chairman and Ranking Member Cantwell, for
having this important hearing. I would also like to thank each
one of you, the witnesses, for appearing here today.
It is nice to see Congressman Matheson, and we appreciate
your appearance here. I believe it is your first in this
capacity. During your time in Congress you were known for your
bipartisanship which we miss very much. That is one of the many
reasons I have no doubt that the Rural Electric Cooperative
Association is in very good hands, sir.
We have held several cyber hearings this year, including
the Subcommittee on Energy on which I serve as the Ranking
Member, alongside Chairman Gardner, as we discussed previously,
new digital technologies have increased energy efficiency and
allowed for enhanced customer experience. However, increasing
our reliance on these platforms also leaves us more vulnerable
to cyberattacks. It is not a question of if, but a question of
when.
With that in mind, my home State of West Virginia, as all
of you know, I think, continues to be a net exporter of energy.
That means that our neighbors really depend on us for reliable
electricity which coal and natural gas produces on a regular
basis. I cannot stress the importance of reliable transmission
of energy is our way of life, and I am concerned about our
security every day.
I applaud the ongoing work by the Department of Energy and
Department of Homeland Security, Mr. Walker, but I also want to
make sure we can eliminate our energy sector's vulnerabilities.
As a member of the Senate Intel Committee, I consider these
cyber hearings vitally important and I am very, very
appreciative that we are having this hearing.
Congressman Matheson, I would ask, what has been the single
most helpful strategy or approach for your members to prepare
for and mitigate the risk of cyberattack? What do you think
that you all have been able to do to assist the Department of
Energy and any of our other agencies?
Mr. Matheson. The answer starts with the word partnership
and we've had excellent relationships in terms of working with
the Department of Energy and developing, as I mentioned in my
opening comments, the program we call RC3, which is a program
that we put together to train our co-ops. It's really a toolbox
of different options that they can use to do a self-assessment
of their circumstance at their co-op, identify potential
vulnerabilities and risks, share best practices with each
other.
And it's, sort of, a self-improvement process as well,
continuous improvement dynamic because this threat is evolving
every day, as we've all discussed, and it's something that we
recognize that wherever we are today, we've got to get better
by tomorrow. And that's been a significant play for us through
these smaller utilities, you know?
Senator Manchin. Yes.
Mr. Matheson. We need a program that recognizes the small,
medium-sized utilities and the fact that the Department of
Energy recognized as well and help fund this effort.
And I might mention, this effort was not just done with the
Rural Electric Co-ops, it was also done with the municipal
utilities as well. I think that's been an important program,
and that's a specific answer I give to your question.
Senator Manchin. Let me say this, I have been told by my
utility producers, whether they be electricity by coal-fired
for baseload or whether it be our natural gas in all the
pipelines, that we are building and pumping stations. I am
concerned about the vulnerability. I have been able to go up
myself, with maybe just a little gate or a little fence around
it.
Mr. Matheson. Yeah.
Senator Manchin. The pumping or our transmission, I would
guess. I would ask each one of you, and I will start with Mr.
Lee. What keeps you up at night and what are you worried about,
because I see vulnerabilities it would not be hard to attack by
any of us?
If our pumping stations go down most of the East Coast is
in trouble. If our transmission lines go down and our big
transfer stations, which are not all that foolproof.
So, if you could tell me, Mr. Lee, what are you concerned
about and what do you think we need to do for the next step?
Mr. Lee. Thank you, Senator, for your question.
I'm extremely concerned about the disparity between our
industries. So I often like to applaud the electric industry,
specifically, but that does not equate to every other industry.
I think the threats are far more, sort of, aggressive than
people realize, but not as bad as they want to imagine. And in
there is that nuance we have to capture.
I've been in manufacturing facilities, small to medium-
sized co-ops, gas locations that are vital to critical
communities where not even the basics of security have been
done. So, there is this back and forth we have to address.
So I'm concerned about that, and I'm also concerned about
some of the smaller events and our ability to respond to them.
I'm very confident the U.S. Government has a response if a
major cyberattack were to occur.
Senator Manchin. Okay.
Mr. Lee. But what about a 30-minute power outage in DC?
Senator Manchin. Yes.
Mr. Lee. That's something that brings me, sort of keeps me
up at night at how we respond.
Senator Manchin. Mr. Walker, if I could go to you real
quickly on this. I know we are concerned about the cyberattack
and what cyber can do and shut down with a person from far
away. I am concerned also about the hardened attack that can
occur.
Mr. Walker. Sure.
Senator Manchin. What you all have been doing there and
making sure utilities are strengthening their position to
protect?
Mr. Walker. Thank you for the question, Senator.
Specifically, what keeps me up at night in relation to this
is the actual physical security component and, to that end, our
Department has worked with our security department that does
the evaluations of our NNSA sites. We are extrapolating upon
the work that has been done extensively by the national labs
and our security sites to bring it into and we're using our
PMAs which are federally-owned, as the test bed for the proving
ground to utilize the physical security strategies, if you
will, developed mostly by the Sandia labs to employ them on
both the gas, electric and oil infrastructure throughout the
United States.
Senator Manchin. Thank you.
My time has expired. I wish I could hear from all of you,
but if you get a chance, just chime in when you can.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Manchin.
Senator Gardner.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thanks to the
witnesses for being here today.
It is a critical issue, obviously. As we speak, the
Colorado Department of Transportation is actually dealing with
a cyberattack now. It has gone through several days' worth of a
SamSam ransomware attack that has shut down the Colorado
Department of Transportation computers within the Colorado
Department of Transportation for days.
So this isn't just something that we should worry about for
tomorrow. This is something that we should have been worried
about a long time ago and were worried about a long time ago
and need to worry even more about how we address this today so
that we can prevent these kinds of things from spreading even
further into hospitals and to roads and to other places.
Thank you for being a part of that solution and bringing
these ideas forward, because you were worried about this a long
time ago. You are worried about it today and a part of the
solution going forward and I thank you for that.
Congressman Matheson, if you don't mind, I enjoyed serving
with you in the House. You and I are affectionately referred to
as House broken, being in the House and having that experience.
[Laughter.]
But we have talked a lot with our folks back home in
Colorado, the co-ops and others, about the challenges they face
in cyber.
Would an expedited security clearance process address your
need for enhanced background checks and would having more
cleared personnel improve the flow of specific additional
information? For example, we had a hearing, I believe it was
last Congress, where somebody said that they were told by a
security audit that they had a piece of equipment that would
not pass federal standards, but they were then told that they
could not tell them what that piece of equipment was because
they did not have the right clearance.
Mr. Matheson. Right.
No, you've raised a really important issue and that is the
internal threat, the human threat. And what we propose, and
it's not just the co-ops of the electric industry in general
that feels this way, is we would like access where we could
have FBI background check clearance to really check on key
employees. Although, the industry is willing to pay for that
and we don't even want the information, the personal
information, the FBI can keep that, but we would like to have
that capacity to have key employees go through that security
check process.
I think that would be important risk mitigation for the
utility industry and to having better confidence in the people
that have access to sensitive information.
Senator Gardner. Thank you for that.
For those members that do have clearances, do they have
difficulty trying to find or accessing classified briefing
space? Is that a problem as well or----
Mr. Matheson. Yeah, there is a question about timing in
particular, more than ultimately gain access. And I think that
we're always looking to improve, but there's no question that
if we could find efforts for timely information to get to us in
a way that we can act on it in a reasonable way when we have a
threat. That always should be the goal.
And yes, we need to improve----
Senator Gardner. You can't just pick up the phone, on a
regular unsecured line, and talk to the general manager of
Highline Electric or something like that.
Mr. Matheson. You got it.
And we're trying to figure out, you know, this is a two-way
street to how this information goes.
Yes, we want access to information from government sources
in a timely way where we get that confidential information. We
also need to get that information to the government. We want
some protections about how that sensitive information is going
to be used when it goes in that direction as well.
Senator Gardner. Great.
Mr. Walker, I have a couple minutes here so I want to get
to you as well.
In your testimony, you talk about defense critical energy
infrastructure which was defined in the FAST Act. Can you
explain what DOE is doing to address Defense Critical Energy
Infrastructure (DCEI)?
Mr. Walker. Thank you for the question, Senator.
The--I want to note that I think it was an astute
observation by the Congress to include the DCEI in the FAST
Act. Upon taking office in DOE, one of the first things I did
was focus in on that point that was raised by the FAST Act.
To that end, I did a significant amount of research--my
team and working with members from the Department of Defense,
DHS, the Army Corps, RPMAs, particularly WAPA, as well as other
members in the key stakeholder groups--we developed a strategy,
an operational strategy, that will enhance our ability to
ensure that when those defense critical infrastructure are
necessary to be utilized, that they'll be available,
notwithstanding what the impact is to the rest of the grid
throughout the United States. And we continue to work on that
diligently with our federal partners and our industry partners
to focus on that.
And if I may, I'd like to comment on the previous
question----
Senator Gardner. Great.
Mr. Walker. ----to Congressman Matheson.
Earlier this week, DOE, I chair and DHS chairs the Energy
Government Coordinating Council and with regard to clearances,
one of the things that was a key takeaway from that meeting is
the clearance process and getting an expedited process is
important, but I think what's more notable and what I focus the
organization on, in conjunction with DHS, was we need to
provide timely and actionable information to the energy
partners that we have in both the ESCC and the ONG.
And it's really about that action, very black and white.
You either need to act on this or you don't need to act on that
and we need to figure out how to declassify information enough
to be able to provide that guidance so that we won't get caught
into this clearance issue.
So that's one of the key takeaways that we're working on
diligently as well, Senator.
Senator Gardner. Great. Thank you, Mr. Walker.
Thanks to all of you, and I yield my time.
The Chairman. Terrific timing, thank you, Senator.
Next, we will turn to Senator Hirono.
Senator Hirono. Mr. Lee, did I hear you correctly when you
responded to an earlier question that we are prepared to
respond adequately if there is a major cyberattack? And did you
mean a major cyberattack on our energy infrastructure?
Mr. Lee. Yes, ma'am.
So with that discussion, I think that the U.S. Government
is more well-positioned on a major cyberattack than it would be
on a smaller cyberattack was my----
Senator Hirono. No, but are you talking about with
particular reference to the energy infrastructure that we are
prepared to respond so that we can keep our energy
infrastructure going?
Mr. Lee. No, Senator.
So, the response is on the private sector. I think the
belief structure that U.S. military or others are going to go
on civilian networks is misplaced. I'm referring to the
geopolitical and, sort of, diplomatic response that we would be
able to have.
Senator Hirono. Well, it is just that I just came from an
Armed Services Committee hearing with General Nakasone, who is
a nominee to lead NSA and Cyber Command, and he did--now there
is general acknowledgement that we have not responded to
various, particular state-sponsored cyberattacks on OPM, for
example, in other ways.
That is why I wanted to get clarification from you as to
exactly what you meant when you said that you thought we were
prepared to respond. According to General Nakasone, we are not
quite there.
I wanted to further ask you, Mr. Lee. As our control
systems become more complex, and you were asked this, and
perhaps we have become more vulnerable to attacks. So on the
other hand, perhaps, technical advances could potentially make
state-of-the-art security technology, we can incorporate state-
of-the-art security technology such as advanced encryption
algorithms and other measures to protect our systems.
So, in your opinion, is progress being made to ensure that
industrial control systems are more secure as the technology
becomes better or are we losing ground because these systems
are becoming more complex and inherently more vulnerable to
advanced persistent cyber threats?
Mr. Lee. Thank you, Senator, for your question.
I think it's definitely a race that we're also introducing
new risk while they become more verbose in their capabilities.
Some systems that were never designed to do certain things now
have those capabilities built into them and they shouldn't. At
the same time, though, we are making a lot of progress in the
sector.
So, I think it is, sort of, in this position where we're
increasing risk. We're increasing security, but we have to do
more of the security to offset that risk.
Senator Hirono. I think you also testified that our
infrastructure, and I assume that's our energy infrastructure,
is quite resilient at this point so that, particularly on the
electric side, they have done a lot to protect themselves----
Mr. Lee. Yes, and I think there is still balance there that
we didn't have a lot more we need to do, but I think that we
should not be so careful, or we should be careful and sort of,
just say that they haven't done anything which is inaccurate.
Senator Hirono. Yes, I understand.
Mr. Walker, you describe the DOE's work with industry in
developing the voluntary Cyber Risk Information Sharing
Program, or CRISP, as a way of monitoring and managing the
security and resiliency of the electric grid.
I would imagine a utility may not be inclined to
voluntarily report a cyber incident that may have exposed a
weakness in their cybersecurity posture. If they are not
required to share that kind of information, how forthcoming do
you believe utilities have been in sharing sensitive
information relating to cyber risks that they are confronting
on a daily basis? And in your view, is there a way to induce
and encourage greater participation in programs such as CRISP?
Mr. Walker. Thank you for the question, Senator.
I believe that the partnership that we have between the
electricity sector, Coordinating Subsector Coordinating Council
and the Oil and Natural Gas Subsector Coordinating Council is
extremely strong and it continues to get stronger, particularly
as we work through the Government Coordinating Council to
integrate that information with DHS.
So I believe the industry is completely forthcoming, just
like we are completely forthcoming with that bidirectional flow
of information, both classified and unclassified.
You know, this is an ongoing evolution and a partnership
that we all understand that we need to work together. The
integration of both the oil and natural gas as well as the
electric industry into an overall system of energy that's
highly dependent upon each other has driven us to work together
over the years and we continue to progress that.
In fact, today we're meeting at DHS for the C-PAC to
further work between government and our energy partners.
Senator Hirono. So the voluntariness of this program is not
preventing the utilities from fully participating and
cooperating in----
Mr. Walker. Not at all.
The limiting factor has been the cost of the implementation
which is why we've been working very hard. We're going to
continue to work hard with NRECA and the APPA to further embed
this.
You'll note in my testimony, I said about 75 percent of the
utility customers throughout the United States are covered by
that. Our goal is, obviously, 100 percent. And we need to work
harder, and we are working, to develop cheaper solutions, more
cost-effective innovation in our labs for the sensing
technology that's necessary to effectuate the CRISP program.
Senator Hirono. Thank you.
So continuing research in this area is really important and
to provide those resources.
Mr. Walker. Absolutely and we are doing that.
Senator Hirono. Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Hirono.
Assistant Secretary Walker, let me ask you this.
With the restructuring and the division now between the
Office of Electricity Delivery and now this separate Office of
Cybersecurity with its own Assistant Secretary, there would be
some that would argue that so much of this is just intertwined,
the issues of electricity delivery and energy reliability are
not distinct, they are very much intertwined. Then you have the
reality that we are talking here about how we can design
cybersecurity into every aspect of system operations so that an
entirely separate office might be actually counterproductive.
Now I am not saying that I am one of those skeptics, but I
do think it is important, as the Committee that is looking at
that, that you share with us the rationale for this separate
office and the response to those who might say it is a little
bit counterproductive to have it separate.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Senator Murkowski.
I think that's an excellent question and being part of the
decision-making for doing this, I'd like to answer this.
Number one, in taking this position and looking across all
of the different departments that I'm responsible for and
understanding what was set forth in the FAST Act and really the
focus of cybersecurity and given the fact that the FAST Act
designated DOE as the sector-specific agency. That is a
significant undertaking, and I've done the analysis myself as
to what work is necessary.
As I mentioned with Senator Gardner, the DCI component,
just that strategy alone and identifying and working through
the defense critical energy infrastructure, is a significant
undertaking both in breadth and depth.
Now the way I would specifically delineate how the two are
intertwined in one concept but very distinct in the others is
the whole idea of the CESER program is to be actionable, near-
term and highly responsive today. So things like DCI strategies
are things that are actionable today and need to be done.
However, I would note that the remaining portion of OE that I
will be leading focuses on the longer-term solutions so just
because we solve and have an operational strategy to make the
system work for DCI today, having a longer-term strategy that
looks at different R&D capabilities, different design
strategies, is really what the focus of the OE Department is
going to be.
And I note, Senator Murkowski, I'm taking the opportunity
to change the name of my department because both you and I
struggle with it every time we're here.
The other part of the OE component which is very, very
significant and a massive undertaking is the development of the
North American model, an energy sensitive model that is able to
do enhanced analysis, to do contingency analysis to understand
what the next worst case is when a significant infrastructure,
whether it be gas or electric or petroleum, goes offline to be
able to do real load following analyses with a high integration
of interdependency analysis. That work will drive and
fundamentally change the way that we make investments in our
infrastructure throughout the entire United States and it will
change the way markets are driven and it will change the way
that we look at reliability, make investments in operation and
maintenance. So that will be work that will be done in that OE
Department and that's a significant undertaking that we've laid
out the strategy for as well.
The Chairman. You have your work cut out for you.
I am going to defer my time and go to Senator King and then
we will go to Senator Daines.
Senator King. Thank you.
Mr. Walker, welcome back to the Committee. You were here
not long ago, and we are glad to have you back.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, sir.
Senator King. Napoleon said, ``War is history.'' Freud
said, ``Anatomy is destiny.'' King says, ``Structure is
policy.''
I welcome the new office because I think you are creating a
structure that will facilitate good policy in this area because
without some area of responsibility in the department that
focused, specifically, on the problem of cybersecurity and
resiliency, I am afraid the response and the planning and the
programs will be diffused and unfocused. So I hope that you
will move quickly to facilitate the formation of this office
and to get it, to stand it up so that it can meet its urgent
purpose.
Mr. Walker. Yes, sir, that's the goal.
It's important for us which is why the Secretary announced
it and, you know, one of the things I learned early in my
career is you design organizations around process and how you
want to drive the policy. And that was part of the
distinguishing factor in establishing this Department,
specifically for cybersecurity. And you'll note the second
part, which is energy security which incorporates that closely,
you know, type, physical component which is absolutely
necessary for us to focus on, particularly as the
interdependency exacerbates our risk.
Senator King. Now the problem here--and this is not your
problem, this is an all-of-government problem and I just came
from a hearing in the Armed Services Committee with the nominee
to head Cyber Command--is that this country lacks a coherent
strategy of deterrence in the cyber realm. You can argue, we
are either at war now or a war is imminent in terms of
cyberattacks on this country, small and large. And yet, we have
no deterrent policy. Our adversaries feel there is no cost to
their attacking us in a variety of ways, large and small.
So, again, this is not your responsibility, but I hope that
in the councils of government as you are discussing these
matters, we cannot simply rely on defensive measures. We cannot
keep patching software.
Ultimately, people who are making a calculation as to
whether to attack us have to believe there will be a response,
whether in the cyber field or sanctions or some other area, but
this is something that I am urging everyone. I don't have the
Secretary of Energy or the Secretary of Defense or the
President sitting here, so you are it. I hope you will take
this message back, because without a deterrent strategy we are
simply sitting ducks and there will be, not maybe, there will
be an attack unless we can deter our adversaries. I hope you
will take that message back.
Mr. Walker. Yes, sir, I will.
Senator King. Thank you.
Mr. Lee, you did some analysis on the Ukraine attack, is
that correct?
Mr. Lee. Yes, Senator.
Senator King. Rolling out of the response to that, Senator
Risch and I have introduced a bill that is here that
essentially is a back to the future bill because one of the
learnings, I understand, from the Ukraine attack was that they
had some places where there were analog switches and there was
human intervention that enabled them to recover more swiftly.
Our concern is that if we are totally digital that there,
as you, I think, testified a few minutes ago, there may be
unintentional provisions in there that allow us to not be
resilient and we have asked the national labs to look at some
of these ideas. Is that something that you think makes sense?
Mr. Lee. Thank you for your question, Senator.
And yes, I do. I was actually able to provide some comments
to the House companion for that. I thought it was very well
positioned. I thank you for your leadership on it. There are a
lot of----
Senator King. I did not know you were going to say that,
but I am delighted.
Mr. Lee. Yes, sir. So, teed up.
[Laughter.]
But there is a lot of functionality we're putting in that
doesn't make sense. This is not to say we need to go back, sort
of, to the Stone Age. We cannot stop innovation and we should
not. I mean, a lot of optimizations make sense for the
businesses that run, but there are certain locations and
certain functions of protection equipment and safety equipment
that doesn't need to be able to run minesweeper and solitaire
on it. They can do a more basic function which, in a sense,
makes it a much more difficult information and tax base for the
adversary.
So I do think it makes a lot of sense in the right
application.
Senator King. Well, I hope we can. I hope, Madam Chair,
that is a bill we can move.
Again, talk to the national labs, instruct the national
labs to work on this concept of where in the system, not the
entire system and not taking it back, but where in the system
could we place some of these elements that would be more
rudimentary, if you will, but would protect us from a
catastrophic cascading of software.
Mr. Walker, I hope that you can, and I am out of time, but
I hope that you will get back to us with thoughts as you are
standing up this office.
And one of the critical points here is the relationship
between the government and the private sector. We don't run the
electric grid. We can only help work with the utilities to do
so.
And to the extent that there are impediments to full
coordination and cooperation, in other words, things like
utilities concerns about liability or costs or how do we do
this in a way that is not the heavy hand of government, but is
a cooperative relationship.
What I am asking you is, if you observe and develop, and I
would ask this question also to the electric cooperative and to
the utility industry, generally, if there are impediments here,
please let us know what they are so that we can try to address
them, because this is a crucial issue and it has to be close
coordination without smothering is, I guess, the way I would
put it.
Mr. Walker. Sure.
And thank you for the point and I surely, if I run into an
impediment, I have not seen one yet, we have a fantastic
relationship with EEI, APPA and NRECA and then working through
the ONG Coordinating Council and the Electricity Subsector
Coordinating Council.
You know, we work through these issues. And the great part
about these forums is we've all got the same and similar
mission. We approach it from different angles, perhaps, but
we've got, the mission is to make sure that the energy
infrastructure is available when needed. And fortunately, we
have great partnerships with those members.
Senator King. I am out of time, but with the Chair's
indulgence, I hope one of your elements of your work will be
red teaming so that you can demonstrate to utilities where they
have problems.
Mr. Walker. Yes, we are.
We're taking a very progressive, proactive approach on many
of these issues.
Senator King. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator King.
Senator Daines.
Senator Daines. Thank you, Chair Murkowski, for this
hearing. I know that cybersecurity and the protection of the
electrical grid has been an important issue for this Committee,
and I hope we continue to press on it and do find some good
solutions to secure our grid. As you all know there are many
threats to the grid.
I first want to thank all the witnesses today for working
hard to continue to keep the lights on. Mr. Matheson, it's good
to have you here today, back on the Hill.
Mr. Matheson. Thank you.
Senator Daines. We served together in the House and I have
said the rural co-ops when they, the electric co-ops, when they
come to my office once a year, I am not sure there is a better
organization that represents a true cross section of our state
and is closest to I call it, kind of, the real Montana, as our
rural electric co-ops. I mean that sincerely.
Mr. Matheson. And that sure sounds good to me.
Senator Daines. Yes, but it is true, you know, when in
doubt speak the truth, my mom and dad always told me.
Mr. Matheson. Thank you.
Senator Daines. I do believe our rural co-ops are on the
front line in the defense of our grid, especially in rural
states like Montana.
Mr. Matheson. Yeah.
Senator Daines. But for the most part the co-ops you
represent do not have a lot of excess cash to spend on research
or new expensive technologies. And further, there isn't one
single solution as we know, in fact, I have quoted Senator King
when you said, ``There's no such thing as a silver bullet,
maybe silver buckshot.'' I think that is one of the best
takeaways I have had in a long time.
Senator King. Thank you, sir.
[Laughter.]
Senator Daines. Thank you.
Because co-ops are as diverse as any other business and
they span great distances, particularly in rural states like
Montana.
Mr. Matheson, do you have examples of some of the efforts
that co-ops are doing to address these challenges and how our
co-ops in Montana are working to protect local grids?
Mr. Matheson. Well, thank you, Senator, and you are correct
that there is a diverse set of circumstances of the over 900
electric co-ops in America. They're in very different
situations. Some are large. Some are small. Some have great
dispersed geographic areas. Some are more confined. So it's
definitely, there's not a one-size-fits-all. We preach that
often within the co-op community.
When it comes to the cyber threat there is one way I would
delineate between two categories of co-ops. There are about 120
co-ops in this country that really are connected really in the
bulk electric system and that is an area where the need to
comply with the NERC reliability standards and cybersecurity
standards comes into play. And it's where the real threat to
the grid exists, if you will. And those electric co-ops are
subject to the NERC audits. They are subject to that
regulation. They perform well in that regard and that's where
we like to use operational threats, that's where the co-ops
have, that set of co-ops, that set of co-ops have dealt with
that type of circumstance.
The other co-ops are the smaller distribution co-ops.
They're not necessarily directly with the bulk electric system
and a lot of the cyber threats that they see are more on the
information side, you know, on the personal information,
they're trying to hack in to get a social security number
whatever that might be.
And so, in that situation, again, we have large, small but
what we try to do is create a peer-to-peer relationship where
co-ops can compare, they can consolidate and share assets in
terms of taking on these threats because you said some of them
don't have a lot of extra money laying around.
And that's really what cooperatives are about. It's in
their name. They cooperate with each other. That's how our
sectors really try to take on this issue, even across the
diverse set of circumstances we have, we have a really
coordinated effort to make sure that we're sharing best
practices with each other to take on the cyber threat.
Senator Daines. Regarding the cyber threat, I recently
introduced the Cyber SAFETY Act which would, I think,
incentivize----
Mr. Matheson. Yeah.
Senator Daines. ----the private sector and generally we are
better off served with carrots versus sticks----
Mr. Matheson. Yeah.
Senator Daines. ----to incentivize the private sector to
innovate and commercialize the next generation of cybersecurity
technologies. Could you discuss how that bill might help rural
co-ops?
Mr. Matheson. The rural co-ops and, I might add, the rest
of the electric utility sector, support this bill. It's an
important bill for a number of reasons.
One is it removes an impediment that was in the original
Safety Act from sharing information where before we could
share, events had to be described as, declared as acts of
terrorism by Homeland Security. And this legislation that you
have introduced removes that requirement and it will facilitate
greater information sharing between the utility sector and the
relevant federal agencies.
The effort to produce more innovation in this area is
something we strongly support, and I think it's a step that
would go in the right direction.
Senator Daines. Thanks, Mr. Matheson.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Daines.
Senator Smith.
Senator Smith. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, for this
hearing and thank you, Ranking Member Cantwell. I am just also
very much appreciating your testimony today.
Senator Daines, you and I share an interest in rural
electric cooperatives, so I appreciate your questions on that
as well. Thank you, thanks very much.
I wanted to just touch quickly on a couple of things. By
now we have all seen the conclusion of the United States
intelligence community that the Russian government has engaged
in cyberattacks intended to sway the outcome of our election.
We also know that Russia has previously targeted energy
systems, twice taking down portions of the Ukrainian grid in
'15 and '16. And this is in addition to cyber events taking
place in the American energy sector such as the Russian malware
that was found on the computer of the Vermont utility. Senator
Kaine touched on this with our need for a deterrent strategy
for cyberattacks.
But Mr. Lee, I was struck by a point in your testimony that
I would like you to elaborate on a little bit where you said,
``We do not understand the industrial threat landscape and we
do not have enough trained professionals focusing on industrial
control cybersecurity.'' Could you just touch on that briefly
and also suggest what, if anything, the Federal Government can
do to address this shortage of cyber professionals in the
energy sector?
Mr. Lee. Thank you, Senator, for your question.
It comes down to an aspect of collection. So, going back to
the co-op discussion. I know of a number of co-ops that have
told me, well, we don't have cyber threats in our industrial
networks. And I'll ask, well, have you ever collected or looked
inside those networks? And the answer will be, well, no. Then
how would you know that they're not there because I've
absolutely seen nation-state level threats going into those
environments. And oftentimes, utilities and others will say,
well, I'm not a good threat, but that's the one thing you don't
get a vote on. I mean, I've seen adversaries training in those
environments, if nothing else.
I think it's important to address that our lack of
understanding of that threat landscape translates to also how
we are trying to defend against these attacks. A lot of our
best practices and standards and regulations are built off of
what would be applied to enterprise security networks at JP
Morgan and may not be appropriate for an electric utility. So I
think there is that balance and we have to understand that
collection gap.
One of the things that I think is most important is that
workforce development. And this is coming from a technology
vendor, I will tell you, the most important aspect is the
human. We use technology to, sort of, be a Band-Aid until we
get that.
On the human aspect by having better trained professional
industrial security, they will be able to make the right
decisions for their infrastructure.
We talk about information sharing, but the problem with
information sharing is always the ability to action it which is
at the utility or infrastructure site.
These professionals that we're training are very critical,
not only in K through 12, but also in the professional training
that we have out in the industry.
Senator Smith. So the big issue is, we ought to be focusing
on workforce development and that capacity. Okay, thank you
very much.
I have just a little bit more time and I would like to
address a question to the panel more broadly which is, we are
seeing this incredible transformation in the way energy is
generated and distributed and delivered in the United States
with much more distributed energy resources and smart grid
technologies coming online. I am really interested in how this
is impacting grid security overall. Is it making it worse? Is
it making it better? Could you just or could anybody on the
panel feel free to chime in about what challenges or benefits
does a more decentralized grid have when it comes to
cybersecurity?
Mr. Walker. I'll weigh in first.
Senator Smith. Thank you.
Mr. Walker. I think there's two components to the question.
The first is, the diversity of the portfolio on the
generation component, for instance, has and can have the
tendency, if it's modeled properly, we understand where it's
being placed and if it's strategically being placed, have the
benefit of adding security from the standpoint that there's
just more diversity and therefore, more iterations to be able
to go through.
However, I would offset that by the fact that by adding
certain levels of diversity, depending on what they are and the
case I'll point to is the heavy reliance due to economic
factors on natural gas has now placed natural gas in a place
where it's providing a significant amount of generation.
As I noted in my testimony, what that does is it more than
doubles the amount of critical infrastructure that has to be
protected simply because there's an entire pipeline now that
once was, it was a contributing factor, but it wasn't a
significantly contributing factor, to the generation of
electricity throughout the United States.
Senator Smith. Dr. Sanders, did you want to chime in here?
Dr. Sanders. I'll just add very quickly that I think that
Mr. Walker spoke well about the diversity in the energy and
generation portfolio.
But you brought up, Senator Smith, a very, very important
point. Much of the growth of the smart grid is on the
distribution side and much of the cybersecurity protections and
resiliency that's put in place is in the bulk electric power
grid. In fact, NERC and FERC rules only apply on the bulk
electric power grid side.
So as we see this very different kind of smart grid, it's
the architecture, it's the complexity of the architecture that
we need to understand and the kind of point solutions we've had
in the past just aren't going to apply.
Thank you.
Senator Smith. Thank you very much.
And Madam Chair, oh----
Mr. Matheson. I know we're over time----
Senator Smith. Yes, please.
Mr. Matheson. ----but just what I said within some earlier
comments about we appreciate the fact that there has been an
effort and we've received R&D efforts to look at small and
medium-sized utilities. We still think that that's an area that
merits continued emphasis and your questions have raised
another reason why that's the case.
Senator Smith. Thank you very much.
Madam Chair, I believe I am past my time. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Smith.
Senator Cantwell.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Madam Chair.
As former Director of National Intelligence, General
Clapper said, ``Cybersecurity is now more significant to our
national security than terrorism.''
So, last year along with all those numerous cyberattacks
and breaches, we see that more and more of our economy and
critical infrastructure is being attacked. I see everyone
nodding here.
Do we have the right threat assessment yet on our grid? Do
we have an accurate threat assessment, Mr. Lee?
Mr. Lee. I do not believe so.
Dr. Sanders. I do not believe so as well. I think that's a
capability that's absolutely critical to develop and the
maturity models we have today just are not sufficient.
Senator Cantwell. Anybody else?
Okay, so what do we need to do to get that? Mr. Lee?
Mr. Lee. When it comes to the threat landscape and
understanding the threats that pose, I do think private sector
is best positioned.
I always hear discussions about security clearances which I
think are incredibly important, especially for the strategic
level, but I think people are going to be dismayed when they
get a security clearance to go in for this magical intel about
the industrial threats and be met with nothing or very little.
A lot of the insights are in the private sector companies. My
insight at my firm today rivals what I have when I led the NSA
mission for it. So, I think to do proper work we have to work
together.
It's where I do think DOE's CESER will be important, work
with the ISAC is important, trying to understand what's going
on at the operational layer of the CRISP program as an example
is great, but it's for the enterprise networks. It doesn't
touch the operations networks and our ability to do that
together will give us that threat landscape.
Senator Cantwell. Dr. Endicott-Popovsky?
Dr. Endicott-Popovsky. Yes, I'd like to suggest that the
work that the National Guard is doing in Washington State has
relevance to your question.
I point to the recent work that they did with SnoPUD and
later with a utility in the middle of the state where the Guard
cooperated with the utility itself, with the Governor's
permission, to go in and do red teaming which is not easy
considering that you're working military to the private sector.
But that kind of effort, I think, was beneficial to the utility
itself where they understood where they were vulnerable when
they actually thought they were not.
It puts people in the mindset of the threat actor and one
of the things that could help this Committee, going back to
some conversation earlier about the threat actors involved, is
to understand the evolution and the motivation of the threat
actors. Many people still remember War Games and we had this
mental model that it's some kid at a computer that's hacking in
randomly and causing trouble. We very quickly saw organized
crime figuring out that it was easier to log into a bank than
to walk through the front doors with a gun and risk life and
limb.
And so, monetary motivations are really easy to grasp, but
for nation-state actors, it's more complex to figure out what
they're after. And that, I think, has made it challenging for
the private sector to really think about what's going on
because strategically they don't think militarily. They think
markets, they think economies but they've never been a military
target. And so, now they find themselves as a military target
and your strategic thinking has got to be different and this is
where those red teaming exercises with the Guard were so
helpful. Kilmer's bill is designed to replicate this in Major
Lowenberg's name across the country with all National Guards.
Senator Cantwell. We are finding our whole political system
is a target.
Dr. Endicott-Popovsky. Correct.
Senator Cantwell. And so, I think people think that when we
sent this letter a year ago that we were trying to echo, maybe,
some larger tone about the Russians. We are just dead serious
that this is a problem.
Dr. Endicott-Popovsky. And it's not just----
Senator Cantwell. And we are dead serious that we have to
come up with a threat assessment and work through it, as you
just said. I like the way you described it because you are
saying you have to understand what the threat actors'
motivation is and then you will understand the potentials and
possibilities for attack and what you want to do with it. I see
you all nodding there.
Dr. Endicott-Popovsky. And it's not just the Russians. It's
the North Koreans. It's the Chinese. The Russians, I think, are
particularly good at it, but we certainly have a variety of
nation-states that raid against our own infrastructure.
And I go back to World War II movies. What did we, as the
Allies, take out with the German attacks from our bombers? We
went for infrastructure. And now our infrastructure can be
breached at a distance. What would you do if you were a nation-
state actor? And so, getting your mind in the role of the
adversary, I think, is very helpful.
Senator Cantwell. Yes, Dr. Sanders?
Dr. Sanders. I think you asked a really excellent question.
I agree with Mr. Lee that we need more data collection. I
agree with my academic colleague on the right that red teams
can be useful. But I want to emphasize that red teams only can
find problems. They cannot give forward-looking assessments.
When we find a problem with a red team we, hopefully, fix
that problem. We do not know what our state is going forward.
So exactly what you're asking for is a credible way to
assess the situation, to understand the bad guys, to understand
the threat actors, but also to understand the users of the
system because the users of the system through incorrect use or
accidental use will also open up vulnerabilities.
So it's really three things we need to understand: we need
to understand the attackers, we need to understand the users of
the system and we critically need to understand the
architecture of the system because if the system is not
perfectly secure then we need to understand how that
architecture can create cascading failures or prevent cascading
failures. So these three things.
Senator Cantwell. Mr. Walker, is this something that the
Office can achieve? A threat assessment?
Mr. Walker. Yes, ma'am.
We work with the intelligence communities which DOE is part
of and the effort in understanding the different components
with regard to CRISP.
One of the things we've already done, and we're in the
early stage of development, is the development of a program, an
R&D program, called CYOTE which is Cybersecurity for the
Operational Technology Environment. So it goes to the OT
environment that Mr. Lee was speaking about before.
Much of the work in the past has been spent on the IT side
of this. We are now focused on the OT side of this and that
will provide us the situational awareness that we need to
understand the threat assessment, particularly on the OT side
which is where the vulnerability for the energy sector resides
the most.
Senator Cantwell. Do you think this squarely resides at
DOE?
Mr. Walker. I think that it needs to be a partnership
between private industry that owns the majority of
infrastructure throughout the United States as well as other
agency partners that have, particularly on the intelligence
side as well as DHS where they have much of the information
necessary for us to have a 360-degree view of the
vulnerability.
But we could work, obviously, through our EGCC and the ONG
SCC to get the oil, natural gas, private sector, as well as the
electricity subsector together and working with the energy
government side, the coordinating council which I co-chair with
DHS, to take this initiative on, move forward and come back
with a complete understanding of what we've got, as well as a
number of solutions.
Senator Cantwell. Well, I think, as the witnesses have all
said, we need to be serious about this. We need to get the
threat assessment done.
Mr. Walker. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Cantwell. We need to get an understanding of what
our workforce need is from that threat assessment.
What other additional focuses besides just hardening of our
infrastructure? What else do we need to be undertaking to make
sure that we can continue to grow in the ways that we want to
grow in an information age so that we can give our constituents
certainty?
I so appreciate it, Madam Chair. Thank you for the extended
time.
The Chairman. Very important questions.
It really goes to the broader issue. If we don't know what
our threat is, it is pretty tough to be able to address it and
the recognition that knowing what we know now is wonderful, but
how are we able to anticipate and project and basically stay
one step ahead of those that are looking to be destructive?
I just note that there is a report out this morning from
the House Science Committee that describes Russia's extensive
efforts to influence U.S. energy markets through divisive and
inflammatory posts on social media platforms, not unlike what
was going on at the time of the election. I, obviously, have
not read this. This just came out this morning but, again, it
just speaks to what we are dealing with and the, kind of, the
multiheaded issue that it is. How you pin down or can target
what that next threat is is anybody's guess here.
I wanted to ask just a few follow-on questions from some of
the things that have been raised by members this morning.
This is directed to you, Congressman Matheson. Last
Congress when we moved the FAST Act through we gave the Energy
Secretary these emergency authorities and we strengthened the
information sharing----
Mr. Matheson. Right.
The Chairman. ----with FOIA exemptions for our critical
infrastructure information. Have these FOIA exemptions been
helpful?
And then to Senator King's question. He mentioned the issue
of liability and the information sharing and how it can be
further improved if you have some assurances----
Mr. Matheson. Sure.
The Chairman. ----that the sensitive information is going
to be properly protected and free of liability concerns.
On the liability side of things, is this an area where we
need to legislate with that? Are you comfortable with what
we've put in place with the FAST Act and the provisions that we
have now with regards to the information sharing?
Mr. Matheson. First on the FAST Act and we were, we, of
course, supported the FAST Act as it moved through Congress.
Your question of how it's played out now in terms of the
FOIA exemptions, since this Act, since it's been implemented,
has been in its infancy. It's a little bit of an open question
still.
The Chairman. Because we don't really know.
Mr. Matheson. I have no concerns. I'm just saying I can't
tell you this is how it's worked in a really substantive way
because it's just too new to get that kind of answer.
The Chairman. Okay.
Mr. Matheson. But we did support the FAST Act as it was
moving through Congress, and we appreciate that it's a law. If
we have any issues with it, I'm sure we'll be communicating
that back.
On the liability, yeah, look, I think this is an issue
where there's always going to be an interestedness looking for
opportunities to make sure that information that we pass on to
our government partners has some level of protection and the
FAST Act clearly addressed some liability concerns that we had
and we appreciate that. Am I going to tell you we've got
everything off the table now? I'm sure this is going to be an
ongoing conversation as we look at going into practice, where
we have information transfer and making sure we have
appropriate liability protections, that's going to be an
ongoing conversation which is going to have to happen.
The Chairman. Assistant Secretary Walker, on the government
disclosure of data, we have the Critical Energy Infrastructure
Information, CEII, and this dealing with, basically, the
public's right to know certain information and I think we all
support levels of transparency. But when it comes to critical
infrastructure information, it seems reasonable that we want to
be somewhat circumspect here.
Is this an issue where we need to, again, look at FERC and
how it is able to release data in the format that it is right
now? Is this a policy, given what is going on out there in
terms of balancing the need to know with the need to be as
secure as possible, is this something that we need to revisit
possibly?
Mr. Walker. At this time, I don't think it is.
I recently had a meeting with our newly confirmed
Administrator for EIA with regard to much of the information
that is promulgated out through that department on a pretty
regular basis. And the reason I had met with her was because of
the significant work we're doing with developing this North
American interdependency model for the entire energy system.
Clearly one of the things that's been raised as we start
talking across the bouncing authorities and the regional
coordinators is to protect the flow of information.
That legislation actually enabled DOE to even develop a
policy. So we're actually in the process of working through
finalization of our policy with regard to the CEII that you
noted that was defined in the FAST Act.
So, again, I think the FAST Act provided for a very
significant insight into the needed collaboration between
Congress and the Executive Branch and all of the partners that
really have the purpose of protecting national security.
The Chairman. Good. Good.
Back to you, Mr. Matheson, and this is as it relates to
compliance with mandatory standards. You have said in your
testimony that the electric sector today is the only one with
mandatory and enforceable standards when it comes to
cybersecurity. We have noted that and, in fact, these
violations come with some fines, some pretty hefty fines.
Mr. Matheson. That's correct.
The Chairman. A million dollars per day per violation is
pretty significant.
Mr. Matheson. Yeah.
The Chairman. But we also have those who would suggest that
our utilities are overly focused on compliance. And so, you
have a situation that in an effort to meet the mandatory
standards that have been set out and avoid these financial
penalties, nobody wants to be paying a million dollars a day
per violation, that the electric sector is possibly losing
ground because they are focusing on the wrong thing here. They
are focusing on checking the box on the compliance, and they
miss the goal of cybersecurity protections. Do you think that
that is a real concern?
Mr. Matheson. You know, I would resist that, actually.
The Chairman. Okay.
Mr. Matheson. I believe that, you know, this is an industry
driven process through NERC to develop these standards. FERC,
of course, approves those standards.
Resilience, reliability have always been a concern for the
electric industry throughout its history. Cyber is the issue
that has evolved over the last several years as part of that
now, but no, I don't see any sense where the regulations or the
requirements that the NERC process has produced have diverted
our attention as an industry from focusing on what's most
important.
I'd like to think, instead, it's actually created the focus
on what we ought to be looking at. So, yeah, I would disagree
with that premise that it has caused some inappropriate
attention on compliance at the expense of legitimate
cybersecurity efforts.
The Chairman. Okay, fair enough.
Let me ask you one more question.
Mr. Matheson. Sure.
The Chairman. You were asked a question from Senator
Daines, specific to Montana and Montana's co-ops, but obviously
in my state, pretty small, pretty small entities.
Do you have confidence that our smaller co-ops, our smaller
entities, are capable of meeting the cyber challenges? It
doesn't make any difference if you are in Seattle or if you are
in Aniak, you still want to be able to rely on your energy
grid----
Mr. Matheson. Absolutely.
The Chairman. ----whether it is a little bit smaller or
not. Do you have a level of confidence that our smaller
entities are holding up okay?
Mr. Matheson. Yeah, I do have that confidence. And I'm
going to say what everyone else has said in this hearing that
this is an evolving threat so we never, even if we're confident
today, we still have to work for tomorrow.
I would offer Alaska specific, you know, there are--a lot
of our electric co-ops that are isolated. They're microgrids.
The Chairman. Yes.
Mr. Matheson. And we have one co-op in Alaska that's right
now working on implementing, sort of, a cybersecurity protocol
specifically for a microgrid distribution utility.
The Chairman. We think we are going to pioneer on this and
everyone is going to want to come up and see what we are doing.
Mr. Matheson. I'm all for that.
The Chairman. Yes.
Mr. Matheson. Because as we said earlier, every co-op is
different and municipal utilities have the same. And so, yeah,
I like to think that individually people are recognizing--these
are my circumstances, what should I do to take on cybersecurity
risk and mitigate in an appropriate way? And I see even smaller
co-ops doing just that.
The Chairman. Good. Good.
One last question and this relates to the workforce. I
appreciate what Senator Cantwell raised in her opening
statement and the work that you have done, Dr. Endicott-
Popovsky, in focusing just on this.
The training is absolutely key and critical. I think we
recognize that. I think we know that the training has to go all
the way down the chain, those who are making the decision at
the top, all the way down to the grid operators at the very,
very local level. I wrote down your comment here, Doctor, that
you said, ``there's no firewall for stupid here.'' I think we
all want to make sure that at the end of the day we have that
level of training and skill and expertise all the way down. Are
you convinced that we are getting the training all the way down
to that local grid operator?
Dr. Endicott-Popovsky. I think it's mixed, but I think that
is the trend. Every person that participates in some fashion is
a potential node in the network that can cause a problem.
I think Mr. Lee had mentioned something about a phishing
attack, clicking on a link and causing problems. I mean, this
is a very common issue and firewalls don't prevent that. You've
got people that need to know not to do that sort of thing. So,
you're absolutely right. There does have to be training down
through every level.
There are some organizations that are modeling some very
effective training. You have to avoid the yada, yada flavor of
the month. That happens in many organizations. I take asbestos
training. I take this. I take that.
And so, there's some ways to make training vivid and NIST
has some guidelines that they've published that are very good
at telling you how to be effective with your training. We use
them in our classes.
But somehow you have to get it visceral for people. We
could conduct a training here for the Committee, give you a
sense of what it's like to be the bad guys. Once you start to
think like bad guys, you start to see more things.
I had a student, internationally, one time write me a
little note--and I teach things that are safe to teach:
operations, business operations--but he wrote me a very telling
note, ``Why do you people in the West keep emphasizing the
technology when the bad guys''--and I'm thinking, how do you
know?--``when the bad guys are always looking for the person?''
So, if you put yourself in the role of the adversary, a
nation-state, if you have a particularly plum target, something
luscious that you can't resist. What lengths would you go to to
violate that system? How important is that to you? It's a
completely different mindset. We have to be right every time.
They only have to be right once. So it's a daunting problem and
we have complex systems and lots of participants. I don't think
we can expect to get it right every time. I think we have to
recognize vulnerabilities and risk. But awareness is the
beginning.
The Chairman. Yes.
Dr. Endicott-Popovsky. I'd be happy to provide some
materials, if you're interested.
The Chairman. I think it would be helpful for the
Committee.
Dr. Endicott-Popovsky. It's a passion of mine.
The Chairman. I can tell and that is appreciated.
Senator Cantwell, did you have any follow-on?
Senator Cantwell. I want to thank you.
The Chairman. I want to thank each of you. I think your
testimony has been very, very important. We have had a very
important discussion today, and we will look forward to
additional input for the record as some have promised.
We will look forward to working with you, Mr. Walker, in
this capacity here with a very keen focus on cyber.
I will note the Committee's appreciation for your
attendance here, Mr. Lee. Not only have you given us good
insight, but I'm told that your wife is expecting and has been
expecting to deliver for quite some time----
[Laughter.]
----and that your appearance here today was made possible
because hopefully, hopefully, she is going to have this labor--
--
Mr. Lee. Today.
The Chairman. ----commence----
Mr. Lee. So, she's amazing.
The Chairman. ----soon----
[Laughter.]
----after you are excused from this table. So hopefully if
she is watching now, she's got the go ahead----
[Laughter.]
----and she can deliver a beautiful baby safely into the
world. We congratulate you on that.
Mr. Lee. Thank you.
The Chairman. You have always got to end the Committee on a
happy note, so thank you all.
Dr. Endicott-Popovsky. Madam Chairman, I have a question.
The Chairman. Doctor?
Dr. Endicott-Popovsky. I did get a real-time update on
Senator Cassidy's question about the potential change in the
language requirements for K-12 in the State of Washington. They
are still considering computer language as a substitute for
foreign language. The original bill died, but there's still
residual interest in that concept, and it's being studied
throughout this year. And apparently, we're going to be meeting
with the Office of Superintendents here sometime in the near
future to discuss this issue. So can you pass that on to him?
The Chairman. We will share it with him and others as well.
Dr. Endicott-Popovsky. Alright, thank you.
The Chairman. We appreciate that.
Thank you all.
The Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:53 a.m. the hearing was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
----------
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]