- REGULATORY REFORM AND ROLLBACK: THE EFFECTS ON SMALL BUSINESSES
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
REGULATORY REFORM AND ROLLBACK: THE EFFECTS ON SMALL BUSINESSES
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD
MARCH 7, 2018
__________
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Small Business Committee Document Number 115-061
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
28-782
WASHINGTON : 2018
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
ROD BLUM, Iowa
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto Rico
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
JOHN CURTIS, Utah
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
STEPHANIE MURPHY, Florida
AL LAWSON, JR., Florida
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
VACANT
Kevin Fitzpatrick, Majority Staff Director
Jan Oliver, Majority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Adam Minehardt, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................
1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................
10
WITNESSES
Ms. Karen Harned, Executive Director, Small Business Legal
Center, National Federation of Independent Business,
Washington, DC.................................................
4
Mr. Patrick Hedren, Vice President, Labor, Legal & Regulatory
Policy, National Association of Manufacturers, Washington, DC..
5
Mr. Randy Noel, Chairman, National Association of Home Builders,
Washington, DC.................................................
7
Ms. Lisa Heinzerling, Justice William J. Brennan, Jr., Professor
of Law, Georgetown Law, Washington, DC.........................
9
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Ms. Karen Harned, Executive Director, Small Business Legal
Center, National Federation of Independent Business,
Washington, DC.............................................
27
Mr. Patrick Hedren, Vice President, Labor, Legal & Regulatory
Policy, National Association of Manufacturers, Washington,
DC.........................................................
38
Mr. Randy Noel, Chairman, National Association of Home
Builders, Washington, DC...................................
46
Ms. Lisa Heinzerling, Justice William J. Brennan, Jr.,
Professor of Law, Georgetown Law, Washington, DC...........
52
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
ABC - Associated Builders and Contractors....................
91
CUNA - Credit Union National Association.....................
92
REGULATORY REFORM AND ROLLBACK: THE EFFECTS ON SMALL BUSINESSES
----------
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 7, 2018
House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:04 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Steve Chabot
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Kelly, Blum, Comer,
Fitzpatrick, Marshall, Norman, Curtis, Velazquez, Evans,
Murphy, Lawson, Adams, Espaillat, and Schneider.
Chairman CHABOT. Good morning. I am going to go ahead and
call the hearing to order.
We have been contacted by the ranking member who has
indicated she is speaking right now in Financial Services and
she has given our authorization to go ahead and move ahead. I
know she is probably very anxious to hear my opening statement
and will be very disappointed not to hear it but we can provide
her with a copy of it.
We have some of our other most distinguished democratic
colleagues here as well to make sure that if I do anything
wrong they will call me on it, so I won't.
The Small Business Committee is here today to examine how
the current regulatory reform and rollback efforts by Congress
and the President have affected small businesses. As this
Committee knows all too well, federal regulations continue to
be one of the biggest challenges facing America's small
businesses, and this impacts their abilities to grow.
Every day, millions of small business owners across the
country are working hard to provide jobs and grow the economy.
But no matter what industry these small business owners are in,
they must navigate what is often a tangled web of complex,
confusing, and costly regulations. In fact, according to the
National Small Business Association, the average small business
owners spends at least $12,000 every year to deal with the
costs of regulation.
Even worse, a start-up company will spend on average over
$83,000 in regulatory costs alone in their first year. Small
business owners also spend a substantial amount of time
navigating regulations, with nearly half of them spending over
40 hours every year to handle new and existing regulations.
The evidence is clear: federal regulations continue to be a
problem for America's small business owners and they need to be
addressed.
There are federal laws in place that are designed to ensure
that agencies do not issue new regulations without careful
consideration. One is the Regulatory Flexibility Act, which
requires agencies to consider how their proposed regulations
will impact small entities. Another is the Congressional Review
Act, a tool that Congress can use to rescind a regulation on an
expedited track.
We have used the Congressional Review Act to overturn 15
regulations from the final months of the previous
administration that were rushed through the rulemaking process
as midnight regulations. Unfortunately, despite these
established procedures, small businesses are not being
adequately considered in the regulatory process.
The President has also taken important steps to reduce the
regulatory burden on small businesses, such as requiring two
regulations be repealed for every new regulation, which we
understand is actually quite more than two. I have heard it is
up to 22 for every new regulation coming out of here, so that
is definitely a step in the right direction. And establishing
regulatory reform task forces to force agencies to take a hard
look at regulations already on the books. And we are seeing
results. In the first 8 months of the President's tenure,
federal agencies added zero new regulatory costs and created
over $8 billion in cost savings.
That is a good start, but permanent, meaningful regulatory
reform needs to come from Congress. For too long, Federal
agencies have ignored their obligations and inappropriately
used loopholes in the rulemaking process to avoid considering
how their regulations will impact small businesses.
That's why I sponsored H.R. 33, the Small Business
Regulatory Flexibility Improvements Act of 2017, which would
strengthen the Regulatory Flexibility Act and ensure that
federal agencies actually examine how their new regulations
would impact small businesses and require them to consider
alternatives to reduce unnecessary costs and burdens.
This bill was included in a larger bill, H.R. 5, the
Regulatory Accountability Act of 2017, which passed the House
with a bipartisan vote. The Senate's counterpart bill, S. 584,
was voted out of Committee and is awaiting action by the full
Senate, as are many other things. I encourage the Senate to
vote on this critical, common sense legislation as soon as
possible, so we can provide meaningful regulatory relief to
America's small businesses.
Our witnesses today will provide important insight into how
the current regulatory reform and rollback efforts have been
working for America's small businesses.
I would normally now yield to the ranking member. I would
assume that my colleagues do not want to give her opening
statement, so we will let her opening statement be given at the
point that she gets here.
So I will then, let's see here. Let me get the appropriate
next thing here.
Okay. Well, we will go right into--I would assume that no
other Committee members have opening statements. If they do, I
would ask that they be submitted for the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
And I will take just a moment at this point to explain our
lighting system. The ranking member is very familiar with that
so this is not going to put her at any disadvantage I am sure.
We operate under the 5-minute rule. It is pretty simple.
There is a lighting system there. The green light will be on
for your first 4 minutes. And then the yellow light will come
on to let you know you have got a minute to wrap up, and then
the red light will come on at the end of 5 minutes, and we ask
you to stay within that time if at all possible. We will give
you a little leeway if you need to go on, but try to wrap up if
you see the light come on.
And I will now introduce our distinguished panel here this
morning.
Our first witness is Karen Harned, who is the Executive
Director of the Small Business Legal Center at the National
Federation of Independent Business (NFIB). Ms. Harned comments
regularly on small business cases before federal and state
courts. She has also written and testified before Congress,
including this Committee, on how regulations impact small
businesses and provides compliance assistance for small
business owners across the country.
Our next witness is Patrick Hedren, who is Vice President
for Labor, Legal, and Regulatory Policy at the National
Association of Manufacturers (NAM). NAM is the largest
manufacturing association in the country and represents small
manufacturers in all 50 states. Mr. Hedren advocates on behalf
of the Nation's manufacturers on specific regulations,
regulatory reform, and labor and employment policies.
Our third witness is Randy Noel, who is the current
Chairman at the National Association of Home Builders. Mr. Noel
also founded a custom homebuilding company in--is it La Place
or La Place?
Mr. NOEL. La Place.
Chairman CHABOT. La Place, okay. Louisiana, which has built
more than 1,000 custom homes in the greater New Orleans area.
He brings more than 30 years of experience to the residential
construction industry, and we appreciate all the testimony.
And I would ask my colleagues, would they like me to
introduce our final witness?
Okay. I will go ahead and do it.
Our final witness is Ms. Lisa--is it Heinzerling? It is?
Okay. Heinzerling.
Ms. Heinzerling is the Justice William J. Brennan, Jr.,
Professor of Law at Georgetown University Law Center. She
specializes in administrative law, environmental law, and food
law, and has several publications on these topics.
We welcome Ms. Heinzerling today as we do all our witness.
Ms. Harned, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENTS OF KAREN HARNED, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, SMALL BUSINESS
LEGAL CENTER, NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT BUSINESS;
PATRICK HEDREN, VICE PRESIDENT, LABOR, LEGAL & REGULATORY
POLICY, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF MANUFACTURERS; RANDY NOEL,
CHAIRMAN, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF HOME BUILDERS; LISA
HEINZERLING, JUSTICE WILLIAM J. BRENNAN, JR., PROFESSOR OF LAW,
GEORGETOWN LAW
STATEMENT OF KAREN R. HARNED
Ms. HARNED. Thank you, Chairman Chabot and Ranking Member
Velazquez.
On behalf of National Federation of Independent Business, I
appreciate the opportunity to testify today regarding the
positive impact deregulation is having and regulatory reform
can have on small business. Overzealous regulation is a
continuous concern for small business. The uncertainty caused
by future regulation effectively acts as a boot on the neck of
small business, negatively impacting their ability to grow and
plan for the future.
Since January 2009, government regulations and red tape
have been listed as among the top three problems for small
business owners according to NFIB Research Center's monthly
Small Business Economic Trends Survey. And in a small business
poll on regulations, NFIB found that almost half of small
businesses surveyed viewed regulation as a very serious or
somewhat serious problem.
Compliance costs, difficulty understanding regulatory
requirements, and extra paperwork are the key drivers of the
regulatory burdens on small business. Understanding how to
comply with regulations is a bigger problem for those firms
with one to nine employees, since 72 percent of small business
owners in that cohort try to figure out how to comply
themselves, as opposed to assigning that task to somebody else.
Finally, NFIB's research shows that it is the volume of
regulations that poses the largest problem for 55 percent of
small employers, as compared to 37 percent who are most
troubled by a few specific regulations.
America's small business owners view President Trump's
commitment to rolling back unnecessary burdensome and
duplicative regulation as one of his administration's greatest
accomplishments in his first year. Every president as
contributed to the problem of overregulation, with tens of
thousands of pages being added to the Federal Register every
year, yet the Trump administration, to its great credit, has
reversed that trend, reducing the number of pages in the
Federal Register by 36 percent.
For fiscal year 2017, President Trump promised to eliminate
two regulations for every new one proposed, but the
administration exceeded that goal, eliminating 22 regulations
for every new regulatory action.
The Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs
Administrator Neomi Rao has directed each Federal agency to
have a net reduction in total incremental regulatory costs for
fiscal year 2018. Congress has also provided significant relief
by rejecting 15 burdensome regulations using its authority
under the Congressional Review Act.
NFIB commends this Committee and the House of
Representatives for passing several regulatory reforms,
including H.R. 5, the Regulatory Accountability Act which, as
the chairman mentions, contains important reforms for small
business and Title III, the Small Business Regulatory
Flexibility Improvements Act.
As H.R. 5 requires, NFIB supports the following regulatory
reforms that we believe would make the regulatory process more
effective, transparent, and accountable. NFIB believes that
every agency should be required to comply with SBREFA and
convene a Small Business Advocacy Review Panel before every
economically significant rule is promulgated.
NFIB supports reforms that would account for the indirect
cost of regulation on small business. Federal agencies often
proclaim the indirect benefits of their proposals but they
decline to analyze and make publicly available the indirect
cost to consumers. NFIB believes judicial review of RFA
compliance should be available during the proposed rule stage.
NFIB also supports reforms that would waive first-time
paperwork violations, require agencies to conduct more vigorous
cost-benefit analysis, end Chevron Deference, provide for
third-party review of RFA analyses, codify Executive Order
13563, and increase agency focus on compliance assistance.
Finally, much work still needs to be done to ensure that
agencies comply with existing law and do not view SBREFA as
simply just another box to be checked.
Small businesses are the engine of our economy, yet over
the last several years, the crushing weight of regulation has
used up valuable human and financial capital which is in short
supply for America's small business owners. NFIB looks forward
to working with Congress to pass regulatory reforms that would
improve current law and level the regulatory playing field for
small business.
Thank you for inviting me to testify, and I look forward to
answering any questions you may have.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
The ranking member has indicated to me that she would like
to give her opening statement after all the witnesses have
testified.
So Mr. Hedren, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF PATRICK HEDREN
Mr. HEDREN. Chairman Chabot, Ranking member Velazquez, and
members of the Committee, thank you very much. It is an honor
to testify in front of you today about the impact of regulatory
reform on small manufacturers in the United States.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the kind introduction earlier.
I would like to focus my remarks on three key messages.
First, when it comes to small business impacts, it is not
just the heat, it is the humidity. Small manufacturers worry
about the accumulation over time of overlapping and even
conflicting rules, not just the big ticket items.
Second, reducing burdens on small manufacturers, it is not
about the number of rules that come off the books, but it is
about the way the executive branch approaches regulation.
And third, right now is an ideal time for Congress and the
executive branch to reflect on what works and to reform the
things that do not work.
Today's hearing comes at a very interesting time for
regulatory policy in general. Last year saw some of the biggest
shifts in regulatory policy that I am aware of. Congress
passed, Mr. Chairman, as you mentioned, and the President
signed 15 Congressional Review Act resolutions. That is about
15 times as many as ever before. The President issued Executive
Order 13771, which calls on agencies to remove two regulations
for each new one that they issue and to adhere to a net zero
budget. And while agencies begin to reevaluate their existing
rules with an eye toward reform, new major rulemaking has
slowed dramatically.
The truth as we see it is that reforming ineffective and
costly regulations is painstaking work, and we see care and
deliberation as a good thing. But our members are optimistic
because of relatively calmer waters in this space and they are
investing as a result.
In our most recently quarterly outlook survey at the end of
2017, 94.6 percent of NAM's members said that they were
positive about their own company's outlook. That is an all-time
high for that survey. That number actually made headlines.
For regulatory geeks like myself, the fourth quarter survey
also highlighted some interesting points. Over a third of
respondents said that they spend at least 7 hours per week on
regulatory paperwork, and almost a quarter spend over 10 hours.
Four in 10 felt like they had enough guidance on how to comply
with the regulations to which they are subject. Over half need
to retain a law firm to help them keep up with paperwork. And
at the same time, manufacturers are not anti-regulation. Over
three-quarters told us that smart regulations are essential to
ensure a level playing field.
Our members want to see regulations that make sense for how
small and medium-size manufacturers work in the real world, and
we know that this is a bipartisan goal.
Regulatory policy is always contentious, however, because
the benefits of regulation are usually diffused while the
burdens are usually concentrated. Some sectors like our own
bear a major share of overall regulatory costs in the economy
and our smaller members experience regulation on almost a
personal level, and certainly to a greater degree.
Despite bipartisan agreement that we need to do a better
job in this space, we worry that both sides are talking past
each other. Rulemaking by its nature should be about finding
the right balance between the goals to be achieved and the
price to be paid. So reforming the regulatory system is really
about putting in place basic procedures to ensure that agencies
do their best to achieve that balance. They should understand
the parties they are regulating. They should evaluate
meaningful alternatives. And they should try to maximize the
net benefits of their rules.
Executive Order 13771 has been in effect for about a year
now, and since then, agencies have issued about half as many
significant rule documents as under Presidents Bush and Obama
in a similar time period. In fact, last year, the
administration published 23 deregulatory actions with estimated
cost savings.
Through the end of fiscal year 2017, the administration
wrapped up 67 deregulatory actions all together. These numbers
do not really show a slash-and-burn approach to deregulation.
Instead, they show a more methodical approach taking place
through the rulemaking process, and that approach takes time.
But maybe the most noteworthy number from last year is
three, and that is the number of new final rules with over $100
million in burdens on industry which is a historic low.
So in light of what we have seen in the past year, we
believe there are plenty of opportunities to implement further
reforms, and now is an ideal time to do so. This Committee has
done great work this year, last year, and in prior years, to
propose necessary reforms that would close loopholes in the
Regulatory Flexibility Act. This work is critical for small and
medium-size manufacturers because agencies too often avoid
analyzing small burden impacts or business impacts despite the
original intent of Congress.
But beyond legislation such as the Small Business
Regulatory Flexibility Improvements Act, Congress should also
focus on meaningful bipartisan reforms that may not be
explicitly focused on small business but would nevertheless
have an important impact on those businesses by driving better
regulatory outcomes overall.
The NAM urges the Committee to continue developing and
promoting sensible, bipartisan legislation that will give small
business a true voice and seat at the table. Thank you for your
invitation again to speak today and for your attention on small
and medium-size manufacturers across the country.
I look forward to answering any questions you may have.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Noel, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF RANDY NOEL
Mr. NOEL. Thank you. I am pleased to be here on behalf of
the National Association of Home Builders on Regulatory Reform
and Rollback: The Effects on Small Businesses.
My name is Randy Noel, and I am a second-generation home
builder from La Place, Louisiana, with more than 30 years of
experience. I understand how difficult and costly it can be to
comply with government regulations. But it is not just costly
for me and my business. These costs also deny Americans the
opportunity to own a home.
Government regulations account for nearly 25 percent of the
cost of a new single family home, and that places is 14 million
American households out of the market for a new home.
I am happy to report that things are getting better. In its
first year, the administration has taken major steps to reduce
the relentless and costly overregulation of American industry.
We have seen more than 20 significant regulatory changes that
will benefit homeowners and home buyers.
I wish to focus on the progress that has already been made
in reducing regulatory burdens for small businesses in our
industry, the regulatory headwinds that still linger, and what
steps should be taken to fix our broken regulatory rulemaking
system.
I would like to highlight one particularly unnecessary
regulation the administration has ended. The previous
administration issued an executive order creating a new Federal
flood risk management standard, which required agencies to
develop new regulations based on an expanded floodplain zone.
The owners would have had no way of knowing if they had to
comply with the new floodplain rules because maps of the
expanded floodplain did not exist. They still do not exist.
Although FEMA deals with flood insurance, this would have
greatly affected HUD's mortgage programs. Specifically,
homeowners within these unknown, unmapped, potential flood
plains may have lost access to FHA mortgage insurance,
jeopardizing affordable housing opportunities for low to
moderate income working class families. We are grateful for
this administration's decision to rescind the executive order,
and HUD has withdrawn its proposed regulations.
Even with the progress we have seen this year, significant
work remains to peel back and revisit the accumulated layers of
regulations. Let me highlight one of these regulations from my
written statement.
EPA's Lead Renovation Repair and Painting program. This
rule addresses lead-based paint hazards created by renovation,
repair, and painting activities that disturb lead-based paint
in homes built before 1978. We all recognize the need to
protect the health of our children, but this regulation is
needlessly burdensome. For example, does it not make sense to
ensure that homeowners and remodelers have an easy method to
test their older home for lead paint? Yet, more than 5 years
after the EPA said a test kit would be ready, we still lack a
reliable, commercially available testing kit. This means
remodelers may have to assume that a home has lead paint, which
means a more costly bill to their client, which in turn may
discourage homeowners from using a professional remodeler, one
that has been trained. Or perhaps do the jobs themselves and
risk exposure to lead paint.
We should and must make fixes to existing regulations. But
at the end of the day, that amounts to little more than a Band-
Aid. We need to reform our regulatory process to deal with
these problems before, not after, the regulation is crafted.
And we need to increase the level of congressional oversight
over those agencies. This is the only sure way to safeguard
against future bad regulation.
Fortunately, there is a solution. Legislation has already
passed this chamber that would go fix our regulatory system.
The Regulatory Accountability Act, the Regulatory Flexibility
Improvements Act, and the Regulations from the Executive in
Need of Scrutiny Act, more commonly known as the REINS Act.
NFIB will continue to urge the Senate to take up these
important bills.
I personally believe enacting the REINS Act is a lynchpin
to reforming our regulatory process. It restores much needed
congressional oversight to the rulemaking process. Without
meaningful congressional oversight, poorly crafted rules often
go into place, and businesses are forced to divert precious
resources to lengthy and uncertain legal challenges.
While the REINS Act returns control of the regulatory
process to the people, the Regulatory Accountability Act
repairs the process of developing regulations. And the
Regulatory Flexibility Improvement Act ensures that agencies
are considering the full impact of a proposed regulation on
small businesses. Taken together, these reforms will ensure we
protect the environment and our workers while also adding fuel
to the engine of economic growth that America's small business
represents.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Ms. Heinzerling, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF LISA HEINZERLING
Ms. HEINZERLING. Thank you for the opportunity to testify
before you today.
President Trump has made deregulation a central goal of his
domestic policy. He has directed agencies to take an ax to
existing regulations and has placed strict limits on the
development of new regulations.
Agencies have responded by delaying, suspending, and
revoking existing regulations. All across the government, rules
and policies that took years to develop have been put off or
wiped out. These rules and policies address issues as important
and diverse as climate change, consumer deception, airline
safety, chemical accidents, food safety, sexual assault, and
more. In a great many cases, the rules and policies have been
put off or rejected with little of the legally required
attention to statutory constraints, factual records, or
procedural frameworks. As a consequence, Federal courts have
rejected the administration's attempts to delay or suspend
existing rules on such matters as lead paint, energy
efficiency, and methane emissions from oil and gas facilities.
Two weeks ago, for example, a Federal district court in
California granted a preliminary injunction against the
Department of Interior's suspension of a rule that was intended
to reduce waste of natural gas from oil and gas facilities on
public lands. Particularly pertinent in today's hearing, the
court found that the Department's attempt to justify the
suspension based on the rule's purported effects on small
businesses was not supported by the factual evidence.
Agencies have also responded to the President's
deregulatory agenda by putting off or canceling new regulatory
initiatives. Under the two-for-one executive order, the Office
of Management and Budget is empowered to set regulatory budgets
for the executive agencies. These are not ordinary budgets in
which agencies have a limit on what they can spend to do their
work. With regulatory budgets, agencies have a limit on what
they can require private parties to spend to alleviate the
problems the agencies have been charged by statute with
addressing. For fiscal year 2018, OMB has given the agencies
regulatory budgets that are in every case zero or negative.
At the current rate of annual cost savings from all
deregulatory efforts across all agencies, it would take the
entire executive branch 2 or 3 years to accumulate cost savings
sufficient to offset the cost of just one specific rule from
one agency.
Under this executive order as well, a reduction in
regulatory costs is considered a success no matter how dearly
we pay for it in benefits far gone. Consider again the
regulatory budgets OMB has set for this fiscal year. The
Department of Energy takes one of the biggest hits in OMB's
regulatory budget. It must find $80 million in savings from
discarded rules before it may spend a single dollar on new
regulation, at which point it must still offset each dollar
spent with reductions elsewhere. However, according to OMB
itself, the Department of Energy is one of the star performers
in the government when one compares the regulatory costs it
imposes to the regulatory benefits it reaps for the public. The
Department's regulations on energy efficiency over a 10-year
period produced net benefits of as much as $31 billion.
Consider, too, the example of the Environmental Protection
Agency, no agency in this administration has taken a bigger ax
to existing regulatory programs than the EPA. Yet, OMB has
reported that EPA rules outperform the rules of all other
agencies combined in the Federal government in terms of
producing net monetized benefits. OMB estimates from 2006 to
2016, EPA regulations provided as much as $750 billion in
benefits measured in terms of lives saved, illnesses averted,
and environmental degradation reduced, while imposing no more
than $65 billion in costs. These are the kinds of programs the
administration has slated for especially deep cuts. It makes no
sense.
As for the effects of the deregulatory surge on small
businesses, make no mistake. The war on regulation is being
conducted at the behest of some of the largest corporations in
this country and its benefits are being delivered primarily to
them. In fact, many of the administration's deregulatory
actions not only fail to target their savings to small
businesses, but they affirmatively harm small entities by
withdrawing regulatory protections that would have benefitted
them. In evaluating the deregulatory initiatives of this
administration, one cannot simply assume that small entities
are benefitted when regulations are withdrawn. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
And before I recognize the ranking member, I have noticed
that one of our former members of Congress here who had a very
distinguished career representing the state of Missouri, Kenny
Hulshof is in the back of the room over here. So Kenny,
welcome.
And I would now like to recognize the ranking member for
the purpose of making her opening statement before we move to
regular order on questions.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to
all the witnesses for being here today.
Regulations serve an important purpose in the world we live
in. From the food we eat to the air we breathe, government
regulations serve the primary purpose of helping to keep ups
all safe.
Yet, some regulations, even those with noble public safety
reasons, also place an added burden on the public. Most
prevalent among them are regulations which place an excessive
compliance burden on small business owners.
Small businesses face a greater burden of federal
regulatory costs than their larger competitors, something
federal agencies must consider when crafting regulations.
On this committee, we are here to help ensure small
businesses and entrepreneurs have an economic environment where
they can grow and flourish.
That is why we take very seriously the responsibility posed
by the Regulatory Flexibility Act and the Small Business
Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act.
It is critical that agencies are considering the economic
impact of their regulations and paperwork requirements on small
firms. At the same time, Congress needs to know what steps are
needed to help agencies achieve this goal.
Transparency and communication are the key to an effective
system of regulation. To have efficient regulations, we must
have a strong dialogue between regulators and the businesses
before rules are promulgated. An open line of communication can
ensure that regulations are written in a common sense way which
minimizes unnecessary burdens for small businesses.
We need to be sure small firms have an opportunity to weigh
in on any changes made to the rulemaking process.
Whether it is embracing technology, working to synchronize
and coordinate at all levels of government, or improving
communication, it is an important discussion we must have.
Congress plays a critical role in ensuring regulations are
not too burdensome, while at the same time protecting the
American public. It is therefore irresponsible for the
legislative or the executive branch to recklessly change or get
rid of regulations without thoroughly looking at the impact and
the long-term consequences.
Although on its face, Executive Order 13771, which says
that for every new regulation issued, at least two prior
regulations should be identified for elimination, may seem like
a good idea, it has very real impacts on the lives of consumers
and small business owners. For instance, offshore drilling on
our coasts not only harms the environment; it leaves small
businesses that rely on tourisms subject to potential harm and
lost revenue. Immediately we saw the governor of Florida
sending a letter to President Trump regarding how opening
offshore drilling will have an impact on a major industry
activity, tourism, in not only Florida, but also New Jersey.
We must collaborate to thoughtfully produce streamlined
regulations for small firms, while keeping in mind our ultimate
goal, to protect consumers and public safety.
I look forward to hearing from each of you about how we can
improve our current regulatory system and promote long-term
economic growth.
I once again thank the witnesses for being here.
And I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back.
And I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes to begin the
questioning. And I will begin with you, Ms. Harned.
In your testimony, you stated that small business owners
are frustrated by federal regulations and that early engagement
in the process is key for small business owners. What are the
current tools that small business owners can use to engage in
the regulatory process? And are your members usually aware of
these tools?
Ms. HARNED. Right. So really SBREFA I guess has provided
the best tools in that, you know, especially for the
significant regulations where SBREFA applies EPA and OSHA,
there is a chance for small business owners to participate on
the Small Business Advocacy Review panels and really walk the
regulators how a regulation is going to impact them. We think
that is a great model that honestly needs to be replicated. We
have had members that have done that and seen good results
because really why we are so supportive of early engagement is
we find still to this day, I mean, I have been at NFIB 16
years, that the biggest challenge all of us face is trying to
educate the regulators on what it actually means to be a small
business owner and understanding that they do not have a
general counsel if they have got five employees. They may not
even have an attorney they could call to figure out what is
going on. More broadly beyond where SBREFA applies currently,
you know, obviously there is the comment process. We will
comment on their behalf at NFIB, and we do again have a number
of members that will engage that as well if they find out about
it.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Hedren, I will go to you next.
We know that notice and comment is an important tool that
small businesses can use to ensure their concerns are being
heard during the rulemaking process. Do you believe that notice
and comment is enough? Or are there still other problems that
prevent small businesses from being able to fully participate
in the rulemaking process?
Mr. HEDREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for that question.
I would first start by echoing what Karen said. I think
that this is a challenging issue because with notice and
comment, everybody in the country, and in fact, even if you are
not in the country you have an ability to put a comment into
the record for review by the agency and later, potentially, by
a court. That is an incredibly important part of the engagement
process.
For smaller businesses, however, they are facing a lot of
different issues just to kind of get to that point. And one of
them is even understanding that something is taking place. So
folks like ourselves at this table may have an advantage in
hearing when an agency starts to act and undertake a new
rulemaking that small businesses just are not really watching
for. I mean, they are watching their bottom line. They are
investing. They are growing. And not hopefully reading the
Federal Register each day like we do.
So the tools I think that we need and will benefit from are
about greater outreach and SBA Office of Advocacy does an
awesome job with reaching out to companies around the country
and pulling together roundtables and helping them jump into the
process. But we also need tools that enable and encourage and
even force agencies to pay attention to these impacts and to
affirmatively go out, find them, and incorporate them into
their decision-making.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Noel, I will go to you next here. In your testimony,
you mentioned the Waters of the United States rule as an
example of a rule that was deeply flawed but has been withdrawn
and is currently being rewritten. What advice do you have for
the agencies to make sure small business owners are heard while
they are rewriting various rules? This rule in particular,
actually.
Mr. NOEL. Well, it is important that, of course, they be
part of the rewriting of the definition of the Waters of the
U.S. It is a pretty murky subject to begin with. But the
flipside of that is you need to make sure that they have access
to property so they can continue to have their business.
I have participated in some roundtables and discussions
about issues like Waters of the U.S., and one of the things
from a frustrating point of view from somebody in the industry
is it seems that it falls on deaf ears when it comes time for
the rule or regulation to come out. There does not seem to be a
whole lot of accountability to reacting to the information that
they receive, which discourages people to give them the
information.
Clearly, Waters of the U.S. impacts our industry in
particular, and we are having a very, very difficult time
getting to a point where we have affordable housing folks, so
much so that most of the large urban areas across the country
are beginning to talk about the affordable housing crisis that
they are having. And a big piece of that was the definition of
the Waters of the U.S. When you have to go through a 404 permit
to get a wetlands permit to develop a piece of property, it is
an expensive and long piece of work you have to do. So it is
very important that the EPA listen to us. They have been
listening to us. We are real proud that Secretary Pruitt has
allowed us to participate in that discussion, and we think we
can get to a place where it works for everybody.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Ms. Heinzerling, unfortunately, my time has run out, so I
apologize for not getting a question to you. But as I say, my
time has expired, and the ranking member is recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. Professor, when we go through the
regulations, whether on this committee or when we hear about a
discussion or debate on regulations, it seems like the focus is
always on the complying costs associated with them. But many
regulations benefit small businesses, both large and small,
especially when it comes to increasing the productivity of
their employees. Can you elaborate on this perspective?
Ms. HEINZERLING. Yes. There is a distressing focus these
days on costs alone and not on the benefits of regulation. And
those benefits can take a huge variety of forms. And sometimes
the regulations, in fact, directly pit large businesses against
small businesses. And in that case, we miss, if we simply take
a cleaver to the regulation, we miss the benefits for small
businesses.
So just to give you one example, the Department of
Agriculture had been in the midst of developing a rule that
would have protected small farmers against the anticompetitive
practices of the large meat industry, and that rule has been
withdrawn. And that is just one example of a case where we have
regulations that not only indirectly benefit small businesses,
which I would say a wide variety of regulations do, just like
the tourism effects that you were talking about, but that
directly are aimed at protecting them.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. Noel, Hurricane Harvey devastated Texas where there are
very relaxed building codes. In fact, it is just one of four
states along the Gulf and Atlantic Coast with no mandatory
statewide building codes and no program to license building
officials. That has put insurers, who favor stricter building
codes and fewer homes in risky locations against homebuilders
who want to ease rules. How do we balance these competing
regulatory demands to protect small construction firms, small
insurance companies, and consumers at the same time?
Mr. NOEL. Sure. Thanks for that question. As you know, I am
from right outside of New Orleans, and we actually had that
issue after Katrina. And I actually was actively involved with
the Louisiana Home Builders Association passing a statewide
uniform building code that was enforced thanks to a great deal
of help from the Federal government to help fund the standup
issues.
Texas does have codes in certain areas. They have adopted
the International Residential Code, particularly those on the
coast are building to that. Floodplain maps, they comply with
that. Builders do not oppose building codes. They want
reasonable building codes that achieve what they want to
achieve. You want to keep a house safe. You want to make sure
that the homeowner has a place to go home to after a storm. But
the flipside of that is to do it as affordable as you possibly
can because what we do not want to have is to make housing so
unaffordable that they are living in substandard housing that
is not built----
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. But do you not think that it does not
provide a level playing field? We are not talking about not
supporting rules or codes, but it eased those rules. And for
insurance to take the risk of providing insurance for
construction that might not provide a steady home, how do you
reconcile that?
Mr. NOEL. Well, in Louisiana, we passed the code so that
would not happen. And the insurance companies were a large
driver of that.
Texas has a building code, and I suspect there may be some
states that do not. I could get back to you on that. But for
the largest part, the National Association of Home Builders, in
particular, are very, very active in the adoption of building
codes across the country because exactly what you say is the
level playing field is not there if you have some people who
are not building to codes and people building to codes.
Also, most of our members across the country support
licensing of builders, and actually, I think Texas had that at
one time and they undid it. But the same thing as you point
out. Let's have some consistency so the insurance companies
know what their actuarial risk is basing their premiums on.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. NOEL. So for the most part I think our members would
support building codes across the country.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Professor, do you have any comment on that question?
Ms. HEINZERLING. No.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back.
The gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Kelly, who is the
chairman of the Subcommittee on Investigations, Oversight, and
Regulations, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. KELLY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to the
ranking member. Thank you, witnesses, for testifying today. And
thank you, Mr. Noel, for not having an accent.
During my 3 years in Congress, I have never once had small
businesses--and I stayed very active in my district and very
active with my small businesses, and I have been on this
Committee my entire time. And not once have I heard any of my
small business owners say I wish you guys in Congress or I wish
administrative agencies would enact more rules and regulations.
Not once have I heard that. I have heard the opposite of that
many, many times. In my opinion, every rule that is enacted
should have to get congressional approval and should not be--so
I would go further than the REINS Act. I think any rule should
have to be approved by Congress. I think we have advocate our
responsibility to rulemaking organizations which are not
elected by the people.
The costs to comply for small businesses are extremely over
burdensome. They do not know what rules they have to. They do
not have the staff, the training. They cannot afford to hire
professionals to do those things, so they become really, many
times I feel the administrative agencies, when they enact
rules, are making regulations or solutions in search of a
problem. They do not have a problem that they are trying to
fix.
That being said, Mr. Hedren, you note in your testimony
that there is a record high optimism in the manufacturing
industry. Is the reduction in new regulations part of the
reason for that optimism?
Mr. HEDREN. Thank you very much for that question,
congressman. I think, from our perspective, there certainly is
a component of that. I think that manufacturing optimism is
supported by the general regulatory environment right now. And
what we see I think most notably in that is there is a
slowdown. So for particularly small and medium-size
manufacturers, they have an opportunity to catch their breath
and understand a little bit about what is going on and what is
coming at them. And before, you know, you may have periods of
time in which there are four or five new rules a month that
might impact you that you have to learn how to comply with. And
while our members completely understand the benefits that those
rules may bring, it is still pretty tough to keep up with.
Mr. KELLY. Mr. Noel, as a small business owner, do you feel
like your voice is being adequately heard in the Federal
rulemaking process through the comments and things? Do you feel
like yours is properly heard?
Mr. NOEL. From a personal perspective, I have dealt with
placement of levies with the Army Corps of Engineers, the
overtime rule. We sat on some roundtables for those things, and
I have got to be honest. When I got the reports, because we
participated they sent us reports, and I read the reports, I
was a little disappointed that very little of what the
community had said was overshadowed by all these outside
entities that have never been to our area, comments in that
same report, and that the agency reacted to not the community
as much as they did to those outside entities.
Normally, the way a small business in my industry finds out
about a rule or regulation is the Federal employee walks onto
the jobsite and cites them because they do not have the proper
poster up or they do not have the proper paperwork in a file.
Not that they have polluted anything but because they do not
follow this long list of rules they do not have time to read
because they are trying to work for a living. That is how they
usually find out about it.
Mr. KELLY. Thank you. And my experience has been comments
are not properly paid attention to, and that in many cases,
agencies have improperly influenced certain groups to comment
so that they can get the correct comments for the rule that
they want to enact.
Ms. Harned, if I can ask you a question. Do you feel like,
or what do you think new can do that would require the agencies
to analyze the impact on small businesses better? I think many
times they do look at the large business because they can
afford to, so it puts small business out. What can we do to
analyze the second and third order effects to small businesses
of all regulations?
Ms. HARNED. Yeah. This is something I have thought about a
lot because it is hard, especially with the small businesses we
are trying to get out, the 10 and unders, because they are busy
running their business. I think we need to look at it is 2018,
new technologies, ways to, you know, conference calls. People
do not necessarily have to show up for a meeting. But also,
help them understand here is what this rule is going to do,
because many times they may not even understand they are
impacted until after the fact. And so I think we need to just
be much more aggressive in outreach, quite frankly. And if
there are ways to make the agencies accountable to do just
that, that is going to have a better result where you are not
going to have unintended consequences with so many of these
rules that you see.
Mr. KELLY. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back.
The gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Adams, who is the
ranking member of the Subcommittee on Investigations,
Oversight, and Regulations, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Ranking
Member Velazquez, for hosting the hearing today. And thank you
to our folks here for your testimony.
Ms. Heinzerling, is that correct?
Ms. HEINZERLING. Yes.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay. What are the implications for OMB's plan
giving agencies regulatory budgets of zero or subzero for
fiscal year 2018?
Ms. HEINZERLING. They are dire.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay.
Ms. HEINZERLING. And I think that here in Congress, one of
the things that can go unremarked sometimes is that agencies
are entirely creates of statutes. The problems that they
address are identified by Congress. Agencies are created by
Congress. They are funded by Congress. They are charged by
Congress. And so if we have a year in which we are on pace to
have no major rules enacted, that means that some instruction
from Congress is going unheeded by the agencies. And so to talk
about accountability on the part of agencies without talking
about the vast amount of unaccountability that is happening
today because instructions are not being followed I think is
one sided. And so I think the consequences are dire both in
terms of attention to legal requirements and more profoundly in
terms of attention to the kinds of concerns about public health
and safety and the environment and consumer deception and on
down the line that rules are intended to serve.
Ms. ADAMS. All right. Is it possible that a very important
regulation will not get implemented or will get implemented at
the cost of two other regulations that should also stay in
effect?
Ms. HEINZERLING. I believe it is a certainty. If they
follow those regulatory budgets, as I said, it is hard to find
a major rule that could be achieved within this year given the
level of cost versus----
Ms. ADAMS. Okay. You know, we hear a lot about the
regulatory environment in this Committee and I know that there
are some areas that can be improved. Can you speak to the
overlap between the state and Federal regulations and which has
a greater impact on small firms?
Ms. HEINZERLING. I think this is a hugely important
question, and I think one of the striking features of many of
the studies that talk about the effects of regulation on small
businesses is that they do not separate out what are the
regulatory costs from the Federal government versus what are
the costs by the state government, or indeed, even local
governments. And many of the costs that we see are actually
imposed by those other entities.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay. And this question will be for any of the
other panelists that want to speak to it.
The Paperwork Reduction Act was amended in 1995 to require
OMB to set specific goals for reducing the burden from the
level it had reached in 1995 and preventing those from growing
in future years, but those goals were not met and the paperwork
burden continues to increase. So what are the biggest
challenges that agencies face in reducing the overall paperwork
burden?
Ms. HARNED. The challenges that agencies face?
Ms. ADAMS. Yes.
Ms. HARNED. I mean, honestly, I cannot speak to that. I can
assure you though that is still very much a problem for my
members. And I would just like to go back to something you were
discussing. Our regulation study that NFIB did and released
early 2017 indicated that 50 percent of respondents found
Federal regulations to be the most problematic. We did break
that out. State was 30 percent; local was 15. So I just wanted
to state that for the record.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay. Would anybody else like to respond?
Mr. HEDREN. Sure. Congresswoman, I think that is an
incredibly important question, and one that is actually a
little bit tough to get to because paperwork is relatively less
transparent in terms of how it is prepared, reviewed, and
eventually sent out to the public as a paperwork collection
request, information collection request. But there are
certainly cases in which agencies are collecting the same
information as other agencies but may not be aware of that.
There may be instances, for example, in collecting generalized
data about business operations that over collect, that are kind
of collecting data for the sake of it.
So there is always opportunity there, and I think what we
saw in 2017 is really a lot of the impressive reductions in
regulatory burdens came from the paperwork side because you can
kind of get your arms around it.
Another angle on this which is very important, and which
the Committee has actually dealt with very well with the Small
Business Regulatory Flexibility Improvements Act, is getting
into agencies like the IRS, which have a disproportionate share
of the paperwork collection volume.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay. Thank you very much. I am out of time. Mr.
Chair, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back.
The gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Norman, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. NORMAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to echo
what General Kelly mentioned.
Small businesses are sick and tired of needless
regulations, and it has been a pleasure for this last year to
get regulations off the books that unelected bureaucrats who
have never run a small business--and I am a contractor. I am a
real estate developer. We are sick and tired of people who do
not really know, have field experience, and yet they are trying
to read a book and pass a regulation. So thank God it is
changing. That is why you are seeing the economy do what it is
doing, and it will do greater things.
Mr. Hedren, let me ask you specifically, we have got a
company in our area, Composite Resources. How would they get
notice of a regulation? Would they have to sift through
thousands of papers to see what they have to comply with? And
what is the cost of trying to dig through what bureaucrats have
written to hopefully apply to a particular company?
Mr. HEDREN. Congressman, thank you for that question.
I think to start in reverse order, the cost is time. And in
many cases, small and medium-size businesses do not have a
specific regulatory official. It may just be the president of
that business. So for Composite Resources that may be the
senior leadership team taking their time to understand how they
want to implement something in their facility. And in our
experience, certainly those facility leaders take this very
seriously and they will dedicate the time to do a good job.
In terms of how they find out when things are changing, it
is not always the cleanest process. And as others have
mentioned, there is a state and Federal dynamic to this. There
is an executive department, an independent agency dynamic to
this, but when you really boil it down, there is no truly
effective way to push this information out to people who may be
affected, and that truly is one of the core issues at stake
when we talk about getting small and medium-sized enterprises
engaged in this process effectively.
Mr. NORMAN. Thank you.
Mr. Noel, you are in the field. You are in the business.
What can we do to get the career development opportunities
available that will foster people getting into the business,
and what can we do to, I guess, influence that so that we can
have our carpenters, we can have our brick masons, we can have
our land developers?
Mr. NOEL. I am speaking a lot in a lot of different venues
about trying to change the mindset of the parents across the
country that working with your hands is a noble pursuit. We
have for so long told our children, and parents think that it
is more important to go a 4-year college to be a success in
life, and we have got to somehow reverse that. We have worked
with counselors at schools. We are in a big push nationwide now
to put vo-tech school classes back into the high schools.
I was in Johnson City, Tennessee, recently, and watched
some high school students that had vo-tech schools build some
things, and it was remarkable. And those children loved it. It
is a good pursuit, and we need to change that mindset across
the country. And it is going to take a big advertising campaign
of some sort to get to the parents to let them know, you know,
how important it is to be able to work with your hands and
create things. We are working on it. And if you can help,
please help.
Mr. NORMAN. We will do it. And keep up the good work. It is
something, you know, the best social program we can pass is a
job.
Mr. NOEL. Yes, sir.
Mr. NORMAN. And by helping people find their niche and
doing it.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. You
made some very good points there I would say.
The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Lawson, who is the ranking
member of the Subcommittee on Health and Technology is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LAWSON. Thank you.
One of the questions I wanted to ask you centers around the
BP oil spill. When the regulation that we had in place then, or
lack of regulation, how did it really hurt small businesses in
the Louisiana area?
Mr. NOEL. The results of the oil spill and the
corresponding moratorium on drilling that happened, there were
multiple layoffs in our area in South Louisiana, so there were
a lot of people who worked in the oilfield that suddenly did
not have a job so they did not want to build a home, clearly.
Down the coast into Florida where the tourists were, the
tourism just dropped off because of all the negative publicity
across the country. People thought the beaches--you are from
Tallahassee; right?
Mr. LAWSON. Right.
Mr. NOEL. Were covered with oil, and it was wonderful for
me. My son lives in Destin. We did not have all the traffic
problems and the beaches looked pretty well.
My understanding, and I do not know this for a fact, but
the BP oil spill was as much about enforcing the rules on that
group of people that were responsible for that as it was
anything. But it did have a negative impact on the economy down
there, clearly.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay. My other question would be from an
attorney. How do you get people to participate in these
regulations at agencies actually make them because it really
affects the bottom line of a lot of different things. When we
are talking about home building, people do not seem to realize
that it really is going to be passed down to the consumer, and
the consumer will not have the opportunity to purchase a home.
But you see the regulation over and over. From a legal
standpoint, how do you get them involved with some of the
agencies when they are making these type regulations?
Ms. HEINZERLING. Well, I think just to back up for one
second, one of the things we have to have is to make sure that
we actually go through that process that would allow them to
comment, and in many of the activities we are seeing today we
actually do not see that being followed, and that means they do
not get a chance to comment because there is no process
afforded with that opportunity.
Secondly, to allow more people or encourage more people to
comment. I think the agencies are making use of social media in
a way that they did not before. I think that they have come
under criticism, sometimes from the same people who like to
have public comment and like to have the widest range of voices
as possible, but they are using I would say a variety of modern
tools to get as much input as possible in their rules. I have
to say, having worked at the Environmental Protection Agency
for 2 years, we did see things from another perspective which
was we saw the amazing number of comments that we got on any
significant proposal, and we felt our obligation to respond to
those comments. Maybe at the end of the day the outcome was not
what everybody wanted, but we felt it was our legal obligation
to respond to the significant comments.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay, thank you. And, you know, earlier, I
think Mr. Harden was speaking about the rollback regulation. I
have been in the insurance industry for 36 years. You have not
seen any regulation unless you have been in the insurance
industry. It is a lot of regulation. These rollbacks, when you
say it is going to stimulate--that we have seen, I have seen
them on the floor. Being a first timer, the rollbacks are going
to stimulate the economy and you see it working in the economy
now. From your perspective, and I do not have much time, how
did the business community respond?
Ms. HARNED. Right. Like Mr. Hedren's members, our members
have been very positive about the rollback because it really
did for so many of them, so many regulations coming at once,
which is how they felt like they were living the last several
years, was paralyzing. And as a result, they were sitting on
their business the way it was. They were not growing. They were
not moving forward. And now they do have a chance to catch a
deep breath and know, okay, well, I do not have to worry right
now about a ton more coming out of Washington at the moment.
Let me get the decks cleared and figure out what is going on
and that sort of thing, because it really was overwhelming. And
our data has shown since the beginning that has been one of the
key drivers to them growing.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay. I have another question but my time is
running out, so Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. If you would like I can extend the
gentleman a little additional time if you would like.
Mr. LAWSON. Just a little additional time.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman has another minute.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay. Thank you very much. And anyone can
answer it.
A lot of these regulations come down to partisan issues,
and you have one group who is saying it is the best thing to do
the rollback, and the other group is saying that we are going
to hurt the consumer. You know, how do you respond to that?
If anybody cares to respond.
Mr. NOEL. Well, let me see if I can try.
You know, the parties change in the admonition ever soft.
You know, we just had a change. The bureaucrats in those
agencies, the people that work, not necessarily secretaries, et
cetera, are not changing. And so they perpetuate a rule and
then that continues on regardless of whose party is in power.
Then it was all talk about, okay, are we going to roll back?
Are we going to put more? You know, whatever. But the American
people elect the Congress. They put them in office to safeguard
their lives here in America, and I think it is important that
those same elected officials safeguard that the laws that they
pass are being implemented correctly, which is why I think we
should have congressional oversight over the agencies in their
rulemaking.
Mr. LAWSON. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back.
The gentleman from Utah, Mr. Curtis, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. CURTIS. Thank you. I appreciate all of you being here
today.
I have listened with great interest. Having been a former
small business owner, I would like to speak and echo some of
the comments that have been made. I believe small business
owners wake up in the morning and they just pray that nobody
gets hurt, none of their employees get hurt. They pray that
their employees handle any sexual harassment claims
appropriately in the way that they were taught to do. They pray
there are no new lawsuits by their customers. This is what is
on their mind and on their agenda. And then they worry about
sales, and they worry about paying taxes. And then you have
what we have alluded to. You have cities, you have counties,
you have states, and you have the Federal government. Each one
of them, all the things that they think are important for them
to do that day when they wake up. And it is overwhelming.
And I guess one of my questions is, and I will ask Ms.
Harned--did I pronounce that correctly--is it possible that
fewer regulations will actually lead to better compliance with
existing regulations because we filtered out some of these
things that they just cannot pay attention to and allow them to
really focus on the things that are most important?
Ms. HARNED. Absolutely I would agree with that because that
is a huge problem. As Mr. Hedren said--or maybe it was Mr.
Noel--so often, unfortunately, small business owners find out
about a requirement when the inspector is at their business.
There is just no way for them to keep up.
I have friends that are very well heeled, small business
owners, but they said, ``Karen, I learn about a new requirement
every time I see you.'' And it is because I do this for full
time. They are busy running their business, and I do think we
need to prioritize. What is most important? What is most
important for public safety? What is most important for
environmental? And get rid of the regulatory underbrush. I am
actually hopeful that the executive order the President put
forward last year will do just that. Get rid of those
regulations that have not been enforced in decades. If they
have not been enforced in decades, why are they on the books?
Just for a game of gotcha? I mean, that is not helpful.
Mr. CURTIS. Yeah. We heard in testimony today that the war
on deregulation is waged by big business. Would you address the
disproportionate burden on small business of regulation and why
it is harder for them actually than big business to comply?
Ms. HARNED. Yes. Again, our research has shown that 72
percent of those small business owners with less than 10
employees are the ones actually reading that Federal Register
notice once they find out about it to try to figure out what
that rule is they are going to have to comply with and how to
do so. And so that is a complete time burden for them because
they are not an expert on that regulation or that area of the
law. And for those that have more employees, they are farming
that out but they are paying significant costs to do so. And
so, again, not all regulation is bad, but we do need to
prioritize and limit how much there is so that we can get--I
really do again agree with you. We can get better compliance if
people know what they are actually supposed to comply with.
Mr. CURTIS. Right. Mr. Hedren and Mr. Noel, you are shaking
your head. Would either of you care to comment on that?
Mr. NOEL. Love to.
Mr. CURTIS. All right.
Mr. NOEL. You know, the National Association of Home
Builders represents 140,000 building companies across the
country. Every one of them find out about Federal regulations
from us. And we have to take pages and pages of regulations and
rules and condense them down into something they can digest and
comply with. And then when you begin to comply with it you
find, okay, the end goal, what the law is is one thing, but now
I have got to do all this paperwork. I have to literally hire
somebody and pay them anywhere from $500 to $1,200 a house to
do the paperwork. You know, and most of our members are three
people. So you raise the cost of housing every time you do
this.
Mr. CURTIS. Which is where the disproportionate burden
comes on the small guy because the big guy can hire the
lawyers?
Mr. NOEL. He has already got the guy.
Mr. CURTIS. Yeah.
Mr. Hedren?
Mr. HEDREN. Congressman, it is a great question, and we
represent 14,000 members, of which some are larger and the vast
majority of them are smaller. And I think the best way to think
about our members is really an ecosystem of manufacturers. They
supply to each other. They compete with each other. They grow
together. And at times you might find that when a big business
engages in advocacy in the process, the net outcome of that may
be that they put whatever comes down from the agency in a final
rule into bid requirements and the small businesses will get
the bid requirements and shake their head thinking I have no
idea why they are asking for this. And they did not see it
coming. Did not really have a chance to connect with that. But
it is a resource issue. It is an awareness issue.
And to get to your opening thoughts. These business leaders
do take this seriously. Having an injury on your worksite is
awful. And people take it personally and they do what they can
to avoid that. But the rules sometimes are prescriptive and
they do no connect all the way through.
Mr. CURTIS. Yeah. I find with small businesses a lot of
times that injury is a very close friend. Right? These people
are family in many cases.
So I am out of time. I yield my time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
Mr. CURTIS. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
The gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Murphy, who is the ranking
member of the Subcommittee on Contracting and Workforce is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. MURPHY. Thank you all for being here. I found the
conversation very interesting, especially since I am married to
a small business owner and live vicariously through his dealing
with regulations.
I also represent a district in Central Florida that is home
to a vibrant hub of entrepreneurial activities and numerous
innovators and creators and small businesses. We have created
an environment that has allowed entrepreneurs to take chances
and pursue their passions in Central Florida, and that is why
it is one of the Nation's fastest growing regions. But
nonetheless, I continue to hear from many of the entrepreneurs
in my district that burdensome regulations have hindered the
growth of their businesses. While I believe that reasonable
regulation is essential to protecting our economy and public
health and our environment, I do think as some of the witnesses
have noted today that excessively burdensome regulations, while
perhaps well intentioned, can do more harm than good in
practice.
With that in mind, my question to the panel is how can we
better ensure that Federal agencies sufficiently understand the
activity they are tasked with regulating? You will find that
many of those bureaucrats have never actually worked in the
industries that they are trying to regulate, and so while it
may be well intentioned, there are quite a bit of unintended
consequences.
And then kind of a second part of that is how do we
encourage agencies to regulate in a way that does not adopt a
``one size fits all'' for regulation and instead uses
approaches that acknowledge that there are differences in firm
sizes and sophistication, especially as it relates to startups
and second stage businesses?
Ms. HEINZERLING. I think it would be useful, if you do not
want the ``one size fits all'' approach, it would be useful for
Congress to write laws in that way because many times statutes
do not do that. They take on a problem, even a really important
problem--air pollution, workplace safety, and so on--and they
do not differentiate among different entities. If you want an
agency to do that, you need to tell the agency to do that
because in many cases there are legal problems associated with
differentiating if the statute does not allow it. So I would
recommend that kind of differentiation if that is what you
want.
Ms. MURPHY. Okay, thanks.
Ms. HARNED. I also think that in addition to so much of
what is in the Small Business Regulatory and Flexibility
Improvements Act, which I think would all be very helpful in
that. I mean, NFIB is very supportive of all the provisions in
that.
One idea I have heard that I think has been used in the UK
is to have regulators shadow businesses. I really again think,
and your husband has probably seen this, they just do not
understand. And you cannot until you actually see a day in the
life. And maybe there are ways that we can do that. I do really
encourage Congress to consider these solutions that are more
creative and also will get the regulators again to understand
who they are regulating. And I just do not think that can
happen without somebody having a real personal connection with
that person and have the small business owner show them their
business, but also really engage in the process. That is again
why we are such big fans of the SBR panels and getting those
for other rules.
Mr. NOEL. In the perfect world we would have that done
before the regulation ever goes in place.
We took a gentleman that is in OSHA to a jobsite. We have
to tether people so they do not fall off of roofs. And when you
stand trusses up, which are the things that hold the roof up,
there is nowhere to hook them to. So their solution was we
build the roof on the ground and get a crane and put it on the
top. So we took this gentleman to a jobsite and let them watch
how they put together--and actually, this was a two story. And
it dawned on him the things that they were requiring of our
guys did not work. Now, unfortunately, the rule is already in
place, so he had to go back and fix the rule. However Congress
can have the agencies involved with the people that it is going
to affect early in by seeing it on the ground, the better this
will all be.
Ms. MURPHY. Great. Thank you.
Mr. HEDREN. Congresswoman, that is a great question. And
actually, I would agree with Professor Heinzerling in saying
that a big portion of how to address this problem is to give
agencies the tools that they need in law to actually do that.
And so this Committee has considered several bills that do
that. But in our opinion, there is no shortage of ideas on how
to improve this process, and I think that there is more to
discuss here.
Ms. MURPHY. Great. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady's time
has expired.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Fitzpatrick, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. FITZPATRICK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to
the panel for being here. Thank you for being the voice of
small business, which creates 7 out of every 10 new jobs in
this country. The work you are doing is very important. So
thanks for being here.
A couple things I wanted to touch on, which may have been
addressed earlier. Number one is the process. We took up
something called the REINS Act early on in this session, which
I believe to be very important because it goes to who decides.
The administrative agencies under the executive branch
obviously executing their constitutional authority to
promulgate rules by giving the House of Representatives and
Congress oversight over that. Because we are the body closest
to the people, we get to consult with you all and hear the real
road impact that these regulations are having. I hope that the
Senate will take up consideration of that bill in short order
because I think the process piece is very important.
But then it becomes a question, if it is brought to us, how
best can we find that point of equilibrium, that sweet spot, if
you will, between overregulation and under regulation? We
certainly talked about a lot during the tax reform debate,
about finding that point of equilibrium where you are not--
rates are low enough so that we are competitive and it is not
costing us jobs, but they are not so low that we are bleeding
revenue to the U.S. government. The same with regulations. It
is a matter of finding that point of equilibrium that under
regulation, which we cannot tolerate either because that poses
a threat in a whole host of areas, but not overregulating where
we are strangling businesses and hurting small businesses'
ability to create jobs.
And lastly, if you could, for our purposes, identify one or
two agencies where you think are the biggest culprits, if you
will, of overregulation that are hurting small business.
Mr. NOEL. Okay, I will try that. You know, many times when
there is a problem that needs to be addressed, the stakeholders
who are in the middle of the problem, will not address the
problem, probably have the best answers. They need to help
craft how that rule or regulation goes in place. Homebuilders
typically do not like building codes, but we passed the
statewide building code in Louisiana because we were going to
lose all our insurance companies. There was a problem defined
and the builders helped pass those codes. That is just an
example of how you take the stakeholders and tell them we have
a problem with something and we need to address it.
When I was in high school, you never met an oilfield worker
that did not have an arm missing or something. Well, we created
workman's compensation programs across the country that do loss
control, help people, teach people how not to get hurt because
it affects their bottom line when they have to pay more premium
because they had an injury. So the more you bring this closer
to the people that actually are involved, I think the better
the rules and regulations are going to be, and the problems
will get solved.
Ms. HARNED. I would echo that. That really has been
something I consistently have heard from small business owners
all over the country, is that really, they do not have as much
of a problem with their state regulators because they know
them, there is a relationship there, and they can get to where
everybody wants them to be quicker. And I really think a lot of
study would be required, quite frankly, and hard work by the
regulators to figure out what all agencies are regulating on a
specific issue. Because, you know, just as Patrick had pointed
out on paperwork, two agencies with the same paperwork, this is
not a good situation. That is happening across the government.
That is happening with Federal and state. Why can you not have
a situation where if somebody is doing well with state OSHA,
for example, that, you know, stamp of approval by them, no
issues, then that means that they do not have to worry about
Federal OSHA. I mean, I just think there is so much more that
can be done cooperatively with the different governments, the
state and Federal, and also just, again, pairing everything
down so that you are really getting the priority issues
addressed and not just having a lot of regulatory underbrush
that could really just be used for a ``gotcha game'' for small
businesses.
Mr. HEDREN. Sure. I will jump in as well. And congressman,
thank you for that question.
I would echo the comments of others. It is about rigor. It
is about awareness. It is about building cooperation and
relationship and understanding between agencies and the parties
that they regulate. I would probably stop short of picking on a
particular agency. We are a very broad group of manufacturers,
and I think everybody sort of lives in their own environment in
that regard. But that is why we advocate for regulatory reform
measures that really get to the core essence of rulemaking
itself rather than a particular agency or another.
Mr. FITZPATRICK. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back and his time has expired.
And we want to thank our panel for being here today. And as
this hearing comes to a close, I would just note that while
progress has been made to address the regulatory burden on
America's small businesses, it is clear that we have work to
do. Small business owners should be allowed to focus on growing
their businesses instead of spending countless hours navigating
through a confusing mess of federal regulations.
I look forward to working with my colleagues to make sure
that we provide meaningful regulatory relief and reform the
current process to give small business owners a stronger voice
in the regulatory process.
I would ask unanimous consent that all members have 5
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
And if there is no further business to come before the
Committee, we are adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 12:25 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
COMMENTS OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF MANUFACTURERS
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
MARCH 7, 2018
Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, and members of
the Committee on Small Business, thank you for the opportunity
to testify about the impact of regulatory reform on small
manufacturers in the United States.
My name is Patrick Hedren, and I am the vice president of
labor, legal and regulatory policy for the National Association
of Manufacturers (NAM). The NAM is the nation's largest
industrial trade association and voice for more than 12 million
men and women who make things in America. The NAM is committed
to achieving a policy agenda that helps manufacturers grow and
create jobs. Manufacturers very much appreciate your interest
in, and support of, the manufacturing economy.
State of Manufacturing
The NAM's most recent quarterly outlook survey from the end
of 2017 showed the manufacturing sector on the upswing, with
business leaders more upbeat about demand and production and
more confident in their overall outlook. Indeed, 94.6 percent
of NAM's members said that they were positive about their own
company's outlook--an all-time high in the survey's 20-year
history.
It is important to note that the vast majority of
manufacturers, 98.6 percent, have 500 or fewer employees. Three
quarters of manufacturing firms have fewer than twenty
employees.
In the most recent data, manufacturers in the United States
contributed $2.25 trillion to the economy in 2016, (or 11.7
percent of GDP). For every $1.00 spent in manufacturing,
another $1.89 is added to the economy, the highest multiplier
effect of any economic sector. In 2016, the average
manufacturing worker in the United States earned $82,023
annually, including pay and benefits.
Beyond providing economic signals in the manufacturing
center, the quarterly NAM survey also highlights other points
of interest among our 14,000 members. Last year's fourth
quarter survey results were illuminating.
Over 37 percent of respondents indicated
they spent at least seven hours per week on paperwork
to comply with regulations, and almost a quarter spend
over ten hours.
Under 41 percent felt they had enough
guidance on how to comply with the regulations that
their company must follow.
About the same percentage indicated they
felt that regulatory agencies are primarily concerned
with issuing fines, and
Over half of respondents need to retain a
law firm to help them keep up and comply with paperwork
requirements.
At the same time, manufacturers are not anti-regulation.
Over three quarters of respondents told us that smart
regulations are necessary to ensure a level playing field.
Almost 45 percent felt that regulatory agencies were primarily
concerned with ensuring compliance or with working alongside
companies to reduce risk.
Regulatory Environment
Democrats and Republicans often agree on the need for
simpler, less burdensome, and more effective regulation, even
when the rhetoric often fails to match that consensus.
Similarly, the business community is often misunderstood about
its views on regulation. Manufacturers believe regulation is
critical to protect worker safety, public health, and our
environment. Regulation is also a critical tool to promote more
efficient markets by addressing externalities and correcting
market failures. Indeed, some critical government objectives
can only be achieved through regulation, and that is a powerful
argument for improving the process by which regulations are
developed.
The core challenge of regulatory policy is this: the
benefits of regulation are often diffuse to society while the
burdens of regulation are concentrated. Certain sectors, such
as manufacturing, bear a sizeable portion of overall regulatory
costs in the economy and therefore are able to provide good
estimates of those costs during the course of a typical
rulemaking. The benefit side of the ledger is much tougher to
estimate, however, because individual parties may receive a de
minimis share of the overall benefit, or because regulation may
be intended to prevent so-called ``black swan'' events. As a
result, it is no surprise that our public discourse on
regulation tends to involve each side talking past the other.
Rulemaking by its nature contemplates a balance between the
goals to be achieved and the price to be paid. Reforming the
regulatory system in many ways is about putting in place basic
procedures to ensure that agencies do their best to achieve
that balance. We believe they create better rules when they
understand the parties they are regulation (who oftentimes may
even share the agencies' goals), when they evaluate meaningful
alternatives that could achieve the same or better regulatory
outcome, and when they seek to maximize the net benefits to
society of their actions.
Small and Medium-Sized Manufacturers
Small and medium-sized manufacturers experience the burdens
of regulation in a different way than larger businesses,
primarily because they lack the economies of scale that larger
businesses rely on to spread the costs of compliance. Those
costs include the burden of monitoring new or changing
requirements, implementing new or different processes,
completing paperwork, and working directly with regulatory
agencies to resolve disputes. Each dollar that a small or
medium-sized manufacturer spends on regulatory compliance is a
dollar that it cannot spend to grow its business or expand its
workforce.
Executive Order 13771
Executive Order 13771, often referred to as President
Trump's ``one-in, two-out'' or ``net-zero regulatory budget''
order, has now been in effect for a little over a year. This
Executive Order marks a significant change in regulatory
philosophy compared to that of past Presidents from both
parties. In President Trump's first year, according to the
federal register, federal agencies issued roughly half as many
rule documents deemed significant under Executive Order 12866
than Presidents Bush and Obama issued in their respective first
years.
In President Trump's first year in office, the
administration published 23 deregulatory actions with estimated
annualized cost savings, excluding those nullified under
Congressional Review Act resolutions. Through the end of fiscal
year 2017, the administration completed 67 actions classified
as deregulatory, including rules without estimated annualized
cost savings. While these numbers are dramatic, they do not
indicate a slash-and-burn approach to deregulation. Instead,
they indicate a more methodical approach taking place through
the rulemaking process. Perhaps the most noteworthy number
through the end of fiscal year 2017 is three; the number of new
final rules with over $100 million in burdens on industry--a
historic low.
This methodical approach, and dramatic slowdown in new
rulemaking, has likely been an important component in record-
high manufacturing optimism. Manufacturers do best when
regulatory conditions are certain and stable, because fast-
paced and dramatic regulatory or deregulatory actions may
introduce new variables and risks into their operations. Simply
slowing down discretionary agency actions appears to have had a
greater impact than the projected net-decrease in per capita
regulatory burdens.
Opportunities for Executive Branch Reform
Presidents of both political parties have engaged in
efforts over the years to retrospectively review regulations
and amend or rescind them as appropriate. The NAM has supported
these efforts, and we remain impressed that each subsequent
round of retrospective review identifies even more regulations
in need of a fresh look. Executive Order 13771 structurally
incentivizes an ongoing process of retrospective review, as
agencies attempt to meet their burden reduction targets each
fiscal year.
Beyond retrospective review, we believe there are several
important opportunities to improve the rulemaking process
overall and across each agency. For example, through an
Executive Order or further guidance to agencies, the
administration could:
Ensure stronger cost-benefit analysis.
Unless prohibited by law, agencies should seek to
maximize net benefits by requiring full cost-benefit
balancing when implementing regulatory statutes. This
may take the form of a rebuttable presumption that a
regulation should not proceed if the benefits do not
justify the costs. Agencies could further encourage the
public to submit their own cost-benefit analyses into
the rulemaking record for the agency to review.
Require robust analysis of small business
effects. The administration may require each agency to
analyze the effects of high-impact rules on small
businesses, and when appropriate should invite greater
engagement with the Small Business Administration's
Office of Advocacy. Under the Regulatory Flexibility
Act, agencies are required to prepare a regulatory
flexibility analysis to determine the impact of
proposed or final rules on small entities and to
consider regulatory alternatives that would accomplish
the rule's objective with minimal burden on those
entities. Agencies frequently avoid this analysis by
simply asserting that the rule at-issue will not
significantly impact small entities.
Promote better information quality. Agencies
should use the best available science for agency risk
assessments, and should provide more significant
transparency to the public on any data upon which the
agency relied when deciding among regulatory
alternatives.
Conduct oversight or peer-reviewed of
independent agency rulemaking. Prior Presidents have
stopped short of requiring independent agencies to
submit their rules to the White House Office of
Information and Regulatory Affairs for review, a step
traditionally expected of executive agencies. As a
result, independent agencies have issued rules that
were later struck down in court because of deficient
analysis and a failure to fully consider the
consequences of agency action, an outcome that creates
risk and implementation burden without a countervailing
public benefit.
Require advanced notices for economically
significant proposed rules. Major rulemakings should
give the public ample opportunity to provide early
input to agencies as they evaluate the most cost-
effective approaches to meet their statutory goals.
Allow response comments for significant
rules. Perhaps the single best way to improve the
quality comments submitted to agencies would be to
allow commenters to reply to arguments made by other
commenters. A 30-day response period may ultimately
save agencies time. This step would be especially
impactful for significant rulemakings, and could be
waived if exigent circumstances do not allow for it.
Build in smart, prospective lookback
criteria. No new major rule should be issued without a
plan for future review. Rather than rely on ex poste
judgments on how a rule is performing once finalized,
agencies could set forth a set of bellwether
measurements by which each major rule will be measured
to determine if it is working as intended, or should be
amended or rescinded in the future.
Provide fresh guidance on guidance. Non-
binding guidance documents can help regulated parties
better understand federal requirements, but they can
also impose burdens when the public views them as
mandatory. Compounding this issue, agencies typically
do not issue draft guidance documents for public
comment. Providing more access to, and transparency
around, these documents will improve the ability of
small businesses to comply while simultaneously
lowering the risk of improper or unpredictable
enforcement actions.
Each of these reforms would benefit small and medium-sized
manufacturers by promoting smarter rules that are fit for
purpose.
Priorities for Congress
Last year was noteworthy in terms of the role of Congress
in the regulatory process. Before 2017, Congress had only used
the Congressional Review Act (CRA) to overturn one rule (the
so-called ``ergonomics'' rule in 2001). In 2017, by comparison,
Congress overturned fifteen rules across a range of industries
and subjects. Each of these rules was by definition a
``midnight regulation'' completed late in the prior
administration, and some of them would have had outsized
impacts on small businesses. The CRA is only useable in limited
and specific circumstances, however, so the NAM continues to
advocate for substantive regulatory reform that will lead to
smarter rules going forward.
This committee has done admirable work this year, and in
prior years, to propose needed reforms that would close
loopholes in the Regulatory Flexibility Act. This work is
critical for small and medium-sized manufacturers, because too
many regulations that have significant effects on small
businesses escape the process that Congress intended agencies
to follow to ensure their rules make sense as-applied to those
businesses.
Beyond legislation such as the Small Business Regulatory
Flexibility Improvements Act of 2017,\1\ Congress should also
focus on meaningful and bipartisan reforms that may not be
explicitly focused on small businesses, but would nevertheless
have an important impact on those businesses by driving better
regulatory outcomes overall. These efforts certainly include
bills that would:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ S. 584, originally sponsored by Senators Lankford (R-OK), Risch
(R-ID), and Grassley (R-IA); see also H.R. 33, originally sponsored by
Representatives Chabot (R-OH-1), Goodlatte (R-VA-6), Marino (R-PA-10),
Radewagen (R-AS-At Large), Knight (R-CA-25), Cuellar (D-TX-28), Graves
(R-MO-6), Sessions (R-TX-32), King (R-IA-4), Kelly (R-MS-1), Tipton (R-
CO-3), Curbelo (R-FL-26), Hultgren (R-IL-14), and Luetkemeyer (R-MO-3).
Require standards of rigor that match the
impact of rules. The NAM supports legislation such as
the Regulatory Accountability Act of 2017 \2\ that
would require agencies to conduct a robust analysis and
then truly evaluate alternative ways to address each
regulatory problem, but commensurate with the level of
impact anticipated from each rule. Greater analytical
requirements need not slow down agency rulemaking
efforts, and the NAM opposes restrictions on rulemaking
that serve no other purpose than to delay nece4ssary
protections. Rules with billions of dollars in economic
impacts deserve careful consideration and analysis, and
the NAM commends the House of Representatives for
passing its version of this bill last year as part of
the broader H.R. 5 package.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ S. 951, originally sponsored by Senators Portman (R-OH),
Heitkamp (D-ND), Hatch (R-UT), and Manchin (D-WV); see also H.R. 45,
originally sponsored by Representatives Goodlatte (R-VA-6), Peterson
(D-MN-7), Smith (R-TX-21), Marino (R-PA-10), Sessions (R-TX-32), and
Franks (R-AZ-8).
Promote earlier participation in major
rulemakings. Public engagement is an important driver
of good regulatory outcomes, and is a critical
component of both transparency and predictability. The
NAM supports legislation such as the Early
Participation in Regulations Act of 2017 \3\ that would
require agencies to solicit earlier public
participation in major rulemaking. That engagement will
result in more effective rules that provide the
regulated public with better predictability.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ S. 579, sponsored by Senators Heitkamp (D-ND), Hatch (R-UT),
and Roberts (R-KS).
Require agencies to lay out the standards by
which their rules will be measured in the future. Often
called ``prospective retrospective review,''
legislation such as the Smarter Regs Act of 2015 \4\
would ask agencies to set out up-front performance
metrics for their intended regulatory goals. If a rule
proves to be ineffective in achieving its stated goal,
agencies should look to update, restructure, or rescind
it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ S. 1817 (2015), originally sponsored by Senators Heitkamp (D-
ND), and Lankford (R-OK).
Agencies should provide their guidance
documents in one easy-to-access place online. As above,
guidance documents are an important tool that agencies
use to provide information to the regulated public but
can become regulatory in their own right because they
may lay out expectations that appear mandatory.
Legislation such as the GOOD Act \5\ would require
agencies to put guidance documents online on one
location, enabling both oversight and easier compliance
for the public.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ S. 2296, sponsored by Senator Johnson (R-WI); see also H.R.
4809, sponsored by Representative Walker (R-NC-6).
Independent agencies should be held to the
same standards as executive agencies. Independent
agencies are responsible for a significant portion of
high-impact rules, but they often fail to conduct
robust analyses of their regulatory proposals and they
seldom conduct an inter-agency review process to
identify areas in which their rules may overlap or
conflict with other agencies' requirements. Bills like
the Independent Agency Regulatory Analysis Act of 2017
\6\ would establish a basic, flexible, and non-binding
OIRA review process that would provide valuable insight
among agencies, and uncover opportunities for more
effective and efficient rules.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ S. 1448, sponsored by Senators Portman (R-OH), Collins (R-ME),
Lankford (R-OK), Ernst (R-IA) and Johnson (R-WI).
The NAM urges the committee to continue developing and
promoting sensible, bipartisan legislation that will give small
business a true voice and seat at the table. Thank you for your
invitation to speak to you today, and for your attention on
small and medium-sized manufacturers across the country.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Introduction
Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez and Members of
the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
My name is Randy Noel. I am a home builder and small business
owner from LaPlace, Louisiana, and the Chairman of the Board of
Directors of the National Association of Home Builders (NAHB).
NAHB is a federation of more than 700 state and local
associations representing more than 140,000 members nationwide.
NAHB's members are involved in home building, remodeling,
multifamily construction, land development, property
management, and light commercial construction. Taken together,
NAHB's members employ more than 1.26 million people and
construct about 80 percent of all new American housing each
year.
The majority of NAHB's builder members are truly small
businesses constructing 10 or fewer homes each year with fewer
than 12 direct employees. These builders, in addition to
building homes, must navigate a dense thicket of regulations.
There is no question that we need to protect public health,
welfare, safety and the environment. But federal agencies need
to fully and consistently consider the unique burdens small
businesses face in complying with regulations.
As a second-generation home builder with more than 30 years
of experience, I understand all too well how difficult (and
often costly) it can be to comply with the many and varied
government regulations that apply to my day-to-day work. NAHB
estimates, on average, regulations imposed by government at all
levels account for nearly 25 percent of the final price of a
new single-family home built for sale.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ http://www.nahbclassic.org/
generic.aspx?sectionID=734&genericContentID=250611&channelID=311&--
ga=1.255452874.358516237.1489032231
The significant cost of regulations reflected in the final
price of a new home is not just a problem for the small
businesses that build them; it has a negative effect on main
street U.S.A. by making affording a home that much more
difficult. Based on findings from a 2016 study, NAHB estimated
that approximately 14 million American households were priced
out of the market for a new home by government regulations in
that year.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ http://eyeonhousing.org/2016/05/14-million-households-priced-
out-by-government-regulation/
But I am happy to report today that things are getting
better. The first year of Donald Trump's presidency has seen
major progress on efforts to reduce the relentless and costly
over-regulation of American industry. The home building
industry and the small businesses that predominate it have been
significant beneficiaries of these efforts. Builders have taken
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
note and entered 2018 with a great deal of optimism.
Over the last three months, NAHB's Housing Market Index
(HMI), a measure of builder sentiment, has recorded its highest
readings in nearly two decades. Much of that optimism is due to
tight existing home inventory, a solid economy with low
unemployment, and an improving policy environment that offers
hope for reduced regulatory burdens.
Good Progress but the Job is Not Done
Today I wish to focus on the significant progress that has
already been made in reducing regulatory burdens for small
businesses in our industry, how the changes have helped
builders, and what regulatory headwinds still linger. While
much has been accomplished, the hefty price home buyers are
paying for government regulations represents just one more
obstacle that home builders need to overcome in restoring the
marketplace to normal conditions. Later in my testimony, I
outline a number areas that Congress and the administration
should address that would further reduce regulatory burdens on
small businesses and spur job and economic growth.
On the positive side, the successful efforts of this
administration and Congress to reduce the regulatory burdens on
small businesses in the home building industry are remarkable
both in their number and scope. To date, we have seen more than
20 significant regulatory changes that will benefit home
owners, home buyers, and home builders. Allow me to quickly
summarize some of the more significant changes.
HUD Federal Flood Risk Management Standard (FFRMS)
The Obama administration executive order that created the
FFRMS would have expanded the federally regulated floodplain
and required increased structural elevation and flood-proofing
for all federally funded projects, including single-family
homes and multifamily projects using FHA mortgage insurance.
In response to the FFRMS, HUD proposed a problematic rule
in 2016 to expand its floodplain management oversight. HUD's
proposal threatened access to FHA mortgage insurance for
single-family home buyers and multifamily builders and would
have jeopardized affordable housing opportunities for countless
low- to moderate-income working-class families.
The additional elevation and flood-proofing requirements
proposed for multifamily properties using FHA mortgage
insurance programs would have made many projects infeasible,
thereby preventing the delivery of much-needed rental housing
during the current affordable housing crisis. Additionally,
multifamily builders would have had no way of knowing if they
had to comply with the new floodplain rules because maps of the
expanded floodplain did not (and still do not) exist. President
Trump rescinded the executive order and soon after HUD followed
suit by withdrawing its FFRMS proposal.
EPA/Corps Waters of the U.S. (WOTUS) Rule
The 2015 WOTUS rule expanded federal jurisdiction of the
Clean Water Act to isolated wetlands, channels that only flow
when it rains, and most man-made ditches. The result would have
greatly increased federal regulatory power over private
property and led to increased permit requirements, project
delays, and significant avoidance and mitigation costs. Equally
important, the changes would not have significantly improved
water quality because much of the rule improperly encompassed
water features under state regulatory authority. As a result,
31 states sued the federal government over the deeply flawed
rule. The agencies are in the process of withdrawing the 2015
rule and developing a new rule.
Expanded Health Care Options
Small businesses continue to struggle to provide health
benefits to their employees. On October 12, 2017, President
Trump signed an executive order that will ease restrictions on
association health plans and health reimbursement accounts to
create more options for small businesses to provide health
benefits to their employees. Easing restrictions on association
health plans will grant small businesses access to better and
more affordable health care plans, allow them to negotiate
lower costs for coverage, and level the playing field for
smaller firms that want to help their workers and their
families with their health care needs. Additionally, expanding
the use of health reimbursement arrangements will allow small
businesses to offer pre-tax dollars to insured employees to
help pay premium and/or other out-of-pocket costs associated
with medical care and services.
OSHA Volks Recordkeeping Rule
Finalized on December 19, 2016, this rule extended the
explicit six-month statute of limitations on recordkeeping
paperwork violations in the Occupational Safety and Health
(OSH) Act of 1970 to five years. Earlier court rulings had
affirmed applicability of the six-month statute of limitations;
nonetheless, the agency proceeded with its rulemaking.
The Volks Rule represented a particularly egregious end run
around Congress's power to write the laws and a clear challenge
to the judicial branch's authority to prevent an agency from
exceeding its authority to interpret the law. Had it been
allowed to stand, the rule would have subjected millions of
small businesses to potential citations for paperwork
violations, but do nothing to improve worker health or safety.
Congress voted to overturn the rule by a joint resolution of
Congress under the Congressional Review Act. President Trump
signed the resolution into law on April 3, 2017.
More to Be Done
The Code of Federal Regulations didn't grow to over 180,000
pages oversight. Even with the significant progress of the past
year, there still remains significant work to be done in
peeling back and revisiting the accumulated layers of
regulations heaped upon small businesses. In particular, NAHB
urges Congress and the administration to focus on the
following:
OSHA Multiemployer Policy
Existing policy outlines agency procedures for allowing
compliance officers to issue citations on work sites where
there is more than one employer. On construction sites, this
policy allows OSHA to issue citations to a general contractor
(i.e., a home builder) for safety violations created by
subcontractors, even if none of the general contractor's
employees are exposed to the hazardous condition. This
interpretation impermissibly nullifies the employer/employee
relationship and must be changed.
EPA Lead Renovation, Repair and Painting (RRP) Program
This rule addresses lead-based paint hazards created by
renovation, repair, and painting activities that disturb lead-
based paint in target housing and child-occupied facilities
bui8lt before 1978.
The RRP program, as it is currently being implemented, is
an inefficient tool for achieving the environmental and health
goals of the underlying statute and rule. The regulation is
needlessly burdensome, costly, and fails to provide the tools
needed for efficient implementation, which discourages
homeowners from using the services of certified renovators.
Most importantly, the lack of a reliable, commercially
available lead paint test kit (more than five years after EPA
believed a test kit would be ready) means renovators are left
in the dark when it comes to compliance. Other aspects of the
program, including the new renovator recertification
requirements, add needless complexity to the rule's
implementation and create an unnecessary bias against online
training. EPA expects to complete a comprehensive review in
spring 2018; NAHB is hopeful this review will lead to change.
DOL Apprenticeship Programs
With labor shortages in the residential construction
industry reaching levels not seen in two decades, it is
critically important that the administration and Congress take
immediate steps to encourage the development of a skilled
workforce now and for the future.
Consistent with the President's Executive Order on
Expanding Apprenticeships in America, the Employment and
Training Administration (ETA) will be proposing regulations to
establish the framework for industry-recognized apprenticeship
programs, a new industry-led initiative to promote innovation
and opportunity in apprenticeship, and integrate this
initiative with the existing Registered Apprenticeship system.
NAHB applauds this effort and looks forward to working with the
administration to further this important program.
FWS/NMFS Endangered Species (ESA) Regulations
Implementation of the ESA increasingly impacts land use
activities. The current regulations enable the services to
assert authority over large swathes of land and a broad array
of activities that are rarely associated with species
conservation. The consultation requirements also remain
expensive, burdensome and unwieldy. As land is impacted by the
ESA, it becomes too expensive or otherwise extremely difficult
to use for home building. The higher costs invariably translate
into higher home prices, and higher prices, in turn, disqualify
more individuals from being able to afford a home.
Fixing the Underlying Problem
The administration and this Congress is to be commended for
its successful efforts thus far to reduce regulatory burdens on
small businesses. Additionally, I urge the administration and
Congress to continue its work and move swiftly to address
outstanding regulatory hurdles. However, all of these actions
will amount to little more than a Band-Aid on the problem until
such time as Congress and the administration can successfully
address our broken regulatory rulemaking system.
NAHB has consistently said the only sure way to safeguard
against future bad regulation is to fix the broken regulatory
rulemaking process itself, ensure all regulations are designed
with small businesses in mind, and, perhaps most importantly,
restore meaningful congressional oversight to the rulemaking
process. Fortunately, the solution already exists. Legislation
has already passed the U.S. House that would go a long way
toward accomplishing these goals: the Regulatory Accountability
Act (RAA); the Regulatory Flexibility Improvements Act (RFIA);
and the Regulations from the Executive in Need of Scrutiny
(REINS) Act. NAHB will continue to urge the Senate to take up
these important bills.
The REINS Act restores much-needed congressional oversight
to the rulemaking process, a desperately needed improvement
given the growth of the regulatory state over the past few
decades. Without meaningful congressional oversight, poorly-
crafted rules often to into place and businesses are forced to
divert precious resources to lengthy and uncertain legal
challenges.
While the REINS Act returns control of the regulatory
process to the people, the RAA repairs the decades-old, badly-
broken system and the RFIA makes common sense improvements to
existing law to ensure all agencies are considering the true
impact or proposed regulations on small businesses. Taken
together, these reforms will ensure we protect the environment
and our workers, while also adding fuel to the engine of
economic growth that America's small businesses represent.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today.
Testimony of Lisa Heinzerling
Justice William J. Brennan, Jr., Professor of Law
Georgetown University Law Center
Before the House Committee on Small Business
March 7, 2018
Hearing on ``The Effects of the President's Regulatory Reform
and Rollback Efforts on Small Businesses''
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, thank you for
giving me the opportunity to testify before you today.
President Trump has made deregulation a central goal of his
domestic policy. Through executive orders aimed at particular
regulatory programs, President Trump has directed agencies to
take an axe to existing regulations. Through the so-called ``2-
for-1'' order on regulatory costs, President Trump has also
placed strict limits on the development of new regulations.
Agencies have responded by delaying, suspending, and
revoking existing regulations.\1\ All across the government,
rules and policies that took years to develop have been put off
or wiped out. These rules and policies address issues as
important and diverse as climate change, consumer deception,
airline safety, chemical accidents, food safety, sexual
assault, and more. In a great many cases, the rules and
policies have been put off or rejected with little of the
legally required attention to statutory constraints, factual
records, or procedural frameworks. As a consequence, federal
courts have rejected the administration's attempts to delay or
suspend existing rules on such matters as lead paint, energy
efficiency, and methane emissions from oil and gas facilities.
Two weeks ago, for example, a federal district court in
California granted a preliminary injunction against the
Department of the Interior's suspension of a rule intended to
reduce waste of natural gas from oil and gas facilities on
public lands. Particularly pertinent to today's hearing, the
court found that the Department's attempt to justify the
suspension based on the rule's purported effects on small
businesses was not supported by the factual evidence. Other,
similar challenges to the administration's deregulatory
activities remain pending and may suffer similar fates due to
the administration's apparently indifferent attitude toward
law, facts, and process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Attached as an appendix to this testimony is my forthcoming
article analyzing the first phase of the Trump administration's
deregulatory surge: Lisa Heinzerling, Unreasonable Delays: The Legal
Problems (So Far) of Trump's Deregulatory Binge, Harvard Law & Policy
Review (forthcoming March 2018).
Agencies have also responded to the President's
deregulatory agenda by putting off or canceling new regulatory
initiatives. Under the 2-for-1 executive order, the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) is empowered to set regulatory
budgets for the executive agencies. These are not ordinary
budgets, in which agencies have a limit on the amounts they can
spend to do their work. With regulatory budgets, agencies have
a limit on what they can require private parties to spend to
alleviate the problems the agencies are charged with
addressing. For fiscal year 2018, OMB has given the agencies
regulatory budgets that are in every case zero or negative.
Agencies may not, in other words, issue any new regulations
without offsetting the new rules' costs by at least, and in
most cases by more than, a 1:1 ratio. As the federal district
court hearing a legal challenge to the 2-for-1 executive order
found last week, at the current rate of annual cost savings
from all deregulatory efforts across all agencies, ``it would
take the Executive Branch as a whole two or three years to
accumulate cost savings sufficient to offset even the most
conservative estimated cost'' of just one rule from just one
agency (a Department of Transportation rule related to motor
vehicle safety). The court observed: ``the Executive Order
curtails the ability of agencies to adopt significant new
rules, even when the benefits of the new rules would vastly
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
outweigh the costs.''
Indeed, it appears to be the official policy of this
administration that regulatory benefits do not count when one
is evaluating the wisdom of regulatory policy. Under the 2-for-
1 executive order, a reduction in regulatory costs is
considered a success no matter how dearly we all play for it in
benefits forgone. Consider again the regulatory budgets OMB has
set for this fiscal year. The Department of Energy takes one of
the biggest hits in OMB's regulatory budget; it must find $80
million in savings from discarded rules before it may spend a
single dollar on new regulation, at which point it must still
offset each dollar spent with reductions elsewhere. However,
according to OMB's own draft report on the costs and benefits
of federal regulation, the Department of Energy is one of the
star performers in the government when one compares the
regulatory costs it imposes to the benefits it reaps for the
public. OMB reports that the Department's regulations on energy
efficiency from 2006 to 2016 produced net benefits ranging from
$12 billion to $31 billion. And yet these are the programs OMB
has slated for especially deep cuts. It makes no sense, if one
cares about the public benefits of regulation.
In this regard, consider, too, the example of the
Environmental Protection Agency. No agency in this
administration has taken a bigger axe to existing regulatory
programs than the EPA. Yet OMB has also reported that EPA rules
outperform the rules of all other agencies combined in terms of
producing net monetized benefits. OMB estimates that from 2006
to 2016, EPA regulations provided as much as $706 billion in
benefits--measured in such terms as lives saved, illnesses
averted, and environmental degradation reduced--while imposing
no more than $65 billion in costs. However, the gargantuan
benefits of EPA rules, particularly rules related to air
pollution, disappear in the administration's regulatory budget
for EPA.
A question for today's hearing is whether the costs of this
deregulatory surge to the public at large are at least
mitigated by substantial benefits to small businesses. The
answer is that this war on regulation is not designed to
deliver benefits to small businesses. Recent cases rejecting
the Trump administration's deregulatory moves are relevant here
as well. The court hearing the case on Interior's rule on waste
of natural gas on public lands found that the blanket
suspension of the rule was not tailored to address the concerns
of small entities. Similarly revealing is EPA's most recent
regulatory plan. This plan is full of deregulatory initiatives
the agency intends to undertake, but EPA highlights only two of
the rules slated for revocation or relaxation as affecting
small entities.
Make no mistake: the war on regulation is being conducted
at the behest of some of the largest corporations in this
country, and its benefits are being delivered primarily to
them. In fact, many of the administration's deregulatory
actions not only fail to target their savings to small
businesses, but they affirmatively harm small entities by
withdrawing regulatory protections that would have benefited
them. Consider, for example, the Department of Agriculture's
withdrawal of a rule intended to address anti-competitive
behavior in the meat industry. In this matter pitting small
farmers against big agribusiness, the administration planted
its flag on the side of big business. In evaluating the
deregulatory initiatives of this administration, one cannot
simply assume that small entities are benefited when
regulations are withdrawn.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]