- ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: WITH GREAT POWER COMES GREAT RESPONSIBILITY
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE:
WITH GREAT POWER COMES
GREAT RESPONSIBILITY
=======================================================================
JOINT HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY &
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JUNE 26, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-67
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-877PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HON. LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas, Chair
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
ZOE LOFGREN, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama
DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
BILL POSEY, Florida
AMI BERA, California
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
RANDY K. WEBER, Texas
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
DONALD S. BEYER, JR., Virginia
BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
JERRY McNERNEY, California
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
GARY PALMER, Alabama
PAUL TONKO, New York
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
BILL FOSTER, Illinois
ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
MARK TAKANO, California
ROGER W. MARSHALL, Kansas
COLLEEN HANABUSA, Hawaii
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
CLAY HIGGINS, Louisiana
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona
------
Subcommittee on Research and Technology
HON. BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia, Chair
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
AMI BERA, California
ROGER W. MARSHALL, Kansas
DONALD S. BEYER, JR., Virginia
DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona
EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas
------
Subcommittee on Energy
HON. RANDY K. WEBER, Texas, Chair
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas, Ranking
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
Member
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ZOE LOFGREN, California
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
JERRY McNERNEY, California
GARY PALMER, Alabama
PAUL TONKO, New York
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
BILL FOSTER, Illinois
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
MARK TAKANO, California
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas
C O N T E N T S
June 26, 2018
Page
Witness List.....................................................
2
Hearing Charter..................................................
3
Opening Statements
Statement by Representative Barbara Comstock, Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........
4
Written Statement............................................
6
Statement by Representative Daniel Lipinski, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........
8
Written Statement............................................
10
Statement by Representative Lamar Smith, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..
12
Written Statement............................................
13
Statement by Representative Marc A. Veasey, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Energy, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................
14
Written Statement............................................
15
Statement by Representative Randy K. Weber, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Energy, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................
16
Written Statement............................................
18
Written statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Ranking Member, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
U.S. House of Representatives..................................
21
Witnesses:
Dr. Tim Persons, Chief Scientist, U.S. Government Accountability
Office
Oral Statement...............................................
22
Written Statement............................................
25
Mr. Greg Brockman, Co-Founder and Chief Technology Officer,
OpenAI
Oral Statement...............................................
40
Written Statement............................................
42
Dr. Fei-Fei Li, Chairperson of the Board and Co-Founder, AI4ALL
Oral Statement...............................................
50
Written Statement............................................
52
Discussion.......................................................
59
Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Dr. Jaime Carbonell, Director, Language Technologies Institute,
and Allen Newell Professor, School of Computer Science,
Carnegie Mellon University.....................................
82
Dr. Tim Persons, Chief Scientist, U.S. Government Accountability
Office.........................................................
89
Mr. Greg Brockman, Co-Founder and Chief Technology Officer,
OpenAI.........................................................
97
Dr. Fei-Fei Li, Chairperson of the Board and Co-Founder, AI4ALL..
105
Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record
Dr. Jaime Carbonell, Director, Language Technologies Institute,
and Allen Newell Professor, School of Computer Science,
Carnegie Mellon University, written statement..................
112
Document submitted by Representative Bill Foster, Subcommittee on
Research and Technology, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................
123
Document submitted by Representative Neal P. Dunn, Subcommittee
on Energy, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................
150
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE:
WITH GREAT POWER COMES
GREAT RESPONSIBILITY
----------
TUESDAY, JUNE 26, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology and
Subcommittee on Energy,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 10:37 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Barbara
Comstock [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee on Research and
Technology] presiding.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Comstock. The Committee on Space, Science, and
Technology will come to order. Without objection, the Chair is
authorized to declare recesses of the Committee at any time.
Good morning, and welcome to today's hearing entitled
``Artificial Intelligence--With Great Power Comes Great
Responsibility.''
I now recognize myself for five minutes for an opening
statement.
First, I would like to note that one of our witnesses, Dr.
Jaime Carbonell from Carnegie Mellon University, is unable to
be here today due to a medical emergency. We wish him well and
a speedy recovery, and, without objection, we'll ensure his
written testimony is made part of the hearing record.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Carbonell appears in
Appendix II]
Chairwoman Comstock. One of the reasons I've been looking
forward to today's hearing is to get a better sense from our
witnesses about the nuances of the term artificial intelligence
and implications for our society in a future where AI is
ubiquitous.
Of course, one might say AI is already pervasive. Since the
term was first coined in the 1950s, we have made huge advances
in the field of artificial narrow intelligence, which has been
applied to many familiar everyday items such as the technology
underlying Siri and Alexa.
Called ANI for short, such systems are designed to conduct
specific and usually limited tasks. For example, a machine that
excels at playing poker wouldn't be able to parallel park a
car. Conversely, AGI, or artificial general intelligence,
refers to intelligent behavior across a range of cognitive
tasks. If you enjoy science fiction movies, this definition may
conjure up scenes from any number of classics such as Blade
Runner, The Matrix, or The Terminator.
For many individuals, the term AGI invokes images of robots
or machines with human intelligence. As it turns out, we are
decades away from realizing such AGI systems. Nevertheless,
discussions about AGI and a future in which AGI is commonplace
lead to some interesting questions worthy of analysis.
For example, Elon Musk has been quoted as saying that AI,
quote, ``is a fundamental risk to the existence of human
civilization'' and poses ``vastly more risk'' than North Korea.
Does that mean that AGI may evolve to a point one day when we
will lose control over machines of our own creation? As
farfetched as that sounds, minds and scientists are certainly
discussing such questions.
For the short term, however, my constituents are concerned
about less existential issues that usually accompany new and
evolving technologies, topics such as cybersecurity, protecting
our privacy, and impacts to our nation's economy and to jobs.
I am an original cosponsor of a bill introduced earlier
this year titled the AI JOBS Act of 2018 to help our workplace
prepare for the ways AI will shape the economy of the future. I
will also introduce legislation today to reauthorize the
National Institute of Standards and Technology, which includes
language directing NIST to support development of artificial
intelligence and data science.
There is immense potential for AGI to help humans and to
help our economy and all of the issues we're dealing with
today, but that potential is also accompanied by some of the
concerns that we will discuss today. I look forward to what our
panel has to share with us about the bright as well as the
challenging sides of the future with AGI.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Comstock follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Comstock. I now recognize the Ranking Member of
the Research and Technology Subcommittee, the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Lipinski, for his opening statement.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Chairwoman Comstock, and thank you
to Chairman Weber for holding this hearing to understand the
current state of artificial intelligence technology.
Because of the rapid development of computational power,
the capacity of AI to perform new and more complicated tasks is
quickly advancing. Depending on who you ask, AI is the stuff of
dreams or nightmares. I believe it is definitely the former,
and I strongly fear that it could also be the latter.
The science fiction fantasy worlds depicted on Hollywood's
big and small screens alike capture imaginations about what the
world might be like if humans and highly intelligent robots
shared the Earth. Today's hearing is an opportunity to begin to
understand the real issues in AI and to begin to move forward
with informed science-based policymaking. This is a hearing
that we may remember years from now hopefully as a bright
beginning of a new era.
Current AI technologies touch a broad scope of industries
and sectors, including manufacturing, transportation, energy,
health care, and many others. As we will hear from the
witnesses today, artificial intelligence can be classified as
artificial general intelligence or artificial narrow
intelligence. From my understanding, it is applications of the
latter such as machine learning that are underlying
technologies that support some of the services and devices
widely used by Americans today. These include virtual
assistants such as Siri and Alexa, translation services such as
Google Translate, and autonomous vehicle technologies. As the
capabilities of AI improve, it will undoubtedly become a more
essential part of our lives and our economy.
While technology developers and industry look forward to
making great strides in AI, I want to make sure my colleagues
and I in Congress are asking the tough questions and carefully
considering the most crucial roles that the federal government
may have in shaping the future of AI. Federal investments in AI
research are long-standing, and we must consider the
appropriate balance and scope of federal involvement as we
begin to better understand the various roles AI will play in
our society.
We are not starting from scratch in thinking about the
appropriate role of the federal government in this arena. In
2016, the White House issued the National Artificial
Intelligence Research and Development Strategic Plan that
outlines seven priorities for federally funded AI research.
These included making long-term investments in AI, developing
effective methods for human AI collaboration, and addressing
the ethical, legal, and societal implications of AI, additional
issues to address our safety and security, public data sets,
standards, and workforce needs.
Earlier this year, the Government Accountability Office
issued a technology assessment report led by one of our
witnesses, Dr. Persons, titled ``Artificial Intelligence:
Emerging Opportunities, Challenges, and Implications.'' While
noting significant potential for AI to improve many industries
including finance, transportation, and cybersecurity, the
report also noted areas where research is still needed,
including how to optimally regulate AI, how to ensure the
availability and use of high-quality data, understanding AI's
effects on employment and education, and the development of
computational ethics to guide the decisions made by software.
These are all critical issues, but more and more I hear
concern and widely varying predictions about AI's impact on
jobs. AI has the potential to make some job functions safer and
more efficient, but it also may replace others. We need to ask
what are the long-term projections for the job market as AI
grows? In this context, we also need to ask how well do our AI
capabilities compare to those of other countries? What
education, skills, and retraining will the workforce of the
future need? These are very important questions as we think
about ensuring a skilled workforce of the future that will help
solidify U.S. leadership in AI as other countries vie for
dominance in the field. If AI threatens some careers, it likely
creates many others. We need to consider what Congress should
do to shape this impact to make sure Americans are ready for it
and make sure the benefits of AI are distributed widely.
One other obvious issue of major concern when it comes to
AI is ethics. There are many places where this becomes
relevant. Currently, we need to grapple with issues regarding
the data that are being used to educate machines. Biased data
will lead to biased results from seemingly objective machines.
A little further down the line are many difficult questions
being raised in science fiction about a world of humans and
intelligent robots. These are questions we will likely be
called on to deal with in Congress, and we need to be ready.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today,
and I look forward to your testimony. I'll yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lipinski follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you, Mr. Lipinski.
And I now recognize the Chairman of the Energy
Subcommittee, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Weber, for his
opening statement.
Mr. Weber. Madam Chair, can I defer to the Chairman of the
full Committee for his statement?
Chairwoman Comstock. Yes, you may.
Mr. Weber. Thank you.
Chairman Smith. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I didn't know you were going to do that.
Madam Chair, often unknown to us, advances in artificial
intelligence, or AI, touch many aspects of our lives. In the
area of cybersecurity, AI reduces our reaction times to
security threats. In the field of agriculture, AI monitors soil
moisture and targets crop watering. And in the transportation
lane, AI steers self-driving cars and manages intelligent
traffic systems. Multiple technical disciplines, including
quantum computing science, converge to form AI.
Tomorrow, the Science Committee will mark up the National
Quantum Initiative Act, which establishes a federal program to
accelerate quantum research and development. This is a
bipartisan bill that Ranking Member Eddie Bernice Johnson and I
and others will introduce today. My hope is that every member
of the committee will sponsor it or at least a majority.
Transforming our current quantum research into real-world
applications will create scientific and technological
discoveries, especially in the field of artificial
intelligence. These discoveries will stimulate economic growth
and improve our global competitiveness, important
considerations in light of China's advances in artificial
intelligence and quantum computing. By some accounts, China is
investing $7 billion in AI through 2030, and $10 billion in
quantum research.
The European Union has also issued a preliminary plan
outlining a $24 billion public-private investment in AI between
2018 and 2020. And Russian President Putin has noted that,
quote, ``The leader in AI will rule the world,'' end quote. No
doubt that's appealing to him. Yet, the Department of Defense's
unclassified investment in AI was only $600 million in 2016,
while federal spending on quantum totals only about $250
million a year.
The Committee will mark up a second piece of legislation to
reauthorize the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
The bill directs NIST to continue supporting the development of
artificial intelligence and data science, including the
development of machine learning and other artificial
intelligence applications. It is simply vital to our nation's
future that we accelerate our quantum computing and artificial
intelligence efforts.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Smith follows:]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you. And I now recognize the
Ranking Member of the Energy Subcommittee, the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Veasey, for an opening statement.
Mr. Veasey. I want to thank you, Chairwoman Comstock and
Chairman Weber, for holding this hearing today, and thank you
for all of the witnesses for providing expertise on this topic.
I'm looking forward to hearing what everyone has to say today.
America, of course, is a country of innovation, and in the
digital world of today, more and more industries are relying on
advanced technologies and connectivity to overcome new
challenges. Artificial intelligence and big data are impacting
every facet of production and commerce. AI has the ability to
mimic cognitive functions such as problem-solving and learning,
making it a critical resource as we encounter never-before-seen
problems. Those in the energy sector have already seen
improvements in productivity and efficiency and can expect to
see even more advancement in the coming years.
AI can be used to process and analyze data in previously
unexplored ways. Technology such as sensor-equipped aircraft
engines, locomotive, gas, and wind turbines are now able to
track production efficiency and wear and tear on vital
machinery.
AI could also significantly improve our ability to detect
failures before they occur and prevent disasters, saving money,
time, and lives. And through the use of analytics, sensors, and
operational data, AI can be used to manage, maintain, and
optimize systems ranging from energy storage components to
power plants to the electric grid. As digital technologies
revolutionize the energy sector, we must ensure safe and
responsible execution of these processes.
AI systems can learn and adapt through continuous modeling
of interaction and data feedback. Production must be put in
place to guarantee the integrity of these mechanisms as they
evaluate mass quantities of machine and user data. With
Americans' right to privacy under threat, security of these
connected systems is of the utmost importance.
Nevertheless, I'm excited to learn about the valuable
benefits that AI may be able to provide for our economy and our
well-being alike. With a Gartner research study reporting that
AI will generate 2.3 million jobs by 2020, that's a lot of
jobs. The growth AI will bring not only to the energy sector
but to health care, transportation, education, and so many
others will help ensure the prosperity of our nation.
I look forward to seeing what light our witnesses can shed
on these topics and what we can do in Congress to help enable
the development and deployment of these promising technologies.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Veasey follows:]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you. And I now recognize Mr.
Weber for his opening statement.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Today, we will hear from a panel of experts on next-
generation artificial intelligence, AI as we've all heard it
described. And while some have raised concerns about the
negative consequences of AI, this technology has the potential
to solve fundamental science problems and improve everyday
life. In fact, it's likely that everyone in this room benefits
from artificial intelligence. For example, users of voice
assistants, online purchase prediction, fraud detection that
the gentleman from Texas mentioned, and music recommendation
services are already utilizing aspects of this technology in
their day-to-day life.
In the past few years, the use of AI technology has rapidly
expanded due to the increase in the volume of data worldwide,
and to the proliferation of advanced computing hardware that
allows for the powerful parallel processing of this data. The
field of AI has broadened to include other advanced computing
disciplines such as machine learning. We've heard about neural
networks, deep learning computer vision, and natural language
processing, just to name a few. These learning techniques are
key to the development of AI technologies and can be used to
explore complex relationships and produce previously unseen
results on unprecedented timescales.
The Department of Energy, DOE, is the nation's largest
federal supporter of basic research in the physical science,
with expertise in big-data science, high-performance computing,
advanced algorithms, and data analytics and is uniquely
positioned to enable fundamental research in AI and machine
learning.
DOE's Office of Science Advanced Scientific Computing
Research program, or ASCR as we call it, program develops next-
generation supercomputing systems that can achieve the
computational power needed for this type of critical research.
This includes the Department's newest and most powerful
supercomputer called Summit, which just yesterday, just
yesterday was ranked as the fastest computing system in the
entire world.
AI also has broad applications in the DOE mission space. In
materials science, AI helps researchers speed the experimental
process and discover new compounds faster than ever before. In
high-energy physics, AI finds patterns in atomic and particle
collisions previously unseen by scientists.
In fusion energy research, AI modeling predicts plasma
behavior that will assist in building tokamak reactors, making
the best of our investments in space. Even in fossil fuel
energy production, AI systems will optimize efficiency and
predict needed maintenance at power-generating facilities. AI
technology has the potential to improve computational science
methods for any big-data problem, any big-data problem. And
with the next generation of supercomputers, the exascale
computing systems that DOE is expected to field by 2021,
American researchers utilizing AI technology will be able to
track even bigger challenges.
We cannot afford to fall behind in this compelling area of
research, and big investments in AI by China and Europe already
threaten U.S. dominance in this field. With the immense
potential for AI technology to answer fundamental scientific
challenges, it's quite clear we should prioritize this
research.
We should maintain, I will add, American competitive edge
and American exceptionalism. This will help us to do that.
I want to thank our accomplished panel of witnesses for
their testimony today, and I look forward to hearing what role
Congress can play and should play in advancing this critical
area of discovery science.
And, Madam Chair, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Weber follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[The prepared statement of Full Committee Ranking Member
Eddie Bernice Johnson]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0877.011
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you. And I will now introduce
today's witnesses. Our first witness today is Dr. Tim Persons,
Chief Scientist at the U.S. Government Accountability Office.
He also serves as a Director for GAO's Center for Science,
Technology, and Engineering. Dr. Persons received a Bachelor of
Science in physics from James Madison University and a Master
of Science in nuclear physics from Emory University. He also
earned a Master of Science in computer science and Ph.D. in
biomedical engineering, both from Wake Forest University.
Next, we have Mr. Greg Brockman, our second witness, who is
Cofounder and Chief Technology Officer of OpenAI, a nonprofit
artificial intelligence research company. Mr. Brockman is an
investor in over 30 startups and a board member of the Stellar
digital currency system. He was previously the CTO of Stripe, a
payments startup now valued at over $9 billion. And he studied
mathematics at Harvard and computer science at MIT.
And our final witness is Dr. Fei-Fei Li, Chairperson of the
Board and Cofounder of AI4ALL. In addition, Dr. Li is a
Professor in the Computer Science Department at Stanford and
the Director of the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Lab. In
2017, Dr. Li also joined Google Cloud as Chief Scientist of AI
and machine learning. Dr. Li received her Bachelor of Arts in
physics from Princeton and her Ph.D. in electrical engineering
from the California Institute of Technology.
I now recognize Dr. Persons for five minutes to present his
testimony.
TESTIMONY OF DR. TIM PERSONS,
CHIEF SCIENTIST,
U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
Dr. Persons. Good morning. Thank you, Chairwoman Comstock,
Chairman Weber, Ranking Members Lipinski and Veasey and Members
of the Subcommittee. I'm pleased to be here today to discuss
GAO's technology assessment on artificial intelligence. To
ensure the United States remains a leader in AI innovation,
special attention will be needed for our education and training
systems, regulatory structures, frameworks for privacy and
civil liberties, and our understanding of risk management in
general.
AI holds substantial promise for improving human life,
increasing the nation's economic competitiveness, and solving
some of society's most pressing challenges. Yet, as a
disruptive technology, AI poses risks that could have far-
reaching effects on, for example, the future labor force,
economic inclusion, and privacy and civil liberties, among
others.
Today, I'll summarize three key insights arising from our
recent work. First, the distinction between narrow versus
general AI; second, the expected impact of AI on jobs,
competitiveness, and workforce training; and third, the role
the federal government can play in research, standards
development, new regulatory approaches, and education.
Regarding narrow versus general AI, narrow AI refers to
applications that are task-specific such as tax preparation
software, voice and face recognition systems, and algorithms
that classify the content of images. General AI refers to a
system exhibiting intelligence on par with or possibly
exceeding that of humans. While science fiction has helped
general AI capture our collective imaginations for some time,
it is unlikely to be fully achieved for decades if at all. Even
so, considerable progress has been made in developing narrow AI
applications that outperform humans in specific tasks and are
thus invoking crucially important economic policy and research
considerations.
Regarding jobs, competition, and the workforce, there is
considerable uncertainty about the extent to which jobs will be
displaced by AI and how many--how much any losses will be
offset by job creation. In the near term, displacement to
certain jobs such as call-center or retail workers may be
particularly vulnerable to automation. However, in the long
term, demand for skills that are complementary to AI is
expected to increase, resulting in greater productivity. To
better understand the impact of AI on employment moving
forward, several experts underscored the need for new data and
methods to enable greater insight into this issue.
Regarding the role of the federal government, it will
continue its crucial role in research and data-sharing,
contributions to standards development, regulatory approaches,
and education. One important research area of the federal
government could support is enhancing the explainability of AI,
which could help establish trust in the behavior of AI systems.
The federal government could also incentivize data-sharing,
including federal data that are subject to limitations for how
they can be used, as well as creating frameworks for sharing
data to improve the safety and security of AI systems. Such
efforts may include supporting standards for explainability;
data labeling and safety, including risk assessment; and
benchmarking of AI performance against the status quo. It's
always risk versus risk.
Related to this, new regulatory approaches are needed,
including the development of regulatory sandboxes for testing
AI products, services, and business models, especially in
industries like transportation, financial services, and health
care. GAO's recent report on fintech found, for example, that
regulators use sandboxes to gain insight into key questions,
issues, and unexpected risks that may arise out of the emerging
technologies. New rules governing intellectual property and
data privacy may also be needed to manage the deployment of AI.
Finally, education and training will need to be reimagined
so workers have the skills needed to work with and alongside
emerging AI technologies. For the United States to remain
competitive globally and effectively manage AI systems, its
workers will need a deeper understanding of probability and
statistics across most if not all academic disciplines, that
is, not just the physical, engineering, and biological
sciences, as well as competency and ethics, algorithmic
auditability, and risk management.
In conclusion, the emergence of what some have called the
fourth industrial revolution and AI's key role in driving it
will require new frameworks for business models and value
propositions for the public and private sectors alike. Even if
AI technologies were to cease advancing today, no part of
society or the economy would be directly or indirectly
untouched by its transformative effects.
I thank the committee leadership of the committees. Thanks
to the members here for your holding a hearing on this very
important topic today for such a time as this.
Madam Chairwoman, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Members, this
concludes my prepared remarks. I would be happy to respond to
any questions that you or other Members of the Subcommittees
have at this time.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Persons follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you. And I now recognize Mr.
Brockman for five minutes.
TESTIMONY OF MR. GREG BROCKMAN,
CO-FOUNDER AND CHIEF TECHNOLOGY OFFICER, OPENAI
Mr. Brockman. Chairwoman Comstock, Chairman Weber, Ranking
Member Lipinski, Ranking Member Veasey, members of both
subcommittees, thank you for having me today to deliver
testimony.
I'm Greg Brockman, Cofounder of OpenAI, a San Francisco-
based nonprofit with a mission to ensure that artificial
general intelligence, which we define as systems--the highly
autonomous systems that outperform humans at most economically
valuable work--benefits all of humanity.
Now, I'm here to tell you about the generality of modern
AI, why AGI might actually be in reach sooner than commonly
expected, and what action policymakers can take today.
So, first, what's OpenAI? We're a research company with one
of the world's most advanced AI research and development teams.
Yesterday, we announced major progress towards a milestone that
we, Alphabet's subsidiary DeepMind, and Facebook have
separately been trying to reach, which is solving complex
strategy games which start to capture many aspects of the real
world that were just not seen in board games like chess or Go.
We built a system called OpenAI Five, which learned to
devise long-term plans and navigate scenarios far too complex
to be programmed in by a human in order to solve a massively
popular competitive game called Dota 2.
Now, in the past, AI-like technology was written by humans
in order to solve one specific problem at a time. It was not
capable of adapting to solve new problems. Today's AI, it's all
based on one core technique, which is the artificial neural
network, a single simple idea that, as it's run on faster
computers, is proving to match a surprising amount of human
capability. And this was in fact something that was shown in
part by my fellow witnesses Dr. Li's work in image recognition.
And artificial neural networks can be trained to perform speech
recognition or computer vision. It just depends on the data
that they're shown.
Now, further along the spectrum of generality is AGI.
Rather than being developed for any one use case, AGI would be
developed for a wide range of important tasks, and AGI would
also be useful for noncommercial applications, including
thinking through complex international disputes or city
planning.
Now, people have been talking about AGI for decades, and so
how should we think about the timeline? Well, all AI systems,
they're built on three foundations. That's data, computational
power, and algorithms. Next-generation AI systems are already
starting to rely less on conventional data sets where a human
has provided the right answer. For example, one of our recent
neural networks learned by reading 7,000 books.
We also recently released a study showing that the amount
of computation powering the largest AI training runs has been
doubling every 3-1/2 months since 2012. That's a total increase
of 300,000 times. And we expect this to continue for the next
five years using only today's proven hardware technologies and
not assuming any breakthroughs like quantum or optical.
Now, to put that in perspective, that's like if your phone
battery, which today lasts for a day, started to last for 800
years and then, five years later, started to last for 100
million years. It's this torrent of compute, this tsunami of
compute. We've never seen anything like this. And so the open
question is will this massive increase in combinational power,
combined with near-term improvements in algorithmic
understanding, be enough to develop AGI? We don't know the
answer to this question today, but given the rapid progress
that we are seeing, we can't confidently rule it out.
And so now what should we be thinking about today? What can
policymakers be doing today? And so, you know, the first thing
to recognize is the core danger of AGI is that it has
fundamentally the potential to cause rapid change whether
that's through machines pursuing goals that are mis-specified
by their operator, whether it's through malicious humans
subverting deployed systems, or whether it's an economy that
grows in an out-of-control way for its own sake rather than in
order to improve human lives.
Now, we spent two years. worth of policy research to create
the OpenAI Charter, which in fact is a document I have right
here in front of me. This contains three sections defining our
views on safe and responsible AGI development. So that's--one
is leaving time for safety and in particular refusing a race to
the bottom on safety in order to reach AGI first. The second is
to ensure that people at large rather than any one small group
receive the benefits of this transformative technology. And the
third is working together as a community in order to solve
safety and policy challenges.
Now, our primary recommendation to policymakers is to start
measuring progress in this field. We need to understand how
fast the field is moving, what capabilities are likely to
arrive when in order to successfully plan for AGI challenges.
That moves towards forecasts rather than intuition. Measurement
is also a place where international coordination is actually
valuable, and this is important if we want to spread safety and
ethical standards globally.
So thank you for your time, and I look forward to
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brockman follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you. And we now recognize Dr. Li.
TESTIMONY OF DR. FEI-FEI LI,
CHAIRPERSON OF THE BOARD AND CO-FOUNDER, AI4ALL
Dr. Li. Thank you for the invitation, Congresswomen and
Congressmen. My name is Fei-Fei Li. I'm here today as the
Cofounder and Chairperson of AI4ALL, a national nonprofit
organization focusing on bringing hands-on experience in AI
research to high school students that have been traditionally
underrepresented in the field of--in the STEM fields such as
girls, people of color, and members of low-income communities.
Our program began at Stanford University in 2015. This year,
AI4ALL are expanded across North America to six university
campuses.
I often like to share with my students that there's nothing
artificial about artificial intelligence. It's inspired by
people, it's created by people, and, most importantly, it has
an impact on people. It's a powerful tool we're only just
beginning to understand, and that's a profound responsibility.
I'm here today because the time has come to have an
informed public conversation about that responsibility. With
proper guidance, AI will make life better, but without it, it
stands to widen the wealth divide even further, making
technology even more exclusive, and reinforce biases we've
spent generations trying to overcome. This will be an ethical,
philosophical, and humanistic challenge, and it will require a
diverse community of contributors. It's an approach I call
human-centered AI. It's made of three pillars that I believe
will help ensure AI plays a positive role in the world.
The first is that the next generation of AI technology must
reflect more of the qualities that make us human such as a
deeper understanding of the context we rely on to make sense of
the world. Progress on this front will make AI much better at
understanding our needs but will require a deeper relationship
between AI and fields like neuroscience, cognitive science, and
the behavior sciences.
The second is the emphasis on enhancing and augmenting
human skills, not replacing them. Machines are unlikely to
replace nurses and doctors, for example, but machine learning
assistive diagnosis will help their job tremendously. Similar
opportunities to intelligently augment human capabilities
abound from health care to education, from manufacturing to
agriculture.
Finally, AI must be guided by a concern for its impact. We
must address challenges of machine biases, security, privacy,
as well as at the society level. Now is the time to prepare for
the effect of AI on laws, ethics, and even culture.
To put these ideas in practice, governments, academia, and
industry will have to work together. This will require better
understanding of AI in all three branches of government. AI is
simply too important to be owned by private interests alone,
and publicly funded research and education can provide a more
transparent foundation for its development.
Next, academia has a unique opportunity to elevate our
understanding and development of this technology. Universities
are a perfect environment for studying its effect on our world,
as well as supporting cross-disciplinary next-generation AI
research.
Finally, businesses must develop a better balance between
their responsibility to shareholders and their obligations to
their users. Commercial AI products have the potential to
change the world rapidly, and the time has come to complement
this ambition with ethical, socially conscious policies.
Human-centered AI means keeping humans at the heart of this
technology's development. Unfortunately, lack of diverse
representation remains a crisis in AI. Women hold a fraction of
high-tech positions, even fewer at the executive level, and
this is even worse for people of color. We have good reasons to
worry about bias in our algorithms. A lack of diversity among
the people developing these algorithms will be among its
primary causes. One of my favorite quotes comes from technology
ethicist Shannon Vallor, who says that ``There's no independent
machine values. Machine values are human values.''
However autonomous our technology becomes, its impact on
the world will always be our responsibility. With the human-
centered approach, we can make sure it's an impact we'll be
proud of. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Li follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you. And I now recognize myself
for five minutes for questions.
Dr. Li, there's a generally accepted potential for AI-
enabled teaching to a minimum to provide a backup for
traditional classroom education. So as AI technology advances,
it seems reasonable to assume that your traditional education,
vocational training, homeschooling, and even college coursework
will need to change and adapt. Could you maybe comment about
how education in general and for specific groups and
individuals might be transformed by AI and how we can make that
positive and really sort of have more of a democratization of
education, particularly higher education and in STEM and in
science?
Dr. Li. Thank you for the question. Of course, I feel
passionate about education. So I want to address this question
in--from two dimensions. One is how could we improve the
education of AI and STEM in general to more students and
general community? Second is what can AI as a technology do to
help education itself?
On the first dimension, as evidenced by our work in the
AI4ALL, we really believe that it's simultaneously a crisis and
an important opportunity that we involve more people in the
development of AI technology. AI represents--humanity has never
created a technology so similar or trying to resemble who we
are, and we need AI to--we need technologists and leaders of
tomorrow to represent this technology.
So, personally, I think we need to democratize AI's
education to reach out to more students of color, girls, women
from traditionally underrepresented minority groups. At AI4ALL
for the past four years, we've already created an alumni
population of more than 100 students, and through their own
community and route outreach effort, we have touched the lives
of more than 1,400 youth ranging from middle schoolers to high
schoolers in disseminating this AI knowledge, and we need more
of that in higher education.
The second dimension that I want to answer your question is
AI as a technology itself can help improve education itself. In
the machine learning community, I'm sure, Greg, you also agree
with me that there is an increasing recognition of the
opportunity for lifelong learning using technology as an
assistive technology. I have colleagues at Stanford who focus
on research and reinforcement learning and education of how to
bring more technological assistance into the teaching and
territorialization of education itself, and I think this could
become a huge tool, as I was saying, to augment human teachers
and human educators to--so that our knowledge can reach to more
students and wider community.
Chairwoman Comstock. Excellent. And for other witnesses,
could you maybe comment on how academic institutions and
industry could work with government on AI?
Mr. Brockman. All right. So, you know, for--OpenAI's
recommendation is really about starting with measurement,
right, to really start to understand what's happening in the
field. I think it's really about, for example, the study that
we did showing the 300,000 times increase. We need more of
that. We need to understand where things are going, where we
are. I think the government is uniquely positioned to set some
of the goalposts as well, and we've been pretty encouraged by
seeing some of the work that is happening at GAO and also DIUx
has had some success with us. So we think it's really about
starting a low touch way for the dialogue to start happening
because I think right now the dialogue is not happening to the
extent that it should.
Dr. Persons. All right. Thank you for the question. I do
think that, as the committees have pointed out, this is a
whole-of-society issue. It's going to be government in
partnership with the private sector, with academia to look at
things. So I think there is room for thought about how to learn
by doing, creating internships and ways to try and solve real-
world problems so that you have a mix of the classroom
experience, as well as making and building--you'll fail a lot
of course with these things but learning in a safe environment
and then being able to grow expertise in that way.
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you. And, Dr. Li, did you have
anything you wanted to add to that also? Okay. Well, thank you.
And I now will recognize Mr. Lipinski for five minutes.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you. This is a fascinating topic. And
there's--I want to try to move through some things quickly, but
I'll get some good answers here.
It seems to me that, Mr. Brockman, you have a different
view of how--of AGI, the possibilities of AGI and how quickly
it can come, then, the GAO report. Is there a reason for this?
Is there something you think that GAO is missing? And if Dr.
Persons could respond to that.
Mr. Brockman. So I don't know if I can comment directly on
the report just not being familiar enough with all the details
in there, but I can certainly comment on our perspective on AGI
and its possibility. And a lot of it really comes down to,
rather than--you know, I think that there's been a lot of more
emotion or intuition-based argument. And to your opening
remarks, you know, I think that science-based reasoning in
order to project what's happening in this field is extremely
important, and that something that we've spent quite a lot of
effort on since starting OpenAI almost three years ago.
And so looking at the barriers to progress as compute data
algorithms, data is something that's changing very rapidly in
terms of what data we can use, the computation, the power there
is growing at a rate that we've just never seen over the course
of this decade. We're going to be talking, you know, I think
about ten orders of magnitude, and that something where, if you
were to compare that to the typical growth of compute,
something like Moore's law, that the--over the period where we
saw 300,000X increase in the past six years, we would've only
seen 12X, right? That's a huge gap, and this is somewhere where
we're sort of being projected into the future a lot faster than
people realize.
Now, it doesn't mean that it's going to happen soon. It
means that we can't rule it out. It means that for the next
five years, as long as this hardware growth is happening, we're
in a fog and it's hard to make confident projections. And so my
position is that we can't rule it out. We know that this is--
you know, we're talking about a technological revolution on the
scale of the agricultural revolution, something that could be
so beneficial to everyone in this world. And if we aren't
careful in terms of thinking ahead and trying to be prepared,
it really could be caught unaware.
Mr. Lipinski. And thank you. Dr. Persons, do you have a
response on that?
Dr. Persons. Sure. I think--and with all respect for our
Silicon Valley innovators who are upstarts and challenge the
status quo, I think it's great that we have this system. The
key thing that we're seeing is the convergence of these
technologies that was mentioned by my panelists of the
exponential power in computing, the ubiquitous nature of data,
the sophistication of algorithms are all coming in.
But that said, many folks in the community are mildly
skeptical about the rate at which general AI may come in this
area because--for several reasons. One is just the way that we
think about the problem now, the super complexity that is
manifest in addressing the various challenges. You're looking
at large data sets and looking at all the facets of them. It's
much easier to say than to do.
And again, I think a lot of the--as you pointed out, the
driving force here is the concern about general AI and taking
over the world kind of thing, and it's just much harder to
mimic human intelligence, especially in an environment where
intelligence isn't even really defined or understood.
And I think, as Dr. Li pointed out, a lot of this is really
about augmentation. That's something else we heard from our
experts. It wasn't a replacement of humans; it was a how can we
become better humans, more functional humans in doing these
things? So a lot of it just gets down to the----
Mr. Lipinski. Let me--because I have a short time, sorry.
Dr. Persons. Thank you.
Mr. Lipinski. I just want to throw out quickly, the--there
have been very different--vastly different opinions and--about
the replacement of jobs and the disappearance of jobs and what
the impact's going to be. Mr. Brockman, what do you think the
impact will be?
Mr. Brockman. So I think that with new technologies in the
short term we always overestimate the degree to which they can
make rapid change, but I think in the long-term that they do, I
think technology is change in that we've seen with things like
the internet, that there's been a lot of job displacement, both
creation and destruction. And I think AI will be no different.
I think the question of exactly which jobs and when I think we
don't have enough information yet, and I think that that's
where measurement really starts to come in. So we view it as an
open question and a very important one.
Dr. Persons. And, sir, if I can just say as a bottom line,
nobody really knows the impact on this, and of course our
experts are saying to know more we might need to be able to
encourage--let's--for example, our Bureau of Labor Statistics,
a data-type agency that--out of the federal government to help
provide more data or different data or things to help try and
answer the question of what is the impact as this technology
continues to unfurl.
That said, there's also a history of--when you--it goes
back and attributed to Ned Ludd in the era of British
industrialization and the concern of destroying the machines
for the concern about loss of jobs, and yet--and many times
throughout history, it's happened in an array of technologies
where net jobs actually increased. It just--they were more
sophisticated jobs. They were toward higher value creation and
more productivity. So there is hope with this technology as
well.
Mr. Lipinski. And if the Chairwoman will allow, I want to
hear from Dr. Li.
Dr. Li. I just want to say that technology inevitably
throughout human civilization has an impact to change the
landscape of jobs, but it's really, really critical, like my
fellow panelists said, that we need to invest in the research
of how to assess this change. It's not a simple picture of
replacement, especially when this technology has a much greater
potential and power to augment it.
I just spent days in the hospital ICU with my mother in the
past couple of weeks, and--with my own health care and AI
research, you recognize that a nurse in a single shift is doing
hundreds of different tasks in our ICU unit where they're
fighting for life and death for our patients, and these are not
a simple question of replacing jobs but creating better
technology to assist them and to make their jobs better and
make the lives better for everyone. And that's what I hope we
focus on, using this technology.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you.
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you, Dr. Li. That's a wonderful
example of really vividly explaining to us how that can be used
because certainly, as we're an aging population in this
country, that's a challenge we're all facing. And so the
quality of life and improvement in each of those employees and
nurses being able to do a better job, thank you for outlining
that.
I now recognize Mr. Weber.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Dr. Li, is your mom okay? We hope that she is and pray and
hope that she is okay.
Dr. Li. Thank you. I'm here. That means she's better.
Mr. Weber. Okay. Otherwise, we were going to be missing two
witnesses. Good.
Dr. Li. She's watching me right now.
Mr. Weber. Well, good.
Chairwoman Comstock. Hi, Mom. She's doing a great job.
Mr. Weber. You're doing excellent. She's a proud mom, and
that's some good medicine in and of itself right there.
Dr. Li. Thank you.
Mr. Weber. So we're glad for that.
Dr. Brockman, you in your statement say that your mission
was to actually make sure that artificial intelligence
benefited people and was better for the most economically
valuable work. Do you remember that?
Mr. Brockman. So are----
Mr. Weber. It's in your written statement.
Mr. Brockman. That's right. So the--our definition of what
AGI will be, whether created by us or anyone else but just the
milestone is a system that can outperform humans and
economically valuable work.
Mr. Weber. Okay. Well, let me read it to you real quick.
``I'm Greg Brockman, Cofounder, a nonprofit development
organization. Our mission is to ensure that artificial general
intelligence, by which we mean highly autonomous systems that
outperform humans at,'' quote, ``most economically valuable
work,'' end quote, ``benefits all humanity.'' How would you
define most economically valuable work?
Mr. Brockman. So I think that, again--and, first of all, I
just--you know, the question of--you know, AGI is something
that the whole field has been working towards for--you know,
really since the beginning of the field 50 years ago, and so
the question of how to define it I think is something that is
not entirely agreed-upon, that our definition is this--and when
we think of it, we think of--you think about things like
starting companies or very high intellectual work like that----
Mr. Weber. Right.
Mr. Brockman. --and, you know, also to things like going in
cleaning up disaster sites or things that humans would be
unable to do very well today.
Mr. Weber. Okay. Well, I noticed that in your disagreement
that Congressman Lipinski referred to with the report, and you
call them Silicon Valley upstarts. At least you didn't call
them young upstarts, so that's an advantage. Thank you for
doing that. But you're literally looking at a new industry
that, even though it's shifted--bless you--even though the
shift is going to be changing, you're actually creating jobs
for another industry.
And going back to Dr. Li's example with her mom in the IU
talking about much the nurses do, how do you train for those
jobs if it's moving as fast as you think it is?
Mr. Brockman. Yes, and so, you know, one thing I think is
also very important is that I don't think we have much ability
to change the timeline to this technology. I think that there
are a lot of stakeholders, there are a lot of different pieces
of the ecosystem. And that--what we do is we step back and we
look at the trends and we say what's going to be possible when.
And so I think that the question of how to train--and again,
that's going to be something--we're not the only ones that are
going to have to help answer that question.
But I think that the place to start, it really comes back
to measurement, right? If we don't know what's coming, if we
can't project well, then we're going to be taken by surprise.
And so, you know, I think that there are going to be lots of
jobs and already have been created jobs that are surprising in
terms of--you think about with autonomous vehicles, that we
need to label all this data, we need to make sure that the
systems are doing what we expect, and that all of that--that
there's going to be humans that are going to help make these
systems----
Mr. Weber. But we would all agree, I hope--and this
question is for all three panelists--all three witnesses, that
the jobs they're going to create are well worth the
transformation into all of that technology.
Dr. Persons, would you agree with that?
Dr. Persons. I would agree to that. I'll--let me give you a
quick example if I may. Speaking with a former Secretary of
Transportation recently, just a simple example of tollbooth
collectors, we have now a system where you get the E-ZPass, you
drive through, and you have less of a workforce there that
could have had an impact at that time for short period on the
number or loss of jobs for tollbooth collectors, and yet it
freed them up. It enabled them to perhaps do other things that
were needed and large problems.
Mr. Weber. Okay. And, Mr. Brockman, you were shaking your
head. You would agree with that statement?
Mr. Brockman. Absolutely. I think that the purpose of
technology and improving----
Mr. Weber. Sure.
Mr. Brockman. --it is to improve people's lives.
Mr. Weber. So, Dr. Li, I see you shaking your head, too?
Dr. Li. Yes, absolutely. In addition to the example Mr.
Persons provided, I think deeply about the jobs that are
currently dangerous and harmful for humans from fighting fires
to search and rescue to, you know, natural disaster recovery.
Not only we shouldn't put humans in harm's way if we can avoid
it, but also we don't have enough help in these situations, and
they are--this is where technology should be of tremendous
help.
Mr. Weber. Very quickly, I'm out of time, just yes or no.
If we lose dominance in AI, that puts us in a really bad spot
in worldwide competitiveness, would you agree?
Dr. Persons. Yes.
Mr. Brockman. Yes.
Mr. Weber. Yes. Thank you.
Dr. Li. Yes.
Mr. Weber. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you. Good question.
Now, I recognize Mr. Veasey for five minutes.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Madam Chair.
We have heard about already from your testimony some of the
advantages of AI and how it can help humankind, how it can help
advance us as a nation and a country. But, as you know, there
are people also that have concerns about AI. There's been a lot
of sort of doomsday-like comparisons about AI and what the
future of AI can actually mean.
To what extent do you think this scenario, this sort of,
you know, worst-case scenario that a lot of people have pointed
out about AI is actually something that we should be concerned
about? And if there is a legitimate concern, what can we do to
help establish a more ethical, you know, responsible way to
develop AI? And this is for anybody on the panel to answer.
Mr. Brockman. So I think thinking about artificial general
intelligence today is a little bit like thinking about the
internet in maybe the late '50s, right? If someone was to
describe to you what the internet was going to be, how it would
affect the world, and the fact that all these weird things were
going to start happening, you're going to have this thing
called Uber which you're going to be able to--you'd just--you'd
be very confused. It'd be very hard to understand what that
would look like and the fact that, oh, we forget to put
security in there and that we'd be paying for that for, you
know, 30 years' worth of trying to fix things. And now imagine
that that whole story, which played out over really the course
of the past 60, almost 70 years now was going to play out in a
much more compressed timescale.
And so that's the perspective that I have when it comes to
artificial general intelligence is the fact that it can cause
this rapid change and it's already hard for us to cope with the
changes that technology brings. And so the question of is it
going to be malicious actors, is it going to be that the
technology itself just wasn't built in a safe way, or is it
just that the deployment that who owns it and the values that
it's given aren't something that we're all very happy with? All
of those I think are real risks, and again, that's something
that we want to start thinking about today.
Dr. Persons. Thank you, sir. So I agree with that. I think
the key thing is being clear-eyed about what the risks actually
are and not necessarily being driven by the entertaining and
yet this science-fiction-type narrative sometimes on these
things projecting or going to extremes and assuming far more
than where we actually are in the technology.
So it's--there are risks. It's understanding the risks as
they are, and there are always contextual risks. Risks in
automated vehicles are going to be different than risks in this
technology in financial services, let's say. So it's really
working, again, symbiotically with the community of practice
and identify what are the things there? What are the
opportunities? And there's going to be opportunities. And then
what undesirable things do we want to focus on and then
optimize from there on on how to deal with them. Thank you.
Mr. Veasey. Mr. Brockman, in your testimony you had
referenced a report outlining some malicious actors in this
area. Could you sort of elaborate on some of your findings in
these areas?
Mr. Brockman. That's right. So OpenAI was a collaborator on
this research report projecting not necessarily today what
people are doing but looking forward what are some of the
malicious activities that people could use AI for. And so that
report--let's see. Yes, I think maybe the most important things
here you start thinking about a lot of things around
information, privacy, the question of how we actually ensure
that these systems do what the operator intends, despite
potential hacking. You think about autonomous systems that are
taking action on behalf of humans that are subverted and
whether, again, it's--you know, that this report focuses on
active action. You think about autonomous vehicles and if a
human hacker can go and take control of a fleet of those, some
of the bad things that could happen.
And so, you know, I think that this report should really be
viewed as we need to be thinking about these things today
before these are a problem because a lot of these systems are
going to be deployed in a large-scale way, and if you're able
to subvert them, then, you know, the--all of the problems that
we've seen to date are going to start having a very different
flavor where it's not just privacy anymore; it's also systems
that are deployed in the real world that are actually able to
affect our own well-being.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you. And I now recognize Mr.
Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Madam Chairman.
This, as in all advances in technology, can be seen as the
great hope for making things better, or the new idea that there
might be new dangers involved, or the new technologies will
help certain peoples but be very damaging to others. And I
think that where that fear would be most recognizable is in
terms of employment and how in a free society people earn a
living. And are we talking about here about the development of
technology that will help get the tedious and remedial or the
lower-skilled jobs that can be done by machine, or are we
talking about the loss of employment by machines that are
designed to really perform better than human beings perform in
high-level jobs? What are we talking about here?
Dr. Li. Okay. So I can--I'm still going to use health care
as an example because I'm familiar with that area of research.
So if you look at recent studies by McKinsey and other
institutions on employment and AI, there is a recognition that
we need to talk a little more nuanced than just entire job but
the tasks under each job. The technology has the potential to
change the nature of different tasks. Again, for example, take
nurse--a job of a nurse as an example. It--no matter how
rapidly we develop the technology and the most optimistic
assessment, it's very hard to imagine the entire profession of
nurse--nursing would be replaced, yet within the nursing jobs
there are many opportunities that certain tasks can be assisted
by AI technology.
For example, a simple one that costs a lot of time and
effort in nursing jobs is charting. Our nurses in our, again,
ICU rooms, our patient rooms spend a lot of time typing and
charting into a system, into a computer while that's time away
from patients and other more critical care. So these are the
kind of tasks under a bigger job description that we can hope
to use technology to assist them and augment----
Mr. Rohrabacher. So are we talking about robots here or a
box that thinks and is able to make decisions for us? What are
we talking about?
Dr. Li. So AI technology is a technology of many different
aspects. It's not just robot. In this particular case, for
example, natural language, understanding the speech
recognition, and possibly in the form of a voice assistant
would help charting. But maybe delivering of simple tools on
the factory floor will be in the form of a small simple
delivery robot. So there are different forms of machines.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I see. Well, there are many dangerous jobs
that I could see that we'd prefer not having human life put at
risk in order to accomplish the goal. And, for example, at
nuclear power plants it would be a wondrous thing to have a
robotic response to something that could cause great damage to
the overall community but would kill somebody if they actually
went in to try to solve a problem. And I understand that and
also possibly with communicable diseases where people need to
be treated but you're putting people at great risk for doing
that.
However, with that said, when people are seeking profit in
a free and open society, I would hate to think that we're
putting out of work people with lower skills, and we need the
dignity of work and of earning your own way once we know now
that when you take that away, it really has a major negative
impact on people's lives.
So I want to thank you all for giving us a better
understanding of what we're facing on this, and let's hope that
we can develop this technology in a way that helps the widest
variety of people and not just perhaps a small group that will
keep their jobs and keep the money. So thank you very much.
Chairwoman Comstock. Thank you. And I now recognize Ms.
Bonamici for five minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much. Thank you to our
witnesses.
First, I want to note that our nation has some of the best
scientists and researchers and engineers in the world, but
without stronger investments in research and development,
especially long-term foundational research, we risk falling
behind, especially in this important area. I hope the research
continues to acknowledge the socioeconomic aspects as well of
integrating AI technologies.
In my home State at the University of Oregon we have the
Urbanism Next center. They're doing some great work bringing
together interdisciplinary perspectives, including planning and
architecture and engineering and urban design and public
administration with public, private, and academic sectors to
discuss how leveraging technology will shape the future of our
communities. Their research has been talking about emerging
technologies like autonomous vehicles and the implications for
equity, health, the economy, and the environment and
governance.
Dr. Persons, can you discuss the value of establishing this
type of partnership between industry, academia, and the private
sector to help especially identify and address some of the
consequences intended and unintended of AI as it becomes more
prevalent? And I do have a couple more questions.
Dr. Persons. Sure, I'll answer quickly. The short answer is
yes. Our experts and what we're seeing is the value in public-
private partnerships because, again, it would be a mistake to
look at this technology in sort of isolated stovepipes, and it
would need to be an integrated approach to things, the federal
government having its various roles but key--like your
mentioning at University of Oregon, key academic and research
questions. There's many, many things to research and questions
to answer and then of course industry, which has an incredible
amount of innovation and thinking and power to drive things
forward.
Ms. Bonamici. Terrific. Thank you. Dr. Li, I have a couple
questions. You discuss the labor disruption, and I know that's
brought up a couple of times and the need for retraining. We
really have sort of a dual skills gap issue here because we
want to make sure there are enough people who have the
education needed for the AI industries, but we also are talking
about the workers like you mentioned, the workers in tollbooths
who will be displaced. But with the rapid development of
technologies and the changes in this field, what knowledge and
skills are the most important for a workforce capable of
addressing the opportunities and the barriers to the
development?
I serve on the Education and Workforce Committee, and this
is a really important issue is how do we educate people to be
prepared for such rapid changes?
Dr. Li. So AI is fundamentally a scientific and engineering
discipline, and to--as an educator, I really believe in more
investment in STEM education from early age on. We look at--in
our experience at AI4ALL when we invited these high school
students in the age of 14, 15, 16 to participate in AI
research, their capabilities and potential just amazes me. We
have high school students who have worked in my lab and won
best-paper award at this country's best AI academic
conferences. And so I believe passionately that STEM education
is critical for the future for preparing AI workforce.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. And as everyone on this committee
knows, I always talk about STEAM because I'm a big believer in
educating both halves of the brain, and students who have arts
education tend to be more creative and innovative.
Also, Dr. Li, in your testimony you talk about how AI
engineers need to work with neuroscientists and cognitive
scientists to help AI systems develop a more human feel. Now, I
know Dr. Carbonell is not here today, but I noted in his
testimony he wrote, ``AI is the ability to create machines who
perform tasks normally associated with human intelligence.''
I'm sure that was an intentional choice to humanize the
machine, but I wanted to ask you, Dr. Li, about--he's not here
to explain, but I have no doubt that was intentional. In your
testimony you talk about the laws that codify ethics. How is
this going to be done? Can you go into more depth about how
would these laws be done? Who would determine what is ethical?
And would it be a combination of industry, government
determining standards? How is--how are we going to set the
stage for an ethical development of AI?
Dr. Li. Yes, so thank you for the question. I think for
technology as impactful as AI is to human society, it's
critical that we have ethical guidelines. And different
institutions from government to academia to industry will have
to participate in this dialogue together and also by
themselves.
Ms. Bonamici. Are they already doing that, though? You said
they'll have to but is somebody convening all of this to make
sure that there are----
Dr. Li. So there are efforts. I'm sure Greg can add to
this. Industries in Silicon Valley we're seeing company
starting to roll out AI ethical principles and responsible AI
practices in academia. We see that ethicists and social
scientists coming together with technologists holding seminars,
symposiums, classes to discuss the ethical impact of AI. And
hopefully, government will participate in this and support and
invest and these kind of efforts.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. I see my time is expired. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I yield back. Oh, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Weber. [Presiding] I thank the gentlelady.
And the gentlelady from Arizona is recognized for five
minutes.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I want to thank the testifiers today, very interesting
subject and something that kind of spurs the imagination about
science fiction shows and those type of things.
What countries are the major players in AI, and where does
the United States rank in competition with them? And that's to
any panelist or all panelists.
Mr. Brockman. So, you know, today, I think that the United
States actually ranks possibly top of the list. You know, I
think there are lots of other countries that are investing very
heavily. You know, China is investing heavily, lots of
countries in Europe are investing heavily. The--you know,
DeepMind is subsidiary of a U.S. company but located in London.
And I think that, you know, it's very clear that AI is going to
be something of global impact, and I just think the more that
we can understand what's happening everywhere and figure out
how we can coordinate on safety and ethics in particular, the
better it's going to go.
Dr. Persons. Yes, I--thank you for the question. I think
wherever there is large amounts of computing, large amounts of
data, and a strong desire to innovate and continue to develop
again in this sort of fourth industrial revolution that we're
moving on, then you--it drives toward certainly China and then
our allies and colleagues in Western Europe and developed
worlds. Thank you.
Mrs. Lesko. And is there--did you want to answer?
Mr. Brockman. Sorry----
Mrs. Lesko. Go ahead.
Mr. Brockman. If I could just add that, you know, the most
important thing to continue to lead in the field, it's really
about the talent. And right now, we're doing a great job of
bringing all the talent in. At OpenAI we have a very wide mix
of national backgrounds and origins, and I think as long as we
can keep that up, that we'll be in very good shape.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you. And, Mr. Chair, I have one more
question, and I think this has been asked in different ways
before, but what steps are we guarding against, espionage from,
let's say--you said China is involved in this and that's
basically my question--espionage, hacking, those type of
things. What guidelines are currently taking place, and who's
preventing this? Is it the private companies themselves? Is
government involved? Thank you.
Mr. Brockman. So one thing that's a very atypical about
this field is because it really grew out of an academic--very
small number of academic labs that the overarching ethos in the
field is actually to publish. And so all of the core research
and development is actually being shared pretty widely. And so
I think that as we're starting to build these more powerful
systems and this is one of the parts of our charter that we
need to start thinking about safety and keeping--you know,
thinking about things that should not be shared, and so I think
that this is a new muscle that's being built. It's right now
kind of up to each company, and I think that that something
that we're all starting to develop. But I think having a
dialogue around what's okay to share and what things are kind
of too powerful and should be kept private, that's just the
dialogue that's starting now.
Dr. Persons. And certainly IP or intellectual property
protection is a critical issue. I think of one former Director
of the National Security Agency mentioned that we're--at the
time it was unprecedented theft of U.S. intellectual property
at that time just because of the--it's the blessing and curse
of the internet. It's a blessing it's this open and the curse
is it's open. And so AI is going to I think be in that
category.
In terms of what's being done in terms of cybersecurity, it
is something our experts pointed out and said it is an issue.
As this Committee well knows, it's easier said than done, and
who has jurisdictions in the U.S. federalist system about
particularly a private company and protection of that, the role
of the federal government versus the company itself in an era
where, as I think Mr. Brockman has pointed out, is sort of the
big-data era where data are the new oil, yet we want to be open
at the same time so that we can innovate. So managing that
dialectical tension is going to be a critical issue, and
there's no easy answer.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you. Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Weber. The Chair recognizes Ms. Esty for five minutes.
Ms. Esty. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I want to thank the
witnesses for this extremely informative and important
conversation that we're having here today.
I hail from the State of Connecticut where we see a lot of
innovation at UCONN, at Yale, at lots of spinoffs on the sort
of narrow AI question. But I think for us really the issue is
more about that general AI. And, Mr. Brockman, your discussion
of the advances, which makes Moore's law look puny in
comparison, is really where I want to take this conversation
about, Dr. Li, your discussion, which I think is incredibly
important, about diversity. We saw what happened to Lehman
Brothers by not being diverse. I am extremely concerned about
what the implications are for teaching a--as it were, if it's
garbage in, it's going to be garbage out. If it's a very narrow
set of parameters and thought patterns and life experiences
that go into AI, we will get very narrow results out. So,
first, I want to just talk--get your thoughts on that.
And the second is on this broader ethical question. We've
looked for many years--I remember back when I was a young
lawyer working on bioethical issues. The Hastings Center got
created to begin to look at these issues. This Committee has
been grappling with CRISPR and the implications with CRISPR. I
think about this being very similar, that AI has many similar
implications for ethical input.
So if you can opine on both of those questions and
recognize we have got two minutes--three minutes left--about
both the ethical--whether we need centers to really bring in
ethicists, as well as technologists, and then the importance of
diversity on the technology side so that we get the full range
of human experience represented as we're exciting--our exciting
new entry into this fourth revolution. Thanks.
Dr. Li. Yes, in fact when--just now--thank you for asking
that question. Just now when somebody is using the term
doomsday scenario, to me I think if we wake up 20 years from
now, whatever years, and we see the lack of diversity in our
technology and leaders and practitioners, that would be my
doomsday scenario. So it's so important and critical to have
diversity for the following three reasons, like you mentioned.
One is shared jobs that we're talking about. This is a
technology that could have potential to create jobs and improve
quality of life, and we need all talents to participate in
that.
Second is innovation and creativity like you mentioned in
Connecticut and other places. We need that kind of broad talent
to add in the force of AI development.
And the third is really justice and moral values, that if
we do not have this wide representation of humanity
representing the development of this technology, we could have
face-recognition algorithms that are more accurate in
recognizing a male--white male faces. And these are--we could
have dangers of out--biased algorithms making unfair loan
application decisions. You know, there are many potential
pitfalls of a technology that's biased and not diverse enough.
Which brings us to this conversation and dialogue of ethics
and ethical AI. You're right. Previous disciplines like nuclear
physics, like biology have shown us the importance of this. I
don't know if there is a single recipe, but I think the need
for centers, institutions, boards, and government committees
are all potential ways to create and open this dialogue. And
again, we're starting to see that, but I think you're totally
right. It's critical issues.
Ms. Esty. Mr. Brockman?
Mr. Brockman. If I may, so I agree completely with my
fellow witness. So diversity is crucial to success here. So
actually--so we have a program called OpenAI scholars where we
brought in a number of people from underrepresented backgrounds
into the field and provided mentorship and they're working on
projects and spinning up. One thing that we found that I think
is very encouraging is it's actually very easy to take people
who do not have any AI or machine learning background and to
make them into extremely productive first-class researchers and
engineers very quickly. And that's, you know, one benefit of
this technology being so new and nascent is that in some ways
it--we're all discovering as we go along, too, so becoming an
expert, there just isn't that high of a bar. But--so I think
that everyone putting effort in to places where the expertise
is, I think it's on them to make sure that they're also
bringing in the rest of the world.
On the ethical front, that's really core to my
organization. That's the reason we exist, that we do think
that, you know, for example, when it comes to the benefits of
who owns this technology, who gets it--you know, where did the
dollars go, we think it belongs to everyone. And so one of the
reasons I'm here is because I think that this shouldn't be a
decision that's made just in Silicon Valley. I don't think that
the question of the ethics and how this is going to work should
be in the hands solely of people like me. I think that it's
really important to have a dialogue, and again, that something
where, you know, I hope that that will be one of the outcomes
of this hearing.
Ms. Esty. Thank you very much.
Mr. Weber. The gentleman now recognizes Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the Chair for holding this and
the Ranking Member, and I thank the witnesses, really very
interesting testimony and diverse in its own right.
One of the things that I think that's important here is--
with this committee is how does the government react to AI? Do
we need to create a specific agency? Does that agency report to
Congress or to the Administration? Those sorts of things I
think are very important.
Dr. Brockman, you said--I think one of the most important
things was that we need a measure of AI progress. Do you have a
model or some description of what that would look like?
Mr. Brockman. Yes, I do. Thank you for the question. And
so, first of all, I don't think that we need to create new
agencies for this. I think that existing agencies are well set
up for this. And I was actually very encouraged to hear that
people are talking about giving NIST a remit to think about
these problems.
Again, GAO and DIUx are already starting to work on this.
For example, DIUx had a satellite imagery data set, hosted a
public competition. The kind of thing that we think would be
great for government to do as well is to have standardized
environments where academics and private sector can test
robotic approaches, setting up competitions towards specific
problems that various agencies and departments want to be
solved. All of those I think can be done without any new
agency, and I think that that's something that you can both get
benefits directly to the relevant agencies, also understand the
field, and also start to build ties between private sector and
public sector.
Mr. McNerney. I'm one of the founders of the Grid
Innovation Caucus. What are the most likely areas we'll see
positive benefits to the grid, to electric grid stability and
resiliency? Who would be the best to answer that? Mr. Persons?
Dr. Persons. Sure. Thank you for the question. I think one
of the ways--GAO has done a good deal of work on this issue,
but it's just protection of the electrical grid in the
cybersecurity dimension. So as one of our scenarios or profiles
that we did in this report, what our experts and what folks are
saying, and again based on the leadership of this Committee and
the importance of cyber is that it's a--without which nothing--
AI is going to be a part of cyber moving forward, and so
protection of the grid in the cyber dimension is there.
Also, I think, as the Chairman mentioned earlier, the word
optimization, so how we optimize things and how algorithms
might be able to compute and find optimums faster and better
than humans is an opportunity for grid management and
production. Thank you.
Mr. McNerney. So AI is also going to be used as a cyber
weapon against infrastructures or potentially used as a weapon,
is that right?
Dr. Persons. There are concerns now when you look at a
broad definition of AI and you look at bots now that are
attacking networks and doing distributed--what are--DDOS or
distributed denial of service attacks and things like that,
that exists now. You could--unfortunately, in the black hat
assumption you're going to assume that as AI becomes more
sophisticated, the white hats, and so, too, unfortunately, the
black hat side of things, the bad guys are going to also become
more sophisticated. And so it's going--that's going to be the
cat-and-mouse game I think moving forward.
Mr. McNerney. Another question for you, Dr. Persons. In
your testimony you mentioned that there's considerable
uncertainty in the jobs impact of AI.
Dr. Persons. Yes.
Mr. McNerney. What would you do to improve that situation?
Dr. Persons. Our experts were encouraging specific data
collected on this. Again, we have important federal agencies
like BLS, Bureau of Labor Statistics, that work on these
issues, what's going on in the labor market, for example, and
it may just be an update to what we collect, what questions we
ask as a government, how we provide that data, which of course
is very important to our understanding of unemployment metrics
and so on.
So there are economists that have thoughts about this. We
had some input on that. There's no easy answer at this time,
but the idea that there is an existing agency doing that sort
of thing is there. The key question is how could we ask more or
better questions on this particular issue on artificial
systems?
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. Dr. Li, you gave three conditions
for progress in AI being positive. Do you see any acceptance or
general wide acceptance of those conditions? How can we spread
the word of that so that the industry is aware of them and the
government is aware of them and that they follow those sorts of
guidelines?
Dr. Li. Thank you for asking. Yes, I would love to spread
the word. So I think I do see that--the emergence of efforts in
all three conditions. The first one is about more
interdisciplinary approach to AI and ranging from universities
to industry, we see the recognition of neuroscience, cognitive
science to cross pollinate with AI research.
I want to add we're all very excited by this technology,
but as a scientist, I'm very humbled by how nascent the science
is. It's only a science of 60 years old compared to
traditionally classic science that's making human lives better
every day, physics, chemistry, biology. There's a long, long
way to go for AI to realize its full potential to help people.
So that recognition really is important, and we need to get
more research and cross-disciplinary research into that.
Secondly is the augmenting human, and again, a lot of
academic research as well as industry startup efforts are
looking at assistive technology from disability to, you know,
helping humans. And the third is what many of us focus on today
is the social impact from studying it to having a dialogue to
having--to working together through different industry and
government agencies. So all three are the elements of human-
centered AI approach, and I see that happening more and more.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Weber. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New
York. No. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman that's not
from New York, Mr. Palmer.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to know if AI
can help people who are geography-challenged.
Mr. Weber. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Palmer. I request that that question and response be
removed from the record.
I do have some questions. In my district, we have the
National Computer Forensics Institute, which deals with
cybercrime, and what I'm wondering about is with the emergence
of and evolution of AI. What are we putting in place because of
the potential that that creates for committing crime and for
solving crime? Dr. Persons, do you have any thoughts on that?
Dr. Persons. Well, certainly in one of the areas we did--
thank you for the question. One of the areas we did look at in
general was just criminal justice. So, I mean, just the risks
that are there in terms of the social risks, making sure the
scales are balanced exactly as they ought to be, that justice
is blind, and so on was the focus of that.
However, I think in terms of the criminal forensics, AI
could be a tool that helps suss out what--you know, in a
retrospective sense what happened. But again, it's an
augmentation that's helping the forensic analyst who would know
what things look like. And the algorithm would need--in the
machine-learning sense of things would need to learn what the
risks might be going forward so that you perhaps could identify
things more proactively and perhaps in near or at real-time. So
that's the opportunity for this. Again, AI is a tool and cyber
was a key message we heard moving forward.
Mr. Palmer. Any thoughts on that?
Mr. Brockman. So, today, you know, we're already starting
to see some of the security problems with the methods that
we're creating, for example, that there's a new class of attack
called adversarial examples where researchers are able to craft
like a physical patch that you could print out and put on any
object. They'll make a computer vision system think that it's
whatever object you want it to be, so you could put that on a
stop sign and confuse a self-driving car, for example. So these
sorts of ways of subverting these powerful systems is something
we're going to have to solve and going to have to work on, just
like we've been working on computer security for more
conventional systems.
And I think that the way to think about if you could
successfully build and deploy an AGI, what that would look
like, in many ways it's kind of like the internet in terms of
being very deeply integrated in people's lives but also having
this increasing amount of autonomy and representation and
taking action on people's behalf. And so you'll have kind of
this question of how do you make sure, you know, first of all,
that's something that could be great for security if these
systems are well-built and have safety in their core and are
very hard to subvert. But also if it's possible for people to
hack them or to cause them to do things that are not aligned
with the value of the operator, then I think that you can start
having very large-scale disruption.
Mr. Palmer. It also concerns me in the context of--it was
announced a couple of weeks ago that the United States plans to
form a space corps. We know that China has been very aggressive
in militarizing space. If you have any thoughts on that
discussion of how artificial intelligence will be used in
regard to space. Communication systems that are highly
vulnerable already, I think that there's some additional
vulnerability that would be created. Any thoughts on that? And
any one of the three of the panelists.
Dr. Persons. Yes, sir. So in terms of the risk in space,
obviously, one of the key concerns for AI is weaponization
and--which I think is part of that and so much less the space
domain or any other one. And so I know our Defense Department
has key leadership thinking on this and working strategically
on how do we operate in an environment where we have to assume
there's going to be the adversary that might not operate in the
ethical framework that we do and to defeat that, but there's no
simple answer at this time other than our Defense Department is
thinking about it and working on it.
Mr. Palmer. And he's not here obviously to testify, but Dr.
Carbonell's testimony, he made a statement that we need to
produce or AI researchers, especially more U.S. citizen or
permanent resident AI researchers. And I think that kind of
plays into that issue of how do we deal with AI in space.
That's one of the reasons why I've been pushing for a college
program like an ROTC program to recruit people into the space
corps in these areas, start identifying students when they're
maybe even in junior high and scholarship them through college
to get them into these positions. Any thoughts on that?
Dr. Persons. I'll just answer quickly and just say I think,
as Dr. Li has I think elegantly pointed out before, this is
really an interdisciplinary thing. I think there's going to be
a need for sort of the STEM, STEAM specialist that's
particularly focused on this, but I think any particular
vocation is going to be impacted in one way or the other, just
like you could imagine rewinding a couple decades or a few
decades--I'll date myself--but when the advent of the personal
computer, the PC coming in and how that affected. Now, we walk
into any vocation and somebody's using a PC or something like
that and it's not unusual, but at the time you had to learn how
to augment yourself or your task with that. And I think that
will be the case.
Mr. Palmer. Well, we're--if I may, Mr. Chairman--just to
add this final thought that we've had to deal with some major
hacks, federal government systems that are hacked, and what
we're faced with, we're competing with the private sector for
the best and brightest in terms of cybersecurity. We're going
to find ourselves in the same situation with AI experts, the
truly skilled people, and that's why I'm suggesting that we may
need to start thinking about how do we recruit these people and
get them as employees of the federal government? And that was
my thoughts on setting up an ROTC-type program where we would
recruit people in, we'd scholarship them, whether it's for
cybersecurity or for AI and with a four- or five-year
commitment to work for the federal government because there's
going to be tremendous competition. And the federal government
has a very difficult time competing for those type people.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Weber. Now, the Chair recognizes the gentleman from New
York.
Mr. Tonko. It's okay. We're patient. I thank our respective
Chairs and Ranking Members for today's very informative
hearing.
And welcome and thanks to our witnesses.
I'm proud to represent New York's 20th Congressional
District where our universities are leading the way in
artificial intelligence research and education initiatives.
SUNY Polytechnic Institute is currently the home of
groundbreaking research developing neuromorphic circuits which
could be used for deep learning such as pattern recognition but
are also useful for AI or machine learning.
In addition, the institute has established an ongoing
research program on restive memory devices. Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, RPI, is pushing the boundaries of
artificial intelligence in a few different areas. In the
healthcare front, RPI is focusing on improving people's lives
and patient outcomes by collaborating with Albany Medical
Center to improve the performance of their emergency department
by using AI and analytics to reduce the recurrence of costly ER
visits by patients. And RPI researchers are also collaborating
with IBM to use the Watson computing platform to help people
with prediabetes avoid developing the disease.
In our fight to combat climate change and protect our
environment, researchers at RPI and Earth and Environmental
Science are working with computer science and machine learning
researchers to apply cutting-edge AI to climate issues. In the
education space, RPI is exploring new ways to use AI to improve
teaching, as well as new approaches to teaching AI and data
science to every student at RPI.
With all that being said, there are tremendous universities
across our country that are excelling in AI research and
education. And what are some of the keys to helping AI
institutions like them to excel? What do we need to do? What
would be the most important? That's to any one of our
panelists.
Dr. Li. So thank you for asking this question. I think,
just like we recognize AI really is such a widespread
technology that I think one thing to recognize is that it is
still so critical to support basic science research and
education in our universities. This technology is far from
being done. Of course, the industry is making tremendous
investment and effort into AI, but it's a nascent science. It's
a nascent technology. We have many unanswered questions,
including the socially relevant AI, including AI for good,
including AI for education, healthcare, and many other areas.
So one of the biggest things I see would be investment into
the basic science research into our universities and
encouraging more students thinking in interdisciplinary terms,
taking courses. You know, they can be STEM students, STEAM
students. AI is not just for engineers and scientists; it could
be for students with policymaking mind, for students with law
interests, and so on. So I hope to see universities
participating in this in a tremendous way, like many great
schools in New York State.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Dr. Persons or Mr. Brockman, either
of you?
Mr. Brockman. Sorry. I agree with Dr. Li but I also point
out that I think it is also becoming increasingly hard to truly
compete as an academic institution because if you look at
what's happening, industry right now is actually doing
fundamental research. It's very different from most scientific
fields in that the salary disparity between what you can get at
one of these industrial labs versus what you can get in
academia, it's a very, very large.
And there's a second piece, which is in order to do the
research, you need access to massive computational resources.
And, for example, the work that we just did with this, you
know, game breakthrough that required basically a giant cluster
of, you know, something around 10,000 machines. And that's
something where in an academic setting it's not clear how you
can get access to those resources. And so I think for the
playing field to still be accessible, I think that there needs
to be some story for how people in academic institutions can
get access to that, and I think the question of, you know,
where is the best research going to be done and where are the
best people going to be, I think that's something that it's,
you know, playing out right now in industry's favor, but it's
not necessarily set in stone.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Dr. Persons?
Dr. Persons. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question. And I
would just add to my fellow panelists the fact that our experts
had said that real-world testbeds are important to this. You
don't know what you don't know, so not only in addition to
adding access to data but being able to test and do things,
these--one thing for sure, and I learned, in fact, from OpenAI
that a lot of the times these things come out with surprising
results, and so that's the whole reason of creating safe
environments to try things out and de-risk those technologies.
And that's something that I think is going to be important to
enable that base of research to have an avenue to perhaps move
up the technology maturity scale possibly into the market and
certainly hopefully to solve critical, complex, real-world
problems.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Very informative. Mr. Chair, I yield
back.
Mr. Weber. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Illinois.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
coming to testify today.
You know, I've been interested in artificial intelligence
for quite a long time. Back in the 1990s working in particle
physics we were using neural network classifiers to have a look
at trying to classify particle physics interactions. And when I
couldn't stand it during the government shutdown and not so
long ago, I went and downloaded TensorFlow and worked through
the--part of the tutorial on it.
And, you know, the algorithms are not so different than
what we were using back in the 1990s, but the computing power
difference is breathtaking. And I very much resonated with your
comments on the huge increase in dedicated computer power for
deep learning and similar--and that is likely to be
transformative, given the recent--and so that--you know, we
have to think through that because even with no new brilliant
ideas on algorithms, there's going to be a huge leap forward.
So thank you for that. That's a key observation here.
You know, in Congress I'm the co-Chair of the New Democrats
Coalition on the Future of Work Task Force where we have been
trying to think through what this means for the workplace of
the future. And so I'd like to--if--Mr. Chairman, I'd like to
submit for the record a white paper entitled ``Closing the
Skills and Opportunity gaps,'' without objection.
Mr. Weber. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears in Appendix II]
Mr. Foster. Thank you. And I will be asking for the record
if you could have a look at this and see if--you know, how--
what sort of coverage you think this document has for the near-
term policy responses because it's--you know, this is coming at
us I think faster than a lot of people in politics really
understand.
And also, I will be asking for the record--I guess you may
not have to respond right now--where the best sources of
information on how quickly this will be coming at us. You know,
there are conferences here and there, but you attend and your
friends attend a lot of them. I'd be interested in where you
think--you really come together to get the techno-experts, the
economic experts, you know, the labor economists, people like
that all in the same room. I think it's something we should be
putting more effort into.
On another track, I've been very involved in Congress in
trying to resurrect something called the Office of Technology
Assessment. You know, and what the J.O. did here is very good,
which is to bring--we had a conference of the experts, and you
brought in a good set of experts. And a year later now we are
getting a report on this. And, you know, you need more
bandwidth in Congress than that just, you know, on all
technological issues, but this is a perfect example. A year-old
group of experts and then AI, you know, is--those are opinions
that are sort of dated a little bit, even a year in the past.
And so the Office of Technology Assessment for decades
provided immediate high-bandwidth advice to Congress on all
sorts of technological issues. And so we're coming closer and
closer every year in getting it refunded after it was defunded
in the 1990s. And so I think--well, to ask you a question here,
is there anyone on the panel who thinks that Congress has
enough technological capacity as it currently stands to deal
with issues like this?
Dr. Persons. So----
Mr. Weber. I can answer that.
Mr. Foster. Yes--no, it's a huge problem, and it's been
aggravated by the fact that people have decided in their wisdom
to cut back on the size and salaries available for
Congressional staff. One of my--the previous members who talked
about--here talked about the difficulty the federal government
will have in getting real professionals, top-of-the-line
professionals in here, and, you know, we're seeing Members of
Congress who are willing to do anything but give them the
salaries that will be necessary to actually compete for those
jobs.
Let's see. I am now--let's see. Oh, Mr. Brockman, you had--
your--I would advocate everyone have a look at the reference 5
in--which is your malicious use of AI, your--reference 5 in
your testimony, which I spent--I stayed up way too late last
night reading that, and it is real.
Along the same lines, Members of Congress have access to
the classified version of a National Academies of Science study
on the implication of autonomous drones for--and this is
something that I think, you know, has to be understood by the
military. We're about to mark up a military authorization bill,
an appropriations bill that is spending way too much money
fighting the last war and not enough fighting the wars of the
future.
And then finally, Dr. Li, the--in the educational aspects
of this, one thing I struggle for--I guess if you look through
the bios of people who are the heroes of artificial
intelligence, they tend to come from physics, math, places like
that. And in theoretical physics or mathematics a huge fraction
of the progress comes from a tiny fraction of people. It's just
a historical truth. And I was wondering, is AI like that? Are
they--you know, are there a small number of heroes that really
do most of the work and everyone else sort of fills in the
thing?
Dr. Li. So, like I said, Dr. Foster, AI is a very nascent
field, so even though it is collecting a lot of enthusiasm
worldwide, societally, as a science, it's still very young. And
as a young science, it starts from a few people.
As a--I was also trained as a physics major, and I think
about early days of Newtonian physics, and that was a smallish
group of people as well. I mean, it's--it would be too much to
compare directly, but what I really do want to say is that we--
maybe in the early, even pre-Newtonian days of AI, we are still
developing this, so the number of people are still small.
Having said that, there are many, many people who have
contributed to AI. Their names might not have made it to the
news, to the blogs, to the tweets, but these are the names
that, as students and experts of this field, we remember them.
And I want to say many of them are members of the
underrepresented minority group. There are many women in the
first generation of AI experts. So----
Mr. Foster. Yes. And when I was----
Dr. Li. --we need to hear more from them.
Mr. Foster. --you know, two or three clicks down in the
references cited by your testimony and you look at the papers
there and the author lists, it's pretty clear that our
dominance in AI is due to immigrants, okay? And, Dr. Li, I
suspect you might not have come to this country under the
conditions that are now being proposed by our President. And I
won't ask you to answer that, but it's important when we talk
about what it is that makes this country dominant in things
like AI. It is immigrants, okay? And I'll just leave it at
that, and I guess my time is up.
Mr. Weber. I thank the gentleman. I thank the witnesses for
their testimony and the Members for their questions. The record
will remain open for two weeks for additional written comments
and written questions from Members.
The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:24 p.m., the Subcommittees were
adjourned.]
Appendix I
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]