- COUNTERING DOMESTIC TERRORISM: EXAMINING THE EVOLVING THREAT
[Senate Hearing 116-154]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-154
COUNTERING DOMESTIC TERRORISM: EXAMINING THE EVOLVING THREAT
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON
HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
SEPTEMBER 25, 2019
__________
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
38-463 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin, Chairman
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
KAMALA D. HARRIS, California
RICK SCOTT, Florida
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri
Gabrielle D'Adamo Singer, Staff Director
Joseph C. Folio III, Chief Counsel
Margaret E. Frankel, Research Assistant
Nicholas O. Ramirez, U.S. Coast Guard Detailee
David M. Weinberg, Minority Staff Director
Alan S. Kahn, Minority Senior Investigations Counsel
Claudine J. Brenner, Minority Counsel
Megan L. Petry, Minority Investigative Counsel
Charles W.E. Shaw, Minority Investigative Counsel
Laura W. Kilbride, Chief Clerk
Thomas J. Spino, Hearing Clerk
C O N T E N T S
------
Opening statements:
Page
Senator Johnson..............................................
1
Senator Peters...............................................
3
Senator Portman..............................................
16
Senator Hassan...............................................
20
Senator Carper...............................................
22
Senator Rosen................................................
24
Senator Scott................................................
27
Senator Sinema...............................................
31
Prepared statements:
Senator Johnson..............................................
43
Senator Peters...............................................
45
WITNESSES
Monday, September 25, 2019
William Braniff, Director, National Consortium for the Study of
Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism (START), and Professor of
the Practice, University of Maryland...........................
5
Clinton Watts, Distinguished Research Fellow, Foreign Policy
Research Institute.............................................
7
Robert M. Chesney, James A. Baker III Chair in the Rule of Law
and World Affairs, and Director, Robert Strauss Center for
International Security and Law, University of Texas at Austin
School of Law..................................................
9
George Selim, Senior Vice President for National Programs, Anti-
Defamation League..............................................
11
Alphabetical List of Witnesses
Braniff, William:
Testimony....................................................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
47
Chesney, Robert M.:
Testimony....................................................
9
Prepared statement...........................................
84
Selim, George:
Testimony....................................................
11
Prepared statement...........................................
98
Watts, Clinton:
Testimony....................................................
7
Prepared statement...........................................
79
APPENDIX
Statements submitted for the Record from:
Arab American Institute......................................
114
Arab Community Center for Economic and Social Services.......
119
American Civil Liberties Union...............................
123
Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights..............
130
Muslim Public Affairs Council................................
132
Shirin Sinnar................................................
142
Responses to post-hearing questions for the Record:
Mr. Braniff..................................................
151
Mr. Watts....................................................
159
Mr. Chesney..................................................
164
Mr. Selim....................................................
169
COUNTERING DOMESTIC TERRORISM: EXAMINING THE EVOLVING THREAT
----------
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 25, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Homeland Security
and Governmental Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in room
SD-342, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Ron Johnson,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Johnson, Portman, Romney, Scott, Hawley,
Peters, Carper, Hassan, Sinema, and Rosen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN JOHNSON
Chairman Johnson. Well, good morning. This hearing of the
Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
will come to order.
I want to thank the witnesses. We talked back in the
cloakroom. Excellent testimony on a very topical issue here.
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has just released
their Strategic Framework on basically domestic terror,
targeted terror.
What the witnesses are going to be testifying to really
ties in very nicely with what the Department is trying to do as
well. We are working with the Department quite honestly right
now on kind of the data part of this. If we can get some
language codifying some of the things they are talking about
here into the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA), we
will try and do that. Otherwise, we have another opportunity
with the Intelligence Authorization Act. Otherwise, we will
just move it before our Committee. So, again, this is an
incredibly timely hearing.
Normally I just enter my written statement into the
record,\1\ but I actually want to read my opening statement
because I want to be precise here. So, again, thank you for
your attendance. The first and what I expect will be a series
of hearings examining domestic acts of terrorism. Although we
must always remain vigilant, the defeat of the territorial
caliphate of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIS)
and focused counterterrorism efforts have resulted in the
recent decline in the number of ISIS-inspired terrorist attacks
in the United States and worldwide. Unfortunately, the increase
in domestic attacks has kept our Nation on edge and forced a
re-evaluation of how law enforcement can and should deal with
different kinds of threats.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Johnson appears in the
Appendix on page 43.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In May, Ranking Member Peters and I sent letters to the
Department of Homeland Security, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI), and the Department of Justice (DOJ)
requesting basic information about their efforts to track,
counter, and prevent all forms of domestic terrorism. From the
outset of our inquiry, it has been clear that there is a lack
of consistent and reliable data concerning domestic terrorism.
A quick little side note. It is not an easy issue. How do
you find these things? How do you track these things? I think
that will be coming out, but, again, that is what we are trying
to do, potentially in a piece of legislation to codify this.
But if the Federal Government is not accurately tracking
the threats and outcomes, it is exceedingly difficult for
agencies and Congress to properly allocate resources and/or
determine if additional authorities are required.
In allocating law enforcement resources and considering new
authorities, it is important to put the threat and human cost
of terrorism into perspective. In the 51 years from 1967
through 2017, there were 938,000 murders committed in the
United States--an average of about 18,393 murders per year, or
about 183,000 per decade. According to the Washington Post and
their definition, since August 1, 1966, there have been 167
mass shootings in which 1,207 individuals were killed--an
average of approximately 228 per decade. And Study of Terrorism
and Responses to Terrorism (START) Global Terrorism Database
(GTD) reports 3,774 deaths from terrorist attacks in the United
States over the last five decades starting in 1970. If you
exclude 9/11's death toll of 2,996, terror-related deaths since
1970 equal 778--an average of 156 per decade.
In citing these statistics, I am in no way minimizing the
human cost of terrorism or mass shootings. Every murder,
regardless of the cause, is a tragedy that takes an
incalculable toll on the lives of those affected. As a result,
public policy, operating within the bounds of constitutional
government and limited resources, should be designed to prevent
as many of these tragedies as possible. The purpose of this
hearing is to explore the many issues raised in attempting to
achieve that worthy goal.
We need to understand how authorities differ in addressing
international terror versus domestic terrorism. What is the
proper role of Federal versus State governments? What
definitions need to be developed and what data needs to be
gathered? What can be done to prevent online radicalization?
And maybe the most fundamental and vexing question is: How does
a free and open society deal with someone who is ``not guilty
yet''?
One final thought. Although I took no offense from any of
the testimony because I know none was intended, I do want to
challenge the use of ``far-right'' and ``far-left'' as
descriptive adjectives for hate groups like white supremacists,
anti-Semites, or environmental terror groups. I realize this
has become accepted terminology, but I believe we need to break
that habit. There is an acknowledged political spectrum ranging
from left to right that is a useful shorthand description of
one's general political philosophy. But hate groups not only
fall far outside that spectrum, they also advocate and use
violence to advance their political aims--a radical rejection
of the norms that permit America to be a free and self-
governing country. Those of us who abide by the fundamental
rejection of political violence do not want to be, nor should
we be, associated with such despicable views and evil behavior.
So let us drop the far-right/far-left descriptors, and simply
call a hate group a ``hate group'' and a terrorist a
``terrorist.''
Again, we have assembled a highly qualified panel of
witnesses to discuss these and other issues. I thank you again
and look forward to your testimony.
With that, I will turn it over to Senator Peters.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PETERS\1\
Senator Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am certainly
grateful to the Chairman that today, for the first time, this
Committee is holding a hearing that gives us the opportunity to
focus on white supremacist violence, a form of terror that is
older than our Nation itself.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Peters appears in the
Appendix on page 45.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since September 11, 2001, this Committee has held more than
50 hearings focused on terrorism. We have been, and we remain,
rightly focused on the threat posed by foreign terrorists and
their homegrown imitators.
Unfortunately, over that time, we have not adequately
grappled with white supremacist violence. Over the last decade
it has become, by far, the deadliest form of domestic violence
that we face.
Its trademark racist rhetoric and dehumanizing language has
embedded itself in our public discourse. And it is amplified
around the world at the speed of light via social media
platforms.
In Charleston, the shooter who took the lives of nine
African American churchgoers as they gathered in prayer had
self-radicalized online and regularly espoused racist rhetoric
on his own website.
The terrorist who ran down a crowd of peaceful protesters
in Charlottesville drove hundreds of miles to join in the
largest and most violent gathering of white supremacists in
decades.
The extremist who murdered 11 worshippers at the Tree of
Life synagogue, the deadliest attack on the Jewish community in
our Nation's history, regularly posted anti-immigrant and anti-
Semitic conspiracy theories on white supremacist online
platforms.
A white supremacist in Southern California was inspired by
the horrific Christchurch mosque attack--which was livestreamed
and shared virally--and the Tree of Life massacre. He failed in
his attempt to burn down a mosque but succeeded in shooting up
a synagogue, killing one and injuring three, including the
rabbi.
The perpetrator in El Paso, who killed 22 people and
wounded dozens more in the deadliest attack on the Latino
community in our Nation's history, also cited the Christchurch
attack and spewed familiar hateful rhetoric about a ``Hispanic
invasion'' in a manifesto that he posted online.
White supremacy is a homeland security threat. That is why
Chairman Johnson and I have launched one of the first
bipartisan efforts in Congress to address it. In May, we asked
the Department of Homeland Security, the FBI, and the
Department of Justice this question: How many Americans have
been killed or injured in domestic terrorist attacks since
2009, broken out by ideology?
It took DHS 2 months to tell us they did not know. After 4
months, the FBI and the Justice Department have simply failed
to respond. Last week, in response to our pressure, DHS finally
released a policy paper acknowledging the growing white
supremacist threat.
But we cannot effectively address a threat that we cannot
measure. We need data to track and assess this rapidly evolving
threat so that we can ensure that our resources are aligned
with the threats that we face.
Today we will have a discussion about a path forward. We
need to confront the scourge of domestic terrorism, and any
solutions we consider must be based on facts and sound data.
But even the most well-intentioned policies can have
harmful, unintended consequences. Looking back on our response
to September 11th, I am acutely aware of how our policies were
wrongfully used to cast suspicion on entire communities,
primarily Arab Americans and Muslim Americans--including
vibrant, patriotic communities that I am blessed to represent
in Michigan. As we work to tackle the threat posed by domestic
terrorism and white supremacist violence, we cannot repeat the
mistakes of the past.
I hope that today's hearing will be an important step
toward meaningfully addressing the growing threat of white
supremacist violence. We must be clear-eyed about the
challenges that we face, focus our resources according to
accurate threat assessment, and make sure that all Americans
feel safe where they live, where they work, and where they
pray.
Mr. Chairman, I would also like to add that I have heard
from countless stakeholders in Michigan and nationwide who care
deeply about our efforts today, and I have received statements
from the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), Professor
Shirin Sinnar of Stanford Law School, the Arab Community Center
for Economic and Social Services, the Muslim Public Affairs
Council, and the Leadership Council on Civil and Human Rights,
and I ask that they be entered into the record.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The information referenced by Senator Peters appear in the
Appendix on page 114.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chairman Johnson. Without objection.
Thank you, Senator Peters.
Senator Peters. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. It is the tradition of this Committee to
swear in witnesses, so if you will all stand and raise your
right hand. Do you swear the testimony you will give before
this Committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth, so help you, God?
Mr. Braniff. I do.
Mr. Watts. I do.
Mr. Chesney. I do.
Mr. Selim. I do.
Chairman Johnson. Please be seated.
Our first witness is Professor William Braniff. Professor
Braniff is the director of the National Consortium for the
Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism at the University
of Maryland. Prior to his work at START, Professor Braniff was
director of practitioner education and instructor at West
Point's Combating Terrorism Center. Professor Braniff, a
graduate of the U.S. Military Academy, began his career as an
armor officer in the U.S. Army. Professor Braniff.
TESTIMONY OF WILLIAM BRANIFF,\1\ DIRECTOR, NATIONAL CONSORTIUM
FOR THE STUDY OF TERRORISM AND RESPONSES TO TERRORISM (START),
AND PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE, UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND
Mr. Braniff. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Peters, and
esteemed Members of the Committee, I would like to thank you on
behalf of the START Consortium for inviting us to testify
before you today.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Braniff appears in the Appendix
on page 47.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
START data from a number of relevant datasets demonstrate
the following:
In the U.S. over the last decade, domestic terrorists are
more numerous, active, and lethal in gross numbers than
international terrorists, including what the U.S. Government
refers to as ``homegrown violent extremists (HVEs)''.
Among domestic terrorists, violent far-right terrorists are
by far the most numerous, lethal, and criminally active. Far-
right extremists conducted over 50 percent of the successful
attacks in 2017 and 2018.
There were six lethal attacks in the United States in 2018.
All six lethal attacks shared far-right ideological elements,
primarily white supremacy, and, in at least two cases, male
supremacy. And we observed this general pattern to continue in
2019.
Looking back over a longer time horizon, between 1990 and
2018, the violent far-right was responsible for 800 failed or
foiled plots, and 215 homicide events, compared to 350 failed
or foiled plots and 50 homicide events emerging from HVEs.
They have pursued chemical and biological weapons more
frequently than HVEs, albeit very infrequently, thankfully. And
they were more active in the illicit financial world, with
nearly 1,000 far-right extremists engaging in over 600 terror
financing schemes and generating over $1 billion in damages to
the U.S. Government between 1990 and 2013.
Furthermore, between 80 and 90 percent of the hate crime
perpetrators in START's new Bias Incidents and Actors Study
(BIAS) dataset conformed to the ideological tenets of violent
far-right extremism, broadly defined.
The composition of far-right targets has changed, with
anti-immigrant and anti-Muslim attacks increasing in frequency.
Over the last 10 years of data, 22 percent of violent far-right
offenders were motivated at least partly by anti-immigrant or
anti-Muslim sentiment compared to only 3 percent in the 10
years prior, and this percentage spiked to 37 and 38 percent in
2016 and 2017, respectively.
Now, despite the fact that more domestic terrorists are
arrested than HVEs in gross numbers, 62 percent of far-right
offenders and 78 percent of far-left terrorists succeeded in
their violent plots compared to only 22 percent for HVEs. This
is due to a combination of pragmatic and political factors that
collectively reduce resource allocation to domestic terrorism.
There are several challenges to the U.S. Government's
ability to maintain, share, analyze, and make public data on
U.S. persons involved in domestic extremism. I will share just
three of them.
One set of challenges emerges because domestic terrorism
and international terrorism are handled separately within and
between executive branch agencies and departments, leading to
bifurcated threat assessments, bifurcated situational
awareness, which undermines risk assessments and rational
resource allocation decisions. To reflect reality, violent
extremism has to be understood, and data has to be collected
globally.
The second set of challenges results from the civil rights
and civil liberties protections that the Constitution affords
us. The U.S. Government is limited in its ability to maintain
data on ideologues, propagandists, and recruiters, for example,
who are not acting in violation of current law. Researchers
outside of the government are often better able to examine
domestic extremist movements as a result.
Now, the FBI Counterterrorism Division maintains high-
quality data on individuals under investigation and uses that
data to manage risk across their portfolio of both domestic and
international investigations. That information is highly
granular, but there are limitations to how broadly case
information on known or suspected domestic terrorists can be
shared outside of the FBI. That information is not included in
our interagency watchlisting efforts, for example.
The next set of challenges speaks to a criminal's journey
through the criminal justice lifecycle. There has historically
been a breakdown of information, once these perpetrators enter
the correctional system and again when they exit the
correctional system.
The final set of challenges speaks to politics. Given the
inherently political nature of terrorism, defining, tracking,
and reporting data on terrorism is subject to biases, subtle
pressures, or even manipulation.
It is clear that domestic terrorism, and specifically far-
right extremism, require greater attention and resource
allocation. This is not to say that the U.S. Government should
replicate its response to HVEs as it responds to domestic
terrorism.
Congress should pass the Domestic Terrorism Documentation
and Analysis of Threats in America (DATA) Act or similar
legislation, including the continued funding of unclassified,
objective, and longitudinal data collection and dissemination
through the DHS Centers of Excellence apparatus. That language
was stripped out of the House Homeland Security version of the
bill, and it should be reinserted.
The Homeland Security Grants Program, responsible for
things like Urban Areas Security Initiative (UASI) grants,
should incorporate these objective data.
The U.S. Government should scale up the DHS Office of
Targeted Violence and Terrorism Prevention and specifically
replicate the program being run out of Denver quite quietly
which has succeeded in over 40 interventions, many of which
deal with the violent far right.
The government should take a public health approach to
violence prevention and invest in programs that build community
resilience, programs that foster non-criminal justice
interventions for at-risk individuals, and programs that foster
rehab and reintegration for domestic extremists. A parallel
grants program to the Homeland Security Grants Program should
be run out of an organization like the Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS) to support these public health programs.
Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Professor.
Our next witness is Clint Watts. Mr. Watts is a
distinguished research fellow at the Foreign Policy Research
Institute and a senior fellow at the Center for Cyber and
Homeland Security. A graduate of the U.S. Military Academy, he
began his career as an infantry officer in the U.S. Army. Mr.
Watts later became a Special Agent in the Federal Bureau of
Investigation where he was part a Joint Terrorism Task Force
(JTTF). After leaving the FBI, he served 1 year as executive
officer at West Point's Combating Terrorism Center and returned
to the FBI as a consultant from 2007 to 2009, when he advised
the Counterterrorism Division and National Security Branch. Mr.
Watts.
TESTIMONY OF CLINT WATTS,\1\ DISTINGUISHED RESEARCH FELLOW,
FOREIGN POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE
Mr. Watts. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Peters, and
Members of the Committee, thanks for having me here today.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Watts appears in the Appendix on
page 79.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Today both international terrorists and domestic terrorists
congregate, coordinate, and conspire online, often without
having any direct connection or physical interactions with a
terrorist organization or fellow adherents.
Domestic terrorists differ from international terrorists in
two critical ways that vex law enforcement efforts. First,
domestic terrorists, for the most part, do not operate as
physical, named groups in the way that al-Qaeda and the Islamic
State have in an international context. And, second, law
enforcement pursues domestic terrorists via different rules and
structures separate from international terrorists.
Investigators must pass higher thresholds to initiate
investigations and have fewer tools and resources at their
disposal. In sum, domestic counterterrorism remains
predominantly a reactive affair in which investigations respond
to violent massacres and then pursue criminal cases.
There is more to discuss than I can capture during these
brief opening remarks, but I will focus on what I believe to be
critical gaps in countering domestic terrorists.
First, if we cannot define the threat, then we cannot stop
the threat. Countering al-Qaeda and the Islamic State is no
easy task, but foreign terrorist organization (FTO)
designations allow law enforcement to pursue investigations
according to the Attorney General (AG) Guidelines, organize
their agencies and allocate resources, centrally manage cases
across the country helping connect associated perpetrators and
plots, and measure investigative performance and return on
investment.
Without a designation by group or violent ideology and the
pursuit of investigations limited to criminal codes, nationwide
we are essentially just pursuing cases as individual one-off
cases, maybe not recognizing the collaboration and
communication that goes on in the online space.
Second, if we do not understand the threat, we cannot
defeat the threat. After 9/11, agencies dramatically increased
their staffing of intelligence analysts and committed research
funds for understanding terrorist ideologies helping to
identify key influencers, ideological justifications for
violence, and radicalization pathways for those enticed to join
terrorist groups.
With domestic terrorism, threat knowledge comes anecdotally
from the experience of the most seasoned investigators. Few if
any personnel and resources can establish a collective picture
of which violent ideologies perpetrate violence, why they do
it, and how they overlap, which I think is particularly
significant today.
If we cannot see the threat, then we cannot preempt the
threat. To reduce the frequency and scale of international
terrorism in the United States, we sought to connect the dots
between extremists through all source analysis and targeted
outreach with community partners and online interventions.
In the online space, Federal agencies might look to rapidly
increase their partnerships with groups like Moonshot
Countering Violent Extremism (CVE) which employs innovative
approaches for spotting and engaging vulnerable individuals via
social media in both international and domestic contexts.
Similarly, terrorism task force officers should extend their
``See Something, Say Something'' strategies to domestic
terrorism threats and create community partner engagement
strategies with nongovernmental groups.
Fourth, if we do not resource the defenders, we will keep
losing to the offenders. International terrorist threats
brought about a whole-of-government approach by which Federal
resources created terrorism task forces synchronizing
information sharing and actions across the country to defeat
distributed terror networks. We have intelligence fusion
centers stretched across the country designed to detect
international terrorism that now seek out more missions. The
Federal Government could lead the way to not only help State
and local law enforcement do more than simply respond to
attacks, but also help them to employ effectively their
manpower and resources for preempting domestic terror attacks.
And, finally, my fifth point I really would like to stress
is if we only look at what is happening in the United States,
we will miss the dangerous global connections that are
currently occurring around the world. Our homegrown terrorists,
at times, appear to be lonely, but they are not alone in their
motivations, and their connections extend far beyond U.S.
borders. Over the last decade, we worried about the global
networking, State sponsorship, and facilitation of jihadist
terrorism.
Today we should worry equally about foreign connections and
influences on domestic terrorist threats. The social media
posts and manifestos of recent domestic attackers point to the
international inspiration and global connections of violent
ideologies. These connections extend beyond the Internet
leading to physical movement across international boundaries to
attend training or execute attacks.
In Sweden, two of three bombers from the Nordic Resistance
Movement received military training in Russia before returning
home to attack. The Christchurch mosque attacker was not from
New Zealand but Australia. And just this week, the FBI
conducted an arrest of an individual in Kansas, at Fort Riley,
Kansas, who wanted to travel overseas to join a ``militant
group,'' as one way to define it.
So, in conclusion, with these remarks I have only addressed
gaps that I believe, if closed, would reduce the frequency of
domestic terrorist attacks. These remarks do not address how we
could reduce the impact, the number of dead and wounded,
arising from each domestic or international attack.
Thank you for having me here today, and please accept my
full remarks into the record.
Chairman Johnson. They will be entered in the record,\1\ as
everyone's will.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statements of the Witnesses referenced by Senator
Johnson appear on pages. 47, 79, 84, and 98.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thank you, Mr. Watts.
Our next witness is Professor Robert Chesney. Professor
Chesney is the James A. Baker III Chair in the Rule of Law and
World Affairs at the University of Texas at Austin School of
Law. He is also the co-founder of the Lawfare blog and a
prolific author on legal issues and national security policy.
Professor Chesney is a graduate of Harvard Law School.
Professor Chesney.
TESTIMONY OF ROBERT M. CHESNEY,\2\ JAMES A. BAKER III CHAIR IN
THE RULE OF LAW AND WORLD AFFAIRS, AND DIRECTOR, ROBERT STRAUSS
CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND LAW, UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
AT AUSTIN SCHOOL OF LAW
Mr. Chesney. Thank you, sir. Chairman Johnson, Ranking
Member Peters, distinguished Members of the Committee, thank
you for the opportunity to appear before you today to talk
about this important topic.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The prepared statement of Mr. Chesney appears in the Appendix
on page 84.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I want to talk about the steps that might or might not be
desirable as we work to increase the orientation toward
prevention in the domestic terrorism context, and I want to do
that by taking lessons by comparison to what we have done over
the past two decades in the international terrorism context.
As an initial matter, I think it helps to frame our
engagement with this issue by distinguishing among some broad
categories of how we might alter what we are currently doing.
First of all, we have the authorities we use to
incapacitate threats, and in the domestic terrorism setting, we
are mostly there talking about the charging options that are
available to prosecutors and bases for arrest. But let me
flag--and here I am drawing a lot on the recent experience we
have had in Texas where I have had some involvement in our
State's response to the tragedy in El Paso. We need to keep one
eye on the potential for early stage interventions that are not
criminal in nature, and here I will reference my colleague
Professor Braniff's remarks.
There are things in the nature of wellness checks and other
more aggressive measures that when a family member or friend of
a person who is disturbed and the family member or friend can
tell that this person may be dangerous, there are ways of
conducting threat assessment that the Secret Service, among
others, trains local law enforcement on. We need to support and
surge resources toward that training to make sure that every
State is thoroughly organized and equipped to be able to take
advantage of that information in advance of harm occurring, in
any event, capacities or authorities to intervene, to
neutralize the threat a dangerous person poses.
Second, separate but related to that, investigative
authorities. Do investigators have the right tools?
And then, third, distinct from both of those, resourcing
both in terms of personnel, financial resources, and the policy
will at all levels of the relevant institutions to make sure
that the line officials, the agents and the line prosecutors,
fully understand the range of things that existing law already
enables them to do if they are ready to commit to certain
approaches.
A few notes on each of these things.
First of all, it is important to underscore that we do have
Federal terrorism statutes, and I mean parts of Title 18,
Subchapter
113B-Terrorism, that are applicable in the domestic terrorism
context. It is often said that we do not have a domestic
terrorism law. We do not have one as such. We do not have a
single statute that says everything, however conducted, that
counts as domestic terrorism is a Federal offense. But we do
have a lot of more specific terrorism-labeled laws that are
applicable, and the one I will highlight here, although it is
only one, is the so-called weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
law, which sounds really narrow. It is terribly mislabeled. It
covers ordinary explosives. It can be used and has been used in
a number of cases, and I will cite the recent conviction of
Cesar Sayoc, who tried to send mail bombs with nails in them.
He was convicted under this, among other charges.
So we do have some such statutes. Where is the gap, then?
When it comes to conduct, the gap has to do with attacks on
non-Federal personnel where the weapon of choice is a gun, an
edged weapon, or a vehicle--things that are not explosives.
That gap can and should be closed. I think the best argument
for closing it is to assert the moral equivalence or perhaps
the equal immorality of political violence. As the Chairman
said, regardless of the ideological background, political
violence is unwelcome and intolerable in our system.
Skipping ahead to the topic of designated domestic
terrorist organizations, because we have the foreign
designation process, I am against creating a formal system of
this kind for a number of reasons.
First, I will mention the constitutional can of worms that
would open up under the First Amendment. Now, I am happy in the
question and answer (Q&A) to go into that in more detail.
Second, the thought experiment of imagining the capacity to
designate a group being in the hands of officials who may be
from whatever is the opposite ideological orientation or
political orientation you may have, it is a Pandora's Box we do
not want to get into unless the use case for doing so is
clearly enough established. I think the use case for doing so,
the best we can say is it would certainly provide a broad basis
to clarify investigative and arrest authorities and prosecution
authorities, but I think we can get there without opening this
particular Pandora's Box.
Last, a few quick words on investigative authorities. The
Attorney General Guideline revisions in 2002 and 2008, which
were controversial at the time, expressly aimed to open the
door to more proactive prevention-oriented terrorism
investigations. I think if we have a problem here, it is that
not enough officials are fully aware of what they do permit,
and we might need to press to make sure that more advantage is
being taken of those existing frameworks.
Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Professor Chesney.
Our final witness is George Selim. Mr. Selim is the senior
vice president of programs for the Anti-Defamation League (ADL)
where he oversees ADL's Center on Extremism and is responsible
for its education, law enforcement, and community security
programs. Prior to joining ADL, under President Obama Mr. Selim
was the first Director of the Department of Homeland Security's
Office for Community Partnerships (OCP), where he also led the
Federal Countering Violent Extremism Task Force. Mr. Selim also
served on President Obama's National Security Council staff, as
a Senior Policy Adviser at DHS' Office of Civil Rights and
Civil Liberties, and at the Department of Justice. Mr. Selim.
TESTIMONY OF GEORGE SELIM,\1\ SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT FOR
NATIONAL PROGRAMS, ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE
Mr. Selim. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Peters, Members of
this distinguished Committee, good morning, and thank you for
allowing me the opportunity to testify today. As mentioned, my
name is George Selim. I serve as senior vice president of
programs at the ADL, and it is an honor to be with you this
morning.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Selim appears in the Appendix on
page 98.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For decades, ADL has fought against anti-Semitism and
bigotry in all forms by exposing extremist groups and
individuals who spread hate and incite violence.
Today ADL is the foremost nongovernmental authority on
domestic terrorism, extremism, hate groups, and hate crimes. I
have personally served in several roles in the government's
national security apparatus, at the Departments of Justice,
Homeland Security, and at the White House on the National
Security Council staff. And I am now at ADL where I oversee
these efforts to investigate and expose extremism across the
ideological spectrum.
In my testimony, I would like to share with you some key
data and analysis on the threat of domestic terrorism as well
as identify some significant gaps in current policy and
practice that, if closed, could better equip the government to
counter this threat.
Understanding the threat of domestic terrorism requires us
to look at the threat of white supremacy. Three of the five
deadliest years of murder by domestic extremists in the period
between 1970 and 2018 were in the past 5 years. Of the 50
murders committed by extremists last year, 78 percent of those
were tied to the threat of white supremacy.
In the past decade, 2009 through 2018, the majority of the
427 people killed by domestic extremists were killed by white
supremacists. In the last year alone, we have seen mass murder
after mass murder targeting Jews, Muslims, Latino, and other
immigrant communities at the hands of white supremacists that
were radicalized and lauded online--on the open Net.
Unfortunately, in the last 2 years, resources have shifted
away from these threats. The limited information provided by
this Administration makes it difficult to determine the known
prevalence of domestic terrorism and what the government is
really doing to prevent it.
What we do know is that this Administration is currently
not doing enough. Greater transparency is critical to
understanding what the policy challenges are, and just as
significantly, accurate reporting on the threats to communities
can help lawmakers ensure that FBI, DHS, and other Federal
agencies are applying investigative resources in line with real
threats and not based on identity, political belief, or other
categories.
At DHS I served as the Director of the Interagency
Countering Violent Extremism Task Force and the Director of the
Community Partnerships Office. Both of these offices provided
support to State, local, and community groups and provided
resources to help prevent and intervene in the process of
radicalization to violence. The staffing and funding for these
efforts has been significantly reduced or completely eliminated
in the past 3 fiscal years.
Last week, DHS released its new Strategic Framework for
Countering Terrorism and Targeted Violence, which called out
the heightened threat environment of domestic terrorism,
specifically including the threat from white supremacy. The
forthcoming steps of a concrete implementation plan and
associated funding request will be the ultimate test as to
whether or not this framework will succeed or fail.
Looking ahead, ADL's top request is for our Nation's
leaders to always use and speak out clearly and forcefully and
call out anti-Semitism and bigotry in all forms at every
opportunity. Beyond that, policy gaps that must be addressed
include:
Increased collection and reporting of data on extremism and
domestic terrorism by the Federal Government. As the Chairman
mentioned, we cannot address what we cannot measure.
Resourcing the threat. Federal offices across the Executive
Branch that address domestic terrorism should be codified into
law and must be provided resources commensurate with the threat
today and at a scale that can be impactful.
Prioritizing reporting and the enforcement of hate crimes
laws, the key precursors to white supremacist terrorism, and
empowering local communities to be part of that solution
nationwide.
Supporting civil society, academic institutions, and the
private sector to step up and play meaningful roles where the
government cannot or should not.
And, undertaking an examination of whether overseas white
supremacist groups meet the foreign terrorist organization
designation criteria.
In conclusion, white supremacy is a very real and very
deadly threat to our homeland. This is an all-hands-on-deck
moment to protect our communities. Solutions will require a
whole-of-government, whole-of-society impact, and ADL stands
ready to serve as a constructive partner as this Committee and
Members of this Congress explore these issues.
Thank you for your time this morning.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Selim.
I am going to defer my questions except for one because I
think it will help our questioning. Have any of you taken a
look at what DHS has published now? And if so--who has looked
at it? OK. So for the Committee Members, realize that all the
witnesses have reviewed what DHS just published, and, again,
from my standpoint, having read the testimony, having read
this, things really dovetail quite nicely here. So it looks
like the Department is moving in the right direction. We can
talk about resourcing, emphasis, that type of thing,
prioritization. But to me, the timing of this hearing, the
timing of this release is working out nicely, and it seems like
we are moving in the right direction. We are acknowledging the
same things, and we just have to develop that data, which we
are trying to work on a piece of legislation to codify, as you
said.
But, with that, Senator Peters.
Senator Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to
each of our witnesses for your testimony here today and for
your presence.
Certainly, as I think we have reiterated many times
already, our domestic terrorism resources and priorities should
be based on an accurate assessment of the threat and really a
frank assessment of the facts on the ground.
My first question to you, Mr. Selim: What is the deadliest
domestic terrorism threat currently facing Americans? What
should Americans know?
Mr. Selim. The ADL has been tracking and monitoring all
forms of extremism across the ideological spectrum for over
three decades. We assess that today, based on publicly
available, open-source data, the deadliest threat to the
American homeland is the threat of ideologies that are
associated with white supremacy, white nationalism, and the
data to back that up is that over the past decade more American
lives--specifically 73 percent of the murders and homicides
committed in the homeland are associated with white supremacist
ideology.
Senator Peters. Mr. Braniff, what is your assessment of the
deadliest domestic terrorism threat currently facing Americans?
Mr. Braniff. Ranking Member Peters, our data also looks
across ideologies, and we do not use predetermined ideological
categories, meaning we look for behaviors first, and once a
behavior meets the threshold for inclusion, we then look at the
ideological motivations, which means we are able to identify
new and emergent trends and not just be wedded to a previous
understanding of what does or does not constitute terrorism.
We would also demonstrate via our data sets that violent
white supremacists are the most active of the ideological
groups in the United States in terms of violence by just about
every empirical metric. The one exception would be fatalities
per attack. Regarding fatalities per attack, Muslim extremists,
those inspired by al-Qaeda or the Islamic State are marginally
more lethal. But by every other measure, including the total
number of individuals killed or injured, it is the violent far
right, and I do fully appreciate how unsatisfactory these large
umbrella categories are, but within the violent far right, the
white supremacist movement.
Senator Peters. President Trump has spoken of immigrants
``invading'' and ``infesting'' our country. Both the El Paso
and Tree of Life mass murderers used that very language in
announcing their imminent attacks.
Mr. Selim, what is the impact of having a President using
this sort of rhetoric?
Mr. Selim. Ranking Member Peters, thank you for your
question. What we know is that when rhetoric like the form you
mentioned is used by the President of the United States or any
public figure, it is lauded and echoed and repeated over and
over again by individuals online and offline who are openly
bigoted and individuals who espouse an ideology of white
supremacy or white nationalism.
The most important point here is that in times of crisis
and in times of division, leaders need to lead, and whether you
are the President of the United States or the president of the
Parent Teacher Association (PTA) in your hometown, it is
incumbent on leaders to use the bully pulpit to forcefully
speak up and stand up when it comes to that form of bigoted or
biased rhetoric that can tear communities apart and not pull
them together.
Senator Peters. DHS told us that they ``do not track
statistics'' regarding the number of people killed and injured
in the United States by domestic terrorist attacks. And they
said that they do not have ``firm statistics'' on personnel and
resources used to combat domestic terrorism. The Department of
Justice and the FBI have provided no response to multiple
inquiries that the Chairman and I have made. So either this
Administration is unable or it is unwilling to provide some
basic data about domestic terrorist threats.
So again to you, Mr. Selim, is the government capable of
providing this information? You certainly provided an awful lot
of information in your testimony. What is going on here?
Mr. Selim. Senator, I can say based on firsthand
experience, having managed and overseen both the interagency
group and the office at DHS that was tasked with executing this
specific mission that we are talking about today, it is
absolutely possible to gather with a pretty good degree of
specificity the number of Federal employees--within the
Department of Homeland Security I can speak to--that are
executing a piece or part of this mission as outlined in the
framework that was released last week and that the previous two
Administrations used to guide their work. It is something that
I did as the Director of that office and certainly something
that the Department has the means through which to provide this
Congress based on my experience having done so several years
ago.
Senator Peters. In the absence of data, it is pretty
difficult to prioritize, isn't it?
Mr. Selim. It is extremely difficult to prioritize. It
starts with the implementation of the strategy that the
Chairman alluded to and associating appropriate staffing
levels, resource dollars, and prioritization to drive such a
strategy on a week-in and week-out basis all year long.
I should note that until this past Friday no such strategy
governed DHS or the interagency's work in this regard. While
the strategy released on Friday is specific to the Department
of Homeland Security, it does not apply to the interagency or
other parts of the Federal family that have relevant equities
in this issue. My hope is that the Administration would look
more broadly for a whole-of-government approach on these
issues. But to date, this is an important starting point, as
the Chairman noted, and my hope is that this Administration
continues to build on that momentum.
Senator Peters. Every community across the Nation obviously
deserves to be kept safe from acts of terror or violence, and
no one, no matter who they are, no matter where they live,
should fear being attacked in their neighborhoods or at their
neighborhood store or in houses of worship.
Mr. Chesney, my question to you: What are some of the
concerns of impacted minority communities related to the
expansion of governmental authorities to combat domestic
terrorism? What have you been hearing?
Mr. Chesney. As you noted in your opening remarks, sir,
there is a challenge that arises when there is a particular
identifiable group or set of individuals that the government
decides to start intervening to investigate with an eye toward
prevention, where on one hand there is a huge benefit in trying
to get information from people in contact with persons who
share the ideology that is in question, or whatever it may be,
and so there is an effort to get into that community and
sometimes use of undercover informants, monitoring of events
taking place in public, attending those
events and so forth. And while that makes a lot of sense as a
strategy--indeed, is arguably one of the most critical
strategies for finding out in advance of an attack what is
happening--the historical record shows it does tend to carry
with it a bit of a negative reaction from communities that may
feel--fairly or unfairly, but nonetheless subjectively they may
feel that they are being tarred with too broad a brush.
There is no silver bullet solution to this. It is an
important investigative approach. It carries with it offsetting
dangers, and it has to be handled very carefully.
Senator Peters. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Before I turn it over to Senator Portman,
again, data is going to be important. We need to be very
accurate.
Mr. Selim, I just want to clear up--you said 73 percent of
murders were caused by white supremacists. Now, I talked about,
on average, 18,000 murders. So exactly what data set are you
comparing it to? What number is 73 percent of?
Mr. Selim. Sorry, Mr. Chairman. Let me just clarify that
specifically. Of murders and homicides that were committed by
extremists, not writ large in the American public----
Chairman Johnson. And, again, that number is approximately
what? You are taking 73 percent of what? Just give me the
numbers. I mean, percentages are----
Mr. Selim. Yes, 427.
Chairman Johnson. Over?
Mr. Selim. Over a decade-long period, 2009 through 2018.
Chairman Johnson. OK. So 73 percent of that, about 300 of
those were----
Mr. Selim. Approximately.
Chairman Johnson. OK. Again, I just want to make sure that
we are dealing with actual numbers here.
Mr. Selim. Correct.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Portman.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PORTMAN
Senator Portman. That would not include 9/11, then.
Mr. Selim. No.
Senator Portman. First, Mr. Chairman, thanks for holding
this hearing. I think it is incredibly important, and I
appreciate the witnesses and their expertise.
I, as some of you know, have been focused on this issue of
helping our nonprofits, particularly our religious communities,
to be able to better defend themselves against domestic
terrorism. It has been particularly difficult in the Jewish
community because we have had a number of attacks. Synagogues,
community centers, schools have been targeted. We have had some
horrible incidents, as we had in Pittsburgh, and then exactly 6
months to the day later in the San Diego area.
We held an interesting conference back in Ohio about 2
weeks ago, and it was on the whole issue of how to help prepare
and to be more vigilant. We had folks there from the Hindu
community, the Sikh community, the Muslim community, the Jewish
community, the Christian community, and very well attended. The
FBI was there to give a briefing, and that was quite eye-
opening. And, Mr. Watts, I want to talk to you about that if it
is OK in a minute about what the FBI can and cannot do given
your experience.
We also talked about the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) Nonprofit Security Grant Program that Senator
Peters and I have been very involved with and trying to get
reauthorized, and we got the funding up a little last year.
Ohio is using that program. Several of the faith-based groups
have applied for and received help there. What they get help
for is cameras and sensors and even armed guards now, which
they could not get previously until recently when the
Administration changed its view on that, but also just best
practices. A lot of it is about just trying to understand how
to be able to respond more quickly should something tragic
happen. So, one, hardening the institutions, but, second, to be
able to respond quickly and effectively.
So I appreciate what FEMA has done in that area. We had DHS
there. They had a lot of good information. People left, they
told me, with a better sense of what they need to do.
On the FBI front, one thing they said was it is actually
difficult for them to investigate these kinds of cases. Someone
goes online, for instance, and makes a credible threat of
violence, and the FBI said that it is difficult for them to
investigate all of those cases.
Can you talk a little about that, Mr. Watts, and just
operationally what happens when there is a threat online?
Mr. Watts. Yes, I think a way to sort of think about it is
how you would initiate a case. In the international
counterterrorism context, even if you are State and local law
enforcement, if you get an indicator that ties an individual as
having sympathies or supporting al-Qaeda or ISIS, that would
usually initiate an assessment, which would give you the
ability to assign investigative leads to an actual case, ISIS-
inspired terrorism, al-Qaeda-inspired terrorism.
Once that is assigned, you would then look for indicators,
and it would be managed centrally across the FBI. So for those
familiar with the FBI International Terrorism Operations
Section (ITOS) would take that over. They would manage it. The
investigators out in your community would go. They would look
at open source. They would look at social media. They might
even go interview the person depending on the circumstances.
And then that would be tied into the national picture so that
you could understand if there is any connection, sympathies,
other indicators. And it could be elevated then to a
preliminary inquiry and then a full field investigation based
on the status of it.
In a domestic context, I will give you----
Senator Portman. Well, the first one with regard to ISIS or
al-Qaeda or maybe some other specified groups, but
international terrorism.
Mr. Watts. Right, and here is a hypothetical example. I do
not want to be too hypothetical, but someone has Osama bin
Laden as their Facebook avatar or social media avatar. They say
the infidels should be killed. That might trigger leads, which
the FBI would respond to.
Senator Portman. And on the domestic side?
Mr. Watts. On the domestic side, take, for example, one of
the shooters in any of these recent attacks is posting in the
same way and it says we should kill all the invaders. That is
not tied to any nationwide case. That might be, maybe, followed
up as an assessment, but I doubt it because there is no
specific crime. There is no designation around a violent
ideology that opens a nationwide case. And it becomes very
difficult for the FBI, or DHS, or even State and locals to
understand what is the larger context of this picture. Are
there global connections? Which we saw this week in one of the
arrests that was undertaken. Are there other connections in
these social media platforms that they are using that are
increasingly more encrypted, more in the dark web pushed to the
fringes? Which means human intelligence collection. It becomes
very difficult not only to get a picture of that violent
ideology, but to even have a reason, because it may be
protected under the First Amendment, to investigate just
through public records or to show up and do an interview of
that person to really assess what their inclinations are toward
violence.
Senator Portman. So the big issue with regard to domestic
terrorism is the protected speech and that line that is crossed
sometimes and where does that line get drawn. Is it somebody
saying hate speech generally? Or is it somebody saying, as an
example, recently in Youngstown, Ohio, there was a credible
threat, a specific threat as to the Jewish synagogue there and
the community center. In that case, the FBI and local law
enforcement was able to intervene.
Where is that line? And where should it be drawn?
Mr. Watts. As of right now, it is really drawn around is it
specific to an actual location, a person, an incident. That is
when the FBI triggers dramatically in that direction.
However, if we had pursued that in the al-Qaeda-ISIS era,
we would have sustained a large number of attacks, in my
opinion, across the country because we would not have been
preemptively trying to move out and penetrate into those
networks.
The line to me should be--I would like to see the FBI
Director have the ability based on certain thresholds, open
investigations, maybe incidents, tips and leads related to a
specified violent ideology, to open a nationwide case such that
investigators can then do their assessments without prying into
people's personal information, minimum threshold, right? We are
not actually going in and being intrusive, but we are looking
to say is this person connected to other individuals that have
concocted attacks? Are they talking about targeting in some
sort of dark space on the Internet? Can we put these pieces
together in a nationwide picture so we can actually go ahead
and try and be preemptive rather than reactive?
Senator Portman. My time is expiring, but I would say that
I do not disagree with what you are saying. And I think you are
right. I think we need to be more proactive to be able to
preempt and to try to thwart some of these attacks.
Many of these attackers are lone wolves, though, so you are
not going to see a national thread necessarily, and I think
some of the recent incidents of mass shootings as an example,
where there does not seem to be a connection to a national
group. So you would not want to preclude that as well, right?
Mr. Watts. Correct. I think you have to establish a
threshold based on the violent ideology. For example, where do
they congregate? Think if this was in the 1990s. These
individuals to do these associations would have to show up
physically in a place, right? And that is what our laws are
built for. We see people congregating. Maybe they are doing
reconnaissance, weapons training, things like that. They are
picking out targets.
Today that all happens in the online space. There is no
real tip or lead system for the public even to report on that
because they have gone to a fringe platform that is maybe
completely encrypted, totally offline, and they are
communicating, they are associating. They are talking about
what types of weapons to purchase or acquire.
So we have to help law enforcement come up with a way to
get to that space legally where they are also not infringing on
people's freedom of speech.
Senator Portman. I know this Committee is eager to get your
input on it because you need to help us to be able to figure
out is there a legislative role here and, if so, to help draw
that line properly and help to protect--and I mentioned houses
of worship and other faith-based organizations, but to protect
all of us.
Thank you for your testimony, everybody.
Chairman Johnson. As long as we have started down this line
of questioning, I do want to bring up--I believe it was Omar
Mateen, the Pulse Night Club shooter.
Mr. Watts. Yes.
Chairman Johnson. I want to talk about the difficulty
within a constitutional government about, again, the ``not
guilty yet.'' There was an FBI investigation. It was, I think,
undertaken for 6 months, but then because of Justice Department
guidelines, when there was not enough ``there'' there, they had
to--could you just quickly speak to that? And, again, this is
the difficult issue. What do you do with the ``not guilty
yet''?
Mr. Watts. Yes, and I could probably add the Boston bombing
case, as another example where oftentimes we do encounter these
people. They are not a surprise necessarily to law enforcement,
particularly State and local law enforcement. They tend to
know. But it really comes down to those initial assessments. If
we cannot do those initial assessments--for example, someone
calls in and says, ``My neighbor is really angry. He has been
threatening to kill people or blow things up,'' but it is not
specific to any location or event, the FBI or DHS really does
not have anything to go on, right? They cannot even do that
initial assessment. There is no nationwide violent ideology
that it can be tied to.
Chairman Johnson. Talk about the guideline that really
requires you to stop an investigation even though you have been
undertaking something for 6 months. Just talk about that.
Mr. Watts. Sure. I am very dated on this. I have not been
in the building since 2012. But there are specific periods--it
is usually 90 days--in terms of your assessment. You have to
show progress if it is a preliminary inquiry. You have a little
bit longer with a full field investigation. But if you cannot
actually show that there is some sort of movement toward it,
the case oftentimes is closed or reduced. I think that is
something to remember with this radicalization process.
Sometimes people become radicalized right up to the point of
violence. Then they stop or move back. And then years later,
they can reaccelerate again. But that is really the important
bridge about our community partnerships and our online
interventions that we work with partnerships.
So as I mentioned in my opening statement, we have those
bridges. We have developed them. Bill and I worked together on
this. George I have seen in the past. They have worked on these
community partnerships which are who do we hand this off to. We
see this person, they are extremely angry, they are not being
specific, but they could mobilize later. How do we keep those
tips and leads coming in? We have that for sure in the
international context, and we have built that over the last 18
years.
In the domestic context, we do not necessarily have it, but
we are starting to see it kind of naturally emerge, right? We
will see in Youngstown. There was another case in Pennsylvania
where somebody does call in a tip or lead, but that is kind of
after the fact. They have seen lots of violence. We have not
really built that out for a lot of these violent ideologies and
even for mass shootings. School resource officers, in my
opinion, are one of the most critical bridges across this,
college campuses the same way. And even in terms of some of the
other communities we could engage in a very civil way, this
creates a lot of angst with some people. But gun advocacy
groups would be a great bridge to say, hey, we want to protect
your Second Amendment rights, but you have to help us identify
people that maybe they are moving along the spectrum to
violence so that we can interdict it. Timothy McVeigh would be
a classic example of that.
Chairman Johnson. But also First, Fourth, and Fifth.
Mr. Watts. Right.
Chairman Johnson. There are constitutional differences
between what we can do with domestic versus international.
Senator Hassan.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HASSAN
Senator Hassan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member,
for having this hearing. Thank you to all of the witnesses for
being here and for your expertise and commitment on this issue.
Charleston 2015, Charlottesville 2017, Pittsburgh 2018,
Poway 2019, Dallas 2019, Gilroy 2019, and El Paso 2019. These
are just a few of the cities impacted by domestic terrorist
attacks in recent years, and they all have one thing in common:
None of the perpetrators of these attacks were under FBI
investigation at the time of the attack.
Earlier this year, FBI Director Christopher Wray told
Congress that there is a ``persistent, pervasive threat''--his
words--posed by white supremacist violence. I want to piggyback
a little bit on what Senator Portman and Senator Johnson were
just asking you, Mr. Watts. I have deep concerns that the
Federal Government does not understand the full scope of the
threat and, given current legal and resource constraints, is
limited in its ability to prevent future attacks.
Mr. Watts, you have written that, ``Short of violence or a
fully approved domestic terrorism investigation, preventing
white supremacist terrorist attacks becomes nearly impossible
for investigators,'' and that is a little bit about what you
have just been talking about. So that is obviously a startling
revelation, and I just want to give you an opportunity to
continue the discussion that we have just started. Can you
expand on how current laws may constrain domestic terrorist
investigations? And how do these constraints both impact the
FBI's understanding of the threat and impact resources
dedicated to preventing the threat?
Mr. Watts. Yes, thanks, Senator. So there are a couple
things to consider. One, without a designation or opening of a
nationwide case----
Senator Hassan. Right.
Mr. Watts. So you could do that either--and he will be much
better, Mr. Chesney, at explaining the legal parameters around
that. But without a domestic terrorist organization designation
or the opening of a nationwide case based on a violent
ideology, there is no central repository to collect or even
count on--or do counts, measure statistics. We have to rely on
Bill and George to tell us statistics because there is nothing
really to harness that information. It could be civil rights in
one jurisdiction. It could be a domestic terrorism viewed
threat in another or a firearms violation. So there is no way
to really get your hands around what the scale or scope of the
threat is.
I actually go to outside researchers. Moonshot CVE does
national maps. I could pick out jurisdictions. I think I have
the map even here. I brought it with me. But I could go to
these jurisdictions, and I would be like none of these red dots
are surprises to me. We have had many cases over the years of
violence.
The same thing in the online space. I could tell you there
is a significant white supremacist threat after Christchurch
just in terms of the online uploads of that video.
Senator Hassan. Right.
Mr. Watts. 1.2 million stopped at the time of upload, I
think, at Facebook; 300,000 more were taken off. I call it the
``iceberg theory.'' That means under the surface you have a
massive support network online around the world and in the
United States that is helping boost that ideology, which is
going to further increase the pace of attacks, which is
directly what you are talking about with those incidents.
It also creates commonality around targets, so synagogues,
African American churches, mosques, Hispanic locations with a
Walmart. Those all have commonalities because the movement now
collectively is starting to direct in terms of the targeting.
The problem for the FBI is, without some sort of
designation or some nationwide case, there is no way for
analysts or even investigators to report centrally in. When I
was a brand-new agent, we would report all Sunni violent
extremism to one operational analytical unit. They would then
analyze it. They would make connections and parse out leads to
other investigators. At this point it is almost impossible for
a domestic terrorism investigator in the FBI or DHS who is out
there on their own to really piece it together. They almost
have to do it in a grassroots way throughout the organization.
So there has to be some sort of designation and measurement,
but also to help those investigators be more preemptive.
I think the other part is we know where they are at, right?
It is not just these locations. It is Gab. It is Telegram. And
if I were trying to close on those, I would not ask anybody in
government. There are researchers outside in public that I
would go to that could tell me exactly what is going on in
those environments. I feel like the Federal investigators are
way more limited in that regard.
Senator Hassan. That is helpful, and I am going to submit
for the record\1\ a question to you too about the way we could
improve information sharing, State, local, Federal, similar to
what we do do for foreign terrorism.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The questions from Senator Hassan appears in the Appendix on
page 159.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
But I wanted to turn to Mr. Chesney because you had
referenced him, Mr. Watts, about the legal impediments we have
that make it so hard for us not only to gather the information
but then to really prevent this kind of terrorism. I would just
like you to expand on your previous answers and help us
understand that.
Mr. Chesney. Thank you, Senator. I would argue that it is
not really a legal constraint. It is a question of commitments.
It is cultural perceptions within the agencies about what is in
scope, what is out of scope, and so forth. And here is why I
say that. Maybe we should disaggregate the problems a little
bit. One of the questions is: Can we get the national
coordination that we need to have in some though definitely not
all cases, but in some cases? There is not a legal obstacle to
doing that, I believe. There is nothing in the Constitution
that would preclude that. I do not think we have any statutory
obstacles.
Senator Hassan. Right.
Mr. Chesney. It is an internal organizational question
about----
Senator Hassan. I think what I am trying to get at, though,
is in your testimony you have indicated that there are gaps in
terrorism law that impact domestic terrorism charges. So can we
focus on that?
Mr. Chesney. Sure. OK. So setting aside investigation.
Senator Hassan. Yes.
Mr. Chesney. I argue in my testimony, in my remarks, that
we should close the gap in the scope of substantive Federal
criminal law to reach gun-based terrorist attacks that would
have been, if carried out with explosives, within the scope of
the so-called and misnamed WMD statute. That is the major gap.
I also argue that actually the scope of Federal criminal law is
much broader in this area than many people appreciate already.
Senator Hassan. OK. That is helpful. I have more questions,
but with only 30 seconds, I think I will turn it back to the
Chair.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Carper.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR CARPER
Senator Carper. Some of us wanted to hear those other
questions, but I will go ahead.
Our thanks to all of you for joining us today. My thanks to
our Chair and to our Ranking Member for pulling this together.
It was not that many years ago--I think it was 2016--that
the Chairman and I worked with the Department of Homeland
Security and stakeholders on a bill to address violent
extremism, and our legislation would have done a number of
things. It would have created an Office for Partnerships
Against Violent Extremism, as Mr. Selim will recall, within the
Department of Homeland Security.
Building on Mr. Selim's work in the Obama Administration,
our bill would have established an office reporting directly to
the Secretary to lead the government's efforts to counter
violent extremism. And, further, our bill would have put in
place important accountability measures to protect civil rights
and civil liberties and ensure congressional oversight of
Administration efforts to counter violent domestic terrorism.
That bill passed out of this Committee. I think it was on a
voice vote, but it passed without opposition, as I recall, over
2 years ago, but it was not taken up by the full Senate. Since
then, the current Administration has rescinded grants
administered by that office, cut its budget, renamed it not
once but twice, and created additional reports between the
Director and the Secretary.
Now, I would just ask you, Mr. Selim, could you just share
with us today some of your thoughts, please, on the need for
congressional oversight of Administration efforts to counter
domestic terror and violent extremism? And the second half of
my question would be: Do you think that statutory
authorization, including strong reporting requirements such as
were required in our bill, are a good first step?
Mr. Selim. Senator Carper, thank you for your question, and
I am grateful for the opportunity of having appeared before
both you and Chairman Johnson before on this specific issue,
and I appreciate the diligence and the sincerity which you and
other Members of this Committee have given this over the years.
So thank you for your question. I think it reflects some of the
history that you and this Committee have brought to this issue
specifically.
Two initial points to start to answer your question. It is
important to point out, as a number of Members of this
Committee have noted already, data drives policy, and it is so
important when we are making policy in the homeland security or
in the national
security space to have the data that drives and depicts the
accurate--the threat or risk that we as a country face.
One of the pieces of legislation that is pending right now
that would support achieving a clearer picture is the DATA Act
that I think is pending before both the House and soon to be
the Senate. This is a key piece of legislation that I think can
fill some of the critical gaps, and I would urge this Committee
to help----
Senator Carper. There have been several DATA Acts, even in
recent years. Do you recall the prime sponsors in the Senate?
Mr. Selim. I will put that in my written response if that
is OK, Senator.
Senator Carper. Thanks.
Mr. Selim. I have it here in my notes, but I do not want to
waste too much of your time.
The second thing to address your question specifically is a
pending piece of legislation currently titled the ``Domestic
Terrorism Prevention Act.'' This does, again, what a number of
Members of this Committee have noted in terms of codifying into
law the resources tailored to the threat picture today. As this
Committee attempted to do several years ago and is interested
in engaging on again today, having an accurate picture to make
data-driven policy and programmatic decisions, coupled with
statutory appropriations and authorizations of offices that
require reporting on an annualized basis, can help give this
Committee and this Congress a better sense of where these
trends are going year in and year out and where resources can
be more accurately applied.
Senator Carper. Alright. Thanks very much.
Mr. Braniff, a question for you, if I could. Tragically, in
recent years we have seen an increase in targeted violence,
especially gun violence perpetrated in our country. In horrific
instances, we have seen domestic terrorist attacks against
minorities. They have occurred against people of color in
Charleston, South Carolina, against immigrants in El Paso,
Texas, last month, and against religious groups in places of
worship such as mosques all around our country and in
synagogues and any number of places from Poway, California, to
the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Mr. Braniff, you lay out your extensive data graphs in your
testimony highlighting the rise of domestic terrorism in the
United States, looking back I think as far as the 1970s. And we
have seen these attacks surge in just the last couple of years.
Could you just highlight for us what you believe to be the main
reasons for the most recent spike in domestic terrorism in this
country? The main reasons for the most recent spike in domestic
terrorism in this country.
Mr. Braniff. Thank you, Senator Carper. We should note that
domestic terrorism is a persistent threat in the United States,
so there has been an uptick in recent years, but it is not like
it came out of nowhere. There is a very large population of
individuals who have espoused violence to advance a political
agenda in the United States, and that is more of an enduring
fact than a recent trend.
In recent years, we have seen an uptick in violence
emerging from those extremist movements, and I think there are
probably a host of reasons. We are talking about political
violence, and political violence and politics are interrelated.
That is uncomfortable and true. There appears to be an
emboldened movement in the United States over the last several
years, and we see things like targeting preferences shift
according to political rhetoric. So the anti-immigrant verbiage
or political rhetoric is reflected in anti-immigrant targeting.
We also see social media or online platforms that enable
the most virulent of these individuals to find each other
online and to exacerbate one another's tendencies. Researchers
might call this the ``gamification of violence,'' where one
individual seeks to one-up another that he or she has never
met, but tries to get a higher body count in their next violent
attack. This kind of deviant behavior facilitated online allows
individuals to group-think themselves into greater and greater
levels of violence.
You are correct in your question when you referenced
firearms. The availability of firearms, although that is not
new, is interrelated with the level of violence, and we see in
the United States by far firearms are involved in most lethal
terrorist attacks--and the most lethal terrorist attacks
involve firearms.
Senator Carper. Thank you for, I thought, an excellent
answer to a pretty good question. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Rosen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR ROSEN
Senator Rosen. Thank you to Senators Johnson and Peters for
holding this important hearing, and I want to thank the
witnesses, of course, for being here today to talk about this
incredibly important and extremely challenging issue.
And so the recent rise of extremism and domestic terrorism
we know is a serious threat. We have seen far too often across
our Nation, from El Paso to Pittsburgh, from our houses of
worship to our schools, and it requires a concerted effort on
the part of Congress and our State and local partners.
As I said in last week's Commerce Committee hearing on
online extremism, however, we cannot ignore the fact that the
absence of sensible, common-sense gun safety measures like
background checks is allowing hate-filled individuals who wish
to commit acts of terror to access dangerous weapons far too
easily.
I hope that, alongside this important push for gun violence
prevention, today's hearing on this rapidly evolving homeland
security threat helps us better tackle this Nation's ongoing
challenge with white supremacy, anti-Semitism, and other hate-
filled domestic terrorism.
But I would like to turn to UASI reform for a moment. As we
approach the 2-year anniversary of the October 1st shooting in
Las Vegas--I represent Nevada; I live in Henderson, not very
far from where the shooting was, as a matter of fact, the
deadliest mass shooting in modern American history--we in
Nevada are not only reminded of the pain our community felt but
how the threat posed by mass violence is present now, and we
hope not but possibly in the future.
So despite this and despite the fact that Las Vegas had
more visitors than any other year last year in history, the
Department of Homeland Security's principal program for funding
urban security, the UASI grant, does not take into account the
unique
challenges faced by a city like Las Vegas. The UASI funding
formula--I want to explain this to you. If you have ever been
to Las Vegas, we have the beautiful Las Vegas Strip, great
downtown area. It treats those 30 major hotels, casinos, on the
Las Vegas Strip as one entity. Our airport, of course, right
next to where the shooter was on October 1st, another piece of
critical infrastructure. We have a vast convention meeting
space, all of them soft targets. Although we only have about 3
million people in Nevada, about 2 million in Las Vegas, nearly
50 million people come there each year. So between the Strip
and downtown Las Vegas, over 100,000 hotels rooms, critical
infrastructure.
We have Hoover Dam, Nellis Air Force Base (AFB) just a few
miles off the Las Vegas Strip, major data storage centers, our
Nevada test and training range, and our Nevada national
security site. So, in statute, UASI does not consider this.
What I want to ask you is this, and whoever would like to
take it, please feel free. How should we re-evaluate what
constitutes a possible domestic terrorist target? And how
should we rethink our definition of critical infrastructure as
the terrorism threat evolves? And do we consider in Nevada that
Nellis Air Force Base, the training range, the nuclear test
site, Hoover Dam, and 50 million visitors are all within a
small space? How do we add that to the formula? Please.
Mr. Selim. Senator, if I may, I would like to maybe attempt
to start to answer your question. Thank you for outlining a
number of those key issues. I am very familiar with the UASI
formula, and I want to make two important points before I get
to that that you accurately touched on in your statement as
well.
Two data points to share with you: that over the past 10
years, firearms were used in 73 percent of domestic extremist-
related killings in the United States. So in a major metro area
like Las Vegas or other parts of Nevada, the preferred weapon
of choice to commit an attack is, in fact, without question a
firearm.
And you also mentioned in your opening remarks addressing
the hate and bias and anti-Semitism and bigotry that is often
the underlying issue that drives many of these attacks. It is
so important for there to be increased training, resources, and
engagement with State, local, and community-based partners to
help address what is often the precursor to much larger
incidents.
One of the things that we have looked at very closely and
that ADL is supporting is a current piece of legislation known
as the ``NO HATE Act.'' I think this does provide a significant
increase in resources to State, local, and community-based
organizations to incentivize the reporting and training and
engagement on hate-and bias-motivated incidents. I think as we
start to think through making better risk-based decisions for
resources, having better data to drive that information is a
key starting point.
I would offer that as something for you to consider.
Senator Rosen. So we need risk-predictive analytics, would
you say?
Mr. Selim. Yes, Senator.
Senator Rosen. Please, Mr. Watts.
Mr. Watts. Senator, so when we are doing a risk-based
assessment, we would usually do two types of assessment. One
would be a vulnerability assessment, which Las Vegas could be
applied pretty consistently across a wide range. And that is
where you are looking at the potential targets. But that would
be matched with a threat assessment. We did not do this very
well 10 years ago, so oftentimes I would be on a Joint
Terrorism Task Force training team. Bill and I worked together
on this. We would go out to--I will give you an example--
Louisville, Kentucky, to talk to them about al-Qaeda, and they
would be like, ``We have no interest in this, but we have other
interests in other threats we are interested in.''
So along with just allocation in terms of resources, I
think it is making a menu or options for how you allocate UASI
funding for different things that are needed by those
locations. It is not just an even map. The vulnerability
assessment of Las Vegas is going to be wildly different from
New York City just in terms of how it lays out as a city----
Senator Rosen. But would you think that categorizing the
Las Vegas Strip as one entity does not seem correct on its
face?
Mr. Watts. No. My vulnerability assessments would be based
on the type of venues, types of structures; transportation
nodes are extremely important. But then on the threat
assessment, too, it would be wildly different for Las Vegas
than it would be possibly for New York City or Charlotte, North
Carolina, or any of these locations.
So rather than making a very cookie-cutter ``everybody gets
the following,'' I would like to see UASI allocation on both
the vulnerability and threat assessment side be allocated in a
way that makes sense for local jurisdictions. And I think that
is bringing in State and local partners. We have fusion centers
now which really under----
Senator Rosen. We sure do----
Mr. Watts. Tons of them, right? Which understand these
threats at a local level better. New Jersey State Police and
the Office of Homeland Security there I have worked with for
about a decade, and they have done a pretty good job of
twisting that. But their UASI funding is coming out of New York
City predominantly. That is how they are doing it. And so there
are constant battles about what to allocate on, and oftentimes
it is the Federal Government pushing down, this is what you
need to focus on, and State and locals saying, ``But this is
what my problem is.''
I would like to see better risk integration from State and
local up to the Federal level.
Senator Rosen. I look forward to working on that. Our
fusion center brings together about 27 groups, and that was the
reason the October 1st tragedy was not worse than it was. And
so I look forward to working with you on re-evaluating the
formulas in the future.
Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Scott.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SCOTT
Senator Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
holding this hearing today. And thank you all for being here.
I just finished 8 years as Governor of Florida, and we
experienced a variety of shootings. We had the Pulse Night
Club. We had an individual whose father was an FBI informant
who was, my understanding, supposed to be under FBI
investigation or surveillance, who killed 49 people.
Then we had an individual from Anchorage that went to the
FBI office in Anchorage and said, ``I should not have a gun,''
and then they gave it back to him, and then he came to Florida
and pulled his gun out of his checked suitcase and killed five
people in an airport.
Then we had 17 people killed at Parkland. The FBI had a
YouTube video 18 months before it happened. He said he was
going to be a professional school shooter, and his name was
Nikolas Cruz, the shooter, and nothing happened.
Then I think 35 days before the shooting, the FBI, the tip
line, somebody called and said this guy--the shooter, was going
to shoot up a school, and it was never passed on to local law
enforcement.
Finally, right before I finished, as Governor three people
were killed in a yoga studio, and the information had gone to
the FBI hotline but not to the locals.
I worked a lot with our fusion centers on a variety of
issues at the State level. We were working with the FBI and
other agencies, the U.S. Attorney, the Florida Department of
Law Enforcement. They really did a good job. But there is
something that is not working at the Federal level that there
was prior knowledge, and we had four mass shootings, and, the
lives of so many families have been completely changed because
of this.
So what ideas do you all have that we should be doing at
the Federal level? Is there something different that the FBI
should be doing that they are not doing to try to stop this?
Because in those four cases, there was prior knowledge in
Washington, but it did not make it to the local level. Mr.
Watts or Mr. Braniff, do you want to start?
Mr. Braniff. Thank you, Senator, for the question. So what
we have been discussing today is the fact that the threshold,
the legal threshold that allows the FBI to conduct
investigations is quite high for these kinds of general or
vague threats that may result in violence. So if the threshold
for legal action is quite high, logically we need more tools in
the pre-criminal space, in the civilian space to receive that
information.
One problem is people often hear things, and they either do
not take it seriously or they are afraid to call the FBI with
that information. They do not want to get somebody in trouble.
So, one, we need a place to capture those tips that is a non-
criminal justice entity to increase reporting.
Two, when people do call the FBI but it does not hit the
threshold for an assessment or a preliminary or full
investigation, the FBI needs to know it can turn to a civilian-
led intervention team. We do not invest in that.
Chairman Johnson. Let me just stop here. Stop the clock. I
want to ask the question: What Senator Scott just talked about,
did it meet that threshold or was it under the threshold?
Mr. Braniff. A general statement that ``Jews should be
killed,'' that ``I want to become a school shooter,'' may not
make a legal threshold for an investigation by the FBI. And, in
fact, if we put everybody under investigation who made a
statement----
Chairman Johnson. ``I have a gun, and I should not have
it''?
Mr. Selim. Can I answer that, Mr. Chairman?
Chairman Johnson. Sure.
Mr. Selim. If I may, just 10 seconds. If it may not reach
the threshold for a Federal criminal investigation or
assessment, it should absolutely meet the threshold for perhaps
a nongovernmental organization (NGO) or State and local
authorities to conduct the type of things that this panel has
mentioned of interviews, engagements, mental health, social
service, education providers, meeting and making contact----
Chairman Johnson. So, again, the question--I do not want to
put words in your mouth, but there was a failure here. Do we
acknowledge there was a failure? You can sit there and go,
``Hey, we need more resources.'' But here are some examples
where I would think we had legal authority, we could have done
something. We did not. And I think the key question there is:
Why not? And how do you prevent those types of law enforcement
failures?
Again, I am not trying to beat up on anybody, but I think
Senator Scott is laying out a pretty convincing case.
Mr. Chesney. May I contribute something from the recent
experience in Texas with the El Paso shooting, my home State?
The mother of the shooter had called local authorities, and it
is a small police department with limited resources, limited
training, had not gotten that push toward how do you do proper
threat assessment in a situation like this. But the local
officers went by and had a conversation. There was no basis for
arresting somebody. At least in Texas we do not have red flag
laws that might enable a process of civil action to remove
someone's gun from their possession. That is a big part of this
story. We have not talked about that. We all understand how
hard the politics are in that, but that is a big part of the
story as well.
It was not a civil commitment situation yet. There was not
enough evidence for that. And yet, in retrospect, it is clear.
There was the tip; there was the warning; there was the
opportunity for engagement.
And I want to reinforce what Professor Braniff said. One of
the things we could be doing, that Congress could do
effectively, is to surge resources into the threat assessment
mechanisms that are being developed, in some places deployed
very effectively. I believe the Secret Service works closely
with local school officials and school resource officers, as
Mr. Watts mentioned. Those sorts of early warning signal
systems are critical. And, of course, we are now spread far
beyond just terrorism.
Chairman Johnson. But, again, we had the early warning.
Again, I apologize to Senator Scott. I just could not constrain
myself. Senator Scott.
Senator Scott. So you really believe that if somebody has a
video and they say they are going to be a professional school
shooter, that should not get sent down to the locals?
Mr. Braniff. It is not a ``should.'' It is not a belief
statement. When we look at our data, over 60 percent of
domestic terrorist violent plots succeed. So they are not being
interdicted by the criminal justice process. So I am agreeing
that----
Senator Scott. But don't you think that they should have
called the local FBI office in all those cases? I have been
asking for more transparency of how they handled this stuff,
and I have not gotten it from the FBI yet. Take Parkland. When
you have the video, and you have a hot tip that it is going to
happen, and it is somebody that has been arrested 49 times
locally, and he was told he could not bring a backpack into
school because everybody believed he was going to be a school
shooter, that one, no one should have looked into it?
Mr. Braniff. Senator, please, I do not want to be
misunderstood. Certainly there were opportunities for an
interdiction. I would just like us to consider that not all
interdictions are going to be possible via a criminal justice
interdiction and that we should think very hard about how
aggressive we want our Federal law enforcement community to be
in investigating freedom of speech and freedom of association.
This is one of the tensions within our Constitution, is that it
affords a lot of speech, including hate speech, including
speech that encourages violence. And this is a really
challenging debate for us to have. How aggressive do we want to
be?
Senator Scott. Well, what we did afterwards is we passed
risk protection orders, where only law enforcement can do it.
The process has to go through the courts. You have to
constantly review it so we do not believe we have impacted
somebody's due process rights. But we have to figure out--and
what does not make sense to me is why can't I get information?
That is more money, because I have now been in this process now
as a Governor and here, and everybody wants more money. I get
that. That is what they do. Everybody comes to my office asking
for more money. I get that part. But why wouldn't we want to
fix a system? The cases that happened in Florida, that ought to
be fixed. And I do not think just saying throw more money at it
and have lower standards is the right fix. It seems to me that
those cases, that is a big enough deal that the information
should have been sent down locally.
Mr. Watts. Senator, can I quickly add to that? I do not
disagree at all. That is a mistake. But I would also say that
you might be shocked at the volume of tips and leads that come
in to any FBI office or DHS location, a fusion center, to where
there is no real assessment mechanism. In international
terrorism, we did do this. We did very rigorous assessment,
even down to scoring systems overseas about who has the
potential to be violent based on several factors. It is not
done for mass shootings or suspects. We have not gone back
through that.
The same thing, we did the Militant Ideology Atlas. We
looked at all of these factors in terms of what people were
citing. We looked at all the evidence. It has not been done
because there has not been a designation of a case or a
terrorist group at the domestic level, so it is hard to put
that together.
So when you go to triage, it really just depends on who is
on shift that day and what the backlog is. Sometimes that
backlog, particularly after a violent incident like El Paso,
more soar to 100 leads a day in an FBI office, which could
create a lag that is enormous. And then you are just going
through shifts. There is no real rigorous system for
assessment, and it is just based on that person that day and
what they think they should go through.
The other thing is with the social media part, I do not
agree with this, but there is pushback that you are ruining the
lives of young people whenever you aggressively go after them
for one posting they have done in social media. And so if I
actually went out on the Internet and sucked in every YouTube
of a young person making a violent threat or some claim, we
would maybe run down hundreds of young people every day. I
agree, there were many warnings and indicators there. Omar
Mateen is another example. We should have had some handoff
mechanism with State and local to make that transition.
I also feel like we have made those triage systems and a
good method to hand-off to State and locals so that they would
know. That could be the Boston bombing, Omar Mateen, Las Vegas,
a thousand different examples. And so we could help them do
that, but I think clearly defining what to look for around
these threats, whether it is a school shooter, workplace
shooter, white supremacist, incel, which is this whole brand-
new branch that has come up, I think that is extremely
important to do.
Senator Scott. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Before I turn it over to Senator Sinema,
I think, again, the whole purpose of this hearing is to
understand the problem so we can determine do we need
additional authorities, different allocation, or more
resources. So, again, I will ask the question. You said
``mistake.'' I would call this--it seems to me, I think,
Senator Scott, this was a failure to use existing authorities.
First of all, is that true?
Again, let us just talk about Parkland. Here you had a
video. You had a long history. And, listen, I understand the
volume. I do not think you have 100 threats like the
perpetrator of Parkland come into the office. I would think
that would be, like hair on fire, alarms going off with that
one. Maybe I am wrong. Mr. Watts?
Mr. Watts. Yes, I would just say each assessment,
regardless of how serious it seems when it first comes in the
door, takes the same amount of time. So I just recall certain
day when somebody would post something on the news and say this
person may be in the United States, and you are done for the
day.
Chairman Johnson. But, again, that is like one notice. This
was multiple notices over a very long period of time. So,
again, you would admit that is a failure to utilize existing
authorities that is just glaring. Again, I am really not----
Mr. Watts. Right.
Chairman Johnson. I understand how difficult this is.
Mr. Watts. Senator, I understand.
Chairman Johnson. So we do not need to pass a new law to
address that. We just need to make sure that we use existing
authorities. Is that true?
Mr. Watts. Yes. I think it also comes down to what the FBI
would investigate. Much of what the FBI gets pumped in terms of
information, Parkland would be an example, maybe is not
something that they are immediately going to move on, but it
would be for State and local law enforcement. So I think it
comes down to how does the assessment process get recorded and
put into databases and managed, and then how is that triaged
and transmitted down to State and local.
Chairman Johnson. And, Senator Scott, I am going to join
you in additional oversight letters to get this information
from the FBI, because we need to know what happened to assess
this.
Senator Scott. Yes, because you want to get better--so what
I did, after Pulse, what we did is we added 46 counterterrorism
experts at the State level. We added, I think it was, about six
or seven different offices for State law enforcement. But,
again, in my State, the fusion centers work, but the
information to get there first. They work really well.
Chairman Johnson. We are not beating up on--we are just
asking these legitimate questions. By the way, law enforcement
by and large is a State function. Senator Sinema.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SINEMA
Senator Sinema. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing.
The only way our Nation can successfully tackle a challenge
such as domestic terrorism is by working together, so it is not
a problem that the FBI can solve alone, nor is it something we
can leave just to our local police and sheriff departments. But
by sharing information, working together, identifying areas for
improvement, and then actually coming up with solutions, we can
actually make progress here. So I think we cannot let ourselves
get caught up in arguments about what the perfect definition of
``domestic terrorism'' is, but instead we need to focus on
solutions that improve Federal, State, and local efforts in
this space.
I know the police departments in Arizona cities like
Phoenix and Tucson are fully integrated into Federal task
forces which are addressing this problem right now, and the
Arizona law enforcement community wants to do whatever they can
to help stop, prevent, and prosecute crimes that fall under
domestic terrorism, so I am hoping we can continue to talk
about how we improve our existing Federal and local
partnerships.
My first question is for Mr. Selim and Mr. Watts. In
Arizona, the FBI leads task forces related to domestic
terrorism, and the Tucson police departments report these task
forces are a great tool. But both of these departments are
large, and they can assign officers full-time to the task
force. That is not the case for smaller departments in my
State.
So what changes to the existing FBI task force efforts
related to domestic terrorism need to be made so that smaller
local law enforcement departments can access needed information
and share what they are seeing on the ground with the
appropriate Federal authorities?
Mr. Selim. I will start with just a very short response,
and then my co-panelists can jump in. Senator, thank you for
your question, for your very important question about--I
understood your question as the need for better integrated
information sharing across the law enforcement spectrum,
irrespective of the size of that department. And I would just
add to that that the information sharing that is so critical
that you are alluding to in your question happen not just with
the size of State and local law enforcement, but as the other
witnesses at this table have mentioned, the information sharing
needs to happen outside of law enforcement circles as well,
especially with individuals who may hold some position, school
resource officer, mental health, social service, education
providers, et cetera. It is really that integrated information-
sharing platform that is what is missing when we are thinking
about this issue holistically.
Mr. Watts. I agree with George, and I do a lot of trainings
with State and local law enforcement, and the further they are
from a Joint Terrorism Task Force hub, the less information
they are going to get naturally, and the more responsibilities
they have across a wide spectrum.
The difference now compared to even 20 or 30 years ago is
there are so many violent ideologies that are connected in a
local rural area that a local law enforcement officer will
never even be able to understand or detect or interdict.
So part of the solution is how do we quickly call them up
and integrate them into these systems. We have task force
officers spread all over the country. But the other part is:
How do we interdict online? We do not always have to do all the
work with that State and local person. Not all the
interdictions have to be with community partners. We actually
have people that see these things in the online space,
particularly in Arizona. One, two, three would be white
supremacy, incel, and even conspiracy-based violence,
particularly in Arizona. I worry about all three of those. A
local law enforcement officer cannot do all the criminal
justice tasks there and understand all three of those that
might pop up.
So how do we help them? I would like to see rapid briefings
on threat, which means we have to do threat assessments first,
and communicate that in a very concise way. We did this in the
FBI during al-Qaeda-ISIS. We did quick cheat sheets, updates,
even YouTube-type videos, short videos, which inform people on
threat. And then the second part is online partners can be
critical in this. There are several out there that do one-to-
one engagements in both the international terrorism and
domestic terrorism space, and we could lever them to do quick
engagements with individuals, assess them, and then relay that
information back in.
I think we tend to think always in terms of our responses
being this physical task force team moving out, but there are
online interventions now that we have actually honed in the
jihadist space that we could use in the domestic context.
Senator Sinema. That is very helpful.
My second question is also for the two of you. One of the
great challenges that always comes up with Federal programs is,
of course, information technology (IT). So task forces and
other groups are important, but making sure that local
departments can interface with key Federal databases is also
important.
So have you come across IT challenges that hamper
information sharing? For instance, one of Arizona's police
departments reports that it is difficult to access certain
threat profile software programs, partly because the licenses
to use these programs are cost-prohibitive and there is no
money to provide additional access.
Mr. Watts. That is absolutely correct, and it is not just
in terms of the databases and access. They need training in
terms of how to utilize them and effectively communicate on
them. And then the third part is cybersecurity, which is really
a separate debate, which is if you have seen Baltimore or any
of these cities right now that have been struggling with
cybersecurity attacks, that is partly because they are so
underresourced in the technology space and the solutions are so
costly. And the larger cities can fund that both internally and
through Federal grants.
So I would love to see some way to help State and local law
enforcement get integrated in terms of these communication
mechanisms. Right now it is still based on a phone call. That
is how most of this would be communicated, and that is really
tough to do, I think, and expect them to have rapid response
and triage and interdicting it. I do not know how they get up
to speed quickly enough that they could really understand what
to do.
Mr. Selim. Senator, thank you for your question. Let me add
an important data point to this just to give you a sense of
this threat environment. As of September 1, 2019, as an
executive within ADL, a nongovernmental civil society
organization, we are not bound by the degree and scope of
information that we can retain. And so as of September 1st of
this year, we had provided as a civil society organization over
400 reports or bulletins and information that has been packaged
to Federal, State, and local authorities across the United
States. That is just on average more than one per day this
calendar year alone. We are on track to supply law enforcement
information collected from the online environment more than 600
times. And part of the advantage of being a nongovernmental
organization is we can take that data, we can retain it, we can
store it, we can analyze it in different ways, and we can hold
onto it in perpetuity.
When I was the Director of the Interagency Countering
Violent Extremism Task Force, that was not the case in the
Federal Government. The rules and limitations on data retention
and threshold and database development are extremely cumbersome
to some degree, where if there is not a real or perceived nexus
to a crime, that data cannot be held on a Federal Government
computer. But as a nongovernmental organization, if, God
forbid, there is another mass shooting or domestic terror
attack tomorrow--and I really hope that there never will be
another one, but God forbid if there is, the ADL can quickly go
through our records and determine if the alleged shooter had
ever posted or kind of made some type of insinuation, as
Senator Scott was referring to, of a mass shooting or something
else.
And so the ability to collect that data, analyze it, retain
it for long periods of time exists outside of government, and
similar considerations for data retention and analysis and some
of these things that are prescribed in the DATA Act that is
currently pending before Congress should be considered to have
a more accurate depiction of the threat environment.
Senator Sinema. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Hassan has a quick question.
Senator Hassan. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I will
just observe, too, that after 9/11 we put together a real
counterterrorism architecture that allowed for some of the kind
of information sharing that we are talking about at the
domestic level that is not happening and has not been
resourced. So I hope we could focus on that moving forward
because I think that that is one of the real deficits we have
been talking about.
The quick question I had was for you, Mr. Selim, because 2
weeks ago we were all in New York City right before 9/11,
having a field hearing at the National Memorial and Museum,
which was an extraordinary place and it was--thank you to both
the Chair and the Ranking Member--a wonderful and important
opportunity. We had three former DHS Secretaries there, and one
of the things we talked about with them was about the recent
rise in threats against and attacks on houses of worship across
the country.
Everybody agrees no one, regardless of their faith, should
fear for their lives when they go to their house of worship.
That is where we want them to feel safest, and that is where
they should be safest.
Your organization has recorded 1,879 anti-Semitic incidents
in the United States just in 2018, including the deadly attacks
in Pittsburgh, not to mention the attack earlier this year in
Poway.
In New Hampshire, one rabbi noted to me that now they only
open the doors to her temple shortly before services begin, and
they lock the doors shortly after the start of services. As she
leads her congregation during those minutes when the doors are
open, she said she wonders, ``Is this the night we die?''
So, Mr. Selim, can you share with me your thoughts about
how Congress, the Department of Homeland Security, and the
entire Federal Government can work with law enforcement and
community organizations to keep soft targets like houses of
worship safe from threats? I worked with Senator Portman on
getting grants to houses of worship of all sizes in all
communities because New Hampshire is a small State, we are a
rural place, we do not always qualify for the big urban grants.
But what else can we be doing to work to really keep soft
targets like these safer?
Mr. Selim. Senator, thank you for your question, and thank
you for making such a sober point in this testimony about the
fear that really tears at the fabric of faith-based communities
across this country. It is very real, and it is something that
many communities live with on a day-to-day basis.
For context, even going back to pre-9/11, for more than
three decades ADL has been a leader on the issue of security
for communal organizations, especially for schools and
synagogues, and it is obvious just based on your question that
the Jewish community and the data that ADL has recorded in 2017
with a 57-percent increase in anti-Semitic incidents across the
country has been a significant target of hate crimes and bias-
motivated crimes.
The FBI and DOJ's own data for calendar year 2017 shows a
17-percent increase in hate crime surge across the United
States. It is so important that as we think about protecting
any house of worship or any faith-based or vulnerable community
in this country, irrespective of race, religion, ideology, or
sexual orientation, that we are doing so mindful of the threat
environment that we are in today.
And so one of the things that ADL has continued to lead--
and we welcome partnership with other governmental and
nongovernmental organizations--is working to increase the
awareness of the threat environment as well as partnering with
organizations that do teaching and education on preventing
targeted violence and mass attacks across the United States. I
think much of the work that has come out of the Federal
Government in this regard for teaching, training, education,
and partnerships across faith-and community-based groups has
been foundational, but much more resources and personnel need
to go into these efforts to increase a State of preparedness,
if you will, across all communities that could be vulnerable.
Senator Hassan. Thank you very much, and, Mr. Chair, thank
you for your indulgence.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you for attending the hearing.
I want to go right to Professor Chesney. In your testimony,
both written and verbal, you talked about gaps in laws. I know
in your written testimony you were talking--one example is the
caliber of a weapon used. It is true that most criminal law is
State law and enforced at the State level. Within those gaps,
are a lot of those gaps covered by State law as well?
Mr. Chesney. Yes. It is important never to lose sight of
the fact that State law has comprehensive coverage as a matter
just of general violent crime statutes across the Nation for
all the scenarios where we have an actual violent act. I think
there is no scenario, once you have a completed act or an
attempted act or conspiracy to do the same, where you could not
bring any charges.
Chairman Johnson. So that is my point. So what do the gaps
in Federal law--what problem does that create? We just heard
Mr. Selim talk about the fact that we cannot hold data for
constitutional reasons. Describe what problems that creates in
terms of the gaps in Federal law when those gaps are filled,
once the act is committed, by State law.
Mr. Chesney. Alright. So if I understand the question
right, the issue is given that there are some gaps in Federal
law but not at the State law level.
Chairman Johnson. Kind of what is--so?
Mr. Chesney. So does it really matter, right. There are a
couple of arguments that are commonly advanced. I think there
is some merit to these. I will articulate them.
First of all, there is an argument about the important
symbolism of what is Federal criminal law covering and what
does it
not cover. And every single time there is a domestic terror
incident--and, unfortunately, in Texas we have had plenty of
repeat examples of this--one of the first things that tends to
come up with the reporters and, thus, with the public at large
is: Why isn't there a terrorism charge here? Why isn't there a
terrorism charge here? Do people not think this is serious? And
the response is, well, the district attorney (DA) in El Paso
has indicted for capital murder. It does not get more serious
than that. It does not matter. There is no terrorism charge.
Where is the terrorism charge? So there is something to be said
for showing that.
Separate from that, there is concern--I think Mr. Watts'
testimony has really highlighted this. There are spillover
effects into what investigative predicates are available for
Federal law enforcement. Insofar as we want to focus on that,
not losing sight of the fact that State law enforcement can do
its own investigative work, but, nonetheless, what the Feds can
do really matters, and if there is a real or even just a
perceived lack of ability to go into certain areas because of a
lack of potential downstream charging options, that is a
problem as well.
Chairman Johnson. OK. So that really needs to be properly
defined, because I also believe in your testimony you talked
about--I do not want to put words in your mouth, but there are
concerns about, for example, like we can designate foreign
terrorist organizations, there have been some suggestions to
provide those investigative abilities, start designating
domestic terror organizations. Can you describe your concerns
about that?
Mr. Chesney. So the designation phrase could mean a lot of
different things, and the consequences that follow from having
any kind of designation really matter.
In the foreign terrorist organization context, famously
there are really serious consequences because the material
support statute attaches just a blanket embargo, criminal
penalties for any association, including even being an active
member of the group yourself. I do not see many people talking
about doing that in the domestic space, nor do I think we
should do that.
So we have to make sure we are clear. We are not talking
about----
Chairman Johnson. You could make criminals out of just
normal citizens who are contributing to what they consider is
an OK organization.
Mr. Chesney. The First Amendment consequences that follow
from this, we do not want to go there. Will it help in some
fashion to have some other--not that but some other form of
designation process that would be focused on domestic terrorist
organizations? There is a problem here that a lot of what is
going on in this problem we are all engaging with here does not
root back to identified, specific, articulable organizations in
the first place. There are common ideologies and there are
social networks, but I think Mr. Watts' testimony highlights
this. We are not talking about command-and-control networks. At
least, that is not what I see from the outside. So the
designation mechanism in that formal sense probably also is not
a great fit for this problem set.
Do we need to have something, though, to facilitate the FBI
in particular in being able to open and advance through the
stages of investigation something that approximates what Mr.
Watts described as the national approach? When you have an al-
Qaeda, it is really easy to get a nationwide investigation
going. Is there some analog to that? I think we should avoid
the phrase ``designation'' because it leads to these other
issues, but something that would make sure that the FBI is more
clearly taking advantage of the expansion of counterterrorism
prevention authorities that the AG Guidelines invite.
Chairman Johnson. So here is the concern, going back to
what issue Senator Scott raised, is here you have existing
authorities where there is just a failure of using those, and
now we want to create new authorities that create certain
problems.
In Robert Bork's book, which I thought was a pretty
prophetic book, in 1996, 2 years after Yahoo! was established,
he talked about these deviants, isolated deviants now having
this tool, this Internet, where they can start connecting to
other formally isolated deviants, and that is kind of what we
are talking about.
With international terrorism, Islamic terror groups, there
is that kind of core group, core ideology, and people are
connecting to it. How many connections do we know about? How
disconnected are these groups? Is it just that those isolated
deviants now being able to connect to this Internet and
realizing--it maybe not a core group. It is maybe not an
organization. But they are just feeding in copycats, and then
literally how do you combat that within the framework of a
constitutional government where we recognize people's
constitutional rights?
Again, I will go back to what I think is the easiest way to
describe this. How does America in a free and open society deal
with individuals that are not guilty yet? Mr. Watts.
Mr. Watts. Senator, great example. So there are two things.
If I went to the best domestic terrorism investigator in the
FBI right now, and I said just go stop the next person that you
think is going to do a terrorist attack in the United States,
they would probably go to Telegram. And then you would have
to----
Chairman Johnson. They would do what?
Mr. Watts. They would go to Telegram, which is a social
media platform.
Chairman Johnson. Oh, OK.
Mr. Watts. They would see that as, OK, this is a place--or
8chan, as we saw in some of the previous ones. Then if you are
the Special Agent in Charge (SAC) out in that jurisdiction, you
would say, ``OK, what is the case that you are investigating?''
And he would say, ``Well, I am trying to stop a domestic
terrorism attack.'' ``What charge?'' He would not have one,
right? So that is one problem.
The second part, though, is we do have opportunities to
designate foreign groups right now that could give us the
predicates to open cases back into the United States. I do not
want to name----
Chairman Johnson. If they are connected to a foreign group.
Mr. Watts. Yes. I could think of four right now that the
State Department could potentially designate as an
international terrorist organization that do not line up with
jihadists that could open the doorway so that you could look
for inspired terrorism, and in much the way we did it with al-
Qaeda-ISIS, just not traditionally the way we think. Now, that
is a back-ended way to do that, to open that up, but it would
make it easier for them to enter into those spaces.
But I feel for the domestic terrorism investigator because
I know they are nervous, even when they are moving forward. ``I
do not have a specific individual. I do not have a specific
crime. I just know this is a violent ideology. It is pushing
people, and I know this is where they are doing it.''
Chairman Johnson. Oh, yes, it is a vexing problem, and I am
going to ask indulgence from Senator Peters here. And I am not
beating up on the FBI. I truly appreciate your past service,
and I know the difficult nature of what they are trying to deal
with. But we had the Garland shooting, and there were two
perpetrators there. Again, I do not like naming them. And this
is a letter I wrote, and in that letter I said, ``According to
reports, during that time the FBI paid [informant name] around
$132,000 to gain intelligence on one of the perpetrators,''
allegedly also sending text messages to this perpetrator that
read, ``Terror of Texas.'' I think it was also true that there
were multiple meetings at coffee shops or whatever.
Again, if I am part of a community and I have FBI agents,
again, concerned about issues, there is somebody who said some
nasty things, then you have an FBI informant having coffee. You
could almost call that incitement. Talk a little bit about
that. That is a real problem. There have been other cases, and
they are celebrating, we have stopped a terrorist incident. Is
it a terrorist incident that we literally incited? Did we plant
an idea in somebody's head who was just going off half-cocked?
Mr. Watts. This was a challenge throughout the al-Qaeda-
ISIS era, which is where is the line between incitement and
entrapment, where you are pushing a potential suspect to that.
Over time, if I am correct--and I do not have the data in front
of me--declination rates from U.S. Attorneys went down,
meaning--or went up. They were declining more cases even under
that circumstance where they were being let go.
I think the other problem with a lot of those cases is the
borderline of what ideology, violent ideology, were they
adhering to. Oftentimes they did not know. And the further you
get away from a named group--you could see this in Phoenix
right now. There was a case recently where an individual was
citing both al-Qaeda-ISIS propaganda and white supremacist
propaganda at different times. It was very confusing whenever
you get away from that. So what is it you are investigating?
And so I think it is a persistent problem around that. Part of
it is measurement. If we do not have the measurement and we do
not really consolidate it, it is very difficult.
I would also say that even for the investigators, they do
not necessarily know where that line would be, and we have not
informed them about how to do that. They would maybe not know
where am I pushing someone to violence versus adhering to an
ideology that is mobilizing someone to violence.
Chairman Johnson. I will turn it over to Senator Peters
here, but, the point of this hearing is just, again, that first
step, to kind of flesh out how difficult this problem is.
Social media companies, I have been dealing with them. They
have done an awful lot about taking down these sites, whether
it is Islamic hate sites or other hate sites or Russian
interference in our election sites. But it is not a perfect
system. And there are real concerns about political bias being
put into their activities as well. So this is an incredibly
difficult issue, and that is why we need to have, as I think
this hearing was, just a very high quality discussion fleshing
all these things out. We have a long way to go, but it does--I
am an accountant, a business guy. You need information to
manage any kind of problem, and so we kind of want to work with
the departments, with you folks, to help codify what needs to
be codified but develop that baseline information and then
continue this discussion, because we are not going to come up
with anything anytime real soon on this.
But my final statement would be I am very encouraged,
having read all your testimony and then reviewing what the
Department of Homeland Security has published here, how they
have to implement it. But I think even you, Mr. Selim, I would
think you would be pretty pleased by what you are reading here
in terms of what the direction is.
Mr. Selim. Absolutely.
Chairman Johnson. That is great. Senator Peters.
Senator Peters. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a
couple followups, and, again, I agree. This has been a very
productive and great conversation and the first of what will
have to be more conversations as we continue to think about
this.
I ran out of time in my questions. I want to ask Mr. Selim
basically the question I asked Mr. Chesney at the very end. If
you could speak to some of the concerns that communities that
are targeted by white supremacists have about expanding
domestic terrorism authorities. Are there concerns out there
that you are hearing?
Mr. Selim. Sure, and let me just, Senator Peters, thank you
for your question and express thanks to both you and the
Chairman for holding this hearing in such a bipartisan and
inclusive way. I think it is really demonstrative of the work
that you all and the Committee staff is bringing to this very
important issue.
To answer your question specifically, Senator, there is a
reason that this has not been done to date. And as the Chairman
was alluding to earlier, this is very difficult and it is very
hard. There has been a history in this country of law and
policy that has disproportionately and disparately impacted
ethnic and religious minority groups. I say that from the
standpoint of between 2006 and December 2012, I served as a
Senior Policy Adviser in the DHS Office for Civil Rights and
Civil Liberties. I saw firsthand the disparate impact of post-
9/11 law and policy that had on Arab, Muslim, Sikh, and South
Asian groups and individuals who were perceived to be members
of those groups. So the fear from many community organizations,
including the ones I mentioned, is very real because, as a
country, we have a history of mistrust between law enforcement
organizations and communities that in some places is better and
worse in others. As an organization that is a founding member
of the Leadership Conference of Civil and Human Rights, it is
important that we mention, as we begin to consider and as
Congress begins to examine this undertaking, that any measure
we take, either legal or policy-wise, that we do not
disproportionately harm communities that are already the target
of white supremacist and other violent extremist ideologies.
And so it is really important to underscore the protections
that need to be put in place, the congressional oversight that
is required, the privacy, civil rights, and civil liberties
oversight that needs to be conducted. And as you all begin to
consider legislative solutions, those factors are critical as
Congress begins to examine this very important topic.
Senator Peters. Thank you.
This question is for you, Mr. Chesney. It seems as if the
decision of when to call a crime ``terrorism'' has largely been
subjective. I say that for the reason--a couple of examples
here. The FBI declined to investigate the Heather Heyer murder
in the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville as a domestic
terrorist, and yet 2 years later, with mounting public concern
over attacks by white supremacists, the FBI announced that both
the El Paso shooter and the Gilroy Garlic Festival shooter
would be investigated as domestic terrorists.
What explains what appears to be an inconsistency in the
FBI's determination of whether or not to investigate a
perpetrator as a domestic terrorist?
Mr. Chesney. So the first thing I would say is that there
is, as you say, a certain amount of subjectivity in the mens
rea elements of both the very statutory definitions and the
non-charging regulatory definition such as the FBI regs that
talk about this. There is the requirement that there is an
intent to coerce a government or to intimidate a civilian
population or part thereof.
There is a wide spectrum that runs from things that are
very clearly designed to be in that zone and that fit that very
well and things that could be described as having that effect,
but perhaps it is not obvious as much. So there is bound to be
a lot of marginal calls. I am not suggesting any of the
examples you mentioned are such marginal calls, but there is
always going to be a little bit of fuzziness on the edge.
I do think it is fair to say that for a considerable period
there was a way of looking at things like what happened in
Charlottesville more in terms of hate crime, which is a very
important and equally visible concept, and a tendency to assume
that we kind of need to slot things toward one bucket or the
other bucket, as if you have to choose between them. And if
something feels or resonates as hate crime, at least until
recently there was a tendency to slap that label on it and move
along and not really pause to consider whether, might that also
be viewed as terrorism? Isn't hate crime, writ large, often a
subset of terrorism?
Now I think we are beginning to see, and especially as it
has crystallized in past year or so with domestic terrorism
being so much more visible in our dialogue about race-based
political violence, we see that hate crime and terrorism are
really overlapping much more. So I think it follows inevitably
that you will start seeing more forward-leaning use of the
terrorism label as an investigative category and as a charging
category when possible; whereas, you might not have seen that
in a few years past, and that is probably a good thing.
Senator Peters. One last question, and this is for you, Mr.
Braniff. While I am concerned that the government does not
consistently provide data on domestic terrorism, as we have
said throughout this hearing, I am probably even more concerned
that the limited data they do provide may be inaccurate and
unreliable, and that creates a whole set of problems that we
have to address.
An example: In January 2018, DHS and DOJ issued a report
that falsely claimed that three out of four terrorism
convictions in the United States were of foreign-born
individuals. A year later, DOJ acknowledged the errors in its
data, but they refused to withdraw the report that had this
false data.
So my question to you is: Do your data sets contradict the
2018 report? And is the data produced by DOJ and DHS reliable,
in your estimation?
Mr. Braniff. Thank you for the question, Senator Peters.
Our data does not line up with the data found in that report.
We actually sent a statement for the record to the House
Homeland Security Committee upon their request for data that
described the socio-political--or economic backgrounds of--
sorry. Let me be more clear. It described the backgrounds of
perpetrators of terrorism in the United States using various
data sets, many of which I have briefed today. And, of course,
they paint a very different picture if you include domestic
terrorism in those statistics. If you exclude domestic
terrorism and only include international terrorism, then you
get half of the story, and the half of the story that was
reported on.
Terrorism is inherently politicized. Terrorism is intended
to get an emotional response from individuals. It lends itself
to be manipulated either subtly, consciously or unconsciously,
because it is uncomfortable to talk about many of these things
and the motivations behind this kind of violence. I think it
has been very important that we have had these public-facing
objective data sets that are transparent. Our inclusion
criteria are publicly available so you know exactly why we
include what we include in our data set. And they serve as a
check against the potential for politicization of terrorism
data.
I cannot speak to the accuracy of DOJ and DHS data
generally. In that one instance I think the data were
misleading. But we pump this data out as aggressively as we
can, so our data sets are used by fusion centers all over the
country. The Global Terrorism Database is downloaded 1,000
times per month, and we answer government requests for
information every 1\1/2\ days at START. So we try to serve as a
sounding board and an objective, nonpartisan entity that holds
these data for the public.
Senator Peters. Good. Thank you for that. And, again, thank
you to each of our witnesses. This has been a great hearing,
and we will look forward to having a continuing dialogue with
each of you as we move forward on some of these issues. Thanks
again.
Chairman Johnson. So I do not want to let the moment pass
because the last answer talked about politicizing terror
events, so let me make another pitch. The use of ``far-right''
and ``far-left'' is just not helpful. It feeds into that. It
politicizes it. And nobody on this panel is associated with
anybody on the far right or the far left, so just I would say
drop that. Again, call a hate group a ``hate group,'' call a
terrorist a ``terrorist,'' and let us move forward, because we
all agree that we abhor that. We want to do everything we can
to prevent these types of tragedies in the past.
Again, I want to thank the witnesses. I think this was an
excellent hearing. It is a first step. We will continue. We are
going to continue to work with Committee Members, DHS, and the
Department of Justice in terms of getting that data and getting
it right and try and work through these very thorny, very
vexing constitutional issues, protect constitutional rights,
and at the same time try and give law enforcement the
resources, the authority, the priorities to try and prevent and
mitigate these tragedies that nobody wants to see. So, again,
thank you.
The hearing record will remain open for 15 days until
October 10th at 5 p.m. for the submission of statements and
questions for the record. This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:05 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]