- [H.A.S.C. No. 115-98]NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.A.S.C. No. 115-98]
_________________________________________________________________
HEARING
ON
NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
AND
OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
FULL COMMITTEE HEARING
ON
THE FISCAL YEAR 2019 NATIONAL
DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION BUDGET
REQUEST FROM THE DEPARTMENT
OF DEFENSE
__________
HEARING HELD
APRIL 12, 2018
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
_________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-572
WASHINGTON : 2018
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Fifteenth Congress
WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, Texas, Chairman
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina
ADAM SMITH, Washington
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey
SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
ROB BISHOP, Utah
JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio
RICK LARSEN, Washington
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama
JIM COOPER, Tennessee
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania
MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas
JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
JOHN GARAMENDI, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California
JACKIE SPEIER, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
MO BROOKS, Alabama
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
PAUL COOK, California
RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio
COLLEEN HANABUSA, Hawaii
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama
CAROL SHEA-PORTER, New Hampshire
SAM GRAVES, Missouri
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma
STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
RO KHANNA, California
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
JIMMY PANETTA, California
MATT GAETZ, Florida
DON BACON, Nebraska
JIM BANKS, Indiana
LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming
JODY B. HICE, Georgia
Jen Stewart, Staff Director
Tim Morrison, Counsel
William S. Johnson, Counsel
Justin Lynch, Clerk
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Ranking
Member, Committee on Armed Services............................
2
Thornberry, Hon. William M. ``Mac,'' a Representative from Texas,
Chairman, Committee on Armed Services..........................
1
WITNESSES
Dunford, Gen Joseph F., Jr., USMC, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of
Staff..........................................................
7
Mattis, Hon. James N., Secretary of Defense, United States
Department of Defense..........................................
3
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Dunford, Gen Joseph F., Jr...................................
110
Mattis, Hon. James N.........................................
86
Smith, Hon. Adam.............................................
84
Thornberry, Hon. William M. ``Mac''..........................
83
Documents Submitted for the Record:
Letter to the Secretary of Defense from the World
Professional Association for Transgender Health............
125
Letter to the Secretary of Defense from the American Medical
Association................................................
126
Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:
[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]
Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:
Mrs. Hartzler................................................
130
Ms. Speier...................................................
129
Mr. Turner...................................................
129
THE FISCAL YEAR 2019 NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION BUDGET REQUEST FROM
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
----------
House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Thursday, April 12, 2018.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:00 a.m. in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. William M.
``Mac'' Thornberry (chairman of the committee) presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM TEXAS, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED
SERVICES
The Chairman. The committee will come to order. The
committee is pleased to welcome back the Secretary of Defense
and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to discuss the
administration's fiscal year 2019 budget request for the
Department of Defense. We are also pleased to have the
Comptroller available to answer any questions.
We meet under rather different circumstances than last
year. Congress and the administration have worked together to
provide to the military the resources they need to begin to
reverse the erosion of our military strength. There is
agreement on the funding levels for defense for fiscal year
2019. We know how much we have to work with.
The challenge, as we work through the details, is that some
of the consequences of years of cuts and neglect are becoming
more apparent. A study published this weekend by Military Times
found that aviation mishaps have risen about 40 percent since
the Budget Control Act took effect. The alarming number of
aviation accidents in just the past three and a half weeks
reveals how deep the damage goes, and the magnitude of the task
of repairing and rebuilding our capabilities.
Meanwhile, as events in Syria remind us, the world does not
slow down and wait on us to rebuild.
This committee has had a number of hearings and briefings
this year to examine more closely the challenges we face, from
readiness to space and cyber. We have studied what adversaries
are doing. We have heard from combatant commanders, service
chiefs, and outside experts.
The issue today is how well the administration's budget
request meets our national security needs under the parameters
set in the Bipartisan Budget Act. We also want to examine how
this budget request implements the new National Defense
Strategy, about which the Secretary testified in February.
I am committed to working with the Department to achieve
reforms that enable our military to be more agile and more
efficient in facing the threats which confront us. The
challenges are great, but if Congress and the Department work
together, we can ensure that the military has what it needs to
meet those challenges.
I would yield to the ranking member for any comments he
would like to make.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Thornberry can be found in
the Appendix on page 83.]
STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM WASHINGTON,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Secretary Mattis, General Dunford, Comptroller Norquist. We
appreciate you being here, and we appreciate your leadership in
the Pentagon. And the chairman, I think, is quite correct in
that it is better this year that we have a budget for 2018. We
have the framework of an agreement for 2019, going forward. And
certainly, some degree of predictability is going to be
enormously helpful.
And without question, we have a readiness crisis within the
military. The chairman has cited a number of the examples of
that. We are better now than we were a year or two ago, but
still a long way to go to make up for 15 years of war and,
frankly, for spending money in other places and not on
readiness.
So, as we look at the 2018-2019 budget, one of my top
priorities is to make sure that that money goes to make sure
that our force is ready, that we address that problem, because
there will be other needs, there will be other pressures. I
hope we don't give in to those, I hope we remember that the
troops should come first. Having them ready for the fights that
they are saying they need to be ready for is our number one
priority, going forward.
I will also point out that, while 2018 to 2019 are great, I
hope you are also planning for a lean future, because we are
looking at an over $1 trillion deficit this year. We just cut
taxes by almost $2 trillion, increased spending by somewhere in
the neighborhood of $500 billion in the face of a now nearly
$22 trillion debt.
So, going forward in the next decade, certainly for the
country as a whole, but for your purposes, for the military,
understanding our fiscal restraints and dealing with them is
going to be a critically important part of making sure that our
military is ready to do what it can do. So we do need to get
the budget under control.
On a couple other matters, just quickly, in North Korea I
just want to emphasize that we should find a peaceful solution.
It is a very, very difficult situation. But going to war on the
Korean Peninsula would have catastrophic consequences. So I
hope that we figure out a way to contain and control the very
real threat of North Korea, but at the same time prevent going
to war.
The last two things I will say is, one, on Syria, it is a
very, very difficult situation. You know, two Presidents have
struggled with how to deal with it. I am not going to pretend I
have an easy answer. But until we have a more long-term
strategy, until we have some idea of where we are going in
Syria and the Middle East, it seems unwise to me to start
launching missiles. We need to know where that is going, what
the purpose of it is, before we take that act.
I think it is also worth pointing out it is hard to find a
legal justification for that military strike in Syria, absent
congressional approval. So, whatever you decide to do, I would
hope that you would include the legislative branch.
And then, lastly, we have heard a lot--and I agree with
this--that we have shifted our focus in the last few years. We
are now back into an era of great power struggles because of
what Russia and China are doing, and how aggressive they are in
pushing their agendas and their ideas across the world. And I
agree with that.
I just hope that we don't see a great power struggle as
simply an excuse for another arms race, and that we understand
that a great power struggle involves all the elements of our
government: diplomacy; I think, most critically, allies,
finding partners in the world to advance our agenda and thwart
those aspects of the Russia and Chinese agenda that are against
the interests, not just of the United States, but I think of
the world. So we work with partners, and we use diplomacy, and
we use development, that we don't simply use the excuse of the
rise of Russia and China to build more and more weapons.
There has to be a much more comprehensive approach, if we
are going to be successful in creating a peaceful and
prosperous world, which certainly is in our best interests, but
it is in the best interests of the entire world, as a whole.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith can be found in the
Appendix on page 84.]
The Chairman. Mr. Secretary and Chairman, welcome. Without
objection, any written statements you would like to make will
be made part of our record.
And Mr. Secretary, you are recognized for any comments you
would like to make.
STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES N. MATTIS, SECRETARY OF DEFENSE, UNITED
STATES DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
Secretary Mattis. Well, thank you, Chairman Thornberry,
Ranking Member Smith, and distinguished members of the
committee. I do appreciate the opportunity to testify in
support of the President's budget request for fiscal year 2019.
I am joined by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, General
Dunford, who will discuss military factors, and the
Department's Comptroller/Chief Financial Officer, Mr. David
Norquist, who is superintending the first full financial audit
in most of our lifetimes, since it is the first of the
Department of Defense history.
I am now in my second year as Secretary of Defense. And
with your help we have made steady progress during the past 14
months. In January, the Department published a 2018 National
Defense Strategy to which I testified previously. It is the
first in a decade.
Framed within President Trump's National Security Strategy,
our National Defense Strategy provides clear direction for
America's military to restore its competitive edge in an era of
re-emerging, long-term, great power competition.
The Department next released the 2018 Nuclear Posture
Review, which calls for America's military to provide a safe,
secure, and effective nuclear deterrent, one that is modern,
robust, flexible, resilient, ready, and appropriately tailored
to deter 21st century threats, and to reassure our allies.
In South Asia and Afghanistan, uncertainty in the region
has been replaced by the certainty of President Trump's South
Asia strategy. Concurrently, in the Middle East, we have
dramatically reduced ISIS's [Islamic State of Iraq and Syria's]
physical caliphate, using a coordinated, whole-of-government
approach that works by, with, and through our allies and
partners to crush ISIS's claim of invincibility, and deny them
a geographic haven from which to plot murder.
Last month, thanks to the bipartisan support and political
courage of Congress, President Trump signed an omnibus spending
bill that funds the government for the remainder of the fiscal
year. This law, along with the 2-year budget agreement passed
as part of February's Bipartisan Budget Act, finally freed us
from the inefficient and damaging continuing resolution funding
process, and is now providing the predictable and sufficient
funding needed to continue implementing the 2018 National
Defense Strategy.
Our fiscal year 2019 budget requests the resources
necessary to fulfill the Department's enduring mission to
provide the combat-credible forces needed to deter war and, if
deterrence fail, to win in the event of conflict. These forces
reinforce America's traditional tools of diplomacy, ensuring
that the President and our diplomats negotiate from a position
of strength.
To restore our Nation's competitive military edge, the
fiscal year 2019 budget funds our National Defense Strategy's
three overarching lines of effort: first, to build a more
lethal force; second, to strengthen traditional alliances while
building new partnerships; and third, to reform the
Department's business practices for better performance and
affordability.
Our first line of effort is to build a more lethal force.
All our Department's policies, expenditures, and training must
contribute to the lethality of our military. We cannot expect
success fighting tomorrow's conflicts with yesterday's
thinking, yesterday's weapons, or yesterday's equipment. As
President Washington said during his first State of the Union
Address, ``To be prepared for war is one of the most effectual
means of preserving peace.'' And today, ladies and gentlemen,
our lethal military arm will enhance our diplomats'
persuasiveness.
The paradox of war is that an adversary will always move
against any perceived weakness. So we cannot adopt a single
preclusive form of warfare. We must be able to fight across the
entire spectrum of combat. The Nation must field sufficient,
capable forces to deter conflict. And if deterrence fails, we
must win.
Following this logic, we must maintain a credible nuclear
deterrent so these weapons are never used, and a decisive
conventional force that can also wage irregular warfare.
Preserving the full range of our Nation's deterrent options
requires the recapitalization of our Cold War legacy nuclear
deterrent forces, as initiated during the previous
administration. Modernizing the Nation's nuclear deterrent
delivery systems, including our nuclear command and control, is
the Department's top priority, and these programs are fully
funded in the fiscal year 2019 budget.
The fiscal year 2019 budget also funds enhancements to the
U.S. missile defense capabilities to defend the homeland, our
deployed forces, allies, and partners against an increasingly
complex ballistic missile threat. In accordance with the soon-
to-be-released 2018 Missile Defense Review, this budget request
continued robust support for missile defense capability and
capacity to keep pace with the advancing threats.
The proposed budget will modestly increase end strength of
the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps to restore
readiness, adding 25,900 to the Active and Reserve Force. The
budget will also continue to invest in the military's most
important assets, its warfighters, with a 2.6 percent military
pay increase.
The 2019 budget continues increased procurement of
preferred and advanced munitions, a necessity due to ongoing
operations in the Middle East, and the need for war reserves.
Ten combat ships and eight support ships are funded,
arresting the downward trajectory of our Navy's size and
lethality. We will continue production of 77 F-35 and 24 F-18
aircraft, evaluating the performance of both to determine the
most appropriate mix, moving forward.
This budget request funds systems to enhance communications
and resiliency in space, addressing overhead persistent
infrared capabilities; positioning, navigation, and timing;
plus space launch systems.
Our 2018 National Defense Strategy also prioritizes
investing in technological innovation to increase lethality.
Cyber advanced computing, big-data analytics, artificial
intelligence, autonomy, robotics, miniaturization, additive
manufacturing, directed energy, and hypersonics are the very
technologies that we need to fight and win wars of the future.
Every investment in the strategy-driven fiscal year 2019
budget is designed to contribute to the lethality of our
military and ensuring that subsequent Secretaries of Defense
inherit a military force that is fit for its time. Those
seeking to threaten America's experiment in democracy should
know if you challenge us, it will be your longest and worst
day.
Our 2018 National Defense Strategy's second line of effort
is to strengthen traditional alliances, while building new
partnerships. In the past, I had the privilege of fighting many
times in defense of the United States, but I never fought in a
solely American formation. It was always alongside foreign
troops.
Easier said than done. Winston Churchill noted that the
only thing harder than fighting with allies is fighting without
them. History proves that we are stronger when we stand united
with others. And accordingly, our military will be designed,
trained, and ready to fight alongside allies.
Working by, with, and through allies and partners who carry
their fair share remains a source of strength of the United
States. Since the costly victory in World War II, Americans
have carried a disproportionate share of the global defense
burden, while others recovered. Today the growing economic
strength of allies and partners has enabled them to step up, as
demonstrated by the 74 nations and international organizations
participating in the Defeat ISIS campaign, and again in the 41
nations standing shoulder-to-shoulder in NATO's [North Atlantic
Treaty Organization's] Resolute Support mission in Afghanistan.
To date, 15 NATO allies are also increasing their defense
budget as a share of the gross domestic product, giving
credence to the value of democracies standing together.
Further, our Pacific partners are strengthening their defenses.
Our third line of effort is the urgent reform of the
Department's business practices to provide both solvency and
security. We will continue to establish a culture of
performance where results and accountability matter on every
expenditure to gain full benefit from every single taxpayer
dollar spent on defense.
We are committed to exercising the utmost degree of
financial stewardship and budget discipline within the
Department. In this regard, this year we will deliver our
Department's first full financial audit in history. We will
find the problems and take swift action to correct our
deficiencies, thereby earning the trust of Congress and the
American people.
I am confident we have the right leaders in place to make
meaningful reform a reality: Pat Shanahan, as Deputy Secretary
of Defense; Jay Gibson, as Chief Management Officer; Ellen
Lord, as our Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and
Sustainment; Michael Griffin, as Under Secretary of Defense for
Research and Engineering; Bob Daigle, as Director of Cost
Assessment and Program Evaluation; and David Norquist, as the
Department's Comptroller/Chief Financial Officer. Each brings
the intellect and the energy and the experience required to
implement and sustain meaningful reform, ensuring the
Department provides performance and affordability for the
American taxpayer.
The Department is transitioning to a culture of performance
and affordability that operates at the speed of relevance. We
will prioritize speed of delivery, continuous adaptation, and
frequent modular upgrades. With your continued critical
support, we will shed outdated management and acquisition
processes, while adopting American industry's best practices.
Our management structure and processes are not engraved in
stone, they are a means to an end. If current structures
inhibit our pursuit of lethality, I have directed service
secretaries and agency heads to consolidate, eliminate, or
restructure to achieve their mission.
The 2018 National Defense Strategy three primary lines of
effort--building a more lethal force, strengthening our
traditional alliances and building new partnerships, and
reforming the Department's business practices for performance
and affordability--will restore our competitive military
advantage, ensuring we are prepared to fight across the full
spectrum of combat, now and into the future.
I want to thank this committee for your strong spirit of
bipartisan collaboration. While our trajectory is going in the
right direction, our work has just begun. This is a year of
opportunity and a chance to continue to work together, building
on a strong start as we turn the 2018 National Defense Strategy
into action.
The points I need to emphasize in today's hearing is that
this budget, which is designed to execute the National Defense
Strategy, is building a more lethal force by restoring current
and future readiness, modernizing our nuclear deterrent forces
and their command and control systems, building for the future
by improving our military's technological competitive edge, and
reforming the Department's business processes to establish a
culture of performance and affordability to ensure security and
solvency. This strategy is the guidepost for all our actions,
including this year's strategy-driven budget request, driving
meaningful reform to establish an enduring culture of
performance, affordability, and agility.
I cannot appear before you without expressing my gratitude
to the men and women of the Department of Defense. They are the
ones that must ultimately turn the National Defense Strategy
into action. Every day more than 2 million service members and
nearly 1 million civilians do their duty, honoring previous
generations of veterans and civil servants who have sacrificed
for their country. It is my privilege to serve alongside them,
and I thank them for their tireless efforts and unyielding
standards in defense of our Nation.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Mattis can be found in
the Appendix on page 86.]
Secretary Mattis. General Dunford is prepared to discuss
the military dimensions of our budget request.
The Chairman. General Dunford.
STATEMENT OF GEN JOSEPH F. DUNFORD, JR., USMC, CHAIRMAN, JOINT
CHIEFS OF STAFF
General Dunford. Chairman Thornberry, Ranking Member Smith,
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to join Secretary Mattis and Under Secretary
Norquist here today. It is an honor to represent your men and
women in uniform. And while we all recognize the challenges
that the chairman outlined and the ranking member outlined in
their opening remarks, I want to begin by assuring you that the
U.S. military has a competitive advantage over any potential
adversary today. I am confident we can defend the homeland,
meet our alliance commitments, and prevail in any conflict.
But as I testified last summer, after years of sustained
operational commitments, budgetary instability, and advances by
our adversaries, our competitive advantage has eroded, and our
readiness has been degraded. Driven by the National Defense
Strategy that the Secretary outlined, and building on the
fiscal year 2017 and 2018 appropriations, the fiscal year 2019
budget submission supports rebuilding the lethal and ready
joint force that the Nation needs.
Our defense strategy recognizes the central challenge to
U.S. prosperity and security is the re-emergence of long-term
strategic competition by revisionist powers. With Russia and
China as the priority, we also have to meet the challenges of
North Korea, Iran, and violent extremist organizations.
China and Russia continue to invest across the full range
of nuclear, cyber, space, and conventional capabilities. Both
states are focused on limiting our ability to project power and
undermine the credibility of our alliances. They are also
increasingly adept at advancing their interests through
coercive, competitive activity below the threshold of armed
conflict.
North Korea has been on a relentless pursuit to develop
their nuclear and missile capability. They have been clear that
these capabilities are intended to threaten the United States
and our allies in the region.
Iran continues to spread malign influence and create
instability across the Middle East. And while we have made a
great deal of progress over the past year, we are still
grappling with the challenges of violent extremism, including
ISIS, al-Qaida, and associated movements.
Defending our homeland, our allies, and advancing our
interests in the context of these and many other challenges
requires us to maintain a balanced inventory of ready, lethal,
and flexible forces that are relevant across the range of
military operations. Fortunately, with your support, we have
begun to arrest the erosion of our competitive advantage, and
we are on the path to developing the force we need to meet our
current and future challenges.
This year's budget builds on the readiness recovery that we
started in 2017, and reinforces our effort to develop the
capabilities we need, both today and tomorrow.
In requesting your support for this year's budget
submission, I, and all the senior leaders in the Department,
are making a commitment to you that we will make every dollar
count. We will fully support the auditing initiative led by
Secretary Norquist, and we will maintain an ongoing dialogue
with you on our progress toward addressing our current
readiness challenges in building the capabilities we will need
tomorrow.
To restore our competitive advantage and assure our men and
women never find themselves in a fair fight, the U.S. military
requires sustained, sufficient, and predictable funding. The
funding in this budget is sufficient. I look forward to working
with Congress to make it sustained and predictable.
Thank you again for your support and the opportunity to
appear before you today.
[The prepared statement of General Dunford can be found in
the Appendix on page 110.]
The Chairman. Mr. Norquist, my understanding is you did not
have an oral statement. Is that correct?
Mr. Norquist. That is correct, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, a lot of members want to ask questions. Let
me just pose one question for you. I made reference to the
study that came out this weekend that showed a 40 percent
increase in aviation mishaps since the Budget Control Act took
effect. And yet, over the past 3 weeks there have been some
criticism about the amount in the omnibus funding bill, which
Congress passed and the President signed.
I think it is important for this committee and for the
country to hear from you about the significance of the funding
bill that was passed and the 2-year agreement that most of us
voted for in February to raise the Budget Control Act. How does
that affect the men and women who serve our Nation, and our
national security?
Secretary Mattis. Chairman, thank you. I believe that this
committee is probably keenly aware of the readiness challenges
we have faced. And for--ever since I got into this job, you
have been part of the solution. All of you have been part of
the solution.
Right now we cannot repair our way out of the situation we
are in. We are actually going to have to buy, in some cases,
the capabilities that we have simply worn out and had to set
aside that can't even be repaired, whether it be aircraft or
squadrons do not have enough; or it be ships that cannot go
back to sea on time because when we open them up, long overdue
for their maintenance period, we find things wrong inside that
lengthen their time in the shipyard.
When you put all this together, this is why you can have
young officers getting promoted to major, for example, that
have not had the same flight hours that you have expected
during your tenure on this committee, that a lieutenant or
captain would have had. They have not had the opportunity
because we have not funded for it, the aircraft are not
available, the spare parts and the maintainers have not been
there.
This is not pointing a finger at anyone in particular; it
is where we are at, and we deal with it. I will let the
historians deal with how did we get here. But with your help,
we are now going to be able to come out from underneath this
and put our readiness back to where you expect it to be when
you put out billions of taxpayer dollars for various parts of
the military, yet when we put it all together, due to the
continuing resolutions, it did not have the kind of budget
support it needed for a balanced force.
The bottom line is we can spend every dollar. The audit is
going to find problems, Chairman, and we will correct those
problems. But we will be working with you, and we are keenly
aware that we have got to deliver a more ready force,
objectively, quantitatively, a more ready force that we can lay
out to you. It is absolutely necessary, what you have given us.
Now it is up to us to spend every dollar where you expect it to
be spent.
The Chairman. General Dunford, do you want to add anything
to the effects of this budget agreement?
General Dunford. The only thing I would say, Chairman
Thornberry, is it is an agreement that allows us to balance
both the needs of today and tomorrow.
And to emphasize the Secretary's point, I think we used to
look at operations and maintenance money as associated with
readiness, and then modernization money as associated with the
future. And to the Secretary's point, I really do believe today
there is a distinction without a difference when you talk about
readiness and modernization. We actually have to modernize the
force in order for us to be ready against the challenges that
are outlined in the National Defense Strategy.
And I think, as a result of the 15 years of erosion, I
don't think we can collectively think about these as discreet
tasks. In other words, today is tomorrow, and the investments
that we make in maintaining a competitive advantage in the
context of the National Defense Strategy are the same ones we
need to make sure our squadrons, our battalions, our brigades
are up and running today.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ranking Member.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I--on the budget, just out of curiosity, I wonder what
your response is. For fiscal year 2019, the agreement that we
reached that the chairman just alluded to, I believe had a--if
you count the DOE [Department of Energy] portion of what we do
in this committee--$647 billion. That is not counting OCO
[overseas contingency operations] in there, and its $716
billion.
The budget cap number for 2020 is, I believe, $567 billion.
So it would be, gosh, about an $80 billion cut in what we did
in fiscal year 2019. Are you planning on having to absorb that
cut, or are you hoping that there will be some way to avoid the
Budget Control Act come 2020 and 2021?
Secretary Mattis. Sir, we will lay out the requirement for
2020 and 2021. However, our internal reforms, we are looking to
accrue savings there.
At the same time, we are going to have to have a budget fit
for its time, and I can't tell you what the threat specifically
will be. I can tell you we are trying to put ourselves in a
position to have a shock absorber, where we can take those
threats on board, maintain budget predictability that includes
requests from us.
But for right now, I would just suggest that, in light of
the percent of the GDP [gross domestic product] we are putting
out for military security, for defense, America can afford
survival, and our job is to make certain what we bring to you
is only what is required. And that is--I don't want to lock
myself into the future, since I don't have----
Mr. Smith. I am sorry, but if I may interpret that,
basically what you are saying is you believe that if we go back
to the budget caps in 2020 and 2021, we will be putting the
country at risk, and you do not accept that number, and you are
not planning on that number.
Secretary Mattis. Sir, I owe you my best advice----
Mr. Smith. Yes. No, I just want your honest opinion, so----
Secretary Mattis. Right. I mean I would love to see the
budget go down. In the world that we are looking at out there,
I don't think that is going to be the case.
Mr. Smith. Right. Well, you don't think that that would put
us in a position to provide for the national security, if the
budget went back to the cap numbers in fiscal year 2020 and
2021.
Secretary Mattis. I do not, sir.
Mr. Smith. Okay, that--and the problem with that, of
course, is the debt and deficit that I talked about. And I
would just say, from my colleagues, that, you know, whatever
disagreements we may have on exactly what the number for the
defense budget should be, we are headed towards an enormous
problem, unless we can continue to borrow north of $1 trillion
every year, basically forever.
So there are some big-picture budget things that we need to
deal with, even if we disagree on the exact number for the
defense budget, going forward. It is going to create--we are
going to be right back in the uncertainty about a year from now
if we don't come up with some comprehensive approach to our
budget challenge.
Last thing I will say is, you know, I think, given the
budget that we face, we have to try to find ways to save money
as much as possible. And we have had this discussion before. I
just want to put it on the record. I don't think we need to
spend $1.2 trillion on modernizing our nuclear weapons. We
certainly need to modernize them.
But again, I will emphasize--I have said this before in
hearings--China has 275 nuclear weapons, that is it. We have
15, 20 times as many. They have set up a deterrence, a very,
very credible deterrence, because a lot of people don't know,
but nuclear weapons these days are, I think, roughly 1,000
times more powerful than the one that dropped on Hiroshima.
We ought to be able to come up with a nuclear deterrence
strategy that costs us a lot less money. And also, if there are
fewer nuclear weapons out there, not just on our side, granted,
but on all sides, there is less risk of stumbling into a
nuclear war.
So I am deeply concerned about the nuclear modification
plan, both in terms of what it really does for our national
security, the risks it places for a nuclear conflict, and also
just for the budget, because I am--I will say this. I am 100
percent with the chairman on the readiness crisis and the way
you described it. We are not providing the equipment or the
training for our troops that we should right now to make sure
that they are ready. I want to find money wherever I can to
make sure that we are. And that is one big area that I am going
to be looking at.
If it is okay, I will just--you know, you can send me your
comments for the record. I want to let other people get in, but
I just wanted to put that on the record.
I yield back.
The Chairman. As all members were notified, we are going to
pick up the questioning today where we left off when the
Secretary was with us in February. And so, Mr. Lamborn is
recognized.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
you both for your service to our country.
So for either or both of you, everyone knows that Russia is
in violation of the INF [Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces]
Treaty. Do you expect the Russians to return any time soon to
full and verifiable compliance with that treaty?
Secretary Mattis. Right now, Congressman, we have very
modest expectations that they would return to compliance as a
result. In the Nuclear Posture Review we are looking for a way,
at the lowest possible cost, to checkmate them and make it in
their best interest to return to compliance.
Mr. Lamborn. General Dunford, do you have anything to add
to that?
General Dunford. All I would say, Congressman, is that one
of the things we are doing in this budget that we have
submitted is there is research and development for non-
compliant weapons that is allowed by the treaty, and that is in
the budget for fiscal year 2019. So we are not only looking for
operational concepts and ways to deal with the Russian
violation, but we are also at least posturing ourselves to
develop weapons, should they be required.
Mr. Lamborn. And I think we should stress the point that,
even as we stay in the treaty--although I am skeptical that
they are going to come back into compliance, and we are kind of
unilaterally tying our hands behind our back--we are
legitimately allowed to do research for non-compliant systems.
Is that not correct?
Secretary Mattis. That is correct, and we are doing that.
It is in the budget, Congressman. We--as we modernize this
nuclear deterrent, our effort will also be matched at State
Department by movement on arms control and non-proliferation.
There are two thrusts to our nuclear strategy.
And so, as a result, we have got to do something that would
make it in Russia's best interest to return to compliance, and
that is why those funds have been requested.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, I am glad they are being requested. And
how important is it to have additional options in our nuclear
stockpile to address possible threats in the future?
Secretary Mattis. In order to keep a deterrent fit for its
time, it has got to be one that adjusts to any changes that we
see an adversary or potential adversary making. And in this
case you will notice that there are several adaptations. One of
them is to return possibly the nuclear cruise missiles to the
Navy ships. We had them there before. A second one is to put a
small number of low-yield weapons onboard Navy submarines,
ballistic missile submarines. This is because we have
uncovered--and Russia has been rather out front with the idea
that they could escalate to de-escalate.
What that means is you use a low-yield nuclear weapon in a
conventional war to compel surrender, basically. And our point
is to say you can't do that, we are going to have a low-yield
weapon, we are not confronted only by using a high yield, which
they believe we would not do. In order to make certain that the
deterrent works, they must know that we don't have a choice
only between surrender or suicide. So that is why we are doing
these kind of adaptations to stay fit for our time.
Mr. Lamborn. I am really glad to hear that because, as we
go into the budget, some folks may argue that having additional
options is destabilizing. We all want as much stability as
possible when it comes to these powerful weapons.
So it is your belief that it is stabilizing to have more
options. Is that not correct?
Secretary Mattis. The entire point of that nuclear
modernization is to maintain a nuclear deterrent that
stabilizes and deters any use of the weapon. Then that is why
we have looked at the research and development as authorized
under the treaty, for one. It is why we are looking at the low-
yield weapon, as well. It actually raises the deterrent effect
of what we have, and actually reduces the chance of nuclear
war.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you so much. I appreciate what you do
for our country.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. And I appreciate the gentleman keeping all
questions and answers within 5 minutes. Let me encourage
everybody to do that, so--because--so we can get to as many
people as possible.
Mr. Courtney is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
both witnesses.
I appreciate the remarks regarding passage of the omnibus
on March 21st. Again, Secretary Mattis, you noted the fact that
it was a bipartisan effort. I think it is important to note
that, not only was it bipartisan, but neither caucus by itself
was able to deliver the votes to actually pass it by itself. So
it truly took a coalition of people who, again, I think have
heeded your repeated testimony over the last 2 or 3 years about
the harm that the sequestration caps were causing, in terms of
readiness and other issues.
So again, you were a big part of the external effort to get
us to that point and, obviously, to create a 2-year horizon
with the bipartisan budget agreement.
Secretary Mattis, on page 3 of your testimony it states
that the 2018 National Defense Strategy provides clear
strategic direction for America's military to reclaim an era of
strategic purpose, which is, I think, a very, you know--has a,
you know, high aspirational goal for our country, to get sort
of a clear picture that budgets are tied to a stable strategy.
Unfortunately, you know, just the events of the last 2
weeks, you know, we have comments coming out of the White House
that--regarding Syria, which I think really are sort of
disconnected to that goal. On March 28 the President was giving
a speech on infrastructure where he--again, without any
prompting--talked about wanting to leave Syria ``very soon.''
Again, when the Pentagon was asked about that, they referred
the media to the White House to get an explanation.
On April 3rd, at a joint appearance with the presidents of
Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, again he doubled down, saying
that they want to get out, that the U.S. wants to get out. On
the 4th, said it would be within a few months, and then on
April 7th we had, obviously, the chemical attack, which, again,
resulted in a gyration of comments coming out of the White
House, talking about missile attacks.
And then, yesterday morning, Russia vows to shoot down any
and all missiles fired at Syria. ``Get ready, Russia, because
they will be coming nice and new and smart.''
Again, in terms of, you know, trying to align those
messages with a clear, strategic direction for our country, I
am not asking you to answer any questions about operational
decisions that you are considering right now, but what is the
policy of the Department of Defense regarding--and strategy
regarding the Assad regime, its future, and the Syrian civil
war? Or is there a strategy?
Secretary Mattis. Yes, sir. Well--and thank you for your
comments about my role in the bipartisan omnibus, sir. But I
would tell you that without this committee's bipartisanship
that you have right in this room, I think my comments would
have been whistling in the dark. I think it was the example you
set. On Syria, sir--both the last administration and this one
made very clear that our role in Syria is the defeat of ISIS.
We are not going to engage in the civil war, itself.
Now, you can look back to a year ago, when we did fire
missiles into Syria, unrelated to ISIS. And that was, of
course, the use of chemical weapons. And some things are simply
inexcusable, beyond the pale, and in the worst interest of not
just the Chemical Weapons Convention, but of civilization
itself.
And so the recognition of that means at times you are going
to see contrary impulses. You saw President Obama try to deal
with those chemical weapons when he was in, and enlisting the
Russians, who now it shows were complicit in Syria retaining
those weapons, Assad retaining them. And the only reason Assad
is still in power is because of the Russians' regrettable
vetoes in the U.N. [United Nations), and the Russian and
Iranian military.
So how do we deal with this very complex situation? First
of all, we are committed to ending that war through the Geneva
process and a U.N.-orchestrated effort. It has been unfulfilled
because, again, Russia has continually blocked the efforts. But
that doesn't mean we give up. We work with the international
community, the United Nations, to get the Geneva process
underway, and make certain that we don't allow this war to go
on.
I have seen refugees from Asia to Europe, Kosovo to Africa.
I have never seen refugees as traumatized as coming out of
Syria. It has got to end, and our strategy remains the same as
a year ago. It is to drive this to a U.N.-brokered peace, but
at the same time keep our foot on the neck of ISIS until we
suffocate it.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Wittman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Secretary Mattis,
General Dunford, Mr. Norquist. Thanks so much for joining us,
and thanks for your service.
Secretary Mattis, I want to begin by going to your words in
your statement when you talked about the downward trajectory of
our Navy inventory and of Navy lethality. In response to that
last year, this committee authorized $26.2 billion and 13
warships. I think many of us were bitterly disappointed when
the appropriators cut that number to $23.7 billion and 10
warships.
And I know that our effort now this year is to be to
continue the path of rebuilding the readiness and capability
within our Navy. And obviously, the Navy-Marine Corps team
needs that on the mission, going forward.
In your testimony you state, ``The fleet will continue to
grow to meet capabilities needed in the future and maintain an
industrial base healthy enough to adapt and evolve in a dynamic
environment.''
I am still concerned, though. As you saw last year, we
authorized $26 billion, essentially; appropriated $24 billion,
essentially. This year the fiscal year 2019 request was for $21
billion for shipbuilding. And I expected more because we had
lifted the caps last year. So I thought there may be, as you
talked about, a response to that downward trajectory.
Mr. Secretary, let me ask this. If, given the resources,
does our military have the need for additional submarines? Do
we have a more efficient and effective way to purchase aircraft
carriers? And could we build amphibious ships for our Marines
on a more cost-effective timeline?
Secretary Mattis. We--sir, we always need more submarines,
we always need more ships. And in a perfect world, I would
have--I would tell you right now that I would have a 350-ship
Navy. But I have to deal with where the ball lies, not where I
want it to be.
I think that, as you looked at the tradeoffs and the
balance as we tried to go forward with current capability, with
the future capability, with the growing challenges in space and
cyberspace that have got to be accommodated, we probably did
very well on shipbuilding.
Now, can we get more affordable aircraft carriers? We not
only can, we will. You will not see another one that goes
through what you all experienced as you went down to Norfolk
and saw that beautiful ship. But it is too late, it is over
budget, and there are ways to prevent that in the future.
So we are going to make better use of the dollars, and make
a more affordable Navy. There are some strategic decisions to
be made about how we do that to include what we do in
cyberspace and space so each ship is more capable. But also, I
would just tell you that this is part of an integrated force,
and nobody can integrate their forces in the world better than
we can right now.
Mr. Wittman. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I want to
talk a little bit about the Ready Reserve Force.
It is projected that our Ready Reserve Force would carry
over 90 percent of readiness lift, if called upon. And our
Ready Reserve Force today, 46 ships averages 43 years old. In
fact, we maintain some of the only steam plants left in the
world onboard ships. They are essentially floating Smithsonian
Institute displays.
Some have speculated that, in a conflict, the limiting
factors are going to be sealift. General Dunford, I know you
had talked a little bit about that, about where we are with
that. What steps is the Department pursuing to address this--
what I believe is a strategic deficiency?
Secretary Mattis. I want to take that for the record, sir.
I have met with the commander of Military Sealift Command.
It--there is a way to make some of the ships more capable
right now: simply modernize them at relatively cheap price. And
we are also going to have to buy certain types of ships in the
future. I believe that, right now, we have got a pretty good
plan for it, the prioritization of it.
And what does the Army really need to bring? You know, the
Army is trying to adapt, as well, and that has significant
impact on what is the requirement. And I want to make certain I
get the requirement right, so I don't come in and tell you that
I built something I didn't need, and 5 years from now I need to
beach it.
I will get back to you with something on that, sir.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Wittman. Very good. Thanks, Secretary Mattis.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Ms. Tsongas.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to you
both, I appreciate your being here before us.
I too would like to focus on Syria. The chemical weapons
attack against innocent civilians in Syria over the weekend is
but the latest tragic atrocity in that country.
Secretary Mattis, you referenced a refugee crisis. Human
Rights Watch has reported at least 86 verified chemical weapons
attacks there. So we know what a terrible situation exists
there.
But in response to the most recent attack, the President
has signaled that the administration is reviewing possible
military action. There are compelling uncertainties surrounding
renewed strikes in Syria. Just to name a few: how these actions
fit into a broader Syria strategy, which you have tried to
address in some form; the nature of the support from the
international partners who share our condemnation of Assad's
atrocities; and how any renewed action in Syria, particularly
should it escalate into a broader conflict, would impact our
ability to engage in other areas of concern around the world,
not the least of which also--what it might require of us in
that part of the world, as well, in Syria.
So these concerns are not de minimis or passing. And I hope
that you would agree that it is clearly time for Congress to
review existing authorizations for use of military force, and
to engage in the considered debate these times require. But as
we speak, the administration is reviewing possible military
courses of action. So I appreciate the timing of your
appearance here today.
So, as you are considering possible steps forward, military
actions you might take, what do you hope to achieve by any
military action that the administration might eventually decide
to take?
Secretary Mattis. Congresswoman, I don't want to get--as
you will understand--into the details of a potential decision
by the Commander in Chief, due to this latest attack, which is
absolutely inexcusable. There have been a number of these
attacks. In many cases, you know, we don't have troops, we are
not engaged on--in the ground--on the ground there, so I cannot
tell you that we had evidence, even though we certainly had a
lot of media and social media indicators that either chlorine
or sarin were used.
As far as our current situation, if, like last time, we
decide we have to take military action in regard to this
chemical weapons attack, then like last time we will be
reporting to Congress, just as we did when we fired a little
over a year ago, slightly over a year ago.
As far as the counter-violent extremist, counter-ISIS----
Ms. Tsongas. So let me go back to this. So before taking
any action, you would report to Congress as to the nature of
what that action might be?
Secretary Mattis. I will speak only to the fact that we
will report to Congress, we will keep open lines of
communication. There will be notification to leadership, of
course, prior to the attack. But we will give a full report to
the Congress itself, probably as rapidly as possible.
On the counter-violent----
Ms. Tsongas. And so I--let's just stick with this.
Secretary Mattis. Okay.
Ms. Tsongas. I would also then like to know, would you take
action absent support from our allies? I know that the
administration is engaged in talks with France and the U.K.
[United Kingdom]. Would you seek to have them involved in any
action we might take?
Secretary Mattis. As you know, ma'am, or Congresswoman,
our----
Ms. Tsongas. Would that be a pre-condition, I should say.
Secretary Mattis. Our strategy is to engage by, with, and
through allies in all things we do. I do not want to discuss
the current situation, because I owe confidentiality to our
allies, due to the sensitive nature of military operations and
the need to keep those secret. But I think you will find
nothing inconsistent with your view in what we are doing,
without going into any details.
On the----
Ms. Tsongas. And what worries you most about any military
action we might take, given the highly complex landscape in
Syria, the many, many actors that are engaged there?
Secretary Mattis. There is a tactical concern, ma'am, that
innocent people--we don't add any civilian deaths, and do
everything humanly possible to avoid that. We are trying to
stop the murder of innocent people.
But on a strategic level, it is how do we keep this from
escalating out of control, if you get my drift on that.
Ms. Tsongas. I get your drift. Thank you.
I yield back.
Secretary Mattis. Okay.
The Chairman. Mr. Coffman.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Mattis,
General Dunford, thank you so much for your years of dedicated
service to the United States.
Secretary Mattis, you mentioned that--in previous testimony
today that we don't have confirmation yet whether or not there
was a chemical attack. Don't we reasonably have enough evidence
to--certainly to believe that there was an attack, and the fact
that they didn't--the Russians and the Syrian Assad government
did not grant immediate access, I believe, that was requested?
Could you speak to that?
Secretary Mattis. I can, Congressman. I believe there was a
chemical attack, and we are looking for the actual evidence.
The OPCW--that is the organization for the Chemical Weapons
Convention--we are trying to get those inspectors in, probably
within the week.
You know the challenges we face, where Russia has six times
in the U.N. rejected and made certain that we could not get
investigators in. We will not know from this investigating team
that goes in, if we get them in, if the regime will let them
in, we will not know who did it. They can only say that they
found evidence or did not. And as each day goes by, as you
know, it is a non-persistent gas, so it becomes more and more
difficult to confirm it.
So that is where we are at right now, sir.
Mr. Coffman. Okay, thank you. Just a question on the light
attack aircraft.
Secretary Mattis and General Dunford, the Air Force is
currently testing light attack--a light attack aircraft that
may be acquired by the Department for use as a cost-effective
way to provide close air support of counterinsurgency, armed
reconnaissance, and other combat operations in a more--when in
a more permissive threat environment.
The--I think an F-22 was recently used to attack a Taliban
drug lab. I think that is $70,000 an hour, in terms of the
operational cost. And a light attack aircraft, I think, is
approximately about $1,000, in terms of its operational cost an
hour.
I wonder if you could speak to having them in our
inventory, as we are, again, in a low-threat environment, where
we don't have air-to-air threat, where we have a limited
ground-to-air threat. And the--and also be able to sell those,
in terms of foreign military sales, to our allies that can't
afford an F-35 aircraft, and that--to foster a better military-
to-military relationship with many of our allies. Could you
speak to that, please?
Secretary Mattis. Yes, sir, Congressman. You hit on all the
right points, sir. We are looking for affordability. And where
we don't need an aircraft that costs 17-, 20-, $70,000 per
flight hour, we need to look at it as a way to deliver
readiness and combat capability on an affordable basis. And we
are looking at it.
As you know, the Chief of Staff Air Force personally flew
in one to check it out. And I think you hit on all the right
points there about why we are looking at this, sir.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. General Dunford.
General Dunford. Congressman, the role I play is to
identify the capability that the force needs. What you have
described is the capability that we need, and the Chief of
Staff of the Air Force I know is committed to delivering that
low-end capability at the most cost-effective way possible, and
that is really why these trials are ongoing,
So we support his attempt to get that capability at the
best cost we can, meeting the criteria you outlined.
Mr. Coffman. Right. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Ms. Speier.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you both for
your service.
Mr. Secretary, approximately how many transgender troops
are currently deployed?
Secretary Mattis. I do not know, Congresswoman.
Ms. Speier. Could you provide that to us, subsequently?
Secretary Mattis. I think I can. I will give you the best
data I can come up with on it, yes.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Ms. Speier. Do you believe that the currently serving
transgender troops are weakening readiness or reducing
lethality?
Secretary Mattis. Congresswoman, on this one I submitted my
recommendation and put it out publicly, my recommendation to
the President. It is a highly charged issue from some people's
perspective, and it is under litigation right now. So out of
respect for the courts, I will just tell you the current policy
stays in effect, the last administration's policy, as directed
by the courts. And I have submitted to the President what I
think is the best military advice.
Ms. Speier. So, Mr. Secretary, I want to introduce you to
Staff Sergeant Logan Ireland. He was a noncommissioned Officer
of the Quarter when he was deployed to Afghanistan. He is also
transgender. Do you believe that currently serving transgender
troops like Staff Sergeant Ireland are a burden to our
military?
Secretary Mattis. Congresswoman, I think that, as we look
at the enlistment standards, I gave a recommendation that
troops, patriotic Americans who do not have gender dysphoria,
should be allowed to serve. I do not--did not recommend that we
change the clear standards that apply to all in that regard, or
make a special group. And I would prefer to leave the courts to
their action at this point, and then see where they stand at
the end of it, and then look at what I have recommended to the
President when I can answer you more fully.
Ms. Speier. Well, Mr. Secretary, you rolled out this new
policy, and now you are basically saying, ``I am not prepared
to defend it.''
Secretary Mattis. Oh, I am prepared to defend it, ma'am.
But out of respect for the courts, I do not intrude into
something that--it would be inappropriate for me to say
something that would somehow impact in a court case that is
going on. I think this is a rather standard situation, once the
courts engage.
Ms. Speier. Were there any nongovernmental individuals or
organizations involved in the formulation of the
recommendations by the DOD [Department of Defense] to the
President?
Secretary Mattis. It was the best military advice I could
draw up from civilian overseers and military personnel, both
officer and senior enlisted.
Ms. Speier. Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous
consent to enter into the record letters from medical groups
refuting the conclusions of the DOD report on military service
by transgender individuals in which they say no medically valid
reasons exist to exclude.
The Chairman. Without objection, whatever letters the
gentlelady would like to enter into the record may be included.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
beginning on page 125.]
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, a Military Times article this week revealed
that the Defense Manpower Data Center failed to report the
number of combat troops deployed in Iraq, Syria, and
Afghanistan last quarter. That website was also stripped of
deployment data from previous quarters.
I am very concerned about that. I think that there is no
combat advantage to obfuscating the number of U.S. service
members that were in these countries 3 months ago. And
furthermore, the American public has a right to know.
Do you intend to restore that information to the website?
Secretary Mattis. I will look at it, Congresswoman. As you
know, we keep the Congress fully informed, right down to every
week we can update you on exactly the numbers in each case. And
we do maintain some degree of confidentiality over the number
of troops engaged against enemies in the field. So I will have
to look at it. But we will not, of course, ever keep that--
those numbers away from Members of Congress for your oversight.
Ms. Speier. Well, I know, but this has been an ongoing
website that has provided this information to the public, and
all of a sudden the last quarter it is not posted and they have
sweeped away all the data for previous quarters.
So it would suggest to, I think, the public and to Members
of this Congress, that you are no longer going to make that
information available. And I think the public has a right to
know.
Secretary Mattis. I see. When I come in, ma'am, I don't
come in intending to hide things. But I would just ask what
would you do if you thought the enemy could take advantage of
that kind of data, seeing trends at certain times of the year,
and what they can expect in the future.
But I will certainly look at it. I share your conviction
that the American people should know everything that doesn't
give the enemy an advantage----
Ms. Speier. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mrs. Hartzler.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I
want to certainly commend you and your leadership, all of you,
to make sure that our force is ready, capable, and able, and
deployable. And so I appreciate the policies that--and the
positions that you are advancing.
I would like to ask--bring up the topic of base security,
as it relates to rogue and careless drones. What many people
don't realize is that, under title 18, to interdict a drone, it
is very--it is illegal to do that, because they are used as an
aircraft or a protected computer.
And in the NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act] of
2017 and 2018, as you know, we did give DOD some new
authorities to go after them, which I certainly applaud. But
they are limited to certain areas like nuclear deterrence,
missile defense, air defense, assistance in protecting the
President and the Vice President.
So I am wondering and I am concerned about other DOD
facilities and, you know, specifically a couple of things in
Missouri makes me think of Mobility Command, it makes me think
of also training bases and the potential danger or threat with
a rogue drone on those missions. So I was wondering how is the
Department of Defense interpreting the authorities provided by
the fiscal year 2018 NDAA, and should this authority be
expanded to all DOD mission sets, or perhaps to other specific
missions like mobility and training that aren't currently
included?
General Dunford. Congresswoman, I will start, and maybe the
Secretary will add something.
The Secretary, when the legislation was passed, brought
together all the service chiefs and leadership to look at this
issue, both from a material solution perspective, as well as
from an authorities perspective. And he made it pretty clear
that if we have a threat to our forces, to our bases, that we
had the authorization--so we have interpreted it as we have the
authorization to protect our people.
There are still some gaps in our material solutions to be
able to do that. I am satisfied that, particularly for our
sensitive sites, we have addressed that. But we perhaps haven't
produced the equipment in the volume that we would want to see
to be able to protect all of our facilities, and so forth.
But I have been in a room a couple of times with the
Secretary, and I feel like our leadership has interpreted the
law to mean that we can protect our bases and protect our
people.
Mrs. Hartzler. So you said there are some gaps, though?
Would you like to see those addressed in the next NDAA?
General Dunford. We are addressing now the material
solution gaps. In other words, making sure we have the right
amount of equipment out there in the hands of our people across
all of our bases and stations.
Mrs. Hartzler. That is great.
Secretary Mattis. We also have authority gaps, though.
Congresswoman, you are exactly right about the threat. We see
what they are doing overseas, we know what is coming to a place
near us, back here. We do need more authorities, and we will
outline what those should look like, because you indicate that
we can protect our nuclear sites. That is accurate. But we have
a lot of other sensitive situations that are basically left
outside the authority.
So we owe to you what we think that authority should look
like, and make our case.
Mrs. Hartzler. Great. Thank you for that.
And the National Defense Strategy--rightfully so--
highlighted the long-term strategic competition with China as
one of the central challenges to national security. As you
know, China is very focused, they have multiple lanes of
effort, from espionage to the military effort to
counterintelligence to propaganda arm, et cetera. And there are
multiple lines of efforts in OSD [Office of the Secretary of
Defense] policy, the Joint Staff, across services and the
combatant commands that look at these issues.
Who is the focal point for such coordination across policy,
across the services, across the commands?
Secretary Mattis. Inside DOD, it would be the Under
Secretary of Defense for Policy. However, there is a broader
issue here, a defend the Nation, a holistic, and that falls
under Secretary Nielsen of Homeland Defense. And in that case,
we have confronted a number of vulnerabilities that have not
been fully addressed, and we are putting together the
interagency effort to outline the holistic approach to that
defense.
Mrs. Hartzler. Very good. I know we only have 28 seconds,
but China, as you know, is beyond just the Indo-Pacific in
their influence and their goals. Their activities are present
in Africa, Europe, Latin America, et cetera. What efforts are
you aware of being taken by each of the combatant commands in
the different AORs [areas of responsibility] to counter the
China challenge?
General Dunford. Congresswoman we have--in the time
remaining--we have a global campaign plan for China. Each one
of the combatant commanders addresses China in the context of
that global command--global campaign plan.
Admiral Harris, as the Pacific Command, is the coordinating
authority for that global campaign plan. But each one of the
combatant commanders has supporting plans in their respective
areas of responsibility that address specifically Chinese
activity and capability in their areas.
Mrs. Hartzler. Could I have a copy of that, or maybe be
briefed on that?
General Dunford. I--we will make sure you get briefed on
that, Congresswoman.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Veasey.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know that everyone
on the panel today is very concerned about what happened in
Niger with the four soldiers that were killed there. And what I
want to ask you today are about the risks that we are accepting
by responding to crises or incidents on the continent of
Africa, and wondered if you could comment on those risks. And
can we respond to multiple threats around the world,
particularly when you look at Africa and how large that
footprint is, under our current defense budget restraints that
we have?
Secretary Mattis. Representative, you hit on a key point
for why our second line of effort--three lines of effort, the
second one is building allies and partnerships. What we want to
do is address those kinds of issues, whether it be in the
Pacific or in Africa Command, in Europe, by, with, and through
our allies.
So when we go in--let's just take Africa for an example. I
actually looked at how many troops we are going to invest
against how many--in this case, African--troops are we going to
then be training or bringing in to the fight. And it looks like
an investment chart right out of corporate America: one
American equals how many trained and ready troops who can
defend their own country.
So our goal is to turn this to the right people, that is
the people who--whose country it is. And that is the way we go
about it. We don't try to take on the full mission, we do a
needs assessment of that specific country. In the case of the
Sahel area--and you know Boko Haram and the threat that is
there--in that case the French are leading the effort in--as
the leading nation. And African nations are gathered around
France, and we support France and the African nations.
So you can see how we are doing this by, with, and through
our allies, so we don't carry the burden.
Mr. Veasey. When you--if we were to cut the State
Department budget--and, of course, they work on things like
governance that are, you know, very key, in my opinion, and in
the opinion of many others, on making sure that these countries
know how to govern themselves accordingly, so we don't have to
spend as much militarily--if we cut back on those particular
efforts, how much more money would we need to be able to
invest, and how much more risk would we need to take on the
continent of Africa under those sort of restraints?
I would imagine you would need more U.S. military power to
be able to address--again, just because of the expanse of the
continent.
General Dunford. Congressman, just to follow up on what the
Secretary is saying--and I think this is where you were going
with your question--you know, we have approximately 1,000
forces in West Africa. The French have over 4,000, and we are
working with some 20- to 30,000 partners on the ground. So the
requirement is for somewhere north of 30,000 forces to actually
do the job, and our investment is only 1,000.
So if your question is what would it take if we were doing
it by ourselves, you know, it would take on a large order of
magnitude greater than what we are investing right now. That is
what by, with, and through really means, is a small U.S.
footprint leveraging local capability to actually do the work
that needs to be done to address terrorism, extremism in the
region.
Secretary Mattis. Congressman, I worked very, very closely
with my counterpart at State. It was Secretary Tillerson, as
you know. I am now working with Secretary Sullivan, the Deputy
Secretary, as nominee Pompeo goes through his hearing today.
But I can assure you that, for example, when we have a
small amount of development money given us through this
committee, we meet with State, we align State and Defense
development monies so there is an integrated effort. So
everything we do is done to enable our diplomats to speak with
more authority and to reinforce the foreign policy of the
administration largely put together by State Department.
So they have the lead, we reinforce, and it has been a good
team, sir, all the way through.
Mr. Veasey. For the continent, though, is the best strategy
governance or military right now? Like, what would help those
countries in Africa? Is it more of a governance issue?
Secretary Mattis. Most of the challenges they face,
Congressman, are not militarily solvable. It needs better
governance. It needs diplomacy. It needs development. And we
are working with State Department in support of those efforts.
But it is--you are--I know what you are driving at, and I
agree with you, that it is a diplomatically led effort.
Mr. Veasey. All right, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Hunter.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Gentlemen, good
afternoon--good morning here.
First question, General Mattis, Secretary Mattis, you have
a joint program office with the Coast Guard and the Navy right
now for icebreakers. There is no joint strategy on icebreakers.
Coast Guard has their own Arctic strategy and the Navy has
their own Arctic strategy, and I was wondering if it had
entered your mind to combine those into a joint Arctic
strategy.
Secretary Mattis. We work, as you know, very closely. I
don't hold a meeting with the chairman and the four-stars
without the Commandant of the Coast Guard in the room. So we
intend to stay collaborative. We have different authorities,
different missions, but they need to be integrated in the
Arctic.
Certainly we have not prioritized the Arctic right now, due
to the other situations from Korea and Syria, the situation
vis-a-vis Russia, South China Sea. But----
Mr. Hunter. Would Russia be a reason----
Secretary Mattis [continuing]. I take no issue with----
Mr. Hunter [continuing]. To increase--wouldn't Russia be--
--
Secretary Mattis. Pardon?
Mr. Hunter [continuing]. A reason to increase our presence
in the Arctic?
Secretary Mattis. I think what we increase there is what we
would look at, what type of forces.
Clearly, search and rescue in the Arctic is a high
priority. Environmental protection is. Some of these things are
not fit--are not best done by the U.S. military. But I would
have no problem supporting Department of Homeland Security
Coast Guard efforts in the Arctic. We work closely together on
every other part, from the Caribbean to the Persian Gulf. So it
is--I am sure it is an area we will work together.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you. Last question. The funding request
from everything for the MSP, the Ready Reserve Fleet, basically
the logistics train that you would use to go to war, you didn't
request full funding for the MSP ships. That is the Maritime
Security Program they--you requested the old funding, which is
over $3.5 million, versus $5 million a ship.
General McDew is now working on, for the first time, ever,
looking at if we take casualties with our ships, as they load
our gear--and I remember when I deployed in 2004 we loaded a
RORO [roll-on/roll-off] in San Diego with all of our gear, and
then flew over to Kuwait, and fell in on our stuff. If you
don't have the gear, you can't go to war. You might have the
people there, and you might have the first stage, but you won't
be able to continue that.
Our Ready Reserve Fleet is falling apart, it is done. It is
a steam-engine-powered fleet, which is ridiculous. The MSP is
going to be underfunded now. You might see people dropping out
of that. So what are your thoughts and your--the grand strategy
of aligning the effectiveness and the killing end of the
military with the guys that are going to make it work, which is
being able to get the gear there to sustain a battle?
Secretary Mattis. Right. Projecting power, Congressman, you
are quite right, that is a key area of concern, and we are
trying to prioritize inside many demands on the budget. But I
have met with the Military Sealift Command commander, and we
are going to come up with a way to get out of the situation we
have inherited. It is going to have to be prioritized.
I think that the mobility requirements study that comes in
later this year--I would say probably by October, maybe
November--is going to actually have a part of it that focuses
right on what is the problem, not in general terms. What is the
specific problem? What needs to be moved? What capability do we
need? And how do we go forward?
The problem has not been sufficiently defined yet. We see
all the symptoms of the problem. We need to really get it right
before we start spending, you know, hundreds of millions of
dollars on this.
Mr. Hunter. I can't even tell when my voice is good enough
for both.
North Korea boost phase shoot-down. The same system would
work in Kuwait, shooting down boost phase out of Iran to
Western Europe or to Southeast Europe. You would have the same
system, roughly the same geography and trajectories. So just--
can you give us an update on how, instead of waiting until the
missile is coming down out of space at us, we are shooting at
it, how we are doing on shooting it as it is low and slow and
going up into the air?
Secretary Mattis. Congressman, we are looking at left of
launch, prior to launch, and we are looking at boost phase. I
would prefer to do that in private with you, give you that
brief, because of the current nature of the threat.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, gentlemen.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you so much for your service, and
particularly in this very difficult period of time.
In response to Ms. Tsongas's questions, you dealt with a
lot of the issues of Syria. And I want to pick up one
additional one: the horrific use of chemical weapons by the
Assad regime has prompted the President to threaten military
action.
My question, Secretary Mattis, is very specific: What is
the legal authority, the precise legal authority, of the United
States Government to engage in military action in response to
the chemical weapons use by the Assad regime?
Secretary Mattis. I believe that authority is under article
2. We have forces in the field, as you know, in Syria. And the
use of chemical weapons in Syria is not something that we
should assume that, well, because he didn't use them on us this
time, he wouldn't use them on us next time.
So for right now, I will have the lawyers get back to you
with the broader issue. I am aware of where your question goes,
sir, but I would just tell you that, you know, that we have got
to look at the use of chemical weapons, whether it be in
Salisbury, England, or in Syria, as something that is
inexcusable and that has got to be addressed.
And as Russia----
Mr. Garamendi. So, if I might----
Secretary Mattis [continuing]. Prevents the United Nations
from dealing with it, we can sit acquiescent, or we can do
something about it.
Mr. Garamendi. So you do not believe you need further
congressional authority to respond to the chemical weapons
attack with military kinetic action?
Secretary Mattis. Under article 2, sir, the President has
the right to employ the military. There are war powers
resolutions or other actions that could--or legislative actions
that cause us to come to you, as you know, with reports. But at
the same time, I think we have the authority to deal with this.
Mr. Garamendi. Are you prepared to deliver to this
committee the precise legal authority in writing that you are
referring to?
Secretary Mattis. Well, sir, again, protection of our
forces, I don't think we have to wait until they are under
chemical attack, when the weapons are used in the same theater
we are operating in.
Mr. Garamendi. I understand that. But I am awaiting a legal
document from the Department of Defense specifying the exact
authority and circumstances that cause you to use that
protection of forces.
Secretary Mattis. Yes, sir. I will provide it.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you very much, I appreciate that. And
I think it is necessary. Obviously, there would be a debate
about this.
The--in your testimony you indicated that there is some $12
billion for missile defense, that that is an imminent threat to
the United States. There is also, a week ago--actually, 2 weeks
ago, from the Department of Homeland Security, an imminent
threat from Russia hacking into critical infrastructure systems
in the United States.
What is the Department of Defense doing to defend against
those kinds of attacks that could easily lead to a shutdown of
the grid, or some other critical infrastructure, thereby
bringing physical, as well as social and economic harm to the
United States?
Secretary Mattis. Sir, as you know, we have a fair amount
of money that is given to our Cyber Command for cyberspace
operations. And we have a number of mission teams. But these
are primarily, Congressman, focused on our own defense of the
Department of Defense and offense against an adversary.
For the defend the Nation mission that comes under the
Secretary of Homeland Security, Secretary Nielsen, we are in
close contact with her. We have the only capability to try and
defend, whether it be an electrical grid, a financial system,
something like that.
And I think that right now we need to get a lot stronger in
the defense of our critical infrastructure, all aspects of it.
And I realize that some of that could come under the Department
of Defense, which is going to take congressional initiative and
action in order to balance the constitutional safeguards for
our citizens with the reality that we have got to be able to
protect them.
And this is an area that needs a lot of work, I will be the
first to admit it.
Mr. Garamendi. If I might just--in a hearing that Ms.
Stefanik had yesterday it became very, very clear that the
coordination between the Department of Homeland Security and
Department of Defense is lacking. I appreciate your attention
to it.
Secretary Mattis. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, I want to follow up on that a little bit. And I
know, Secretary Mattis, in the National Defense Strategy you
discussed the need to be strategically predictable, but
operationally unpredictable. We are spending an increasing
amount of time on gray zone conflicts.
Obviously, if we have evidence that somebody used a
chemical weapon, that is a line that we can see. We know we
want a predictable response to that, so that that doesn't
happen again. But with gray zone conflicts, that line sometimes
doesn't seem to exist.
And so, Chairman Dunford, as we talk about these gray
zones, can you discuss the implications of the potential for
future--proxy war might not be the right term, but certainly
could work there. And is this going to be the way in the future
that our adversaries challenge our resolve, as a country, both
to operate on behalf of ourselves and our allies?
General Dunford. Congressman, I think the answer to the end
of the question is yes, it is what we see, particularly with
nations that we have a competitive advantage in the
conventional space. They realize they can't take us on
conventionally, so they find another way.
To put a finer point on gray zone, I would describe that as
political influence, economic coercion, use of cyber, use of
information operations, and then military posture. So there is
a military dimension to it, but it is clearly a broader problem
than just a military dimension.
As we think about it in the military strategy, we think the
competition that is taking place in that gray zone is really
the competition for our allies and partners. So we believe that
the critical thing that they are trying to do in the gray zone,
in the military space, is undermine the credibility of our
alliances and partnerships, which, as the Secretary outlined,
is an important line of effort in the National Defense
Strategy.
So what is critical for us to do is overcome in information
space, overcome in cyber capabilities, and then our military
posture, the erosion of that relationship that we have with our
allies. The broader government piece is, in fact what we are
going to see, and that is going to require the State
Department, the Treasury Department, the Defense Department all
to come together to be competitive in what you described as the
gray zone.
And as I mentioned, it really does have a political and
economic and military and an informational aspect.
Mr. Scott. And so, if I could follow up, it is going to
take an all-of-government approach on the homeland defense side
of the gray zone conflicts. What authorities do you have to
take offensive action in the gray zone?
General Dunford. I think, Congressman, what you get at is a
really important point, and that is that we have
traditionally--and we do today--distinguished between peace and
war. And so the activities and the authorities that we have in
place on a day-to-day basis reflect the fact that we are at
peace.
And our adversaries don't actually have the same
restraints. So what they are doing on a day-to-day basis looks
more like moving towards war than being in peace. And so, from
a cyber perspective and information operations perspective, we
are reviewing, and we do review--we are reviewing that issue,
and we do believe that we are limited in the activities that we
can perform on a day-to-day basis, and the authorities that we
have to allow us to be competitive.
Mr. Scott. This is something that I know, as a Member of
Congress, we are going to need help from people that understand
these definitions and operations significantly better than I
do, and I look forward to your help with the authorities and
other things that you need to not only defend the homeland, but
to take action against those who are taking these actions
against us.
General Mattis, as--I mentioned the strategic
predictability and operational unpredictability, as outlined in
the National Defense Strategy. Can you briefly describe what
this means for troop rotations and overseas assignments and
training?
Secretary Mattis. I can, Congressman. What we will do is
make certain our allies know that we are reliable and we can
break through to them, we can get to them, and stand with them
at the time of need. We will do it by making certain that
keeping the maintenance of the equipment, the training of the
troops, and the family--wear and tear on the families is all
kept in balance.
The way you do this is we ensure that preparation for great
power competition drives us, not simply a rotation schedule
that allows me to tell you 3 years from now which aircraft
carrier will be where in the world. That is a great way to run
a shipping line. It is no way to run a navy.
So during the time when they would be authorized to deploy,
directed to deploy, they may not deploy out of home waters.
They may stay there, operating an aircraft carrier down off San
Diego, operating with the Army at Fort Irwin, overhead cover,
this sort of thing, as we keep our joint force ready.
And then, when we send them out, it may be for a shorter
deployment. It will be three carriers in the South China Sea
today, and then 2 weeks from now there is only one there, and
two of them are in the Indian Ocean. They will be home at the
end of a 90-day deployment. They will not have spent 8 months
at sea, and we are going to have a force more ready to surge
and deal with the high-end warfare, as a result, without
breaking the families, the maintenance cycles, or reducing--we
will actually enhance the training time.
Does that give you a----
Mr. Scott. Yes, sir.
Secretary Mattis [continuing]. Appreciation for it?
Mr. Scott. Gentlemen, thank you for your service.
The Chairman. Ms. Gabbard.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you. Thank you, gentlemen, for your
service.
You know, the President has indicated recently his
intention to launch U.S. military attacks against Syria.
Article 1 of the Constitution gives Congress the sole power to
declare war. Congress has not done so against the Syrian
Government.
Section 3 of the War Powers Resolution requires the
President to consult with Congress before introducing U.S.
Armed Forces into situations of hostilities.
Section 2 of the War Powers Resolution clarifies the
constitutional powers of the President as Commander in Chief,
and article 2, which you referenced, Secretary Mattis, to
introduce forces into hostilities only pursuant to, one, a
declaration of war; two, specific statutory authorization; or
three, a national emergency created by an attack upon the U.S.,
its territories, possessions, or Armed Forces.
Syria has not declared war against the U.S. or threatened
the U.S. The launch of 59 missiles against Syria by Trump last
year was illegal, and did not meet any of those criteria in the
War Powers Resolution.
The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018, which was
signed into law by President Trump, states that none of the
funds made available by this Act may be used with respect to
Syria, in contravention of the War Powers Resolution, including
for the introduction of U.S. armed military forces into
hostilities in Syria.
My question is, will the President uphold the Constitution,
the War Powers Resolution, and comply with the law that he
signed by obtaining authorization from Congress before
launching U.S. military attacks against Syria?
Secretary Mattis. Congresswoman, we have not yet made any
decision to launch military attacks into Syria. I think that
when you look back at President Obama sending the U.S. troops
into Syria at the time he did, he also had to deal with this
type of situation, because we are going after a named terrorist
group that was not actually named in the AUMF [authorization
for use of military force] that put them in.
This is a complex area, I will be the first to admit.
Ms. Gabbard. It is simple, however, what the Constitution
requires. So while you are correct in saying the President has
not yet made a decision, my question is will he abide by the
Constitution and comply with the law?
Secretary Mattis. Yes, I believe that the President will
carry out his duties under the Constitution to protect the
country.
Ms. Gabbard. What would the objective of an attack on Syria
be, and how does that serve the interests of the American
people?
Secretary Mattis. I don't want to talk about a specific
attack that is not yet in the offing, knowing that these are
decisions--this would be pre-decisional. Again, the President
has not made that decision.
However, looking at the chemical warfare convention, I
think it is in the--by far, in the best interest of
civilization--certainly in the best interest of America--that
that convention be obeyed by the nations that have signed it.
And what has happened in Salisbury, England, and now has
happened in Syria again shows that this is not an idle concern.
Ms. Gabbard. So if the decision is made, as you have stated
publicly, you are laying--are all the options on the table for
the President? If the decision is made to launch a military
attack against Syria, Russia has already responded, saying that
they would respond to our U.S. strike. As this action is
considered, can you justify for the American people how going
to war with Russia over Syria serves the interests of the
American people?
Secretary Mattis. No, Congresswoman, I can't answer that
question. I am not ready to speculate that that would happen.
Ms. Gabbard. Would you not say that it is a highly likely
occurrence, given what Russia has stated directly, that they
will respond?
Secretary Mattis. No, Congresswoman, I would not. And there
is a lot of ways to respond to the violation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention diplomatically, economically, militarily----
Ms. Gabbard. Sure.
Secretary Mattis [continuing]. That, taken in total, would
represent, I think, what we have to do in this world if we are
going to turn it over in accordance with international norms
and international law.
Ms. Gabbard. One last question. The 2001 AUMF is the
authorization with which our U.S. forces are in Syria. Today,
while ISIS--there has been much progress made in the counter-
ISIS campaign, and they are close to being defeated in Syria,
al-Qaida has grown stronger.
Brett McGurk stated just over a year ago that al-Nusra is
now al-Qaida's largest formal affiliate in history. So al-Qaida
has grown stronger in Syria.
Secretary Mattis. Mm-hmm.
Ms. Gabbard. Why is this, and why have our U.S. policies
not gone after al-Qaida in Syria?
Secretary Mattis. Well, our policy is in Syria, which is a
very complex battlespace, Congresswoman, that where they are
located right now we do not want to go up and do another part
of Syria. We are doing this by, with, and through our partner
forces. They do not have the capability to move into that
region.
The Chairman. The time of the gentlelady is expired.
Mr. Brooks.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Now, Secretary Mattis and General Dunford, by way of
background, I was one of some of our House Armed Services
Committee members who, in 2011, voted against the Budget
Control Act and its sequestration provisions that
disproportionately cut national defense spending and so badly
damaged America's national security.
Now to the current date. Per the Congressional Budget
Office, we face an $804 billion deficit this year, $12.5
trillion in total deficits over the next decade, and a total
$33.8 trillion gross Federal debt by 2028. Proverbs 22:7 warns
us that, ``The borrower is the slave of the lender.''
Similarly, I would submit America's debt slowly but surely
gives our creditors power over America. For emphasis, China, a
geopolitical rival and perhaps a foe, is America's largest
foreign creditor, at $1.2 trillion.
Here is our problem: If America's creditors simply stop
loaning America more money, something they have every right to
do, our Federal Government is immediately, the next day,
insolvent, and faces an immediate $800 billion shortfall. If
this $800 billion shortfall is prorated equally across our $1.3
trillion discretionary budget, that translates into a
devastating $400 billion cut to national defense, immediately.
In 2011, when America's gross Federal debt was much less,
at approximately $15 trillion, then-Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff Mike Mullen testified in this very same room
that ``The most significant threat to our national security is
our debt.''
Similarly, in 2017, when America's gross Federal debt was
roughly $20 trillion, you, Secretary Mattis, confirmed at your
Senate hearing that ``The greatest threat to our national
security is our own Federal debt.''
In the time that remains, will you please help the American
people understand why you believe America's out-of-control
deficit and exploding debt are threats to America's national
security?
Secretary Mattis. Well, Congressman, I think any nation
that can't keep its fiscal house in order eventually cannot
maintain its military power. Hence the connection to the
Department of Defense that concerns me so much. It is also why
we put solvency and security as watchwords at the Pentagon,
because we need solvency first.
So we are aligned with you. The situation I face is a
worsening security situation in the world. So then, even with
that thesis I just mentioned, I come in asking for an awful lot
of money.
The point I would make is in 1985 we spent 5.7 percent of
our GDP on national defense. It was in the 35, 36 percentile
during World War II. But 1985 was not a war year for us, and we
were spending 5.7. What we are asking for in 2019 is 3.1
percent. So we believe America can afford survival, and I
recognize the competing and very tough decisions on domestic
spending, on health care, on defense, and I can only tell you
that we will spend every dollar as wisely as we can.
I don't have stress, Congressman, I create it. If I find
someone who is getting artful with the money you have given us,
that person will have to leave our ranks as we try to buy the
time, security-wise, for you to put the fiscal situation back
under proper order.
Mr. Brooks. General Dunford, do you share that concern
about our accumulated deficits and total debt at some point
becoming or currently being a national security threat?
General Dunford. I do, Congressman. That really gets to my
opening statement, that--what I said was we needed sufficient
resources at Department of Defense; we also needed that to be
sustainable and predictable. And clearly, on the path we are
on, the sustainability and the predictability is at risk.
Mr. Brooks. On an entirely different subject matter,
Secretary Mattis, do you believe that people who are illegally
in the United States should be allowed to take military service
opportunities from American citizens and lawful immigrants?
Secretary Mattis. I am not quite sure--sir, very bluntly,
we need every qualified patriot we can get our hands on, but we
do not support illegal activity in our recruiting. So I know at
times we have had an awful lot of immigrant--legal immigrants,
children of those families join at a much higher rate than we
do with native-born, believe it or not. So we would like to see
the immigration system fixed, so that we have legal immigrants
coming into the country, because we recruit very well from
them. They are overrepresented, sir, in our ranks.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Secretary Mattis, General Dunford,
and Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. O'Rourke.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, earlier you said in response to a
colleague's question, you said we have not made any decision to
launch attacks in Syria. Yesterday at 6:57 a.m. the President
tweeted, ``Russia vows to shoot down any and all missiles fired
at Syria. Get ready, Russia, because they will be coming. Nice
and new''--and he put in quotes--``smart!''
Can you resolve the disconnect between the answer that you
gave and the commitment that the President made yesterday?
Secretary Mattis. Today our President----
Mr. O'Rourke. I don't know if your microphone is on.
Secretary Mattis. Today our President did say that he has
not made a decision. And I will tell you that we are meeting--
when I leave here I go to a meeting where the National Security
Council will be meeting on this. And we will take forward the
various options to the President and the----
Mr. O'Rourke. When the President of the United States
says----
Secretary Mattis [continuing]. Intelligence assessment.
Mr. O'Rourke [continuing]. ``These missiles will be
coming,'' the President of the United States of America says,
``These missiles will be coming,'' that sounds to me and to the
rest of the world like a decision.
In the answer to another question that was asked for the
legal justification to fire missiles into Syria in response to
these chemical weapons attacks, you said that we have troops in
the field and we are not going to wait for them to be attacked
before we take action. If we did not have U.S. service members
in Syria, would you have the legal authorization to launch
attacks in Syria in response to these chemical weapons attacks?
Secretary Mattis. Yes, Congressman, I am going to have to
have my lawyer start taking these questions. I look for the
legitimate protection of the American people and their
interests. I am the Secretary of Defense. And I did not pick up
a law degree on my way to the job. So I need to get some people
to give me, I think, the specific answers to your question.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you. We have talked today about North
Korea, about Syria, about ISIS, about Russia, about China, but
we have not talked about the threat that the country of Mexico
poses to us.
The President also announced recently that--these are his
words--``We are sending the United States military to secure
our border with Mexico.'' Could you share with me what that
will cost, what the mission is, how long it will last, since
the President vowed to keep U.S. service members there until
his wall is completed?
Secretary Mattis. Yes, I----
Mr. O'Rourke. And then I have a follow-up question for
that.
Secretary Mattis. I cannot tell you the cost yet, sir. I am
in close contact, daily contact, with Secretary Nielsen. We are
in support of Department of Homeland Security, Customs Border
Enforcement personnel, and right now I have got about 800
deployed under the governors' authority. We are paying for them
out of the title 32 funds that the Congress has allocated.
I believe I will get around--a request for around 700 more
in the second tranche. Those will mostly be helicopters and
observation type forces. These forces will not involve
themselves with the migrants themselves, or have any law
enforcement duties.
Mr. O'Rourke. Related question. Can any part of your budget
be used to construct a wall, a fence, fortifications along the
U.S.-Mexico border?
Secretary Mattis. Probably the part where, if I need to
wall off or, excuse me, put a fence along a bombing range that
is right next to the border, this is a safety consideration. I
don't care who they are, they are human beings, I don't want
them wandering into a bombing range that was active.
Mr. O'Rourke. In 1997 then-President Clinton sent the
United States military to the border. A United States Marine
shot and killed an 18-year-old U.S. citizen named Esequiel
Hernandez. The tragedy for the Hernandez family, the tragedy
for that Marine who was put in a position for which he was not
trained should be something from which we learn.
I think this is a grave mistake on the part of this
country. And I would also, given everything else that we are
talking about, all of our other challenges and threats and
priorities around the world, I have to think that you also see,
Mr. Secretary, the opportunity cost of sending the United
States military to the U.S.-Mexico border at a time that it has
never been more secure, more safe, where we have record low
northbound apprehensions, the lowest numbers since 1971.
The community, El Paso, Texas, that I represent, conjoined
with Ciudad Juarez forming the largest binational community in
this hemisphere, is also one of the safest cities in the United
States of America. I think this is a gross waste of taxpayer
resources. I think this is a wasted opportunity, in terms of
what those service members could be doing. And I think it sets
the stage for another tragedy if we do not carefully manage
this. And I would urge you to advise the President to withdraw
this commitment. We do not need another ill-defined, ill-
planned mission for the United States military.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Cook.
Mr. Cook. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank our panel today for their service and everything else. It
has been a tough budget year. I was one of the ones that voted
for the omnibus, I am one of the ones that--I cannot stand the
Budget Control Act, and one of the big supporters behind the
audit. I think that is extremely important, so that we don't
waste money, and get the most cost efficiency.
I want to switch gears a little bit. And Mr. Secretary, you
talked about allies. And I want to talk about F-35s. Ever since
I have been in Congress it has been about the cost, the
problems with the F-35s. And I think we have come a long ways
correcting a lot of the problems that we had with them. I am
all onboard and everything else, but it is not cheap.
And now we are talking--well, Canada dropped out of the buy
for that, and there is some of us on this committee and the
Foreign Affairs Committee that are concerned about Turkey and
its behavior as an ally, and whether we should sell or continue
to have Turkey as one of the recipients of the F-35.
If for some reason they drop out of that program, or we
prevent them from buying that, is that going to significantly
increase the costs of something which is extremely important to
our future, and obviously the conversation today, the budget
that we are trying to do something about?
Secretary Mattis. Congressman, we right now look at the F-
35 as a program that we have got to drive down the costs on,
and that is both the purchase cost but it is also the flight-
hour cost, the sustainment cost, the cost of spare parts. So we
have a full-court press on this, working with the contractor in
order to drive it down.
We do have other allies around the world that are
considering increasing the number of F-35s they buy, and right
now I can't tell you that it is going to be equal, you know, if
some drop and others go in to pick it up. But I will tell you
that our focus on driving down costs and getting rid of excess
costs is ongoing. We have had some success already since we got
in. And between Ellen Lord and my deputy, Pat Shanahan, I have
got two very capable people of going after this with the
contractor and getting the best value on this aircraft.
It is revolutionary. I realize how great it is, but it has
got to be affordable.
Mr. Cook. General Dunford, were you going to comment on
that at all, or----
General Dunford. No. The only thing I can tell you,
Congressman, we would have to get back to you, the specific
implications. Obviously, foreign military sales help hold down
the cost, but I don't have the data on what the implications
would be for Turkey. So we owe you an answer on that.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Cook. Okay. The last thing I just wanted to address
said NATO, number of us are on the NATO parliament, and we are
concerned about our allies. We have some very good allies, in
terms of meeting their commitment, and there are some that were
about half in and half out. Do you have any suggestions on how
we can gently pressure our allies to meet their commitments on
this?
Secretary Mattis. And you used the right word, Congressman,
``commitments.'' Article 3 of the Washington Treaty, the NATO
Treaty, said every nation will provide enough for their own
defense and the defense of fellow alliance members.
Article 5, of course, where we stand together in the face--
a threat against one is a threat against all, and the message
that President Trump directed me to take to NATO a year ago
when I first returned to that headquarters, having been--served
there as a NATO Supreme Commander, was you cannot expect me to
go in front of the Congress and say we need American parents to
care more about the freedom of their children than they care
about the freedom of their children.
We have 15 nations that are on the right track to meet
their Wales commitment, a pledge they made. And we want
national plans. And thanks to Secretary General Stoltenberg,
Secretary General of NATO, former prime minister of Norway, he
is pushing very hard that each nation come to the summit this
year with a national plan showing how they are going to get at
2 percent of gross domestic product committed to defense.
We do not have them all there, and the pressure continues.
And the President, in his usual blunt style, has made it very
clear that this is where we are going.
Mr. Cook. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Gallego.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Secretary Mattis, one of our concerns here, obviously, is
Russia. And I am following up on my fellow Marine's comments on
NATO. One of the focuses that we have had is on the EDI, the
European Defense Initiative.
Last year's NDAA we asked for a report about what would
be--actually, we put a report in the NDAA asking specifically
what kind of resources, tooling, locations--in general, to give
us more information so we can actually come up with a good EDI
this coming NDAA. That has not arrived yet, and we are about to
go back into the NDAA again.
So I am just wondering, when is that report going to come
out? You know, we want to be helpful, we want to make sure that
we are giving you guys everything you need. But we need that
type of information to actually properly size the budget for
EDI.
Secretary.
Secretary Mattis. I regret that you don't have it yet. I
need to go back and look at it, sir. There is over 1,700
reports I am due every year to you all, and I confess that we
at times have been late on a few.
Chairman, do you have anything on EDI?
General Dunford. Congressman, you know, I am not sure about
that specific report, although, you know, I have looked at the
details of the $6.5 billion that are in this year's submission.
And broadly speaking, it addresses the infrastructure, and we
can share with you the specific locations. It addresses the
increased exercise program as a result of rotational forces
that increased. And it is increasing the pre-position equipment
was the third piece.
So those are the three pieces that make up the $6.5
billion, and I think we have a very clear sight picture exactly
how that is allocated.
We will take back the requirement to report, which, like
the Secretary, I am not following a specific report, but I can
assure you I am following the specific way we plan to spend the
European Defense Initiative, and we do have a detailed plan to
lay out.
Mr. Gallego. Well, thank you, General. You know, for us it
would be great that we could compare the two to make sure that
we are rightsizing everything that is going on.
And just to continue on that kind of vein of thought, are
we--and we could have two separate questions on this, but are
you in favor of increasing our forces and adding more pre-
position equipment or, more specifically, putting new basing
locations in NATO with U.S. forces?
General, you can start.
General Dunford. Yes. Did you say, Congressman,
specifically in NATO?
Mr. Gallego. In NATO territory, yes.
General Dunford. We do not have plans at this time to
increase. We have, with your help over the last 3 years,
increased to the level that we believe is sustainable----
Mr. Gallego. General----
General Dunford [continuing]. And appropriate.
Mr. Gallego [continuing]. I understand that. Would you be
in favor of that? Should we give you the right budget? Would
you be in favor of, you know, putting more positioned U.S.
military personnel in NATO territory?
General Dunford. You know, I will be honest with you,
Congressman. Right now, you know, the Secretary has laid out
the National Defense Strategy, we pretty much know what the
forces that will be available over the next several years are,
and we believe, to meet the--our requirements for assurance and
deterrence, we have the right U.S. composition in place right
now, and realizing that that is going to be in the context of
the other 28 members of NATO.
Mr. Gallego. Okay. From some of the RAND studies that I
have read and been involved with, what I have seen is that
there is a clear picture that I have been told that we have a
math problem in the Eastern European theater, specifically when
dealing with Russia and Russian armaments. Do we--you know, do
you agree with some of these studies, in terms of our math
problem and how we could fix that?
Secretary Mattis. The math problem is accurate, sir.
However, there is more to the power of NATO alliance than
simply the number of American tanks, as you understand.
Mr. Gallego. But----
Secretary Mattis. So what we are trying to do is make
certain the American military is there in an--support of the
NATO alliance.
But at the same time, everyone has got to step up for this
thing. And right now I think we could always rotate more forces
in during a period of heightened tensions. But overall, I think
we have got it about right right now, and we are working with
the NATO partners to get their forces up on the step, as well.
Mr. Gallego. I yield back.
The Chairman. Dr. Wenstrup.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Gentlemen, thank you
all for being here today. I appreciate it.
We have witnessed Russia tampering in our elections and
that of our allies. And in open testimony, the Director of
National Intelligence, the Director of CIA [Central
Intelligence Agency] have talked about Russia undermining our
defenses and our foreign policies.
It has been reported that Russia is trying to undermine our
energy investments in Europe. Our science committee has
detailed how Russia has done this. In a declassified report
from CIA in 1983 that detailed Russia's active measures
concerning nuclear modernization, missile defense, and the
report stated--and I quote--one report stated, ``Their campaign
covers a whole spectrum of activities, from overt efforts to
create a fear of nuclear war to covert measures including
forgeries and disinformation.''
And so my question is, do you believe that Russia is
carrying out these types of active measures today? What are we
doing to counter them? And are the agencies involved able to
coordinate well in those efforts?
Secretary Mattis. I think that, as you look at the National
Defense Strategy, Congressman--and this is something that
President Trump personally approved, I talked with him about it
before I signed it--and you see Russia now registers as a
strategic competitor.
We didn't want that, we were all trying to make a
partnership of sorts with Russia after the fall of the Berlin
Wall in the late 1990s, early 2000s. I can remember Russian
marines training at Camp Lejeune with U.S. Marines for U.N.
peacekeeping operations. That is in the dim past now, sir, as
we watch what they have done, from Georgia to Crimea, from the
Ukraine to Syria.
And so, when you look at the gray zone issues that were
brought up by a Member earlier, this is where Russia is putting
a lot of effort. The deniable--they think deniable--efforts
that they believe they can undermine our belief in democratic
processes, elections, as you mentioned, undermine us
financially.
As you know, they have a declining economy, a worsening
demographic. And until they wake up to the fact that they have
a lot more to gain by working with Europe, by working with
NATO, by being a responsible nation in the U.N., we are going
to have to deal with them in all areas as a strategic
competitor.
Dr. Wenstrup. So are you comfortable with how we may be
countering their efforts?
Secretary Mattis. We are doing better. I will never be
comfortable with our security. I will always be looking for
ways to improve.
Dr. Wenstrup. Do you feel like the agencies have the
ability to coordinate the efforts to counter what is taking
place?
I mean I think you have highlighted very well what is
taking place. But how are we countering that?
Secretary Mattis. Right. We have--I believe we do have the
ability, I think we have the focus. There is a lot going on
right now, but I don't think I would--I wouldn't tell you we
are where we need to be, but I know we are going in the right
direction.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
General Dunford, do you have anything to add to that, or--
--
General Dunford. No, Congressman. You know, we spoke
earlier, as the Secretary said, about the gray zone. And that
is the threat we face.
The one thing that comes to mind as you were asking about
are we postured where we need to be, you know, we are in an
environment, particularly in cyber, where offensive operations
are going to outpace defensive operations. And so that is one
of the areas that I think is really being looked at by the
experts right now at CYBERCOM [U.S. Cyber Command] and
Department of Homeland Security and so forth is what is the
right organizational construct, and what is the right level of
activity every day, so we can have the momentum and the
offense.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, I appreciate that response.
Just a quick question for Mr. Norquist--I think you have
been eagerly awaiting a question.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Wenstrup. As we go through the audit, do you anticipate
that this will lead to DOD to be able to redirect funds into
other areas, as we discover where we are spending money and how
we are spending money?
Mr. Norquist. So I appreciate the question. The--there are
three benefits we are going to see from the audit. The first
and foremost is better data, which will feed better decision
making. The second is the transparency and accountability that
goes with it. And the third--and I think it is the third where
you are going to see that the savings is--how it helps drive
reform.
And so, as the Secretary mentioned in his opening
statement, that crosses a number of offices in the Department,
but their ability to drive reform benefits from the accuracy of
the underlying business data.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you very much, and I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Moulton.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Norquist, thank you very
much for being here.
Secretary Mattis, last October before the Senate Armed
Services Committee you stated that, ``It is in our national
security interest to remain in the JCPOA [Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action],'' or Iran nuclear deal. Do you still believe
that remaining in the JCPOA is within U.S. national security
interests?
Secretary Mattis. I think it needs to be fixed,
Congressman.
Mr. Moulton. I am asking if it remains in our interest to
stay within the deal, in our national security interest.
Secretary Mattis. If it is fixed, yes, sir.
Mr. Moulton. But not without it being fixed? What do you
intend to recommend to President Trump, approaching the May
12th sanctions deadline?
Secretary Mattis. Right. We are working on what needs to be
fixed in it. We are also working with our allies, in very close
consultation with our European allies on this. There are three
areas--I owe--this is not an area, because it is pre-
decisional, but I want to go into detail here. But if those
three areas are addressed, then it perhaps can be saved.
Mr. Moulton. And otherwise, you think we should pull out?
Secretary Mattis. I am not willing to say that until I see
how much of it can be saved.
I mean this is not a--I think it is not an easily binary
situation----
Mr. Moulton. And yet the decision----
Secretary Mattis [continuing]. Depending on our success----
Mr. Moulton. Right, but Mr. Secretary, the decision is----
Secretary Mattis [continuing]. With the European allies. If
we can fix most of it, will that make it sufficient? I don't
know right now.
Mr. Moulton. The problem, Mr. Secretary, is the decision to
stay in or pull out is ultimately a binary decision.
Secretary Mattis. Right.
Mr. Moulton. Mr. Chairman, your deputy, General Paul Selva,
testified last July that, based on the evidence that has been
presented to the intelligence community, it appears that Iran
is in compliance with the rules that were laid out in the
JCPOA. And since that time, the IAEA [International Atomic
Energy Agency] has continued to affirm Iran's compliance.
In your assessment, and in the assessment of the
intelligence community, is Iran still in compliance with the
terms of the deal?
General Dunford. Congressman, I will caveat my statement by
saying I haven't seen a recent report. I am not aware of any
violations.
Mr. Moulton. What does the Joint Staff plan to recommend to
the President about staying in the Iran nuclear deal?
General Dunford. Yes, Congressman, I can't share that with
you right now. I mean I think, from my perspective, we want to
make sure that all of Iran's malign activity is addressed:
nuclear activity, cyber activity, missile activity, maritime
threats.
And so we have a framework right now that addresses the
nuclear piece. It has been deemed to be unsatisfactory. What we
need to come out of is a diplomatic and a legal framework
within which to manage the nuclear threat that Iran poses.
Mr. Moulton. Mr. Chairman, how do you expect North Korea to
believe that we will adhere to a deal if we are so willing to
pull out of a deal that the United States of America signed
with Iran on the same subject?
General Dunford. Well, I understand your question,
Congressman, but it certainly won't be up to me to decide
whether we pull out of the deal or not. That is ultimately
going to be a political decision.
Mr. Moulton. I understand, Mr. Chairman. What I am asking
you is how do we expect North Korea to believe in a deal, if we
are so willing to pull out of our previous--our immediate past
nuclear deal?
General Dunford. No, I understand it, and I am not trying
to be argumentative. But you are speculating that we will pull
out, and then you are asking me to determine what the action
would be of North Korea.
Mr. Moulton. Yes, sir.
General Dunford. I can't do that.
Mr. Moulton. All right, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, we discussed before the advent of artificial
intelligence [AI] and its implications for our military, and
you brought it up in your opening testimony. China has made a
clear commitment to meet U.S. capability in artificial
intelligence by 2020, and then exceed it by 2030.
Who owns U.S. research and development in artificial
intelligence, bureaucratically?
Secretary Mattis. Right now it is our new Under Secretary
of Research and Engineering, Michael Griffin. And I would tell
you that we are looking at a joint office where we would
concentrate all of the DOD's efforts, since we have a number of
AI efforts underway right now. We are looking at pulling them
all together.
Mr. Moulton. So, Mr. Secretary, is it just within the DOD?
Is there any government-wide effort on artificial intelligence,
or is it just--is the owner essentially the Department of
Defense?
Secretary Mattis. I can only speak to my portfolio, and I
will get back to you with the broader--answering the broader
question. But in terms of the defense of America, obviously I
am primary. I know that also the CIA works on this issue.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Moulton. Mr. Secretary, a quick question on Syria. When
I served under you in Iraq, you made it very clear what our
mission was. In fact, you made it clear what we had to
accomplish before we came home.
What do the troops in Syria, the over 2,000 Americans
risking their lives every day, have to accomplish in Syria
before they can come home?
Secretary Mattis. I think both administrations, the last
one and the current one, said we are going to take ISIS down so
they do not have a physical caliphate and they are shattered,
in terms of an aura of invincibility that attracts funding and
recruiting.
So that remains the same at this time, Congressman.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Byrne.
Mr. Byrne. Mr. Secretary, General, Mr. Norquist, it is good
to see all of you again, and thank you for your service to our
country.
We talked about a lot of different parts of the world
today, but I would like to shift a little bit, if I could, to
our own neighborhood, the Western Hemisphere. It is very
important to all of us, I know it is to you. We will have a
congressional delegation--I will be a part of it--going to Peru
this weekend for the Summit of [the] Americas.
And Mr. Secretary, I know you believe very strongly in soft
power. But as you well know, soft power alone can't get the job
done.
It is no secret that SOUTHCOM [U.S. Southern Command] is
significantly underresourced to meet the combatant commander's
requirements. And in his list of requirements, Admiral Tidd has
expressed a necessity of a littoral combat ship [LCS] in his
theater because he believes that small surface combatants are
ideal for several missions, including combating drug
trafficking, partnership-building, and providing support for
special forces. Currently the Coast Guard is the only service
providing maritime security in that region.
I also believe, in order to meet our requirements and
provide the necessary support to effectively perform our
missions, it is imperative the Navy play an active role in
SOUTHCOM.
Understanding that we need to invest in our capabilities
across the globe, what would be your solution to get the most
capability for low cost in the SOUTHCOM region? And
specifically within that, how can we provide additional
necessary resources to SOUTHCOM like the LCS that are ideally
situated for the mission requirements in that region?
Secretary Mattis. Right. It has been a prioritization
issue. You are laying it out quite accurately, as has the
commander, Admiral Tidd.
We are looking at the mix of Coast Guard cutters and LCS
right now. As you know, we also have Coast Guard cutters
elsewhere in the world. Would those missions be best carried
out by the Coast Guard or by Navy LCS, shifting more, for
example, cutters into the Caribbean, into the Latin America
area? Or do we want to put some of the LCSs into that region?
We are looking at this issue as we speak. The chairman owes me
some feedback here in the next couple of weeks as we try to
sort out the right mix, based on the mission.
Is it primarily law enforcement? Do they need to have
people with badges, which would mean Coast Guard cutters? We
are going to have to shift and go to the Department of Homeland
Security. Or is it LCSs because of the nature of an evolving
threat? We don't have the answer yet, sir, but we are working
it. We will have it sorted out very soon.
Mr. Byrne. Well, thank you. General, did you want to
respond to that?
General Dunford. The one I can tell you, Congressman, in
the National Defense Strategy the Secretary has directed me to
do something called dynamic force employment. And what that
really means is, in those areas where we don't have sufficient
forces to be forward-posture engaged on a day-to-day basis, to
find ways to use the force in a different way to support the
combatant commanders.
And so that is exactly how we anticipate filling some of
the gaps down in the U.S. Southern Command.
Mr. Byrne. My conversations with leaders from some of those
countries, they actually are seeking that presence, sometimes
only for the symbolic nature of it. But symbols are important;
you know that better than I do.
General Dunford. Congressman, I--there is--I don't think
either the Secretary or I would disagree with the desire to
increase our presence down in the United States Southern
Command.
I think, as you understand, one of the challenges we have
right now is our Navy ships--I mean one example I use, I went
to visit the USS Barry about 18 months ago, and those sailors
had been underway 70 percent of the time the previous 12
months. So we really do have a requirements resources mismatch
here that, again, we will be growing a force over time.
And Congressman Wittman has left, but he spoke about the
size of the Navy, and if we--we are about 55 ships or more
short of the study that Congressman Wittman identified.
Mr. Byrne. Well, I am a strong supporter--a member of that
subcommittee--of rebuilding the fleet. I was a strong supporter
before, but now that my daughter is engaged to a young Navy
officer who deployed yesterday, I am in the Navy now, and I
want to make sure that we do everything we possibly can to
resource you in the appropriate ways so that you can carry out
this important mission, and at the same time protect those men
and women that are wearing our uniform.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Ms. Hanabusa.
Ms. Hanabusa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, General, Mr. Norquist, thank you for being
here. And of course, thank you for your service.
Mr. Secretary, in your statement you speak to the fact that
the United States remains the world's preeminent maritime
power, and I, of course, agree with you. You do say that the
2019 budget provides to fund 10 combat ships and 8 support
ships. What is the combat ships that you envision being funded,
the 10 combat ships?
Secretary Mattis. Yes, there will be two submarines; those
are Virginia class, Congresswoman; three Aegis destroyers--
these are the DDG-51s that you see often in Pearl Harbor and
out in the Pacific. There will be a littoral combat ship. There
is going to be two of the John Lewis-class replenishment
oilers. They are critical for keeping the fleet at sea, and not
having to come into port. In the event of hostilities, we don't
want them coming into ports, we want to keep them outside the
ports.
We have also got an expeditionary sea-based ship that is
funded that is a Lewis [B.] Puller class. And we have also got
the advance procurement for another Ford-class aircraft
carrier, and advance procurement for the Columbia class. These
are the replacement nuclear missile submarines.
Ms. Hanabusa. The reason I ask is for the period of time
that I have sat on this committee I have always felt that
somehow we have had a disconnect in the sense that, instead of
purchasing based on some kind of future needs, we almost set
our policy by acquisition.
In other words, what we buy then sort of sets what we are
going to do.
For the time I have been here, DDG-51s were supposed to
sort of be discontinued. The Zumwalt, the DDG-1000, was the
ultimate ship. Then, of course, the LCSs were preferred. Then
they kind of fell from the grace and now they are back again.
This is a--I am not quite sure how we make these kinds of
decisions.
Of course I don't want you to touch the Virginia class, for
obvious reasons, and that is, of course, Pearl Harbor. So you
keep on the Virginia class. I think those are great.
But it is something that bothers me in how we acquire,
especially with your statement today about the fact that we
want a more affordable Navy.
So I understand that we have to be affordable. That is why
we have Mr. Norquist here. But I want to be sure that we are
not sort of short-changing and defining what our future is
going to look like, because these ships are going to be around
for a very long time, and they are going to define how we
fight, General.
So please, can you explain to me how we come up with these
decisions, in what is the preferred and not preferred and back
to being preferred again?
Secretary Mattis. Congresswoman, you bring up very valid
points. We need to rationalize what we are doing, and yet we
are doing that at a time of dramatic change in information
technology, in certain data handling, in hypersonic weapons,
things that are going to fundamentally change the character of
the war that we might fight, or deter, if we are successful in
deterrence.
So innovation has now become something that we have got to
unleash in a much more focused way, and we have got to have
outputs from our innovative efforts that keep us from building
a ship that, 5 years later, you say, well, that class doesn't
look so good, after all.
So it is challenging. I don't think anyone set out to put
us on the track that you just explained, I think, very
accurately. But that is the situation that you and I confront
in our responsibilities, and I am going to have to come back
and convince you that we have now figured out what is the
requirement, based on the threat, and what can we afford to do
about it in a sustainable way.
And that is where we are going right now. I have got the
right people onboard, as of about January 5th, and we will get
this figured out. I can guarantee you that. But it is a very
dynamic world, and navies are at the cutting edge of this. And
so they take a lot of hits.
Ms. Hanabusa. Yes, Mr. Secretary, that is my point. I do
not want to hear again that we are battling today's war with
last--the last war's equipment. And then our men and women in
uniform are the ones that are in jeopardy. And I know I don't
need to tell either you or the general that, but I think we
need a great understanding of what we are doing before we
engage in all of this.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
The Chairman. Ms. McSally.
Ms. McSally. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks, gentlemen,
for your testimony and your service.
As you have all mentioned today, we just partnered with you
and the President in order to provide a desperately needed
funding boost for our troops to deal with the readiness crisis
and the erosion of our competitive edge.
But with less and less of our society serving in the
military and being veterans, there is a bit of a sometimes
civil-military disconnect, and we go back to our constituents
in translating this, and having them understand how critical
this is.
This testimony you have today is so important, and I really
hope that it breaks through the news cycle and the noise that
is often seen on TV when people are at the dinner table every
night.
I am going to take a little bit of a different approach, as
normal.
Secretary Mattis, you have a way with words. So could you,
in just the next little bit of time, not answer to me, but in
layman's terms to my constituents, the American people, about
what has happened with readiness and the erosion of our
capabilities, and why it is so important that we all are
partnering in order to give our troops everything they need?
And also, for those who have a patriotic urge, why it would
be important for them to join those ranks.
Secretary Mattis. Congresswoman, what happened over these
years was we were engaged in a form of warfare, irregular
warfare, that consumed much of our focus and--as it should
have--but perhaps distracted us from other things going on in
the world.
The result has been that we have got troops who are very,
very good at what they do, but they are not trained for higher-
end warfare to the degree that we want them trained for that.
We have got ships that have not received the maintenance they
needed, we have gone through a period when understandable hopes
for a lower level of expenditure for defense issues guided us.
And the end result of the war and of the rapid change in
the world and the changes especially among several countries
that have decided not to play by the international rules now
puts us in a position that almost every generation of Americans
have had to face, that if we are going to keep this experiment
alive that we call America, we are going to have to once again
fund our military at a higher level.
The--what we owe you is the reality of how we see it, and
we should be able to defend it. For example, readiness today
does not necessarily equate to readiness 5 years from now in a
time of rapid change. So we need to define the problems to a
very keen level of detail, and then bring to you the solutions.
And we will open it up; if someone has got a better idea, I am
wide open to it. But we can afford survival, we are not paying
an inordinate percent of our GDP right now, and I don't want to
pay one cent more than necessary.
But we must pay what is necessary. And if we do not, if we
do not do this, if we decide we are going to save money and
underfund the military and costs there, the cost of a war
basically is magnified many times beyond what the cost of peace
is, even as expensive as the bill I have brought you here
today.
Ms. McSally. Thank you, Secretary Mattis. Also, the
American people are not the only people listening. Our enemies,
the mullahs, the thugs, the dictators are all listening today,
listening to you to hear if they can identify some weaknesses
or vulnerabilities. So I also want to give you the opportunity
to speak to them, that if they were to choose to take us on, it
would be an awful mistake that would come at a high, high
price.
Secretary Mattis. Well, if that were to happen, if they
were to make that mistake, Congresswoman, they would regret it.
We would hit it with overwhelming force. And we would triumph.
That is not our intent. Our intent is that our diplomats be
engaged and we solve things the way rational nations should.
But we have readiness issues. They would not in any way
stop us from dominating. I think the chairman would probably be
good to make a few comments on this, ma'am.
General Dunford. The thing I would say to our adversaries,
Congresswoman McSally, is that they shouldn't confuse our
willingness in a democracy to speak about readiness challenges
as a sign of weakness.
Ms. McSally. Amen.
General Dunford. And as I mentioned in my opening
comments--and I speak with a high degree of confidence about
this--you know, we can protect the homeland and our way of life
today. We can meet our alliance commitments. And we have a
competitive advantage over any potential adversary out there
today.
The reason why we have this discussion and debate, and the
reason why it is so important is we are not only focused on
today, we are focused on tomorrow, as well. And because of the
last 15 or 16 years, both of wars in Iraq and Syria,
Afghanistan, as well as fiscal instability, the competitive
advantage that we have historically had has eroded. It is not
gone.
Ms. McSally. Right.
General Dunford. It has eroded. And the thing, speaking to
both constituencies, both the folks back home, as well as our
adversaries, we never want to send our men and women in a fair
fight.
Ms. McSally. Right.
General Dunford. And the whole dialogue that we are having
today, it is all about making sure when we send our men and
women in harm's way, we do so and we make sure they are not in
a fair fight.
Ms. McSally. Thank you, gentlemen.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Ms. Rosen.
Ms. Rosen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for being
here, and for your thoughtful testimony today.
I just want to bring up that last week we lost one of our
own at Nellis Air Force Base, a Thunderbird pilot, Major
Stephen Del Bagno. It was a great loss to us, and I really
appreciate that you are going to look into these accidents with
our aircraft that have been going on. We know what it is
related to, and I don't want to belabor that, but I want to
honor his service and thank you for looking into that.
What I really want to talk about is a little bit Nevada-
specific--actually, the whole world specific. We have a lot of
challenges ahead of us: people that are our adversaries, with
the President's tweets about sending bombs, with Russia and
North Korea having nuclear weapons.
Can you tell me--you put out a Nuclear Posture Review, so
can you tell me--you said geopolitical challenges may dictate
how we are going to respond or have a possible return to
nuclear testing? We have a Nevada test site. Can you tell me,
is there any circumstance at all that we would return to above-
ground nuclear testing within the United States of America?
Secretary Mattis. I cannot imagine one, Congresswoman.
Ms. Rosen. Thank you. People in my State have been worried
about that.
I want to talk a little bit about below-ground testing. We
do continue to do that. So can you tell me what kind of nuclear
explosive testing that we may consider doing in the future? And
how do we make sure these detonations are safe?
Secretary Mattis. Congresswoman, there I would like to come
back to you in private.
Ms. Rosen. Okay.
Secretary Mattis. I will tell you that we--our primary
effort right now is to use very advanced computer modeling that
removes the need to do much of what you--if you read the
history books----
Ms. Rosen. Right.
Secretary Mattis [continuing]. We did back in the 1950s and
1960s. But in terms of any below-ground, let me come back to
you in a classified form----
Ms. Rosen. Thank you.
Secretary Mattis [continuing]. For you. That should not be
misinterpreted by anyone that that means that this is in the
offing. That is not what I am indicating.
Ms. Rosen. No, thank you, I appreciate it. It is a great
concern to many Nevadans.
And so I also want to turn, then, to our influence
operations and cyber activities. We talked a little bit about
DOD over artificial intelligence. But really, as these
traditional methods of warfare--especially cyberattacks--they
don't fall under traditional means. So really, who is going to
be the lead in this area, and how do we respond to attacks in
every area? Everyone seems like they are going out, they are
doing their thing, but where do we have that confluence?
Secretary Mattis. Inside the Department of Defense,
Congresswoman, we have U.S. Cyber Command, and they are
responsible for defending our networks and attacking the
adversary's. We also have NSA and Cyber Command, National
Security [Agency] and Cyber Command, connected.
We are going to--per the congressional guidance, we are
going to separate those two, but keep them in a synergistic
role together. And we need to figure this out. And once we have
it figured out, we will come back to the Congress. But there
will be most of America's offense and defensive capability.
Ms. Rosen. And then, speaking again to security challenges,
when you do do this and we move to the cloud, what are the
cloud's implications--if we do public and private partnerships,
if we move to the cloud, who is going to own some of that
proprietary information? What if some of those private
businesses go out of business?
Who holds the keys to the kingdom on the private side, and
as it relates to our military readiness in the future, as
things do move forward and we may drop certain technologies in
favor of others?
Secretary Mattis. The movement to the cloud, Congresswoman,
is to enhance the availability of the information among us.
Right now we have to also quickly advance our security.
We have over 400 different basic data centers that we have
to protect. And we have watched very closely what CIA got, in
terms of security and service from their movement to the cloud.
It is a fair and open competition for anyone who wants to--it
is only 2 years. If you have read something about 10 years in
the press, that is not the case at all. So it will be a full
and open competition, not sole source, by the way, to make
certain we don't fall into just one.
And I am very confident that we can get a 2-year horizon on
the--on anyone bidding on it to know with certainty they will
not be folding. And we will just make certain that their
performance tells us where we go in the future.
We just know what we are doing right now has to change,
ma'am.
Ms. Rosen. Perfect. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Mr. Knight.
Mr. Knight. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I join with
Congresswoman Rosen in saying that our country mourns Major Del
Bagno. He came from my district, and we appreciate his service.
There are certain things that have been said, Mr.
Secretary. The speed of relevance, I think, is one of the
things that you used, and I appreciate it very much. It is how
quickly can we get a platform to our military is the most
important issue of defending a nation.
So I believe the audit is very important. But taking that
information and taking it to the next level might mean saving
money, but it also might be identifying how we are getting that
platform to the military faster.
Do you believe that the audit is going to prove out not
only that maybe we are--we can have some savings, but we can
also have some new issues that we can get those platforms
moving faster?
Secretary Mattis. Congressman, I have no doubt that the
data we get from the audit is going to be acted on, whether it
be by the Secretary of the Navy, the Chief of Staff of the
Army, CAPE [Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation], the ones
who really look and give me an independent view of the progress
or lack of progress of certain high-cost weapons systems, this
sort of thing. The data itself is going to open opportunities.
It is data that has never been displayed before.
And you will also be able to review it, so it is good in
the sense of oversight by the Congress. You will have either
more confidence or more questions for me when I come up here
next, sir.
Mr. Knight. And in the NDAA 2017 we did a reorg
[reorganization] of acquisition, technology, and logistics. And
in that we have developmental test and evaluation. We want to
make sure that developmental test and evaluation is at the
forefront of what we are doing today, especially when it comes
to aerospace and things that we are trying to move to the next
technology step.
I would like to take this in the realm of hypersonics.
Hypersonics, we have been doing in America for 65 years, but we
have been taking great leaps in advancements over the last
decade or so. And I think other countries have, too. Having an
open society, it is easy to steal information and data from us.
But that being said, hypersonics and developmental test and
evaluation is extremely important. If we can reach out and
touch the enemy before they can touch us, it is an advantage
that everyone wants to have.
So I would like to have your commitment, Mr. Secretary,
that developmental test and evaluation is going to stay at the
top of our kind of priority list when we are talking about
advancements of technology.
Secretary Mattis. Congressman, you are reading our mind in
DOD. Under Secretary for Research and Engineering Mike Griffin,
formerly NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration],
formerly Lincoln Lab. This is his number one priority. What we
have to do is get something that DT&E [Developmental Test and
Evaluation] can test and evaluate, and our goal is to put
something in the air, not have another study or something like
this.
So it is focused, it is going forward, it is our number one
priority of those innovative technologies, not to the exclusion
of artificial intelligence, certainly, which will probably
contribute, or machine learning, this sort of thing, but it is
number one on Mike Griffin's list of things to do, and we have
got the right man there by experience and force of personality
to take it forward.
Mr. Knight. Thank you, sir.
And General Dunford, the budget we have passed, I think the
number one concern is always our troops, from any standpoint.
But it is the perishable skills, also. It is the time in the
cockpit, it is the time of sailing, it is the time of doing
ground exercises with our Marines and our soldiers.
That, to me, is the part that this budget is now pushing
back on, and we are saying that we are going to advance those
perishable skills. Or maybe not advance, but increase the
amount of time that we have training. Is that a good
assessment?
General Dunford. It is, Congressman. And what this will do,
it will give us the resources necessary to train. It will
backfill the holes in equipment that would allow us to improve
the capabilities of individuals. But combined with the budget
is the Secretary's direction also to redo how we are allocating
forces to have more time at home station to make sure that
those high-end skills you discussed are actually developed.
Mr. Knight. Thank you very much, and I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. McEachin.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Mattis, as you know, discriminatory barriers have
historically prevented many patriotic Americans from serving in
our military. Whenever we have allowed new groups to serve or
serve in new ways, voices have been raised in protest.
In the years before President Truman integrated the
military, many argued that the armed services shouldn't be used
for ``social experiments,'' and raised fears about the effects
of such a change would have on readiness and cohesion. And we
have heard similar arguments more recently, arguments for
banning gay and lesbian Americans from serving openly, or for
keeping women out of combat roles.
In retrospect, I think history has shown that those
arguments are wrong. Time and time again, those who have fought
against discriminatory barriers have been vindicated, and the
military has benefitted from access to an even broader pool of
talented potential service members. Yet today we are hearing
the same kind of rhetoric regarding transgender people.
Mr. Secretary, I have read your memo to the President, and
I know it lays out a sincere professional judgment. I recognize
that you do not recommend a blanket policy, but the arguments I
hear in favor of the current ban are the same as the arguments
that were made in favor of clearly discriminatory policies in
the past.
In light of the historical evidence from racial integration
to repeal of ``Don't Ask, Don't Tell,'' to the participation of
women in combat roles, can you please explain why this time is
different? Why are transgender people different?
Secretary Mattis. Congressman, as you know, these cases are
under litigation, so there is a limit to how much I can say.
That is why I hung on the web what the policy recommendation
was to the Commander in Chief.
I would just tell you that that report was endorsed by the
President as my best military advice for how we keep the
military focused on its lethality. We welcome those who meet
the high standards of the military. I think that without gender
dysphoria it means we are not making a special category of
people who medically perhaps would not have been allowed in
with any of the other--any other condition.
And I think right now the current policy remains in effect,
because it is under court order to.
So I will see where the--basically, where the courts come
out. But I don't want to say more than I have already put out
publicly to make very clear what data we used, so that they
knew there was some--that it was not what I would call standard
rhetoric in there. That was looked at very carefully.
Mr. McEachin. Well, Mr. Secretary, I have to note it is
just ironic to me that I note that your decision not to comment
on matters of the part of the judicial process stand in
complete contrast to your boss's habit of always commenting,
seemingly, on matters of--subject to the judicial process.
But let me ask you this, Mr. Secretary. If the President
had not suggested that there be a ban on transgender troops,
would you have ever initiated that memo in the first instance?
Secretary Mattis. Sir, when I came in I went in front of
the Senate, and they asked me where I stood on a number of
issues, and I said, ``Let me make it clear. I am here to solve
problems in the defense of the country. I don't come in with a
pre-formed agenda.''
In this case it was not the President who brought the
problem to my attention, it was service chiefs who asked me
questions, how do we deal, and they laid out a number of
issues. And I said, ``Well, what is the policy?'' And they did
not have a policy. So I said, ``Let's study it.''
And then that is what triggered what you eventually read
from me, sir. It became a recommendation to the President
because he asked for it, but it already--we were engaged on
studying this to figure out how to employ the policy I
inherited. And you can see where I ended up on that. I was
unable to answer those questions.
Mr. McEachin. Mr. Secretary, in the little bit of time that
we have remaining I am going to shift gears on you.
Last year's NDAA made it our national policy to achieve a
355-ship battle force as soon as practicable. I understand that
the annual long-range plan for construction of Navy vessels has
us reaching that goal some time in 2048. Yet I have read
statements of both news articles and HASC [House Armed Services
Committee] testimony that a 355-ship battle force is achievable
potentially as soon as the 2030s.
Can you please explain to me how the fiscal year 2019
budget request meets the ``as soon as practicable'' standard
when it comes to Navy ships?
Secretary Mattis. I can, Congressman. This is the balancing
act, the prioritization that you expect from us. I have got a
number of competing demands. I am absolutely supportive of
where we need the Navy to go.
But when you read 2048, Congressman, I think you and I have
to keep a certain sanguine view of the people that brought that
up and say, ``Okay, I understand what you are saying. That is
on the current trajectory.'' The Congress is the one that
raises armies and sustains navies. Part of this is the choice
of Congress and what level of funding do they wish to push
forward on this. Part of it is me bringing forward the absolute
requirement at any one point in time.
So it is not on automatic pilot, and both of us in our
responsibilities have an impact on where we go and how fast we
get there.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Dr. DesJarlais.
Dr. DesJarlais. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, you touched on this briefly a moment ago,
but I think it is worth revisiting, due to its importance.
When we spoke at this hearing last year on the topic of
hypersonic weapon development, you indicated that you were not
happy that--where we were or where we needed to be. And thanks
in large part to your efforts during your time as Secretary of
Defense, we have seen a major shift in focus and support
towards hypersonics.
My State of Tennessee has a vested interest in this issue,
with all the work that is done at Arnold Air Force Base in
Tullahoma. What concerns me, though, is the aging
infrastructure and significant investments required across the
range and test center enterprise.
And as you are aware, both class of hypersonic weapons
systems have significant and strenuous test capability
requirements, but because we minimally addressed the long-term
needs of hypersonic development in the past, places like
Arnold, Holloman, Edwards Air Force Base face enormous
challenges to maintaining and improving existing systems.
If we aren't prioritizing our test and evaluation
facilities, then in a sense we are really putting the cart
before the horse. And I think you agree and share these
concerns and sense of urgency. But what would you suggest? How
do we work together to address this problem and prioritize the
challenges faced by our testing centers?
Secretary Mattis. Yes, Congressman, you are hitting on what
I found was what we call the limiting factor, frankly. It
wasn't just our organization, it was that we were not set up to
embrace the required--have the facilities that would embrace
the whole challenge of hypersonics.
So in the budget we have addressed this, to a degree. But
we are going to have to have a complete program, support
program, for this. This is going to be a major effort.
Comptroller, do you have anything additional on it?
Mr. Norquist. Not at this time.
Secretary Mattis. All right, yes. So just rest assured,
sir, that we know where we want to go, and this is one of the
key building blocks to getting us there.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. One final question for both you and
the chairman.
Earlier this year Mr. Putin announced that Russia had
developed a series of new types of strategic offensive arms. Do
you agree that Russia should honor the terms of the treaty, and
agree to limit those new arms under New START [Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty]?
Secretary Mattis. Sir, I believe they should. However, I
will tell you that what he brought up in that video, if that is
the one you are referring to, Congressman, I studied it closely
and talked to people on my staff who know these issues very,
very well. Nothing that President Putin said that day in his, I
think, election hearing changed my strategic calculus one bit.
I wish him a good arms race with himself.
Dr. DesJarlais. Yes. General, did you have anything to add?
General Dunford. I see it the same way, Congressman.
Dr. DesJarlais. I just want to thank you all for your
service. We so appreciate you. And thanks for being here today.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Carbajal.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Secretary Mattis and General Dunford, this has already been
touched on, but I want to--I think it is so important that I
need to do the same.
When this country was started, debating the possibility of
African Americans, women, and lesbians and gays serving in the
military, the same doubts, the same reports and questions were
posed: How would it impact unit cohesion and effectiveness?
Would it negatively impact the morale of the military? The
military would lose its effectiveness. It would put our
readiness at risk, especially when this Nation started talking
about allowing women into the military and, most recently,
opening combat positions to service women. Discussions evolved
around the impacts of pregnancy and the rise in the number of
sexual assault and harassments due to so-called more women
serving.
This Nation's military is as powerful and effective today
because of the sacrifice and the service of all its members,
who proactively volunteer, something this President does not
know and even went to great lengths to not serve. It is
frustrating to me that we have not learned our lessons from the
past, and we are here again, discussing the same unwarranted
concerns and implementing discriminatory policies in the
military.
And as someone who has served in the Marine Corps, a
brother who has served in the Marine Corps, many nephews--half
of my nephews have served in the military--many of who have
gone to Afghanistan and Iraq, I find this extremely troubling
and upsetting.
Transgender individuals are already serving in the
military. And not once during any hearing did I hear military
leaders citing transgender service members as a threat to our
military readiness.
So Secretary Mattis and General Dunford, I hope our
military will focus on getting the most capable and qualified
individuals to defend our Nation, regardless of the race,
gender, and sexual orientation.
Now I will move on to my question.
Secretary Mattis and General Dunford, there are many
officials who believe diplomacy and negotiations are pointless,
and force is the only way forward. Looking back at the past two
decades and what the men and women of this Nation have had to
endure as a result of multiple bloody wars, what would be your
words of caution to those who are more willing to rush and
engage in regime change?
Secretary Mattis. I will just tell you, Congressman, that
in over 14 months in the most sensitive meetings in the White
House, at Foggy Bottom, State Department, Langley, and around
the world with our commanders and allies, I have never found
this thesis proposed, that negotiations and diplomacy are
pointless.
As you can see with what we have going on right now with
North Korea, where we have a summit meeting coming up, the
whole point all along was to drive this to a negotiated
resolution that I am--obviously, we can't see the future, but
we are all cautiously optimistic we may be on the right path
for the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula
In Syria we are driving toward the Geneva process, and that
again is the diplomatic outcome.
So we have not seen this sort of approach, and I would
reject it if I saw it.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you.
General Dunford.
General Dunford. Congressman, I guess just to reinforce the
point you are making, there is no challenge that I can think of
that we are dealing with right now that isn't--that doesn't
have the lead of the State Department, and it is not primarily
a diplomatic or an economic issue.
There is a military dimension to our challenge in
Afghanistan, there is a military dimension to our challenge in
Syria, Iraq, Libya. You can name the crises that we are dealing
with right now. But in no case, in no case was the Department
of Defense actually in the lead in a final--in achieving a
final political solution, which is the end state of all of
those endeavors.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you very much. I think some of the
tweets that come out of this administration sometimes speak to
a different tone and are contradictory to what you just stated
today. But really, really appreciate you. I think many of us in
this country are so grateful that both of you are--or two of
you of this administration are there. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, Secretary Mattis, thank you, and General
Dunford and Mr. Norquist, thank you all for being here.
Second, I noticed in your chart on the back the percent of
defense to GDP, and I couldn't help but notice there is 3.1
percent now. You go back to World War II and it was 35.5
percent. The Korean War, which--I am assuming the 1950 period--
was 11.3 percent, I think. But I think that underscores your
point about the cost of war is much more expensive than the
cost of a military that is capable being able to prevent war.
And I don't want to go back there. So I thank you for that
chart, Secretary Mattis. I think that is very important for
people to understand.
I want to also commend you and the President on the team
that you have assembled for our national defense. I think that
is so important. We start with you, we have got our Joint
Chiefs of Staff, all the members are--your secretaries of your
services, all three are very, very impressive, very well
knowledged, and very capable people. Our Deputy Secretary of
Defense, Shanahan, what a phenomenal guy who brings so much to
the table.
And so I just want to thank you and the President for
bringing a team of that level of talent that is solving our
Nation's problems.
Now I want to get into--this is for both you and Chairman
Dunford. We do not--and the American people certainly do not--
want to see U.S. troops deployed indefinitely in an open-ended
conflict in Syria. However, as the previous administration
learned with Iraq, a hasty withdrawal of U.S. military
personnel and security assistance can have very negative
consequences, especially if they are on a timeline that is
timeline-only driven.
I--unfortunately or fortunately, whatever the case may be--
was there in 2009 during the drawdown, and got to see firsthand
the effects as a battalion commander on the ground of going
from [Camp] Taji being 17,000 soldiers, sailors, airmen, and
Marines, and civilians, to going to probably 1,500 when I left,
and even lower.
So under what conditions would it be prudent for the U.S.
to withdraw or remove our forces from Syria? What are we using
as a catalyst to say we have achieved this objective, and this
is when it will happen?
Secretary Mattis. Basically, Congressman, we want to make
certain that ISIS has been driven to its knees, you know, that
they are no longer a concentrated threat with a geographic
ground that they can use as a safe haven. I think we are well
on the way there.
As you can see right now, we have, due to the Turkey
incursion, had a distracted partner force, and that has thrown
us off in the last couple of weeks. But we are on the right
track right now.
The second point would be what was brought up earlier, and
that is the diplomatic outcome, that we get Geneva underway.
That--the U.N. special envoy, Staffan de Mistura, has got that
responsibility. And so you have got the military security piece
on the ground, which we are achieving, and then we are going to
have to see the diplomats, the U.N. step up to address the
political outcome. But that is where I see us going, sir.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. And that is good to
hear, because it needs to be objective-driven, not time-driven.
And I really appreciate that. And I know you guys--like I said,
I commented on the team, because I know we will make the right
decision.
Doesn't the State Department fund its stabilization
activity--also alleviate strain on Syria's neighbors, like
Israel and Jordan, that must deal immediately with the
instability on the borders?
Secretary Mattis. Absolutely, sir.
Mr. Kelly. And then the final question I kind of just want
to talk to both of you about is kind of a question, but kind of
a comment.
Our State Partnership Programs with the National Guards,
the 50 National Guards, 54 States and territories that we have,
those things are extremely effective, if we use. And I just
encourage both General Dunford and you, Secretary Mattis, to do
all we can to make sure we help our State Department with using
those things. Sometimes they can do things that U.S. DOD or we,
as a nation, can't do. But those at State and individual
territories sometimes have a little more leverage to work with
State to get us to some objectives. And if you have a comment
on that--if you don't, I will yield back.
Secretary Mattis. I think just that we are aligned with
you. I think that, again, by, with, and through allies, plus
there is the person-to-person connection between, you know, the
guys from Tennessee and the guys from a country, or the guys
from Montana and the guys from, you know, wherever they are
serving. And when you start connecting like that, you get a
more enduring, deeper relationship. And that has a lot to do
with stability in the world and building trust, sir.
Mr. Kelly. Well, thank you, Mr. Secretary. And you take
care of my Mississippi Rifles, which are deploying to CENTCOM
[U.S. Central Command] next year.
Thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Suozzi.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you for your good and effective service.
Secretary Mattis, I admire you for so many reasons, one of
which is your candor. And I just want to bring up two issues
that are incongruous with your leadership, one of which was
brought up by Congresswoman Tsongas earlier today about the
Defense Manpower Data Center scrubbing data regarding troop
levels in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Syria. And you addressed that
earlier. I just want to bring up that. You know, it just
doesn't make any sense that we would not share that
information.
And I had written a letter to you back in January about the
special inspector general's report on Afghan reconstruction,
which is a report that has been issued for some time now. And
it always had information regarding population and district
control. And that information was originally listed as
classified. In response to my letter, I was told that the
decision to classify the data was an oversight by NATO Resolute
Support.
So I just want to point these two things out that--you
know, we are watching these things, and it doesn't make sense
in the context of your leadership.
I have been digging in on the issue of Pakistan and
Afghanistan. I read the book by Husain Haqqani about
Magnificent Delusions. I read Steven Coll's book recently. I
have been talking to Pakistani officials, certainly American
officials as well, as to what is going on. And Pakistan claims
that they have reduced the violence in their own country
dramatically over the past several years, that they are
starting to repopulate the ungoverned areas, and that they are
starting to build a border fence along their border with
Afghanistan, and that by 2022 they are going to have some
substantial piece of it done.
They are claiming that they need to see the same thing
happen from the other side, from the Afghani side, to try and
prevent this porous border from--people escaping from
Afghanistan, going into Pakistan, finding a safe harbor, and
then coming back into Afghanistan when they want to.
Is there any discussion about border security from the
Afghani side regarding this porous border? It is--I understand
from reading and talking to people and having visited
Afghanistan how difficult that is to do, and how expensive it
would be to do. But it seems like it is a legitimate concern
that if they are going to be doing it on the Pakistani side, we
need to figure out how the Afghanis can be doing it on the
Afghani side, as well.
General Dunford. Congressman, I think I can answer that
question. A few years ago we had a--what we call the trilateral
border standard operating procedure between Afghanistan and
Pakistan. And we, of course, served as the honest broker.
For the last couple years what we have been trying to do is
develop an effective bilateral border standard operating
procedure between Afghanistan and Pakistan. And you have been a
student of Pakistan, so you followed the fits and starts in
their relationship, even over the last 2 or 3 years.
So the short answer is both nations are looking at this
issue, but not yet effectively have they looked at it in a
bilateral way that allows them to make the compromises
necessary to actually put in place effective border control.
And I think you understand that the historical disagreement
just about where Pakistan begins and ends and where Afghanistan
begins and ends is at the root of the problem of establishing
its bilateral SOP [standard operating procedure].
There is a process that--the encouraging thing is there is
a process between senior leaders in Pakistan and Afghanistan,
both political leaders and military leaders, to work through
this issue. That didn't exist 18 or 24 months ago. So there has
been some progress in that regard and I can tell you--I think
you visited as well--this is one of the things that General
Nicholson certainly works very closely with both the Afghans
and the Pakistanis to move forward.
But again, the short answer is are there detailed plans
that will be reconciled between Afghanistan and Pakistan? No.
Is there a process in place right now to address the concerns
of both Pakistan and Afghanistan, and develop a way ahead? Yes.
Mr. Suozzi. So what can we do to facilitate that in the
context of the tensions that are existing between our country
and Pakistan right now?
General Dunford. Well, that is a great question, because,
you know, as you know, we have talked a lot about the military
dimension of problems here today, and at the end of the day
what is going to be necessary to have peace and stability in
Afghanistan is going to be to have a good relationship with
their neighbor, Pakistan.
And I think this issue is going to be--have to be addressed
in the context of reconciliation, and in the context of
developing an effective relationship between the two countries.
What can we do? That is what our State Department partners
have to do, and it certainly--that is something General
Nicholson is doing at the mil-to-mil relationship, as well. As
you know, the Pakistani Army plays an outsized role in
Pakistan.
Mr. Suozzi. Yes.
General Dunford. And so our military-to-military engagement
is very important to be a foundational element of our
diplomatic efforts.
Mr. Suozzi. So again, I want to thank you very much. I want
to continue to try and encourage the whole-of-government
approach that we hear about all the time. I see the military
has a very clear strategy in Afghanistan. I am concerned that
the rest of the whole-of-government is more like a list of
things that we do, as opposed to an overall strategy.
But I yield back my time. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Mr. Gallagher.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Norquist, I don't have a question for you. But since
the Marines are getting all the attention I just want to say we
appreciate you being here.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Gallagher. Mr. Secretary and General Dunford, the
President, as you know, has endorsed the need to revise the
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States [CFIUS] in
general, and particularly the FIRRMA [Foreign Investment Risk
Review Modernization Act] legislation in particular. Can you
offer any concrete examples of why this legislation and this
broader effort is important to the Department?
And, in other words, what are the long-term consequences if
China is allowed to continue to acquire our advanced
technologies through investment and joint ventures?
Secretary Mattis. Congressman, there are technologies we do
not want to--for defense, for security reasons--to see in
Chinese hands, American technologies, American businesses.
We have got to bring CFIUS up to date. I think you saw on
the 5G effort here some weeks ago that we moved swiftly, even
in advance of what the process requires, in order to make
certain that we did not naively watch a business linkup that
was not in our best interest. But that was a one-shot effort.
We need to look at the entire penetration of our society and
what we need to protect, and CFIUS is a key part of this.
Every democratic nation right now, by the way, that we deal
with, from Germany to Australia, from Canada to the United
Kingdom, they are all working this issue. And so this is not
unique to us, but it is certainly one of our responsibilities.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you. And Australia in particular has
been at the leading edge, in terms of trying to figure out how
to deal with this level of influence.
And I don't know, Mr. Chairman, if you had anything to add
to that.
General Dunford. The only thing I would say, Congressman, I
mean, you zero in on--I would just say if someone asked me what
are our competitive advantages, first and foremost, of course,
is the quality of our people. But second is the technological
edge that we have historically enjoyed over the past 20 or 30
years.
And this is nothing more and nothing less than putting at
risk our ability to remain a technological edge over our
potential adversaries. And the lifting of intellectual property
in the manner in which China is doing that is actually
undermining our ability to maintain a technological competitive
advantage.
Secretary Mattis. We are going to have to improve on the
investment risk review process. That would be the specific area
where the Congress could take some steps, and we would be happy
to work with you alongside Commerce Department and Treasury
Department in order to come up with the specific things we need
to do to protect what we absolutely must hold on to.
Mr. Gallagher. I appreciate that. In a related question,
Mr. Secretary, should DOD permit equipment manufactured and
maintained by companies linked to the Chinese military and
intelligence services, like Huawei or ZTE, to be part of its
supply chain?
Secretary Mattis. I do not think that is wise.
Mr. Gallagher. And in particular, should it be servicing
key military installations in the United States or abroad,
companies like that?
Secretary Mattis. No.
Mr. Gallagher. And are you comfortable with the--that the
Department has the tools it needs to deal with the so-called
white labeling problem, whereby a company like Huawei sells its
equipment to a third party who simply rebrands it?
Secretary Mattis. I think this is an area of needed
attention to include saying we will not deal with white labels.
We need to have--we need to know who we are buying from,
Congressman.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you.
And Mr. Chairman, I don't know if you have any similar
concerns related to companies like Huawei or ZTE being part of
a military supply chain.
General Dunford. I have the same concerns, both here and
abroad.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you. And quickly, with what remains of
my time, we have seen multiple instances in the past year where
the services have sought to be more guarded in their
transparency and accessibility to the media, even at the
unclassified level, particularly in guidance issued by the Navy
and Air Force leadership.
Now, as someone who is new to politics and often spends a
lot of time dealing with the media, part of that is
understandable. But I think transparency is needed now, more
than ever. And I just was wondering, Mr. Secretary, is this
media engagement posture downstream of guidance that was given
to DOD at large issued by you or your staff?
Secretary Mattis. That was issued by me. However, I said I
want more engagement with the media. I want you to give your
name. I don't want to read that somebody speaking on the
condition of anonymity because they weren't authorized to
speak. I have yet to tell anyone they are not authorized to
speak. So if they are not willing to say they know about the
issue and give their name, that would concern me. If they are
giving background, they should just be a defense official
giving background information authorized to give it.
What I don't want is pre-decisional information or
classified information or any information about upcoming
military movements or operations, which is the normal ``loose
lips sink ships'' kind of restriction. Pre-decisional, we do
not close the President's decision-making maneuver space by
saying things before the President has made a decision. But
otherwise, I want more engagement with the military.
And I don't want to see a--an increase opaqueness about
what we are doing. We are already remote enough from the
American people by our size and by our continued focus
overseas. We need to be more engaged here at home.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you. My time has expired.
The Chairman. Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to Secretary
Mattis and General Dunford, thank you for your extraordinary
service. I wanted to just associate myself very briefly with my
colleagues who have made supportive comments regarding our
transgender troops. I think the way we handle this issue
certainly reflects our values, and it is an important one.
I also wanted to just ask you for a moment about the
authorization for the use of military force, or AUMF. As you
know, the Armed Services Committee, unlike what most people
think, doesn't take up this matter. It really aligns with
Foreign Affairs. But to the extent that it would be helpful or
hurtful for that dialogue, that debate to take place, could you
respond in some ways?
Perhaps you are agnostic to it, but on the other hand I am
wondering where you would err on the side of trying to move
forward with that.
I think the concern is really around what kind of a
comprehensive response we would have. It is not just that we
would strike at this horrible time of attacks on the people,
but where are we going with that, and what kind of language in
an AUMF might be helpful to making certain that we are moving
in a direction that perhaps doesn't repeat some of our mistakes
of the past.
Secretary Mattis. Congresswoman, I believe that what we
have right now in terms of AUMF is sufficient legal authority.
Now, why do I say that? Because I can show you where al-
Qaida that becomes al-Qaida in Iraq that becomes ISIS--I can
show a continued thread all the way through. So, when you are
up against an adversary, like we see with al-Nusra--al-Qaida in
Syria that has changed its name yet again--we are up against
groups that change their names very, very rapidly.
So as we look at our legal structures, they have got to
adapt to the reality of that enemy, in terms of associated
movements. Now I have no reservations about reporting to you.
We just found another one that we have got to go after, you
know, the folks found they are ready to attack us, an ally, our
embassy, whatever. So we would have to make certain that
timelines were not addressed, other than in reporting
requirements, and whatever you say on that we would be right
back in here on time saying number of troops, operations,
scope, and concept.
I think geography, you would have to be very careful,
because this adversary, as you know, uses every border because
they think we respect the border and so they can get over the
border and continue what they are doing. We cannot have an AUMF
that would not take that into account, something which I--is
one of the reasons we look at AUMF 2001 and 2003 as being
sufficient.
We also don't want to go for a new one and then find all of
our detainee authority has now dissipated, we have got to start
over in courts of law to try and protect ourselves from people
that we have in our custody today.
And so, if you keep the association, if you watch the
timelines and say we are not going to put--you know, you have
the power of the purse every year, so you really have the
timeline authority now. And if we keep the geography, the
borderlines, from inhibiting our operations and yet you oversee
us so you are comfortable with what we are doing, then I think
that is what we are looking for.
But the spirit of Congress saying you are with us, would be
very helpful. We think we have that right now with AUMFs. I
understand and respect those who think that they are not
sufficient.
Mrs. Davis. General Dunford.
General Dunford. You know, Congresswoman, I think I could
only reinforce what the Secretary said. As I sit here thinking
about the threat, and we are dealing with threats that are
transregional threats, they don't--as the Secretary identified,
they don't respect borders. And the time that some of these
conflicts take is not predictable.
And so what I would, I guess, ask for, regardless of the
specific form, is I think there is three things that is--from a
military perspective, you want to have. One is the full-
throated support of the American people, you know, through the
Congress. You would want to have a framework that was flexible
enough to address the geographical and time issues that the
Secretary spoke about and that would allow you to actually be
effective, from a military perspective. Those are--that is the
criteria. And whatever form that takes politically I would
support. But you would have to deliver those four things to us.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you. I think I may have been hearing
something slightly different coming from you, but I think I
heard that on a positive way there is--could be something
possibly that at least is broad enough and yet specific enough,
I guess, those two things that are important.
And helpful? Not helpful? Helpful if it is done right? And
not so politicized. Is that--would sum up--okay, thank you.
Secretary Mattis. Yes.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Gaetz.
Mr. Gaetz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
your service.
While I fear it came at too high a price, I am very glad
that we are giving you the resources and the tools to go and
fight and win when necessary, and to ensure that you are
supporting our diplomatic efforts appropriately.
Chairman Dunford, you had made mention in your testimony
that you saw Iran's malign influence extending through the
Middle East, and I wanted to make sure that that wasn't an
exclusive reference, and that we weren't merely viewing Iran as
a regional hegemon, but as a potential global threat, as well.
General Dunford. No, Congressman. I think it is fair to say
that they are a potential global threat, and there is certainly
some evidence of Hezbollah, as an example, in South America.
But today we view that largely as a threat in the Middle East.
I mean where we see Iran's malign influence manifest most
is in places like Syria and places like Yemen and places like
Lebanon and Iraq.
Mr. Gaetz. Yes, and I am very interested in that nexus,
wherein the Hezbollah activities in Latin America could be
served to financing the operations that we are having to combat
in the CENTCOM AOR [area of responsibility].
Can you speak to this budget request's treatment of the
Iranian-backed Hezbollah threat in Latin America? Because in
prior briefings with other DOD officials there has been an
appropriate focus on the CENTCOM AOR and on what we see going
on on the Korean Peninsula, but I want to make sure that that
threat you have just identified is well resourced in our
strategy----
General Dunford. Sure. And Congressman, to the theme, one
of the themes that we have had today is that not all the
problems can be solved in a military dimension. And when I look
at transregional groups like Hezbollah, there is really three
things they need to survive. You know, they need the people,
the fighters; they need the resources; and then they have got a
narrative, the message. That is what allows extremists to
survive.
And so, we can deal with the physical manifestation of
Hezbollah in places like Syria or Yemen. We are not currently
dealing with them right now, except in the diplomatic, economic
space. But it is going to take a whole-of-government approach
to deal with an organization like Hezbollah, particularly that
operates transregionally.
Mr. Gaetz. How does this budget request that we are
evaluating at this hearing service that threat from the DOD
standpoint?
General Dunford. Yes, I don't--I can't--I will get back to
you, Congressman, and see if there is a specific way to do
that, other than the fact that we are increasing our overall
capabilities in the U.S. military to deal with whatever threat
we have to deal with.
Mr. Gaetz. Yes, and I am most interested in determining
whether or not we are engaged in an adequate train-and-equip
mission, whether we are engaging in the right, you know, human
activities from a DOD standpoint, because it is a difficult
environment.
So, Secretary Mattis----
General Dunford. Okay, I better understand your question. I
would say right now that supporting the independence and
sovereignty of Iraq is one way to deal with malign influence
in--Iranian malign influence in the region. Our support for the
Lebanese Armed Forces is another way we deal with Iranian
malign influence in the region----
Mr. Gaetz. I speak specifically to the SOUTHCOM AOR,
dealing with the threat there.
General Dunford. Yes----
Mr. Gaetz. So that is something we certainly can work on.
And I am eager to see how the enhanced resources will be able
to be directed to that threat that we face here, in our
backyard.
Secretary Mattis, I fear that when we look 50 years out we
will not win wars with our near-peer adversaries based on our
airframes alone, that we will require the most technically
capable munitions and missiles and bombs in the world to be
able to win. Can you speak to this budget request's treatment
of our research and development assets and our goals to ensure
that we are getting a good bang for the buck, but that we also
have a diverse research and development mission underway?
Secretary Mattis. Right. Up at Picatinny Arsenal and
various other locations we are looking at advanced munitions,
everything from rifle bullets to bombs to precision missiles.
We have a newly energized, innovative effort, as you know,
because we have received more money for innovation. I forget
the specific addition, but it is significant, I will tell you.
And in there is the necessity for identifying those kind of
weapons, and not just hypersonics now, but the kind that allow
us to go to the next level.
Where will you find them? One of the primary efforts right
now is in missile defense, for example. How do we take out
missiles from the air, and do it a lot more cheaply than very
expensive interceptor kill vehicles? We have got to find a
cheaper way to do this against a growing threat. We don't want
to break the budget all on missile defense, for example. So
that would be one.
We also have a number of naval weapons, from directed
energy and others that we are putting money into, so that those
are at the cutting edge and we are in the lead on those weapons
systems if we have to employ them.
So we can give you a more detailed lay-down of the various
ordnance that we are looking at. Some of them are novel enough,
they are not high explosive, they are that different. But we
can give you a more wholesome readout, if you are interested in
that.
Mr. Gaetz. Yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank our witnesses for your testimony today, and
especially Secretary Mattis and General Dunford. Thank you for
your service to the Nation.
So we have this morning discussed the atrocities in Syria,
we have touched on the controversy surrounding our southern
border and the threats posed by North Korea at some point
during these hearings. But one recurring issue that really is
not defined by geographic location is malicious actors in
cyberspace.
Mr. Secretary or General Dunford, how should the Department
of Defense be imposing higher costs on our adversaries who
violate norms of state behavior using cyber means, particularly
when those actions don't rise to the level of armed conflict?
How does your budget request address the tradeoffs between
building capacity and capability to counter these threats, and
what metrics will we use to know if we get the balance right,
going forward?
Secretary Mattis. Congressman, this is a growing area. If
we look at it 10 years ago, we wouldn't even be having this
conversation. This is a dynamic threat that has grown.
We do have a 7 percent increase in the budget for our cyber
efforts, and you are aware that the Congress has directed us to
look at separating Cyber Command and NSA without losing the
synergy of those two organizations, as we expand not only the
defense of our DOD networks and the offense capability, but
also what we call DTN, defend the Nation, which is led by
Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen at DHS [Department of Homeland
Security]. But we at DOD have the bulk of the capability for
this.
So what we are doing about it is we are creating offensive
plans. I won't go into detail about them, but you can imagine
what they look like. We also are increasing our defenses
internally.
The challenge is when we go to the defend the Nation
effort, we are going to have to have agreements and authorities
on what DOD does inside our own country, because while we may
have a lot of the capability, generally speaking we have
concentrated, you know, obviously, outside the Nation. That has
been our responsibility.
So we have got to gather right now a cyber strategy in
support of DHS that is in Secretary Nielsen's hand, and she has
that available. That is only the first step, I might add. We
are going to have to refine it for this when she gets done
defining the problems we didn't address in what we submitted to
her. And we will keep working it forward on the DTN effort.
Internally, we will be going to the cloud. We have a fair
and open competition going on, and we have examined what CIA
achieved in terms of availability of data and using data, but
also security of their systems. And it is very impressive.
So those are just a couple of things we are doing right
now, sir.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. Well, I am going to be following
this very closely. I think it is important that we do impose
costs on those nations that are using cyber tools and, again,
doing things that don't rise to the level of armed conflict,
but we need to have a strong offense here to deter them, I
believe.
Secretary, the fiscal year 2019 budget request includes
more than--more RDT&E [research, development, test, and
evaluation] funding, particularly for prototyping. So I know we
touched on some of these this morning, but I will again raise
this.
So what advances can we expect to see from this increase in
prototyping, in terms of bringing technologies into the field
that leverage prior investments or recent commercial technical
advancements?
And how does the RDT&E portion of the fiscal year 2019
budget request reflect investments in technical advancements to
both enhance current military capabilities and also invest in
emerging ideas like quantum computing, robotics, and
hypersonics to build a foundation for future warfighting
capabilities?
Secretary Mattis. Right. Congressman, Secretary Carter, my
predecessor, set up DIUx [Defense Innovation Unit-Experimental]
out in Silicon Valley for a reason, and we have embraced it and
actually strengthened it.
We are looking to prioritize these various efforts due to
the Congress that broke our acquisition, technology, and
logistics undersecretariat into two parts. One is acquisition
and sustainment, the other is research and engineering. We have
brought in varsity-level players there, and defense test and
evaluation, and we are going to move things into production,
prototyping. We are not going to have more papers, we are going
to move on hypersonics, move on AI.
What do I mean by move? Joint program officers, not a bunch
of different organizations all feeling their way forward.
And you just listed in the list you gave me--just in the
question, you just listed exactly where we are going. And we
can give you a brief on this, sir, but I have got a varsity-
level player in--as the Under Secretary of Research and
Engineering with NASA background, DOD background, Lincoln Labs.
He has really got what he needs, in terms of experience, to
drive this forward, not for theory, not for experiments, but
putting something out for test and moving it into a capability.
Mr. Langevin. Well, we sure look forward to seeing the
results of that work. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Secretary Mattis. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Ms. Cheney.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, all
three of you, for being here today. I am proud that, as we meet
today, we have taken the first steps in providing the resources
necessary to begin the rebuild. I think that there are many of
us who were very frustrated and opposed a lot of the domestic
spending in the omnibus, but made the decision that our own
dysfunction here as an entity, as a Congress, shouldn't be--the
cost of that shouldn't be borne by our men and women in uniform
and their families. And so we will continue certainly to help
fight to make sure we get those resources necessary in the out-
years, as well.
Mr. Secretary, I have a Syria question for you. We lost
significant credibility and deterrence capability when we
failed to enforce the red line with respect to Assad's use of
chemical weapons in 2013. Could you talk about how we get that
back?
Secretary Mattis. Congresswoman Cheney, I think the first
point about red lines is you don't draw them unless you intend
to live up to them. And we don't always even have to draw them,
and we can speak with our actions. And you saw us do that just
slightly over a year ago, when the Syrian Government, with
either Russian complicity or incompetence, carried out a sarin
gas attack, and we took out 17 percent of their air force as a
caution to them that that was unwise.
I am not sure they have learned their lesson, but I think
in this case actions speak louder than words. There are times
to draw a red line, and there is times to leave some ambiguity
and speak with your actions. And I think that is what we are
doing right now to address the question you brought up.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. And I think,
obviously, the concern is that we won't be able to be an
effective deterrence against the future use of chemical
weapons, for example, if we fail to take action once again.
With respect to North Korea, we have seen historically,
time and time again, as we have discussed, the North Koreans
follow the same game plan, where they create a crisis, come to
the table, offer concessions, pocket benefits that we give
them, and then continue down the path of developing their
weapons.
I saw on both Chairman Dunford and Secretary Mattis's
testimony, I think, the phrase ``cautious optimism'' about
where we are.
I wonder, Secretary Mattis, first, if you could talk about
how we are going to guard against a situation where the North
Koreans do exactly that again.
Secretary Mattis. Right. As you know, Congresswoman, right
now or today nominee Pompeo is going through his hearing for
confirmation over on the Senate side. And I will tell you that
in talking with him, he has studied all those past occasions of
negotiation failed, of documents signed and then not carried
through. And I think we have someone who will, with the consent
of the Senate, be in position to guide us in a very mature way
to not walk into the same trap again.
Ms. Cheney. And then, Chairman Dunford, could you address
the issue of the notion that there is significant risk
involved, as we have also discussed, as you have testified
before, with the potential for having to take military action
on the Korean Peninsula?
I am concerned that we have not seen the same level of
focus and attention and reporting, frankly, about the risk
involved in a nuclear-armed North Korea, and the risk involved
with--you know, even if we creep into a policy of deterrence
here, instead of complete and verifiable elimination of their
nuclear capability, would you please address the risks of a
nuclear-armed North Korea?
General Dunford. Sure, Congresswoman Cheney. I think, first
and foremost, I just want to add a point to the earlier
question, which is nothing has changed in the military
dimension of the diplomatic and economic pressure campaign. So
one of the lessons in the past, I think, we have made
adjustments on our military posture where we have changed
things that we were doing. We have made no changes in that
regard.
And with regard to a nuclear North Korea, I think there is
two issues. There is a capability piece and then there is a
capacity piece. And at some point the capabilities that can be
developed can overcome our defenses, or the numbers of missiles
that North Korea can overcome our defenses.
So today I think I can say with confidence that we can
defend against the capability that North Korea has today, the
specific capabilities, and the numbers of missiles that they
can field that can reach the United States. We could never deal
with--we could never create a defense against a growing serial
production missile capability by the North Koreans. So the
North Koreans would be able to hold us at risk, were they to go
into serial production with the numbers of missiles that would
exceed our ability to defend.
And again, the equation can never be you can never afford
to defend your way out of something that--if people are serious
about building offensive capability.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you. I have additional questions, but
will have to--I have to yield back. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Brown.
Mr. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Gentlemen, you have
answered questions that have taken us around the world. I would
like to come back home regarding the National Guard deployment
to our southern border at the direction of the President.
In 2012 there was a GAO [U.S. Government Accountability
Office] report, and this report was conducted at the direction
of Congress. And I think it was motivated by--in large part, by
the number of National Guard deployments by various
administrations, but more recently at that time by President
Bush's administration's decision to deploy, I think, 4,000 to
6,000 guardsmen for almost 2 years at the cost of close to $2
billion.
And the GAO report found that--and they were concerned with
a lack of a comprehensive, long-term strategy for the southern
border. In fact--and I will read--in the report it said, ``DOD
officials expressed concerns about the absence of a
comprehensive strategy for southwest border security, and the
resulting challenges to identify and plan a DOD role. DHS
officials expressed concerns that DOD's border assistance is ad
hoc, and that DOD has other operational requirements.''
And in light of the President's public comment, where he
suggested that the National Guard would be deployed until such
time that a wall is built, I have concerns, and could you
please address what comprehensive, long-term strategy is either
present or in development to frame the National Guard's
involvement on the southern border?
Secretary Mattis. Congressman, I read that 2012 report a
little over a year ago, when I was getting ready for the job
here, and took it on board as I thought my way through what has
come up more recently.
I think the priority that President Trump has placed on the
southern border and Secretary Nielsen's--what she has put
together for a comprehensive plan is sound. Now, I have not
read all of it, I have read enough of it to know what I needed
to do to put these 4,000--up to 4,000 down there until the
first of October in a non-law-enforcement, no contact with the
migrants, position to support DHS. They are under the
Governor's command and control.
Mr. Brown. If I could just jump in, though, Mr. Secretary,
I mean, I am assuming that what you just said was probably what
was in place when President Obama and President Bush asked the
Guard--directed the Guard to go to the border. The GAO found
that there was not a comprehensive strategy.
So I guess my question is, is there a comprehensive
strategy that clearly defines the role of the DOD, the National
Guard in these operations, an operation that may be a very long
time in this scenario?
Secretary Mattis. What we have going on right now, sir, is
to back up the Department of Homeland Security, the Customs and
Border Patrol troops who are down--or Guards who are down are
not troops. The Guards who are down there, this is the time of
year when you will see generally an uptick. This is an
anticipatory backing up so that the Customs and Border Patrol
can put more troops in the field.
As far as the larger issue on the strategy, that is rightly
under Department of Homeland Security, and you would have to--
--
Mr. Brown. Well, I am going to--let me just jump back in
here, Mr. Secretary, because the GAO report looked at both the
DHS and DOD.
Secretary Mattis. Right.
Mr. Brown. DHS said it is ad hoc. DOD said, we are
concerned because there needs to be a comprehensive, long-term
strategy that outlines the role. This is a potential--a
deployment that may potentially last for years, given the
statement of the Commander in Chief that their presence may be
there until such time that a wall is built.
So again, I mean, you may not have time to fully answer the
question today, and I will follow up with a correspondence to
your office, but I would like to have a little bit more detail
about a comprehensive, long-term strategy for a DOD role to
support DHS. Because I assume that you do that in partnership
with the DHS, but they are not going to do it in a vacuum.
Secretary Mattis. Right. But right now, Congressman, this
is not a long-term deployment-- the President says if the wall
gets built, that is one thing. Does Secretary Nielsen--does she
need this reinforcement? That is a second point. It is to buy
time. It is under the defense support to civil authority's
authority, and we have limited it, both in numbers, and we have
limited it in location. She has given us priority areas,
sectors they are called, where they are working.
So this is a short-term--this is not a long-term strategy.
This is a buying-time effort.
Mr. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Chairman Mac Thornberry, for your
diligence covering the fiscal year 2019 National Defense
Authorization Act, and thank you for your extraordinary success
in rebuilding the American military.
The spectrum of our current world threats are becoming
increasingly challenging, from terrorism in Iraq, Syria,
Afghanistan, and Africa to the radicalism of Iran and North
Korea and the competition with Russia and China, our military
has more broader focus than ever before.
As the Readiness Subcommittee chair, I am particularly
grateful as a military dad who has had four sons serve in Iraq
under your leadership--and Egypt and Afghanistan--I appreciate
the challenges our Department of Defense faces, and I would
like to thank you both for your service and commitment to our
country as you manage all the key issues I have identified.
Additionally, as a veteran myself and a military parent, I
would like to thank all of you for your support of the budget
agreement that finally puts our military on the path to
addressing readiness shortfalls.
And for each of you, a--I am really very supportive of
President Trump's initiatives to provide funding for the
European Deterrence Initiative. I believe that this funding
goes a long way in deterring Putin's increasingly aggressive
activities in the region.
One concern I have is--with the EDI, is our ability to
transport troops and supporting resources across Europe. Are
there ongoing efforts within European Command to improve
mobility throughout the region?
As to infrastructure, and additionally as to border
crossings, do you share the concern that I have, if something
happens in Europe, that we may not be able to effectively
respond in time?
And is this a readiness concern? For each of you.
Secretary Mattis. It is a readiness concern for the U.S.
military, but for all of NATO's military. Right now you can
drive hazardous cargo from southern Italy all the way to
Finland faster than we can move some of our troops across some
of those borders, due to different bridge capacities,
authorities, legal restrictions, this sort of thing.
In one area that we have found we can work with the
European Union on security in Europe, they are working on what
is called military mobility across their borders. And that is
underway right now. It is called PESCO [Permanent Structured
Cooperation]. It is--the acronym for it. And NATO is working
closely with the European Union to remove the very obstacles
that are inhibiting our movement of forces.
Mr. Wilson. And General, did you have a--about the
infrastructure? What is the status of improving infrastructure?
General Dunford. Congressman, that is one of the three
elements of the EDI for this year, is infrastructure. It is
infrastructure, pre-position equipment, and exercises.
Mr. Wilson. Well, I want to thank both of you. And Mr.
Secretary, as the co-chairman of the European Union Caucus, I
am certainly going to relay your information immediately, and
thank them for their efforts to provide particularly expedited
border crossing.
And additionally for General Dunford, we have heard that
the force is strained, as services continue to do more with
less. What is your assessment of the current state of force?
What is the greatest strain on the joint force? And how is it
being mitigated? What is your assessment of the military risk?
General Dunford. Sure, Congressman. First, I will start
with the people. I think we are recruiting and retaining high-
quality people.
And then I will go to the operational tempo, which is
causing us to be away more than we would like. And we talked
about rebuilding some of our capabilities, so we need to do
that.
And then the third element that it--I would point out is
material readiness, which this budget really is designed to
address and build on the efforts of 2017 and 2018 to get after
some of those material shortfalls, readiness challenges that we
spoke about.
Mr. Wilson. And as--I am really grateful--recruiting
extraordinary people. I want to show you, as I previously
represented Parris Island. And to see the young people serving
there, it was just heartwarming. And now I continue to
represent Fort Jackson, where I--Secretary Mattis, you would be
so grateful to see these new recruits coming in, and how much
that means to our country.
And General, a final question, and that is could you
provide an unclassified characterization of the annual
Chairman's Risk Assessment to Congress, discuss the strategic
risk and military risk, and what is your assessment of each?
General Dunford. Congressman, I would like to do what I did
last year, is to come in in a closed session with all the
Members and outline the risk assessment.
We asked for your permission to delay it this year, and I
appreciate the opportunity to do that. And the reason is that I
finished it in January, but the Secretary wrote a new National
Defense Strategy, and so the risk assessment that I will come
back to you with in the fall is going to be specifically
benchmarked against the National Defense Strategy the Secretary
has published, as well as the revised National Military
Strategy.
Mr. Wilson. Well, thank you. And your service to our
country is reassuring. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Panetta.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, all three of you, thank you very much for your
time, for waiting out until you get to the last few
questioners. So thank you very much.
Secretary Mattis, I just wanted to direct your attention to
one of your quotes in last year's NDAA fiscal year 2018: ``It
is appropriate for the combatant commands to incorporate
drivers of instability that impact the security environment and
their areas into their planning.'' You also say, ``I agree that
the effects of a changing climate, such as increased maritime
access to the Arctic, rising sea levels, desertification, among
others impact our security situation.''
Next, Chairman Dunford, you then give a quote saying, ``It
is a question, once again, of being forward deployed, forward
engaged, and be in a position to respond to the kinds of
natural disasters that I think we see as a second or third-
order effect of climate change.''
Then subsequent to that there are a number of other
quotes--the one from Defense Secretary Gates, ODNI [Office of
the Director of National Intelligence], and so forth. And all
that leads up to the sense of Congress quote, which says that
it is a sense of Congress that ``climate change is a direct
threat to the national security of the United States and is
impacting stability in areas of the world, both where the
United States Armed Forces are operating today, and where
strategic implications for future conflict exist.''
Presidents Bush and Obama, in their National Defense
Strategies, recognized climate change as a threat to our
national security. But unfortunately, this National Defense
Strategy under President Trump did not.
A couple questions to you. One, do you agree that--with
that sense of Congress in last year's NDAA? Would you like to
see the same sense in this year's NDAA? And if so, why wasn't
it addressed in our National Defense Strategy?
Secretary Mattis. Well, I can take that one, Congressman. I
think that when you see us dealing by, with, and through
allies, you recognize the local nature of much of what happens
in the world that eventually impacts America.
So what we do is we go in and we sometimes call it ``take
three cups of tea.'' We start by listening when we go in. We
don't go in and start solving their problems. We want to go and
listen to what they have got going on. We look at security
issues to include the--what I would call the physical
environment. I mean that is part of it, and why are people
going hungry and turning to violent extremists as the only
solution, this sort of thing. And we have seen this--that very
thing happen.
So we do not sense that we are somehow, by going--by
talking about the root causes, that we are unable to deal with
the local conditions as we engage with each of these countries.
I wanted to trim it down and get everyone focused on three
things I think 5 to 7 years from now that are still going to be
focused on, and that is a lethal force so our adversaries take
note; by, with, and through allies, build more partnerships,
don't just take the traditional ones, build more; and then, of
course, the business practices.
That second one is all about dealing with the real world as
it exists, and standing with our allies. So I--if I would put
in all the root causes, I would have made it a pretty long
document, sir.
Mr. Panetta. General Dunford.
General Dunford. Congressman, my position, as I articulated
earlier, hasn't changed. And actually, the military role is
dealing with the effects, the outcome of natural disasters.
That is still something we have the capability to do, and we
use that, we use our support and humanitarian disaster relief
to foster those relationships that the Secretary just spoke
about.
Mr. Panetta. Great. And gentlemen, would you agree that we
should be addressing that in the upcoming NDAA, this issue,
with the same intent, same sense about climate change and how
it affects our national security?
Secretary Mattis. Sir, when we look at what the outcome is,
what we have to deal with, the origins of it, I think, are
largely issues that are dealt with through diplomacy.
We need to have foreign policy guided by diplomats and
buttressed, backed up, supported by militaries. And militaries
need to stay focused in their lane. That doesn't mean we can't
address these situations, the outcomes. But I think that the--
it is best addressed by the USAID, Agency for International
Development people, the State Department, the ones who actually
set our foreign policy there, so we are working for a purpose,
and that purpose is established by the President or the State
Department.
Mr. Panetta. Okay, thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Chairman Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much.
Gentlemen, we are proud of what you do. I was here for your
opening statements, and in the meantime I have gone to two
hearings, fixed three amendments, and did a fundraiser, and you
are still sitting here.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bishop. So obviously, your training in the military has
given you patience and stamina matched only by Chairman
Thornberry, as well. So thank you for that.
Look, I have a quick question. If this has already been
asked and answered, you can stop me at any time.
But in light of the National Defense Strategy, what is DOD
doing differently to counter the destabilizing activities of
Iran in that region?
Secretary Mattis. Congressman, we are looking at Iran very
holistically right now, and we are looking at the nuclear
weapons program. As you know, the JCPOA is being reviewed. We
are looking at their counter-maritime effort, where our 5th
Fleet, U.S. fleet, actually draws together nations from--
between 25 and 35 nations to do counter-mine exercises. So we
send a--it is not just a naval message, it is also a diplomatic
message that don't try this, nations from all around the world
are going to show up and sweep the mines if you try to do it.
We are working with our partners in the area to counter
their terrorist activities, and those go from Yemen and Syria,
their militia there in Lebanon, to Bahrain and the mischief
they are up to there.
We are also addressing their cyber efforts, working with
other partners in the region to make them more resistant. And
we are dealing with the missile program through foreign
military sales and integration of our allies in the region and
their ballistic missile defense capability.
Mr. Bishop. Close to that, I mean, one of the problems Iran
is doing is their illicit sales of advanced conventional
weapons to their partners. What are we doing specifically to
try and counter those illegal transfers?
Secretary Mattis. Right. You are absolutely right,
Congressman. And out here at Bolling Air Force Base--I invite
you all to come out and see it--is a display that is laying out
the debris and the evidence of the advanced weapons that Iran
is shipping out to other countries. They are a threat,
obviously, to Europe. They are a threat to Saudi Arabia, being
fired out of Yemen right now. They are a threat to Israel, they
are a threat to our forces in the area, and our partners.
So we are exposing this out here at Bolling. We have had
over 70 nations, ambassadors either to the United Nations or to
Washington, their defense attaches come out and look at it, and
we are going to continue to display everything that we can show
the world, as far as what kind of murderous intent they are up
to in that region.
Mr. Bishop. I appreciate those are great answers. One of
the things that you did very well is coming up with a coalition
to fight ISIS in both Syria and Iraq. Do we have that same
commitment, or do we--or why do we not have that same
commitment in trying to confront the Iranian destabilizing
efforts in the region?
Secretary Mattis. Congressman, I think over the years there
have been efforts to try to guide Iran back to a more
responsible stance. Those have been probably unavailing, if we
were to sum it up in one word.
But, as a result, with ISIS we were all focused on
destroying it. I think there was a lot of effort over the years
to see if Iran would want to cease being, at least in terms of
its leadership, a revolutionary cause and join the responsible
nations. From all indications, they have declined that option.
And so we are probably going to have to deal with them in
terms of diplomatic and economic and security issues that are
going to have to be addressed.
Mr. Bishop. Gentlemen, thank you. Thank you for your
service and for your answers. I appreciate it.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Mrs. Murphy.
Mrs. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It looks like I am
the last woman standing on this side. But thank you all for
being here today, and for your patience.
You know, as you know, the National Defense Strategy
concludes that the inter-state strategic competition is--not
terrorism--is the main, primary concern in the U.S.--in U.S.
national security. And while I agree the Department must focus
more on countering the growing threats from Russia and China, I
represent a district in Central Florida that was significantly
impacted by terrorism.
In June 2016, a gunman who swore allegiance to ISIS walked
into a Pulse nightclub in Orlando, and killed and wounded over
100 people. It was the deadliest terrorist attack in the United
States since September 11th. Unfortunately, the Pulse nightclub
shooting serves as a tragic reminder that the violence--that
violence motivated by ideological extremism is an enduring
threat to our security at home and abroad.
How do you think the Department should posture itself to
continue to be able to protect the homeland against imminent
threats from terrorism, while also addressing this transition
to an inter-state, strategic competition in the long term?
Secretary Mattis. You are hitting at the very heart of what
we had to balance as we changed to a dynamic threat envelope,
as we saw it expanding in the great power competition.
What we decided was we had to have a problem statement. The
problem statement is, Congresswoman, that we are going to have
to maintain an effective and safe nuclear deterrent so those
weapons are never used, a decisive conventional force that has
irregular warfare capability. And therein lies the capability
that goes to the heart of your concern. Because if we don't go
after this adversary overseas, if we give them safe havens,
allow them to recruit, allow them to raise funds, then we are
going to see it in your district and more here at home. We do
this by, with, and through allies.
For example, every week the chairman reports to me how many
American troops do we have in the Sahel, where the French have
4,000. We are supporting them as they help the African nations
fight Boko Haram and this sort of thing, which is an al-Qaida
affiliate.
We are going to continue with that sort of by, with, and
through our allies, whether it be in the Philippines or in
Afghanistan, around the world, as we keep this adversary off
balance. We recognize that violent extremists haven't suddenly
decided to become responsible actors and cease their murder.
Mrs. Murphy. Thank you. And, you know, to that end, when
you talk about by, with, and through, there is a huge component
of that that requires diplomacy and the role of diplomats. And
you just said, just a few questions back, that you believe
diplomats should handle diplomacy buttressed by military
capabilities.
You are often quoted having said that if you don't fund the
State Department more fully, then you will need to buy more
ammunition, ultimately. And the more that we put into the State
Department's diplomacy, hopefully the less we will have to put
into our military budget. And yet we have seen a significant
increase in defense funding at the same time as a dramatic
attrition in the State Department.
What policies do you think Congress should pursue to
prevent the dissipation of American soft power, as well as sort
of the erosion of this concept that diplomats can lead with a
military that supports when they are so sorely underfunded?
Secretary Mattis. Ma'am, I am probably the wrong person to
talk with about that, because I just don't have any visibility
or--I don't deal with that issue. I have got a pretty full
portfolio, as you understand.
However, I will tell you that my first stop in every
foreign country I go into is our ambassador, often--right now
it has been a charge d'affaires. And these foreign service
officers that I see out there, the ambassadors and the foreign
service officers of 10, 15, 20 years experience filling these
leadership positions, they are clearly at the top of their
game, they are varsity players. And I think right now we are
very well represented.
Now, that is not to address the details of your question. I
just don't feel confident to do so in an authoritative way.
Mrs. Murphy. Well, I agree with you, that the career civil
servants that are on the front lines in our embassies are very
qualified.
I think my concern a bit, too, is that some of the
leadership changes over at the State Department, as well as
resources. As you know----
Secretary Mattis. Yes.
Mrs. Murphy [continuing]. Resources enable organizations to
move forward. And so it--while you don't have purview over
that, certainly, as you have stated, it has a significant
impact on your mission and how you carry out your mission.
Let me just move to one other thing before I run out of
time. You know, earlier this year my colleagues and I were
really shocked to learn that Dr. Victor Cha was removed from
consideration as ambassador to South Korea after he shared his
objection to the bloody nose strategy against North Korea with
administration officials. I felt Dr. Cha was [an] extremely
qualified candidate for this position, and it is unimaginable
that the Trump administration removed Dr. Cha from
consideration because of his opposition to such a strike.
Secretary Mattis, earlier this year you identified North
Korea as an international threat and said, you know, ``Our
response to this threat remains diplomacy-led, backed up with
military options available to ensure that our diplomats are
understood to be speaking from a position of strength.''
As you know, the administration still hasn't appointed a
U.S. ambassador to South Korea, and we are over 16 months into
this Presidency. How does the lack of an ambassador to South
Korea complicate our bilateral security relationship with the
Republic of Korea [ROK], particularly at a time when war with
North Korea remains a dangerous possibility?
Secretary Mattis. I have not seen that yet, Congresswoman.
I have been to Korea, as you know, and our charge there seems
to have it--you know, he is connected to everyone, he has full
access--as you know, the ROK is a uniquely willing and capable
ally, too. So it is probably a lot to do with their willingness
to deal with him.
But I would tell you, too, that you see the summit that is
coming up now, based on the pressure campaign. As President
Moon of the Republic of Korea put it, he believes the pressure
campaign is what has brought North Korea to the table. And so
we are now seeing a degree of willingness to engage--again,
only cautious optimism, but the diplomacy is clearly in the
lead.
Mrs. Murphy. Great. Thank you, Secretary Mattis and Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Turner.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Secretary, in your opening comments you
stated about the importance of our allies. And I want to thank
you for your work to both assure our allies and to work closely
with our allies.
I chaired the Air and Land Subcommittee, and I also have
the--I am the head of the U.S. delegation to the NATO
Parliamentary Assembly. And I can tell you that your
leadership, as I am certain you are aware, makes a big
difference with respect to our allies, both your
professionalism, your history, your prior work.
I have two questions for you about the F-35, and with
respect to our allies. Last night I had dinner with the
Minister of Defense from the Netherlands at the--with the
ambassador. And they spoke, again, very highly of the time that
they had spent with you. Thank you for the attention that you--
with all the things that you have, the attention that you do
give our allies, because you do give them those assurances.
We spoke about the F-35 and our allied partners, our NATO
partners, more specifically, who are participating in that.
We shared the concern about--as we go to the next phase of
the F-35 on dual-capable aircraft, that we need our allies to
participate in the F-35 program fully, so that our NATO
mission, maintaining NATO as a nuclear mission, is realized.
We are all concerned about the Belgians' upcoming decision,
and I wanted you to speak for a moment about the importance of
our allied partners, especially on the dual-capable aircraft
side, because we don't want that mission to diminish at all.
And then, also, if you could speak about the issue with
Turkey and the Russian air missile defense system--of course
being another F-35 partner--I think we are all concerned about
what we should be doing, perhaps more, to try to diminish the
military cooperation between Turkey and Russia, and ensure that
the United States has a strong partnership with Turkey on a
military basis.
Secretary Mattis. Congressman, on the dual-capable aircraft
in Europe, NATO is a nuclear-armed military alliance, and that
means that NATO nations have got to be--they have to have in
their inventory dual-capable aircraft that are capable of
carrying the nuclear weapons, because the deterrent only works
if it can be employed. And hopefully never to be employed, but
the need is for dual-capable aircraft. The F-35 will be dual-
capable, hence why we support allowing our allies to buy that
superb aircraft.
So it is necessary. And I think, by and large, it is fully
embraced, this mission is fully embraced. The Nuclear Posture
Review, when I brought it forward at a Brussels ministerial,
Congressman, was fully accepted. I didn't run into any
pushback, I think partly because we took them onboard early and
allowed them to have reviews of it and give input for it,
knowing the leadership role the Americans have, but it is an
alliance of democratic partners.
On Turkey and Russia----
Mr. Turner. Mr. Secretary, before you get to Turkey,
I just--I do hope that you underscore with our allies the
importance of their participation in the F-35 to maintain that
dual-capable mission, because I think there may be some
misunderstanding as to the--their options of participating in
that mission, separate from the F-35. And I think we are--we
have it fairly clear that it both affects ours and their
participation.
Secretary Mattis. Well, thank you. And I am on my way to
Brussels in a month. I will make certain I do that in person. I
appreciate that.
On Turkey purchasing the Russian missile defense system,
Turkey is a NATO ally. Once we bring a system like that in, we
know right away it is incompatible with the rest of the NATO
defenses, by its very nature.
Furthermore, there are two NATO nations that provide
missile defense to Turkey now using NATO-approved systems, two
other nations.
So now what you are talking about doing is putting into the
same area incompatible missile defense systems, and this is
hardly something that is in NATO's best interest. So we do not
recommend it. We have been engaging with Turkey on this to
include providing them foreign military sales options that
would permit them to have NATO-compatible systems.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
The Chairman. Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for your
service and for your attendance today.
General Mattis, I look forward to receiving the two reports
that we called for last year in the NDAA on space reform.
But as you know, we--from our previous conversation, you
are acutely aware that we find ourselves now in a situation
where our two primary strategic competitors, Russia and China,
have become our peers in space, and our--and in fact,
challenging our superiority in that warfighting domain.
As you also know, this committee and this House called for
the establishment of a space corps to more aggressively pursue
that problem. And last month the President announced his
support for a space force.
Now my question. While we are still waiting on those
reports, do you have a viable alternative to the space force
the President has called for, and that this committee has
called for?
Secretary Mattis. So we have to define this problem, not
just the space focus of a force, but also from acquisition to
employment, from coordination to innovation for future, all
those things that go with it.
If a space force is the right thing to do, I have no
reservations about it. But I don't want to stand up in DOD,
which is an enormous bureaucracy and has many sub-
bureaucracies, another bureaucracy, as if that will be the
solution.
If it is the solution, then we will go there. But I believe
right now what we are looking at is a warfighting domain. And
when I look at the Pacific domain, or I look at the cyber
domain, I look for combatant commanders of those. I don't set
up a Pacific army in the sense--a new military force. It draws
from all the joint force.
So I am open on this. I will tell you I did not recognize
the degree of the problem when I went through confirmation. And
what you and your colleague have done have brought it to our
attention. It is a primary focus of the Deputy Secretary of
Defense, Pat Shanahan, my deputy, and we are going to solve
this to your satisfaction.
I don't know right now what all that solution looks like,
but we are not waiting, either. As we break out the pieces, we
are solving each one of them, and we will sort this out. It is
not an ideological opposition here, but when we have got an
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps now, putting them together
in the joint force is challenging and makes us the best in the
world, and we are good at it.
Do we want to set up another force--and we have to make
certain it solves the problem before we put out the money for
an entirely new military, from recruiting to training, and
everything else. Might be the right thing to do, though.
Mr. Rogers. Right. And I have--I share your confidence in
Deputy Secretary Shanahan. We think he is the right guy to
pursue this.
General Dunford, in your professional military judgment,
can you tell us--explain to us why you believe that we need a
lower-yield submarine launch ballistic missile when we already
have a lower-yield gravity bomb?
General Dunford. I can do that, Congressman. Deterrence
really is all about making sure the adversary knows that you
have a credible response that is going to impose a cost that is
greater than whatever they do. And while we might like to
reduce our nuclear capabilities, the fact is that Russia
specifically has grown those over time.
They have thousands of what we would call nonstrategic
nuclear weapons. They have a mind that, maybe if they used
those nonstrategic nuclear weapons, we are at the point where
we would have to either risk the homeland or we would concede
that they have escalated to the point where they achieved their
political objectives.
In my judgment, the Nuclear Posture Review and the
recommendation to have a low-yield--the option increases our
deterrence vis-a-vis Russia, because it convinces them that we
do have credible, capable responses. No matter what they do,
they are going to be met with a credible, capable response, and
there is no circumstances under which they will do something
where the cost that they will pay won't be greater than
whatever they hope to gain.
Mr. Rogers. Great. Well, General, we also continue to hear
calls to de-alert our ICBMs [intercontinental ballistic
missiles] and give up our responsiveness of the nuclear forces.
Do you believe that would be a wise path for us to pursue?
General Dunford. I don't, Congressman. And that particular
issue--as you know, you follow it well--it has been looked at
in several posture reviews. In fact, the determination has been
made that it is actually more stabilizing to leave them on
alert so that that is where they are, so that if you--because
in a crisis, if you then alerted them, you would by definition
perhaps create unstable conditions.
Mr. Rogers. Great. Thank you both. Thank you all for your
service.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Banks.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
gentlemen, for being here today.
On August 21st of 2017 many of us championed and welcomed
this administration's change in strategy and focus to win in
Afghanistan and create a safe and secure Afghanistan.
General Dunford, last summer in your fiscal year 2018
posture testimony you stated, ``In Afghanistan fiscal year 2018
investments will reinforce improvements in the Afghan national
defense and security forces.'' Today you stated, ``We are
working toward a sustainable approach to stabilizing the Afghan
Government and denying terrorists sanctuary.''
General Votel recently testified before this committee in
February, and he assessed, ``The ANSF [Afghan National Security
Forces] does not have the ability to prevent the insurgency
from maintaining a rural presence, and occasionally threatening
a population center or critical ground lines of
communication.'' Supporting this, the latest SIGAR [Special
Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction] report stated
in the most recent assessment that the Afghan Government's
control of districts is lowest, while the insurgency's control
is the highest, since December of 2015.
General Dunford, we would expect to see the Afghan
Government's control increase, while the insurgencies' control
decrease. When do you see the ANSF turning the corner against
the insurgents and other terrorists?
General Dunford. Congressman, thanks for that question. I
was just in Afghanistan, I spent 5 days there about 3 weeks
ago. We visited all of our positions and spent time with
General Nicholson to talk about, in detail, how he was
implementing a South Asia strategy, and specifically the
military dimension of the South Asia strategy that Secretary
Mattis directed.
A couple of challenges we have had. Number one, we have
suffered significant Afghan casualties. Number two, the
cooperation across the Afghan police, Afghan Army, intelligence
organizations hasn't been quite what it has--what it needed to
be. And number three, they were short capabilities: aviation
capability, intelligence capability, surface fires capability.
What we have done, I believe, is taken a look exactly at
what the Afghans need to gain momentum and retain momentum
against the adversary. Our advisors are the right advisors.
They are carefully hand-selected, with previous combat
experience. So they are the right people to be providing
advice. They are at the right level.
You remember before they were up at the corps level, a
general officer level, and they now have the capability to go
down to the tactical level. That is significant for two
reasons. One is it enhances the leadership development of the
Afghan forces, but more importantly it helps deliver our fires
at the right time and the right place, and helps them to learn
how to deliver their fires at the right time and the right
place.
And the other thing I was encouraged about by my visit was
that the cross--what we call cross-pillar coordination--that is
the police, the army, and the security forces--many
demonstrations of that in January and February and March this
year. I just would tell you that we just now are about 6, 7
weeks into this new organizational construct, and I would
expect to see different results this summer.
And I will close, knowing that we are short of time, by
just saying this: We are not doing--you know, the people would
say we are just doing more of the same. I would argue that,
until 2013, we did the fighting. From 2013, when at a peak, we
had about 140,000 forces. We focused for the next 3 years on
decreasing our forces to the point we only had 8,000 forces in
2017.
This is going to be the first season where we have had a
fully resourced plan to support the Afghans in conducting
counterinsurgency operations inside of Afghanistan. By no means
is the military dimension of the problem sufficient to achieve
strategic success, but I do believe right now that the military
dimension--the problem has been adequately addressed.
I am confident that we have the right organizational
construct, we have the right people, and we have the right
capabilities in place to address the specific issues that we
identified in doing a failure analysis over the last few years.
We drew from those lessons learned the specific issues that had
to be addressed when we deployed the force for 2018.
Mr. Banks. Okay, thank you. With the less than a minute
that I have left, again, Secretary Mattis, many of us support
this administration's new approach. We have, since August 21st
of 2017. But we have heard far too little from the Pentagon
about the success of that strategy. The American people deserve
to know that we are turning the corner, we are making progress.
What can we do--what can you do to better inform the
American people that we are making progress in the months to
come to show them that we are doing everything that we can to
win in Afghanistan?
Secretary Mattis. Congressman, I register your point loud
and clear. We owe that kind of explanation to the American
people. I think what we need to do is deliver results, as well.
And as the results come with this new organization, now that we
have a strategy, not just to leave, but to actually win, and we
are at a position now to actually give the kind of progress
reports that you are looking for.
But it is a good point. I have not looked at it. Let me
look at it. Okay? And----
Mr. Banks. My----
Secretary Mattis. Thank you.
Mr. Banks [continuing]. Time has expired.
The Chairman. Mr. Hice.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, each of
you, for being here this afternoon, and for your service.
Secretary Mattis, in your written statement you said that
modernizing the Nation's nuclear deterrent delivery systems,
including our nuclear command and control, is the Department's
top priority.
And General Dunford, you similarly said that the nuclear
modernization is the highest priority mission of the joint
force, and there is no margin remaining in the modernization
schedule, and we must deliver these critical nuclear
modernization programs on the established timelines.
So just to elaborate a little bit, both of you, why do you
think the nuclear programs are the top priority?
Secretary Mattis. Congressman, these weapons, if they are
used, bring a tragedy beyond anyone's ability to explain it.
There is--we have got to maintain the prohibition on these
weapons. It is costly, it is a lot less costly than if there
was a slip into a nuclear war, sir.
Mr. Hice. Okay. General Dunford.
General Dunford. Congressman, as the Secretary has made
clear to us that deterring a nuclear war is job one inside the
Department of Defense, and to deter nuclear war we have to have
credible capabilities. The adversary has to know--again, back
to the--that we would respond in a way that would impose a cost
much greater than whatever they would do. If they struck us,
they would be met with overwhelming force.
We have had a successful deterrent framework in place to
deter nuclear war for decades. Unfortunately, we stopped making
investments in our nuclear enterprise back in the 1990s. We
should have started modernizing back then, in the late 1990s.
As we have seen, as much as we might like to emphasize
nuclear weapons, our adversaries have, in fact, modernized
nuclear weapons, and they have created a capable, modern
nuclear enterprise.
And with regard to the Russians, they have certainly opened
that up, and have a lot--large number of nonstrategic nuclear
weapons, as well as nuclear weapons.
So I think, at the end of the day, it does reflect a
relatively small percentage of the Department of Defense. When
you look at job one, deter nuclear weapons, the force that we
have and the command and control systems we have to have in
place have to be credible enough to make sure the adversary
knows that we do have the ability to respond and set the same
deterrent framework that has been in place for decades.
Mr. Hice. So I am assuming from that answer that you would
agree with General Hyten from STRATCOM [U.S. Strategic
Command], his statement that we need to go faster on our
nuclear modernization programs.
General Dunford. Absolutely. And I think that the good
thing is now we have the Nuclear Posture Review roadmap laid
out. In fact, just on one element of it, nuclear command and
control, I am responsible to come back to the Secretary very
soon on nuclear command and control to make recommendations how
we implement the modernization element of that.
And of course, as you know, in this year's budget, in 2019,
we have made investments across the entire triad as a result--
and it is all analytically based in that Nuclear Posture
Review.
Mr. Hice. General Mattis, you would agree with that, as
well?
Secretary Mattis. I do, sir, and I appreciate the 25
percent budget increase that Congress provided for--this would
all just be words, if you hadn't provided the resources. Thank
you.
Mr. Hice. Well taken. Let me ask my final question. Do--and
really, Secretary Mattis, this is for you. Do you think that
de-alerting our nuclear forces is a good idea?
Secretary Mattis. I cannot find any positive aspect of it,
sir. As you know, the weapons, the ICBMs are targeted into the
open waters. We have reduced any sense that they are on hair-
trigger alert, as well, because we don't have to use them or
lose them. It is not that sort of an issue.
What we want is a deterrent. In other words, someone who
wants to attack us would have to take them all out. That cannot
be done with 1 or 10 or even 100 nuclear weapons. And that
sobers anyone who thinks they are going to take us on.
So the ICBM force, the submarines, the bombers, it is the
right way to keep the deterrence intact.
Mr. Hice. So to ask a similar question a little different
way, are you worried that having parts of our nuclear forces on
alert is dangerous?
Secretary Mattis. No, sir.
Mr. Hice. Thank you very much, and I appreciate you all
being here, and I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Secretary, we have been joined by some
good citizens from the Amarillo, Texas, Chamber of Commerce,
whom I stood up about 45 minutes ago.
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. At least a couple of them are involved in
helping provide our nuclear deterrence. On behalf of them and
all of us, I want to thank you both for being here for 4 hours
and answering our questions, and for your service to the
country.
The hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:03 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================
A P P E N D I X
April 12, 2018
=======================================================================
=======================================================================
PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
April 12, 2018
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
April 12, 2018
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING
April 12, 2018
=======================================================================
QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. TURNER
Mr. Turner. You mentioned that you now recognize that when
considering space as a warfighting domain, we should also be looking at
it in the full spectrum of ``acquisition to employment, from
coordination to innovation for the future, and all the things that go
with it''. Given our immediate issues with great power competition
against Russia and China, do we have the luxury of waiting for the
DSD's final report in August or are there steps that Congress should be
taking prior to the report?
Secretary Mattis. I appreciate Congress's continued focus and
attention on the Department's approach to the space domain. I do not
believe that Congress needs to take any additional actions at this
time. The Deputy Secretary of Defense is fully engaged in his review of
the organizational and management structure of the national security
space components of the Department of Defense, as required by Section
1601(c) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018,
and will provide recommendations back to Congress by August 1, 2018.
While the Deputy's review is still underway, the Department is not
sitting still. The Department is acting on the guidance laid out in the
President's recent National Strategy for Space and the 2018 National
Defense Strategy to convert strategy into immediate, near-term, and
long-term action. The Department specifically is harmonizing its space
activities to ensure U.S. leadership, preeminence, and freedom of
action in space for decades to come. The Air Force is reorganizing its
Space and Missile Center in response to the Deputy's focus on
accelerating the speed of space acquisition. The Fiscal Year 2019
President's Budget request, which included approximately $13 billion
for Defense space programs, constitutes over a 9 percent increase above
last year's request. The President's Budget request also included more
than $65 billion across the Future Years Defense Plan, reflecting a 14
percent growth above the previous five-year planning period. Our words
and actions, backed by the increased funding requests, will amplify the
mission assurance of the Department's space-based capabilities against
the growing threats from our competitors and adversaries. It will also
leverage commercial innovation and our international partnerships to
accelerate development and deployment of new capabilities, strengthen
lethality and readiness of the total force, and enhance the nation's
overall deterrence and warfighting power.
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SPEIER
Ms. Speier. Media reports indicate that U.S. and North Korean
officials have discussed ``denuclearization'' in the buildup to a
summit between President Trump and Kim Jong Un. While this news is
encouraging, it's also unclear, because we hope ``denuclearization''
means that the North Koreans will give up their nuclear weapons in
exchange for the lifting of sanctions, while the North Koreans seem to
think ``denuclearization'' means they'd give up their weapons if we
abandoned our defense relationship with South Korea. I understand that
these details pertain to ongoing negotiations, but I think it's
important for this to be public: What does the President mean and
envision when he says denuclearization? Does he understand that his
definition and expectations likely diverge greatly from the North
Koreans'?
Secretary Mattis. Denuclearization means the complete, verifiable,
and irreversible abandonment by North Korea of its nuclear weapons
programs and existing nuclear and delivery programs.
Ms. Speier. Media reports indicate that U.S. and North Korean
officials have discussed ``denuclearization'' in the buildup to a
summit between President Trump and Kim Jong Un. While this news is
encouraging, it's also unclear, because we hope ``denuclearization''
means that the North Koreans will give up their nuclear weapons in
exchange for the lifting of sanctions, while the North Koreans seem to
think ``denuclearization'' means they'd give up their weapons if we
abandoned our defense relationship with South Korea. I understand that
these details pertain to ongoing negotiations, but I think it's
important for this to be public: What does the President mean and
envision when he says denuclearization? Does he understand that his
definition and expectations likely diverge greatly from the North
Koreans'?
General Dunford. I defer to the administration to characterize the
President's remarks.
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MRS. HARTZLER
Mrs. Hartzler. The FY18 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA)
Senate report included language directing the Department ``to ensure
that appropriate training on religious liberty is conducted at all
levels of command on the requirements of the law. . . .'' The specific
committee recommendation was ``to develop curriculum and implement
training concerning religious liberty in accordance with the law.'' Has
DOD, in conjunction with each of the services, developed ``a
comprehensive training program'' for commanders, chaplains, and judge
advocates? How has DOD implemented this recommendation? Please provide
an update on DOD's, and each of the branches, ``intentional strategy
for developing and implementing a comprehensive training program on
religious liberty issues for military leadership and commanders.''
Senator Ernst Religious Liberty Report Language FY18 S. 1519,
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 Bill: https://
www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-115s1519pcs/pdf/BILLS-115s1519pcs.pdf
Report: https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CRPT-115srpt125/pdf/CRPT-
115srpt125.pdf
Secretary Mattis. The training will assist the military services in
ensuring that the right to the free exercise of religion of all service
members, as well as the right to exercise no religion at all, is
protected. Each chaplain corps integrates religious freedom training
into its training for chaplains on the broader topics of facilitation
of religious ministry and religious accommodation for all faith groups.
This training occurs at the basic and advanced course at each of the
service chaplain schools. Judge advocates from each of the services
receive religious accommodation and expression training at their basic
courses, mid-career courses, and senior leader courses. Additionally,
commanders receive religious accommodation and expression training at
pre-command courses, and receive advice from their judge advocates and
chaplains throughout the course of their commands. Religious liberty
training in each of the services is continually refined to address the
free exercise in the context of military service.