- REAUTHORIZATION OF THE SBA'S CONTRACTING PROGRAMS
[Senate Hearing 116-284]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-284
REAUTHORIZATION OF THE SBA'S CONTRACTING PROGRAMS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
JUNE 12, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Small Business and
Entrepreneurship
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
38-342 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
----------
MARCO RUBIO, Florida, Chairman
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland, Ranking Member
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
JEANNE SHAHEEN, New Hampshire
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JONI ERNST, Iowa
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
CHRISTOPHER A. COONS, Delaware
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JOHN KENNEDY, Louisiana
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri
Michael A. Needham, Republican Staff Director
Sean Moore, Democratic Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Opening Statements
Page
Rubio, Hon. Marco, Chairman, a U.S. Senator from Florida.........
1
Cardin, Hon. Benjamin L., Ranking Member, a U.S. Senator from
Maryland.......................................................
3
Witnesses
Panel 1
Wong, Mr. Robb, Associate Administrator, Office of Government
Contracting and Business Development, U.S. Small Business
Administration, Washington, DC.................................
4
Shear, Mr. William, Director, Financial Markets and Community
Investment, U.S. Government Accountability Office, Washington,
DC.............................................................
11
Panel 2
Marino, Ms. Vicki, Founder and President, Kenmar General
Contracting, Key West, FL......................................
41
Dzirasa, Mr. Delali, Founder and President, Fearless Solutions,
Baltimore, MD..................................................
51
Sayles, Ms. Laurie, President and CEO, Civility Management
Solutions, Greenbelt, MD.......................................
68
Alphabetical Listing
Cardin, Hon. Benjamin L.
Opening statement............................................
3
COLSA Corporation
Letter dated June 17, 2019...................................
129
Dzirasa, Mr. Delali
Testimony....................................................
51
Prepared statement...........................................
53
Responses to questions submitted by Senator Hirono...........
123
Employee-owned Contractor Roundtable
Statement dated June 25, 2019................................
131
Fearless
Comments dated June 12, 2019.................................
136
Ho-Chunk, Inc.
Comments dated June 12, 2019.................................
141
Management Solutions, LLC
Letter dated June 25, 2019...................................
144
Marino, Ms. Vicki
Testimony....................................................
41
Prepared statement...........................................
43
Responses to questions submitted by Senator Hirono...........
120
Montgomery County Chamber of Commerce
Comments dated June 12, 2019.................................
145
Native American Contractor's Association
Testimony dated June 12, 2019................................
148
Rubio, Hon. Marco
Opening statement............................................
1
Sayles, Ms. Laurie
Testimony....................................................
68
Prepared statement...........................................
70
Responses to questions submitted by Senator Hirono...........
127
Shear, Mr. William
Testimony....................................................
11
Prepared statement...........................................
13
Responses to questions submitted by Senators Hirono, Kennedy,
and Duckworth..............................................
116
Wong, Mr. Robb
Testimony....................................................
4
Prepared statement...........................................
7
Responses to questions submitted by Chairman Rubio, Ranking
Member Cardin, and Senators Hirono, Kennedy, and Duckworth.
90
REAUTHORIZATION OF THE SBA'S CONTRACTING PROGRAMS
----------
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 12, 2019
United States Senate,
Committee on Small Business
and Entrepreneurship,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:15 p.m., in
Room 428A, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. Marco Rubio,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Rubio, Risch, Scott, Ernst, Young,
Romney, Hawley, Cardin, Cantwell, and Hirono.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARCO RUBIO, CHAIRMAN, A U.S. SENATOR
FROM FLORIDA
Chairman Rubio. Today's hearing on the Senate Committee on
Small Business and Entrepreneurship will come to order. Thank
you for your patience. We have six votes and we made a wise
decision, I believe, the Ranking Member and I, that it would be
better to just ride through the six than to try to do the back-
and-forth, and I think we probably saved time in the long run.
So I want to thank you for being here and for your patience.
For small businesses and entrepreneurs around the country,
securing a contract with the Federal Government can mean
instant growth in the marketplace. In 2018, the Federal
Government obligated $560 billion in contracts for goods,
services, research, and development. More than $100 billion of
that total went to small business contractors.
The Contracting Office at the SBA administers several
targeted programs, authorized by Congress, that seeks to help
entrepreneurs access these procurement opportunities with the
Federal Government, a Federal Government, by the way, which is
required to spend 23 percent of all Federal contracting dollars
with small businesses.
The four primary programs which are the focus of today's
hearing provide participants with access to compete within a
smaller pool of contracts that are set aside for small
businesses. The first, the Small Business and Capital Ownership
Development Program, which is commonly referred to as 8(a)
because of its location within the Small Business Act, also
provides small businesses with procurement training, technical
assistance, and the ability to be paired with a mentor
business.
In addition to the classic small businesses that
participate in this program, for up to nine years before they
graduate out, 8(a) also gives businesses that are communally
owned, by Alaska Native corporations, Native Hawaiian
organizations, Indian tribes, or community development
corporations the ability to participate in the program
indefinitely.
The Historically Underutilized Business Zone program, or
HUBZone, which works to stimulate economic development and
create jobs in the areas of the country that need it the most,
was created in 1997. The program uses set-aside contracts and a
price preference to bring opportunity to distressed inner
cities and rural communities where joblessness is often
rampant.
The Women-Owned Small Business Program and Service-Disabled
Veteran-Owned Small Business Program give two very important
small business groups the chance to compete for set-aside
contracts.
In addition to the government-wide goal of awarding 23
percent of contracts to small businesses, Congress has set
goals of 5 percent each for 8(a) and women-owned businesses,
and 3 percent for service-disabled veteran-owned small
businesses and HUBZone-certified businesses.
The Federal Government, by the way, could easily exceed
these goals if small businesses were given more guidance on the
difficult and complex world of Federal procurement, and if
agency contracting specialists were better informed on how to
make compliant set-aside and sole-source awards to small
businesses.
Unfortunately, as a result of fraud across the board in the
SBA programs, as reported from multiple government
accountability office investigations, businesses that do not
qualify, or should not be qualifying for these specific
category programs are often taking the contracts that are
intended for these groups.
For example, a 2018 audit by the Office of Inspector
General looked at 56 sole-source awards made to firms in the
Women-Owned Small Business Program and it found that 18
contracts, valued at $11.7 million, were awarded to firms that
had no documentation; 32 contracts, valued at $40.5 million,
were awarded to firms with incomplete documentation; and 50
contracts, valued at $52.2 million, were not awarded in
compliance with Federal regulations. The 2019 GAO study of this
program showed that the SBA still had not developed a process
to identify when ineligible awards were made under this
program.
Too many agency contracting officers also do not know how
to work with the contracting programs. A 2018 GAO study found
the SBA's procurement scorecard to assess agency compliance
with small business contracting was not effectively measuring
agency performance or promoting opportunities for small
businesses.
The facts are simple. The small businesses' contracting
goals are aspirational and unenforceable, so if we do not make
contracting with small businesses easy for Federal agencies it
is not going to happen. The SBA should be an ally for small
business contractors, not an additional and frustrating hurdle
to overcome. The disparities amongst the prime contracting
programs have made it difficult for small businesses to even
know where to start. Each program is an entirely different
system, even for the initial certification process, not to
mention the different forms of training, types of awards, award
amounts, price preferences that are made available to each
group.
In 2015, Congress passed a law requiring that the SBA set
up a certification process for the then self-certified Women-
Owned Small Business Program. Unfortunately, four years later,
the SBA has yet to comply with that law. In 2018, Congress
passed a law to measure a business revenue for five years,
instead of three, when determining if that business is small
and if they can compete for set-aside contracts. But the SBA
has frankly refused to comply with that law.
While the prime contracting programs are the most well-
known parts of the SBA Contracting Office, the subcontracting
program is increasingly important, as the government moves
towards consolidated purchasing and larger, multi-award
contracts.
It is important that we find ways for small businesses to
continue to work with the government, even as the government is
changing its purchasing habits to rightfully use taxpayer money
more efficiently. Innovations and unique solutions from small
businesses in the private sector help to support our soldiers,
protect our national security, enhance government operations,
and make the Federal bureaucracy more efficient.
To keep this contracting cycle going we must reduce fraud,
streamlining the Contracting Office at the SBA, and provide
more opportunities for small businesses to grow and prosper,
and I look forward to discussing ways to accomplish these goals
today.
With that I turn it over to you, the Ranking Member.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, RANKING MEMBER, A
U.S. SENATOR FROM MARYLAND
Senator Cardin. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman,
and I thank you for convening this hearing. This is our sixth
hearing on the reauthorization of the Small Business Act, and
today we will focus on the contracting programs with SBA that
help level the playing field for starkly disadvantaged business
owners. These programs include the 8(a) Business Development
Program, the Women-Owned Small Business Program, Service-
Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business Program, and the
Historically Underutilized Business Zones, HUBZones, program.
The motivation behind my commitment to ensuring a fair
Federal contracting process is twofold. First, the Federal
Government is the largest consumer of goods and services on the
planet, and Federal contracting is a vital part of the economy
in my home State of Maryland. In fact, Federal Government
contracting spending accounts for about 8 percent of Maryland's
annual GDP, and supports thousands of jobs that help the
families and bolster the middle class.
Second, Congress passed the Small Business Act to ensure
the preservation and expansion of opportunities for small
businesses because doing so is basic not only to the economic
well-being but the security of our country. Those words were
true 65 years ago when the law was passed and it is even more
true today.
The Small Business Act sets a goal for Federal Government
to spend 23 percent of all contracting dollars with small
businesses. While I am pleased that we are meeting this goal, I
am troubled that the data shows that we have a shrinking base
of contractors rather than an expanding base of contractors. A
recent report by Bloomberg Government found that the number of
Federal contractors working on unclassified, prime contracts is
at a 10-year low, despite a steady rise in government contract
spending over the same period.
This means that while contracts are getting bigger and
bigger, we are creating an insular club with fewer and fewer
businesses successfully competing for government contracts,
creating a less-competitive marketplace and reducing
opportunities in the process, and that is contrary to what
these set-asides and programs are all about, and that is
encouraging new small businesses that can bring innovation and
job growth to our economy and help our Nation.
This trend is being driven by the largest agency. Since
fiscal year 2009, the number of companies working on contracts
with the Department of Defense has declined by 24,000.
Similarly, the General Services Administration has seen an
8,000-company decline. The Department of Veterans Affairs and
Interior are both contracted with 13,600 fewer companies. These
are very troubling figures. Predictably, our Nation's small
businesses are bearing the brunt of this decline. According to
the same Bloomberg report, the Federal Government did business
with 32 percent fewer small vendors in fiscal year 2018 than it
did in fiscal year 2009. For comparison, the number of large
vendors fell by only 4 percent.
This trend is a cause of great concern in my home State of
Maryland, where the Federal Government spent $33 billion in
Federal contract dollars in fiscal year 2018, including $11
billion to small businesses. We want to create contracting
where small, innovative businesses are encouraged, not shut
out.
So today I am looking forward to speaking with our
witnesses from SBA and GAO about how we can improve
opportunities for our Nation's small businesses to contract
with the Federal Government. I am also looking forward to
hearing from small business owners here today about the support
they need from the Federal Government to remain competitive and
compete in the marketplace.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for joining us and I
look forward to hearing your testimony and innovative ideas for
improving the SBA contracting programs and the Federal
Government small business contracting procedures.
Chairman Rubio. All right. We will move to our first panel.
Robb Wong is the Associate Administrator of the Office of
Government Contracting and Business Development at the SBA, and
Mr. William Shear is the Director of Financial Markets and
Community Investment at the U.S. Government Accountability
Office.
Mr. Wong, thank you for being here. We will start with you.
STATEMENT OF ROBB WONG, ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE OF
GOVERNMENT CONTRACTING AND BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT, U.S. SMALL
BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION, WASHINGTON, DC
Mr. Wong. Good afternoon, and thank you for the opportunity
to testify and talk about the contracting and business
development programs provided by SBA.
Since March 2017, I have served as the Associate
Administrator for the Office of Government Contracting and
Business Development. This is my second time at SBA, previously
having worked before in the agency's Office of General Counsel,
where I wrote many of the rules and regulations in the previous
state.
In my current role, I administer programs and services that
assist small businesses in meeting the requirements to receive
government contracts. The Federal Government spends nearly $500
billion a year on goods and services through contracting, and
there are government-wide goals for awards to small businesses
that the SBA helps to foster and support.
Since rejoining the agency over two years ago, my focus has
been on Federal contracting officers across the Federal
Government, and my goal has been simple--to make SBA-certified
companies a better option for the contracting officer so that
they will increase the supply of government contracts to small
business.
We have looked at barriers that contracting officers may
face in hitting their percentage goals. We want to grow the
ecosystems by increasing the number of companies in that
system, and we want to improve the quality of contracts. Again,
it will help the contract officer to continue to award
contracts to small business.
As a foundation, SBA established and continues to refine
our online platform, Certify.gov. Working with our CIO, Maria
Roat, we brought the governance of the platform in-house. Our
next steps are to improve its functionality and interactivity,
not only for the public but also for our SBA analysts and
staff. This should help create a reliable tool to support the
transition of the women-owned small business certifications as
well as for any future considerations with certifying service-
disabled veteran-owned small businesses.
Right now, the agency certifies over 10,000 companies in
our 8(a) and HUBZone programs. The woman-owned and service-
disabled certifications total over 20,000. Adding that amount
of volume and responsibility to our existing staff, without
additional funding, is something the agency continues to
wrestle with.
Adding to these challenges are aspects of the self-
certification process that my GAO colleague, Mr. Shear, has
highlighted. We have also been testing a unified application
process to help standardize the way that the public applies and
also how SBA reviews both eligibility and continuing
eligibility. All of this must occur before we add the volume of
new cases from the WOSB Program, Women-Owned Small Business
Program. Excuse me.
Next, let me update you on an issue that I know is of
interest to the members of the Committee. In late December, SBA
released an information notice to stakeholders regarding the
Runway Extension Act. Since then, we have worked to develop a
rule which was sent to the Federal Register on Monday. When
published, this will further advise stakeholders and will begin
a public comment period to receive their input.
I wanted to close by mentioning a few items that our
program office continues to assess and that might lead to
further discussion with the Committee.
We continue to look at the Federal appropriations cycle and
any effect it may have on contracting officers. We continue to
review category management and whether it is hurting contract
availability. We also continue to assess sole-source thresholds
and whether they need to be adjusted.
I connect these items back to my main goal, to help the
contracting officers and to make small businesses a better
option for them. In my view, these items impair the
government's mission, as well as those people who help to
accomplish it. These are all important factors in keeping small
businesses in our Federal contracting programs, as every time a
small business drops out it hurts our industrial base.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to working with you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wong follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Thank you. Mr. Shear.
STATEMENT OF WILLIAM SHEAR, DIRECTOR, FINANCIAL MARKETS AND
COMMUNITY INVESTMENT, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE,
WASHINGTON, DC
Mr. Shear. Chairman Rubio, Ranking Member Cardin, and
members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here this
afternoon to discuss our recent work on SBA's contracting
programs and SBA's progress in implementing our
recommendations.
My testimony today is based primarily on three reports we
issued between September 2018 and March 2019, and also a report
we issued in October of 2014. I will discuss SBA's progress on
implementing our prior recommendations on first, its women's
procurement program, second, its HUBZone program in Puerto
Rico, and third, SBA's Procurement Scorecard. In the interest
of time, I will largely focus on our work on the women's
procurement program in my oral statement.
SBA has not fully addressed deficiencies we have previously
identified for the women's procurement program, and these
deficiencies are affected by SBA's ongoing implementation of
changes to the program authorized by the National Defense
Authorization Act of 2015. SBA implemented one of the three
changes to the program authorized in the 2015 NDAA when it
published a final rule to implement sole-source authority,
which became effective October 2015. The two other changes,
authorizing SBA to implement its own certification process, and
requiring SBA to eliminate the option for firms to self-certify
that they are eligible for the program, have not been
implemented.
In addition, SBA has not fully addressed program oversight
deficiencies described in our March 2019 report, and first
identified in our October 2014 report. We recommended that SBA
establish comprehensive procedures to monitor and assess the
performance of the third-party certifiers in accordance with
their agreements with SBA and program regulations.
SBA conducted a compliance review of certifiers in 2016,
but SBA officials said, in June 2018, that SBA had no plans to
conduct further compliance reviews until the final rule
implementing the new certification process was completed. SBA
also has not fully addressed deficiencies related to
eligibility exams. The exams identified high rates of
potentially ineligible businesses. SBA does not collect
reliable information on the results of its annual eligibility
exams and continues to have no mechanism to look across exams
for common eligibility issues to inform the program.
With respect to SBA's HUBZone program, we have a large body
of work over a period of time addressing the program. In our
September 2018 report, that focused on Puerto Rico, we
identified internal control deficiencies related to the
certification and recertification process that were generally
consistent with the deficiencies identified in previous work.
We are awaiting documentation from SBA related to the agency's
planned changes to the certification and recertification
process.
Finally, SBA has taken some steps to address recommendation
of our September 2018 report about its Procurement Scorecard.
SBA made revisions to address requirements specified in the
NDAA for fiscal year 2016. Among other actions in response to
our recommendations, SBA has proposed a two-phase program
evaluation of the scorecard.
Phase 1 would include a report to Congress, planned to be
issued in September 2019, on the impact of the small business
procurement goal program for Chief Financial Officers Act
agencies and to provide a recommendation on continuing,
modifying, expanding, or terminating the scorecard program. In
Phase 2, SBA plans to conduct a program evaluation that
investigates the effectiveness of the Small Business
Contracting Scorecard on Federal agencies, small business
contracting goal achievement.
Chairman Rubio, Ranking Member Cardin, and members of the
Committee, this completes my prepared statement. I look forward
to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shear follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Thank you. I will just start with--in the
interest of time and for our members that have other places as
well, because we started late, so I am just going to ask two
questions and they are related.
Mr. Wong, in 2015, Congress passed that law requiring the
SBA to set up the certification program for the Women-Owned
Small Business Programs. It has been four years. They have yet
to comply. What authority does the SBA have not to comply with
law, and why has it not complied?
Mr. Wong. The answer to your first question, we do not have
that authority to not comply, and the reason that we have not
complied was certainly brought to my attention, and it is
something I have worked on since the first month that I have
been here. I am a lawyer by trade, so being out of compliance
with the law is absolutely unacceptable.
The challenge we have had, sir, is basically this. We have
an ecosystem that we have looked at, that we have certain
responsibilities with our certifications to make sure that the
right companies get into our program that are qualified, but
then we also have to make sure, before they get a contract, we
hold the public trust to make sure that anyone who is awarded a
contract with an SBA certification is actually eligible to
receive it. Then we have to make the process easier to make
sure that we can help the contracting officer with the supply
of contracts.
As you noted in your statement earlier, we are dealing with
a system where we had, for 8(a) and for HUBZone, and then
potentially WOSB--excuse me, Women-Owned Small Businesses--we
had three different silos. So literally what happened was if
you--we--if you gave the element of ownership to three
different people, they had three different systems on how to
evaluate this program. That is unacceptable as well.
So when we were looking at WOSB, one of the first things I
looked at was I realized that when I looked at the volume of
applications we had and the number of existing companies that
we had, we realized that we had three times the volume for the
potential WOSB program that we had for any of our other
programs, particular the 8(a) program, which has been around
for 30 years.
Chairman Rubio. Just on this topic, I know you have been
there a month so you are trying to comply now. Correct?
Mr. Wong. Yes. Absolutely.
Chairman Rubio. Do you have any explanation? In the month
that you have been there, have you discovered why nothing has
happened in the last four years?
Mr. Wong. Yes. So--and just to clarify, I have been here a
little bit over two years, but within one month of me being
there, two years ago, I tried to get a handle on what was going
on.
The short version of what we are trying to do is we should
be processing all of our applications the same way, to the
extent possible. So what we have done is we have re-engineered
all of these processes to match. In short, we have 8(a), which
is our historically best program. We broke that down into
elements of eligibility, which there are 11. Then we realized
with HUBZone there are six. And then we even went into each
element of eligibility and we determined the process of how you
actually determine if someone is qualified under each----
Chairman Rubio. What I am just trying to wrap my mind
around----
Mr. Wong. Yes, sir.
Chairman Rubio [continuing]. You have been there two years.
Within a month of getting there you started looking at this.
Mr. Wong. Yes.
Chairman Rubio. You have now been there for over two
years----
Mr. Wong. Yes.
Chairman Rubio [continuing]. And you are still going
through this process of trying to organize it so you can
address it.
Mr. Wong. Yes. Originally, what we had done was we had come
back to Congress----
Chairman Rubio. It does not take two years to do that, and
it has not yet happened.
Mr. Wong. Yes, because we had to try three times now to
come up with a solution that we thought would be palatable for
Congress. Yes, sir.
Chairman Rubio. Okay. Well, let me--Mr. Shear, let me ask
you. You have seen--well, the--they failed to implement the
mandates from the 2015 NDAA on the Women-Owned Small Business
Program. Will the new proposed rule really fix the
certification program?
Mr. Shear. A new rule, whether the one proposed or another
rule, is not going to fix the problem. The question is how does
SBA implement this? We have seen a situation where SBA is not
vigilant on either overseeing third-party certifiers or of
collecting accurate information when there are businesses that
do not seem to be eligible participating in the program, and
following up and looking for the underlying reasons.
We have made recommendations to SBA in a self-certified
environment that we think not only are relevant for the self-
certified environment but the environment that would be created
by a new certification process. We also think that our
recommendations would help inform that process.
So our concern----
Chairman Rubio. Are those recommendations reflected in the
proposed rule?
Mr. Shear. In the proposed rule, the proposed rule which I
do not want to get into, third-party certifiers versus the use
of SBA on its own, but what they all have in common is that
there is a lack of understanding and a lack of focus, like on
following up.
In 2016, there was a review of third-party certifiers,
which not only could inform what job are they doing but could
help inform what makes for good certification process. They had
a recommendation having to do with eligibility exams, where
they seemed to be starting, in 2016, to start looking at the
underlying causes. But both of those seem to have been
suspended for a rulemaking and we really cannot understand why.
And it is also a mystery to us, just as I think it is
something that you raised, which is a very good point. Why has
it taken so long to--you know, without getting into the merits
of the proposed rule, why has it taken so long to get this
proposed rule out? We really do not understand. When we first
asked for a timeline, a project plan for how they were going to
get from A to B, they have never been able to produce that. So
that raises another concern for us.
Chairman Rubio. Well, the concern that I have is all those
women-owned small businesses that should have qualified and
could have qualified but were bumped out of the queue by the
ones that should not have, because of the inaction that has
taken so long to get even to this point.
Ranking Member.
Senator Cardin. Quite frankly, this is not acceptable. We
have a certification process right now for the 8(a) program and
HUBZone, so it is not like SBA does not know how to do
certifications. It is hard for us to understand why the women-
owned small businesses have not progressed. So do we have a
target date when we are going to--when you are going to be able
to give us something specific on this, when that date is?
Mr. Wong. The target--it should be contemporaneous with the
WOSB rule. I misstated this in the hearing we had a couple of
weeks ago, as 2021, but it should be contemporaneous with the
rule in July 1st of 2020.
Senator Cardin. Okay. So it will be another year.
Mr. Wong. Yes, but that--the rule is about as far as we can
push it, but we want to make sure. What I have told our staff
is we need to make sure that----
Senator Cardin. That is not really--that is not acceptable.
So we will look at what we can do to--you know, it is
challenging for us. We passed a statute and we expect it to be
implemented.
Mr. Wong. I agree.
Senator Cardin. And I think what the Chairman said is
absolutely accurate. These are extremely important programs. We
want to make sure that qualified companies can benefit from it.
I think we all agree that SBA certification is where we need to
be----
Mr. Wong. Yes.
Senator Cardin [continuing]. And we are not there. So it
is--it remains a matter of frustration.
We will look at whether we cannot give you a little bit
more directive way to speed this up. I understand rulemaking
takes time. Believe me I do. But this is unacceptable.
I want to get to the point in my opening statement on the
number of small businesses and the decline in the number of
small businesses participating, and talk a little bit about why
we do not have a larger supply base, why SBA has not encouraged
that. We have category management, as I understand it, on
procurement, which aims at larger contracts, which is a
disadvantage for small companies, particularly if their only
entry is through subcontracting.
So what strategies can be deployed to get new small
companies involved in government procurement to counter the
trends that we have seen over the last several years?
Mr. Wong. In my opinion, sir, there are two things that we
could do. If we could exempt small business programs from
category management--if you look at what we do, we represent
the underserved. We represent 23 percent. We fight every year
to make 23 percent.
Senator Cardin. I am sorry. I was listening. I was just
telling my staff to--whether you need legislative authority to
exempt from category management?
Mr. Wong. Probably.
Senator Cardin. Well, why don't we find out whether you
need statutory authority or whether you can do that
administratively.
Mr. Wong. Even still, the specter of category management I
think is a good idea. Efficiency is always important. However,
the way that it is being applied now to small businesses has a
deleterious effect. The MAC report that came out even proves
that we are losing small businesses on both ends for two
different reasons, in my opinion.
What happens is that we just have, even as recently as last
Friday, we get calls from small businesses, for example, in our
8(a) program. With our 8(a) program you get a certification,
but we tell you that you have to do your own marketing and that
will determine the success of your own business. Well, we have
people that are relying on that and they are working really
hard, and they win these contracts, and they win these large
contracts and then they call us and they say, ``The government
is taking our contract away, putting it into a category
management vehicle, and we do not qualify for that vehicle. So
we worked hard to get this exactly like you said and now you
took it away from us.''
And for the small businesses, a lot of small businesses--
and I have been a small business owner for 20 years before
this, and I have worked with is industry for at least 30 years.
They do not have lots of contracts to replace that with, and
often if that is their mainstay contract they lose faith in the
program, they lose faith in government contracting, so they
quit. So we lose people from----
Senator Cardin. I understand what you are saying. I might
also say the Army Futures Command in procurement also raises an
issue whether that is going to be another hurdle that works to
the disadvantage of small companies. I want to explore the
exemption issues that you are talking about, because I think
that does not make some sense.
I also would hope that we could work on reporting
information on prime and subcontracting so that we have a
better understanding of how we can get direct business for
smaller companies rather than having to work as prime
contractors.
Mr. Wong. Absolutely.
Senator Cardin. And one last point, and that is the Small
Business Roadway Extension Act. You mentioned that a rule is
being promulgated, I think today or yesterday, in your
testimony. That is already late. I would urge you to make sure
that is implemented as quickly as you are able to do it. It
does not seem that complicated, quite frankly, and we want to
make sure that the intent of our statute is carried out.
Mr. Wong. Yes, sir. You know, two--may I address that
issue?
Chairman Rubio. Yes.
Mr. Wong. Okay. So I also talk to people in Maryland. I
live in Maryland.
Senator Cardin. If I knew that ahead of time I would not
have given you a hard time.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Wong. I had an Asian dad, sir. That is not hard. It is
okay.
But, sir, here is what happened. When we got the Runway
Extension Act, okay, we understood what the intent was with
Congress. And I tried to be helpful, I tried to be proactive,
and I said, you know, we took a look at it, and what happened
was we got calls from people, and here is what was interesting.
We got calls from small businesses that this would help. It
says if we can count five years instead of three years, we can
still remain small. What is surprising is that we also got
calls that said, if this is active now, we have had some bad
years, so if we include five years it will actually hurt us.
So between the program office and between the attorneys, we
took a look at it, and we determined that the question about
whether or not--which contracts would be affected, was a
legitimate question. And so we decided that despite--instead of
waiting we would do what we could do, as much as we could do.
So we started with rulemaking to make sure that the intent of
the Runway Extension Act, to affect the small business programs
at our agency and every agency, was affected. The most power
that we had, though, was to do it through a rule, and we have
done that as quickly as possible. That one should be commencing
around January of 2020.
We also understand that there is another track that
Congress is taking, but at the end of the day we are both
trying as quickly as we can to make sure that Congress' intent
was fulfilled. We tried to do it collaboratively and
cooperatively, as quickly as we could.
Senator Cardin. Thank you.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Ernst.
Senator Ernst. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to
the witnesses for being here today.
The SBA's contracting programs role in ensuring small
businesses have opportunities to compete as Federal contractors
is of significant importance, and I will address some of the
issues I am really concerned about. I am glad that we have an
opportunity to discuss ways to improve these programs, so
again, thank you for being here.
And, Mr. Wong, I will start with you. In March, Senator
Tammy Duckworth and I introduced a bill called the Expanding
Contracting Opportunities for Small Businesses Act, and it
eliminates a discrepancy that puts women and service-disabled
veterans who own small businesses at a disadvantage when
competing for contracts by setting the contract manufacturing
threshold at $7 million for businesses certified under each
program.
Can you speak to the impact that you think this would have
and what further steps we could do to support women and
veteran-owned small businesses? Any ideas that you have would
be welcomed.
Mr. Wong. So I will caveat that the suggestions that I have
are my own, having been a small business owner.
What I would suggest is the 8(a) program, if you look at
this, this has been the backbone of our agency and it has been
the favorite contract vehicle of contracting officers for
years, particularly if you look at things where we have been
operating in an environment where we work with continued
resolutions.
Senator Ernst. Right.
Mr. Wong. I talk to everyone as much as we can. And if you
look at, sometimes, a lot of these agencies, they have 55
percent of their spending is done after April, in some of these
years. That is not enough time to run competitions, okay? So
that is why 8(a) is such a great vehicle. If we want to spur
more small business growth into this ecosystem, my suggestion
would be this, several things. First and foremost, we fix
HUBZone, which we are trying to do, because I think that
program could be just as powerful as 8(a). Next, what I think
we should do--the suggestion would be is to increase the
capacity or increase the thresholds. Because of category
management and consolidation you are getting larger contracts
and more complex contracts. The problem is that the thresholds
have been set 20 years ago, in 1990. They have been set a while
ago, and that might be more than 20.
So the problem is that, you know, the joke that I say to
people is what do you have that is 30 years old today, other
than your spouse, that is just as good today as it was 30 years
ago? Well, we need to update the SBA limits for 2019 and
beyond, particularly because we have things like category
management, which is compressing things.
So right now, as an example, if you look at the way current
thresholds work, we have a limit on a basic 8(a) company of $4
million, divided by the number of option years. Four million
divided by 5, people tell me, is $800,000 a year. Right now,
though, the basic contracts, for a contracting officer, that is
not very much help to a contracting officer. That becomes like
if they have a big pile of sand, of trying to get it off the
desk with a teaspoon.
I want to turn that teaspoon into a shovel, and the way we
do that, to--you know, at the end of the day, if we fix that
for the contracting officer, they are the guardians of the
supply of government contracts. If you can increase the
capacity at which--or the thresholds at which these sole-source
awards are awarded, the government contracting officer will
love that. I have learned that anecdotally through
conversations with them.
So finally what we do, if we can exempt category
management--or small business from category management, here is
another thing. If you take the added capacity, now, if you look
at what is going into category management, these are all large
contracts. They are over $1 million. But if you give the
capacity to the contracting officer, with up to $4 million a
year, as an example, for each of the 8(a)s, the government
contracting officer has two weapons in its arsenal. They can
make that award, they can allow the small business to
participate because a lot of the contracting officers like
those contracts. So when those contracts are removed into
category management we have many disappointed parties.
So if you increase the threshold for that, the government
can keep those contracts working with small businesses, and
even with--we have worked with OMB, or OFPP. They have a
directive on category management. They kept something in there
in footnote 31 that says meeting a small business goal is
justification not to use category management. So if we can do
that.
And the final thing that I personally would recommend is
that we give the contracting officer, and say to him or her
that if you have missed one of your socioeconomic goals in the
previous year, SBA will temporarily give you 8(a)-like sole-
source direct authority for every socioeconomic category you
have missed. And I think that what that will do is that will
keep--excuse me. Last important thing, sorry. As long as you
hit your 8(a) goal first.
So what I think that will do, from an ecosystem point of
view, you are going to have government procurement hitting that
8(a) goal first. It is still special because it operates
differently than the other programs, but it will also make it
capable, and it will make it more attractive for women-owned,
for HUBZones, and for service-disabled to use our products. We
will bring people into the ecosystem, reward them because they
have higher capacity, and it will be able to abut some of the
problems that we have with category management.
If we remove small businesses from category management, at
least temporarily, learn how that works efficiently with the
other 77 percent. So when you take a large contract from a
large company they have more. But when you take it from a small
business that only has that, they quit. And even if you are one
of the lucky ones that gets into category management, for a
small business, you make so much money you size out, and so you
do not quit but you have to leave.
Senator Ernst. Yes, no. I think it is very good and I
appreciate it. I am sorry. We have gone over time. But it was
really great information and I do think we need to look at
these for the 8(a)s.
And just a comment that I think there is only one program
that actually teaches people how to do government contracting,
and so that is something that we need to focus on as well, so
that we do have more women business owners, more minority
business owners, more of those service-connected disabled
veterans that are engaging in this area as well.
So thank you very much. I appreciate it.
Mr. Wong. Ma'am, to your point, Stanley Jones, Jr. is in
the audience with us. He is responsible for that. He had a
great idea that instead of delivering one-on-one capability to
people we are trying to do one-to-all. The directive we are
trying to do has become more relevant to the 30 million small
businesses out there. So what we are trying to do is come up
with modules that teach all businesses how to identify, pursue,
capture, and execute business opportunities, whether it is
government or not. But that is a great suggestion.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Shaheen.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
both for being here.
Mr. Shear, do you think what Mr. Wong is proposing is a
good idea?
Mr. Shear. When it comes to statutory changes we do not
have work that provides a basis to comment on those. But let me
go to looking at the issue, concerns with category management,
for example. Let me start with that.
Senator Shaheen. Okay. Why don't you start with explaining
what category management is.
Mr. Shear. Thank you. With category management, the idea is
that you have aggregation of different types of procurements so
that you are limiting the number of businesses that compete. So
it tends to lead to kind of larger, you know, larger
procurements, and this can have an adverse effect on small
businesses.
So what I am going to----
Senator Shaheen. Give me an example.
Mr. Shear. It has been used, for example--I am trying to
remember what the eagle program is called that GSA had, but it
comes down to it can be as simple as providing office products
per se, that you are limiting the number of firms that can
compete to provide through those vehicles. So it can lead to a
smaller number of small businesses that might be able to
participate.
So let me start with category management, if you can take--
I am sorry my definition is not more specific than that--but
let me take that as an example. We now are initiating, on a
large engagement, looking at category management, including
impacts on small businesses, but in doing that we are going to
jump back, as a starting point, what the processor was,
strategic sourcing a number of years ago. And what we find,
with these types of vehicles, that there are certain provisions
of the Small Business Act that become even more important in
ensuring that small businesses really have the opportunities
they should be having.
So, for example, we have the Offices of Small and
Disadvantaged Business Utilization. We have done work that
shows many agencies are not in compliance with the requirements
to make sure that what are called the OSDBUs really have the
stature in the agency and the roles in the agency that are
necessary for them to represent small business interests. And
when we look back at strategic sourcing we saw a definite
distinction between agencies where the OSDBUs really had a seat
at the table and those where they did not.
So looking at those Small Business Act provisions through
the roles of the OSDBUs, you know, the procurement center
representatives at SBA, it becomes more important to try to
identify how, in this environment, we can still provide
contracting opportunities for small businesses. So I wanted to
draw attention to that.
Just on the other thing, on women's procurement and
service-disabled veteran-owned small business, SBA has talked
for years about trying to bring technology into its oversight
of the program and technology to try to make these programs
more user-friendly for contract officers and for the firms that
are participating in it. And so we certainly--our
recommendations are very much geared toward the idea of
bringing that type of technology, as far as a solution, to try
to not only make sure ineligible firms are not participating
but that these programs become more accessible for contract
agencies.
Senator Shaheen. So is there anybody that you would cite
who is doing this well, that either you or Mr. Wong would cite,
any agencies within the Federal Government that you think are
doing a good job?
Mr. Shear. The agency that stands out for me, in terms of
the role of the OSDBU director, in terms of identifying, you
know, opportunities for set-asides and other things, in this
environment where we have, let's say, strategic sourcing, which
we have looked at, and category management we have looked at,
would be the Department of Homeland Security.
Senator Shaheen. And how about with women-owned small
businesses, and what are they doing that makes them stand out?
How are they doing a good job?
Mr. Shear. With women-owned small businesses, I think,
really, the ball is in SBA's court to come up with a system
that contract officers can really use, where the certification
really means something that has some confidence for them, that
they feel confident in using, you know, women-owned small
business set-asides.
Senator Shaheen. So you--neither of you can recommend any
agency within the Federal Government that is doing a good job
with contracting out to women-owned small businesses, that is
meeting their--the 5 percent target regularly, that has
practices in place that you think are good at reaching out to
those businesses?
Mr. Wong. I think--I think that there--sorry.
Mr. Shear. No. go ahead.
Mr. Wong. I think that there are several. DHS is certainly
one of those.
So I had an opportunity, for example, to talk to Kevin
Boshears, who is actually retiring next week. Maybe you could
call him and tell him not to.
Senator Shaheen. Um, so----
Mr. Wong. But they do it by looking at every single
procurement. They work with their procurement shop to do that.
It is to their credit, however, the system that they have is
very different than other agencies. And there are other
agencies that do hit their women target sporadically. I could
get you a list. I do not have that off the top of my head.
But----
Senator Shaheen. Is there a list posted on the website of
the SBA?
Mr. Wong. I do not think that there is a historical one,
but I can get you everything that you need.
Senator Shaheen. Well, I am out of time, but just a follow-
up. Is the issue having an individual in that position who is
committed to it and who does a good job, or is the issue having
a process in place that actually makes it happen?
Mr. Shear. You have to have an agency that is willing to
give the stature to their director. So, I mean, you have two
people--you know, you have a director that is involved and you
have an agency, but you have certain agencies that have
facilitated this more complete role. Now, you know, both of us
know Kevin Boshears well. He is one that has been given that
stature and he has earned that stature, so it goes hand-in-
hand.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Cantwell.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for holding this important hearing on SBA's contracting
programs.
I wanted to ask about an important issue for continuing to
give women access to Federal contracts. The current law
provides that women-owned businesses must have unconditional
ownership by women of 51 percent interest in their company to
maintain that SBA certification. I will just note that the
Federal Government never met its 5 percent goal until we
changed the sole-source contracting element, so when we changed
that in 2015, we made our goals. We may have slipped, but I
just think we have to keep peeling back the issues that are
prohibiting us. And, obviously, with 50 percent of the society
coming up with ideas we definitely want to make sure that they
are getting access to capital to do so.
So one thing I am working with Chairman Rubio on, and I
appreciate his attention to this and I am happy to work with
him on this, is to make sure women-owned businesses can get
equity investments that they need to grow and still be able to
compete for those government contracts. This is an important
aspect of their business and also important for winning
contracts.
So do either of you have any concern or opposition about
that language, making sure that women-owned businesses are not
penalized from investment from venture capitalists at all?
Mr. Wong. Ma'am, the only challenge we might have is that
generally we--the issue we have that is in the 8(a) program is
a control issue, okay. But assuming that we can make sure that
the ownership is there and that the control rests with women-
owned companies, I have no problem with that. I mean, we are a
different--you know, when these rules came out, venture capital
was not--that was something that only elite companies did. Now
everybody is doing it.
So I think that if we set our minds to it--and this is my
personal opinion--that, you know, investment at certain ages is
almost a necessary prerequisite, or at least an avenue. At the
end of the day, I think that investment makes a better company.
If they are a better company, they have better quality. If they
have better quality, then that goes hand-in-hand, because that
is how we make awards. We want stronger companies. So I like
that idea.
Senator Cantwell. Okay.
Mr. Shear.
Mr. Shear. We have not done work analyzing that issue to
opine one way or the other.
Senator Cantwell. Okay. Well, I thank the Chairman for his
leadership on this, and I think it just--you know, when we are
looking at this issue of why we do not have more success in
women-owned businesses, we have to look at what are the
stumbling blocks, and I would consider this one of the
stumbling blocks, and we should just proceed and knock it down,
and allow women to have more investment and still have these
government contracts.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Rubio. Thanks for the work you have done, and
the--fixed the VC investments are a key part. You cannot, in
the 21st century, in any century, really, but you cannot really
prosper as a business if you do not have access to investment,
which is increasingly steering away from small business writ
large, but in particular, among those owned by minorities and
those owned by women. So I am grateful for all the work you
have put in.
Senator Hirono. You can use this time, as well, to announce
our Hawaii party at five today.
Senator Hirono. Yes. All of you are invited to Hawaii--a
Taste of Hawaii on the Hill, consisting mainly of small
businesses from Hawaii.
A lot of us are very supportive of the socioeconomic groups
that we want to have awarded these huge--well, not the huge,
but their share of government contracts. So with regard to the
Department of Defense, which has a lot of contracts, the so-
called Section 809--this is for Mr. Wong--809 Panel released
recommendations to eliminate most small business set-asides at
the Department of Defense.
So I have heard from small businesses in Hawaii, including
our Native Hawaiian-owned businesses, who are seriously
concerned about what these recommendations, if implemented,
would mean for small businesses in the United States. And, of
course, set-asides have been an important tool for Federal
Government departments and agencies like DoD to meet their
small business contracting goals, especially for small,
disadvantages businesses, women-owned small businesses,
service-disabled veteran-owned small businesses, Native
Hawaiian small businesses, and others.
So, Mr. Wong, can you elaborate on the importance of small
business set-asides for Federal Government departments and
agencies in meeting their contracting goals?
Mr. Wong. Yes, ma'am, I can. If you want to talk--in terms
of the--you were talking about the Native programs,
particularly in Hawaii----
Senator Hirono. Well, the concern has been raised by the
Native Hawaiian-owned businesses because a number of them did
contract with the Department of Defense and suddenly that
number has plummeted.
Mr. Wong. We heard about that on Friday. Yep, I absolutely
agree.
Your first point, the 809 Panel is certainly an efficient
panel, but, by the same token, it is diametrically opposed to
our mission.
Senator Hirono. Yes.
Mr. Wong. We are all about, and we support the mission of
maximum practicable opportunity for small business.
Senator Hirono. Yes. I share that.
Mr. Wong. Small businesses, by their nature, are not the
most efficient, but they are important, and they are important
to develop--to our industrial base.
Senator Hirono. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Wong. What I like about the Native companies,
particularly the Hawaiian companies as well----
Senator Hirono. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Wong [continuing]. Is that they are power users with
8(a). They allow, again, this shovel for a contracting officer
to help them to deliver the work.
The other thing that I think that is noble about the Native
companies is that they have a responsibility that is much
greater than just running a small business. You know, as you
know, and as we have discussed, they have to take care of past,
present, and future generations, and that is a concern that
almost no other business in the United States has.
Senator Hirono. Yes. They have, basically, like a social
public good kind of a requirement for them that is not applied
to any other small business.
Mr. Wong. That is correct. And so I think that when the 809
Panel, when they are talking about reducing set-asides, I
absolutely would not agree with that.
Senator Hirono. So has SBA voiced their concerns?
Mr. Wong. Absolutely. I went----
Senator Hirono. And what has been the reaction?
Mr. Wong. So when I first got there I went over with Ken
Dodds, who is also in our audience right now, and when we were
there--we went over there, I think, for the third time, and I
think it was Mr. Drabkin, who was the head of this, said, ``Mr.
Wong, you look like a nice fellow, but we are not aligned.''
But he says that, so--he says, ``That is okay, but our job is
to make these recommendations.''
The 809 Panel, similar to category management, in my
opinion, has the effect of destroying the industrial base. If
you look at SBA, our history, our creation was founded on
replenishing and strengthening that industrial base. That is
why our mission of maximum practicable opportunity is there.
Senator Hirono. And, by the way, you know, I sit on the
Armed Services Committee, and for so many of our large
contractors they need a huge, thousands of people in their
supply chain. And if this recommendation by the Section 809
Panel disrupts that chain and starts to--and if it starts to
result in thousands of the people who are in the chain go out
of business, that is bad----
Mr. Wong. It hurts our country.
Senator Hirono [continuing]. For our large contractors
also. So what can we all do? Can this Committee weigh in? Is
there something we can do to say, ``Wait a minute. This is not
the way to go, DoD?''
Mr. Wong. If we could work collaboratively, I would love to
work collaboratively with you to help raise our voice with the
809 Panel and with Congress. But I think we should fight this.
Senator Hirono. I hope that this is something, Mr.
Chairman, that we can pursue.
So I do have some other concerns. Yeah, I hear the concerns
regarding the support for women-owned businesses, because we
are not hitting our goals. Can you clarify something for me?
Does every Federal department have to reach these--the 20
percent contracting goals? Every department--DoD, Homeland
Security, everybody?
Mr. Wong. So the technical answer is no, but the way I
would like to describe it is, if you have a pie that represents
100, we have to eat 23 percent, and we have to go to each of
the agencies, who, if some can eat more in certain portions
then they eat more, and we negotiate that with them.
Senator Hirono. So it would seem that we are not going to
require every department to meet these goals, because some can
exceed those goals. Why don't we make every department meet
these goals?
Mr. Wong. Because I think that for some--depending on how
you look at the buys--the short version is that every agency
does not treat--does not buy from the same sources for the
things that they need, so we are mindful of that.
Senator Hirono. Do you think that kind of approach still is
reasonable now, or have there not been some changes?
Mr. Wong. My personal feeling is that--and I will give you
a lawyer's answer; we are both lawyers--is under the rules that
we have we have exceeded that 23 percent for the sixth year in
a row, but more importantly, in terms of number of dollars,
which translate directly into jobs, no matter who gets those
contracts, we have increased this market by about 21 percent.
So despite the misgivings that we have, we are hitting the
goals that we have, but this is also why, when we are talking,
you know, one of the things that is inherent to me is that when
the government hits a goal and we task somebody specifically in
the government to achieve it, they tend to achieve it. And the
person and people who are responsible, in this case for
government contracts, is the contracting officer. They have the
most power to do that, because they are the ones that are
delegated by their leadership--you have got to hit these goals,
right?
So that is why I am generally saying make it easier for
them, using SBA programs, and they will hit that goal.
Senator Hirono. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for letting me go
over.
Chairman Rubio. Just as a point of information, I believe
Senator Duckworth has filed a Sense of the Senate to the NDAA
bill----
Senator Hirono. Oh, thank you.
Chairman Rubio [continuing]. That would add--that would
oppose the recommendation to remove the DoD set-aside. I think
the Armed Services Committee has a different opinion, so we
will see how that plays itself out.
Senator Romney, you would be next. You just arrived. I
can--I am going to buy some time, or--I can ask a question,
actually.
Senator Romney. Why don't you go ahead and let me take a--
--
Chairman Rubio. It is a short question.
Senator Romney. Okay.
Chairman Rubio. Just on the issue that you talked about,
Mr. Wong, and that is the importance of small business to our
industrial base, do you think that, when it comes to government
contracting it is an enormous customer, particularly in the
Department of Defense field but across the board. And this is
more of a 50,000-foot-level question, but is it your sense that
in addition to having laws in place that require certain
behavior that there is an opening here to also have a broader
national conversation about the importance of a domestic
subcontractor and/or manufacturing supply chain that is capable
of delivering certain steps along the process?
So obviously, in the realm of DoD, it is a little different
because of the security elements that are built into these
contracts, but there are plenty of industries now in which we
believe that large multinationals who are headquartered in the
United States dominate a field without any sort of national
recognition of the fact that many of the subcontracts and
component activities underneath that big umbrella are
oftentimes having to be outsourced to other countries, because
we no longer have the domestic capacity to do certain things.
And this becomes concerning when you begin to realize that,
in many of these fields, that are outside the realm of DoD, but
whether it is telecommunications or any of these other critical
industries, for our future, we are not engaged in a business-
to-business competition. These have become national
competitions, oftentimes in the case of China, against
companies fully backed by a large and powerful government.
So it appears to me that that sort of notion needs to find
itself into this conversation as well.
Mr. Wong. Yes, sir, I agree. You did mention China, and so
I would just simply say that one of the phenomena that they
have is they could be sitting in a room, they come up with an
idea that makes sense, they can implement it in a matter of
weeks. Our rules and regulations still require months, years.
So I think that if there is a way to entertain that
conversation, absolutely. If you could include us in that we
would be happy to work with you on that.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Romney.
Senator Romney. Thank you, Senator. I must begin by saying
I am not a hostile questioner, but partially so in that I do
not like the idea of set-asides generally, or requirements that
people purchase, or that the government purchases from
institutions that are either high cost or less efficient. It
strikes me that small businesses that have the best prospects
come out with better products at lower cost, and that the world
would beat a path to their door. But that requiring the
government to acquire products based upon other requirements
other than the quality, price, and efficiency of the product
being sold is a mistake.
I will put that comment aside for a moment and turn to
something else which is the--with regards to the program
associated with the net worth limit, particularly for those
programs helping disadvantaged women. The net worth has to be
less than $750,000, as I understand it, and given the fact that
the median net worth in the country is $97,000, it strikes me
that if you are an individual with a net worth of $750,000,
excluding your home, you are probably in the top 1 percent of
the country. This hardly strikes me as being a program for
underprivileged individuals.
Should we not reconsider what net worth is appropriate to
justify investment in such a small enterprise owned by a person
of that nature?
Mr. Wong. Senator, thank you for the question. If I could
clarify, the $750,000 is a ceiling. It is not a floor. And so
what we do is we limit people, that if they get into business
and then they get up to a certain level then we kick them out.
Senator Romney. Right. Right. But kicking them out--
$750,000 is well above what I would consider a person that is
disadvantaged and needs help. If the number were $50,000 or
$100,000 I might not, in my head. But the median in the country
is $97,000. Why would a number like $97,000 not be the better
number to use, or half that? But to say that a person can have
$700,000 in personal net worth, excluding their home, that is
going to be a relatively small cohort of individuals who would
have a net worth at that level.
Mr. Wong. So, anecdotally, this is my opinion. I think
that--and I have dealt with many businesses over the last 30
years, and I have run 16 of them. I think that people with
$97,000 of personal net worth do not tend to hire many people.
And so with somebody--you know, if somebody has $750,000, I
agree, it is a higher number than the average national net
worth, but it has been something that we have been using with
the 8(a) program for over 30 years. We have created a lot of
jobs. We have created a lot of businesses with that program,
sir, and I think that it works.
Senator Romney. I would suggest that you are not creating
the jobs, that people who begin those enterprises are creating
the jobs, their potential to find capital from other sources.
If they have got a great business idea and a net worth of
$700,000, they are going to be able to begin that business and
create the jobs without the help of the government. So having
Federal dollars, having average taxpayers in America provide
subsidy, in effect, to individuals who have a net worth of as
much as $750,000, excluding their home, strikes me as being
excessive and not really targeted to the people we are focused
on helping, which are people of very modest or disadvantaged
circumstances.
I guess I will stop there, Mr. Chairman, other than to say
that I think with regards to each of these programs, we need to
re-evaluate whether we are really helping people who could not
get help from the private sector, and whether we are wise to
direct the government, in its purchasing process, to favor the
purchase from an enterprise that is not as competitive as the
alternatives.
Chairman Rubio. Great. Thank you very much.
Thank you both for being here. Do we have anything else?
Thank you both for being here. I am going to call up the second
panel. Thank you for your time and for your patience, given the
vote schedule and the delay in our start.
Mr. Shear. Thank you very much.
Chairman Rubio. So as we kind of accommodate the transition
here in the panel, let me introduce them, give them a few
seconds.
All right. I want to introduce our second panel.
Vicki Marino is the Founder and President of Kenmar General
Contracting, in Key West, Florida. She started Kenmar in 2002.
She became the first female licensed general contractor in
Monroe County, Florida. For those of you not familiar with
Monroe County, Florida, that is the world-famous Florida Keys.
Delali Dzirasa is the Founder and President--is that
correct? Did I say that, Dzirasa?--Dzirasa is the Founder and
President of Fearless, a digital services firm in Baltimore,
Maryland, with a HUBZone certification.
And Laurie Sayles is the Founder and CEO of Civility
Management Solutions in Hyattsville, Maryland. Her company
provides professional consulting services and is certified as
an 8(a), Women-Owned, Economically Disadvantaged, Women-Owned,
and Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned small business. She spent
seven years of active duty in the Marine Corps and is the first
female veteran officer on the Veteran Entrepreneurial Task
Force.
Thank you, all three, for being here. Ms. Marino, we will
begin with you.
TESTIMONY OF VICKI MARINO, FOUNDER AND PRESIDENT, KENMAR
GENERAL CONTRACTING, KEY WEST, FL
Ms. Marino. Good afternoon, Chairman Rubio, Ranking Member
Cardin, and members of the Committee. My name is Vicki Marino.
I own Kenmar General Contracting in Key West, Florida, and am
testifying on behalf of Women Impacting Public Policy, a
national, nonpartisan organization advocating on behalf of
women entrepreneurs. My company is 8(a) certified, as well as
EDWOSB certified. Thank you for inviting me to testify today.
In 2011, I landed my first Federal contract after success
in the commercial marketplace as the first licensed woman
general contractor in Monroe County, Florida. Working with SBA
and a large company, through the SBA Mentor Protege Program,
afforded me access to the resources necessary to build past
performance and become a successful Federal contractor.
I want to take a moment to give a special shout-out to a
contracting officer, Paula Claudio. Paula shepherded my
company's WOSB, sole-source award through SOUTHCOM, making it
one of the first to be awarded to a woman-owned construction
company. I cannot tell you how important this action was to
further our Federal presence and to potentially earn another
exceptional past performance rating. Due to this effort, I am
in the process of opening an office in Puerto Rico to help with
the rebuilding effort.
Despite working as hard as I could to make my 8(a)
certification productive, it took me all of nine years to hit
my stride as a Federal contractor. Had it not been for WIPP's
procurement expertise, receptive contracting officers, and
support from the SBA, I would not have been able to get much
traction. I would like to share a few recommendations and
observations which I hope the Committee will find helpful.
Given the complexity of Federal contracting and the length
of time it takes to build a CPARS exceptional evaluation
rating, I recommended adding a transition time for 8(a) firms,
as we transition to competing in a larger pool of small
businesses. SBA's contracting resources should also be expanded
to include support for businesses at this stage.
We encourage this Committee to look at changing
socioeconomic programs to better reflect the trends in Federal
buying and overcome the reluctance of agencies to use these
programs. WIPP members tell us that contracting officers do not
understand the WOSB/EDWOSB program, requiring the WOSB small
business owners to come armed with specific instructions on how
to use the program. We recommend streamlining small business
programs and requiring education for contracting officers.
Further, we suggest changing sole-source rules to make them
uniform. For example, while 8(a) companies can obtain sole-
source contracts at $4 million or $6.5 million, without market
research or justification, women-owned small businesses,
HUBZones, and service-disabled veteran-owned small businesses
require that a contracting officer must justify, through market
research, that not two or more offers at a reasonable price are
expected, leading to exceedingly few sole-source awards. WIPP
recommends Congress put all socioeconomic contracting programs
on equal footing.
Certification for the WOSB/EDWOSB programs should be
streamlined. In addition, all WOSBs who are willing to
participate in the Federal market should be certified, even if
they do not intend to utilize the set-aside program. Certifying
to SBA would discourage fraudulent behavior. A critical
component of certification is a site visit, so we suggest
utilizing third-party certifiers.
With respect to what qualifies a woman as EDWOSB, we urge
the Committee to change the definition of ``net worth.'' Before
the age of 59\1/2\, retirement accounts do not count toward net
worth calculation. If the retirement account has early
withdrawal penalties, it does not count toward asset total.
However, retirement funds lift those penalties at age 59\1/2\.
Women who are above this age must count retirement funds, often
resulting in disqualification for EDWOSB status, putting older
female entrepreneurs at a disadvantage.
In addition, the current definition of what constitutes a
woman-owned or a minority-owned firm includes a requirement
that ownership must be unconditional, leading to a lack of
equity investment in these firms. Given the size of contracts,
this is a barrier to growth that should be removed.
Lastly, I want to thank this Committee for passing the
Runway Extension Act last year. This new law will greatly
assist businesses experiencing growth in the Federal
marketplace. WIPP urges the Committee to continue holding SBA
accountable as they begin the rulemaking process to expedite
implementation.
In conclusion, small business contracting programs are
critical to the ability for small companies like mine to obtain
Federal contracts, but they need revamping to meet today's
buying realities. In addition, we should be taking what is
working from each program and apply it to all the other
programs.
I urge you to take steps that will increase Federal buying
from small businesses so that the government can meet the
modest goals set for women, veterans, 8(a), and HUBZone
certified companies.
This concludes my testimony and I am happy to answer any of
your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Marino follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Thank you.
Mr. Dzirasa.
TESTIMONY OF DELALI DZIRASA, FOUNDER AND PRESIDENT, FEARLESS
SOLUTIONS, BALTIMORE, MD
Mr. Dzirasa. I got a text from a friend earlier and it said
``be sure not to embarrass the family, friends, or the
country,'' so I will do my best today.
Chairman Rubio, Ranking Member Cardin, and members of the
Committee, thank you for your time and opportunity to testify
today. My name is Delali Dzirasa and I have a confession to
make, that I do not belong here. You know, this was not
supposed to be my path and my role, so how did I end up here? I
had a mother that really invested in work ethic, and taught us
as young boys you had to work hard and accomplish your dreams.
And what she said was she believed in the power of human
potential, that the power of tomorrow--that tomorrow can always
be better than it is today.
And my dad had some lessons to learn also. We had a
software company. We worked for him as kids, and learned two
things. One, I love technology, and two, that I would never,
absolutely ever work for my dad again.
So based on those lessons learned, I started a company. I
founded Fearless in 2009. We are a digital services firm, and
we say our mission is to build software with a soul. And we
really envision a world where good software ought to power
things that matter, and so all of that commercial innovation
that you see, we want to have the power harvest within the
Federal Government to be a benefit to the American people at
large.
Growing up as a kid, I watched my father grow a small
business. Today, my small business powers SBA.gov, the digital
face of the Small Business Administration, where millions of
Americans can grow and start their businesses and obtain
funding.
I watched my mother as she cared for aging individuals.
Today, CMS uses our technology to allow every Medicare
beneficiary in the country to better share patient records
securely and easily.
Fearless also powers Login.gov and Search.gov, the Federal
Government's search engine.
These lessons along the way taught me in the belief of
potential, but I also needed an opportunity, and the SBA
programs provided that opportunity for me. So I am here
testifying on behalf of the HUBZone Council, a nonprofit trade
organization that supports the HUBZone program, because I got
that opportunity, and the Council would like to thank the
Committee for their commitment to small businesses across the
country.
Our relationship with the HUBZone program is a bit unique.
I heard about the program early on in our history and it was
about economic development communities and neighborhoods that
needed it. We were passionate about it, excited about it, so
much so that I moved our family from the suburbs into
Baltimore. Baltimore is a tale often of two cities, right, one
where there is plenty of opportunity but also where almost a
quarter of the population lives below the Federal poverty line.
As I walk to work from day to day, I see individuals,
whether laying on the street, and recently, a couple of weeks
ago, there was a kid that was struck by a car, one of the
``Squeegee boys'' they call them, washing windshields, trying
to make a couple of bucks on the way to school. These are the
very people the HUBZone program was meant to support, and so
you can imagine how I was completely heartbroken to know that
the HUBZone program has not met its goal, ever, in the history
of the program. And so all of that funding, we calculated, was
over $7 billion that were ineligible for these communities that
need it most were not getting there.
So we took it as a labor of love to figure out why and how
we could fix the problem. So on one end you had $7 billion. On
the other hand you had lots of people unemployed, that were
looking for opportunities, not handouts, to get jobs.
So that is the map at that point. We realized technology
needed some updates. We realized there were two major issues--
technology and policy. On the tech side, we are a software
company, so what did we do? We ended up taking SBA's data--the
map was dated, reporting the wrong information. We scraped it
on our own. We built our own map, and what we thought the map
ought to be. That eventually got the attention of SBA, which
then called us and awarded us a contract to modernize all of
the HUBZone technology nationwide.
So we are here to testify to say we have helped to support
and fix some of the technology, and now we are here because we
need support to fix the policy.
On the policy side, we think there are lots of incremental
changes that can be made within the program, but above
incremental changes, we think big, bold changes are needed, and
the bold changes that also were included in how these
certification programs began in the first place, are needed at
this time.
The HUBZone program is unique in how it provides and
supports communities, and so we ask for two things. One, we
have heard streamline the sole-source opportunities for HUBZone
companies and all the certification programs to be on parity
with the 8(a) program, and two, up the small business goal, in
general, across the board. Small businesses are often called
the backbone of the economy, and so it is odd that they control
and create the majority of the jobs, but yet they are a
fraction of the percentage of revenue that goes out.
And why is this important now? You have recently passed
legislation around opportunity zones, and so investment is
going into a lot of these same communities. And so if you pair
it with the Jobs Creation Act through the HUBZone program, we
think we can multiply the effect.
So we live in a city where the ZIP code might determine as
much as a 20-year discrepancy in life expectancy, and so we
need bold change now. And so if today is not the chance, the
time for that bold change, the question really is when, and
when is it going to be right?
Thank you for the opportunity and the time for my
testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dzirasa follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Thank you.
Ms. Sayles.
TESTIMONY OF LAURIE SAYLES, PRESIDENT AND CEO, CIVILITY
MANAGEMENT SOLUTIONS, GREENBELT, MD
Ms. Sayles. Good afternoon, Chairman Rubio, Ranking Member
Cardin, and members of the Committee. My name is Laurie Sayles.
I am a veteran who served 10 years in the United States Marine
Corps and am now the founder and owner of Civility Management
Solutions, a professional consulting firm working within both
the government and commercial space, and located in Greenbelt,
Maryland. I am a member of Women Impacting Public Policy and
VET-Force, both organizations who have assisted in my growth.
Civility provides program, project, financial, and grants
management, training, conference logistics, call center, and
administrative support for several Federal agencies to include
subcontracts.
I am passionate to testify because my company was able to
obtain such clients due to Small Business Administration's
certification program. I am certified economically
disadvantaged and woman-owned small business, VA-verified
service-disabled veteran-owned, and certified 8(a)
headquartered in a HUBZone office. Like others, I have
experienced this with SBA and the Department of Veterans
Affairs to acquire certifications.
My testimony today will address these contract programs
with the hope of providing recommendations to the Committee
that will assist during the reauthorization process, as well as
enable the SBA to increase assistance to veteran and women
small business owners.
I have always been an entrepreneur. As a Marine,
leadership, integrity, teamwork, and persistence became a way
of life, which is essential in business. I earned the respect
as an African-American woman in a man's world, and now am an
outspoken advocate for veterans as I was elected as the first
woman officer on the VET-Force Committee. In this role, I
listen to many veteran small business owners on their
frustrations to ascertain VA certifications and opportunities
within the VA.
Returning to civilian life can be difficult. It is a
process, it takes to adjust, and working with government
agencies can become frustrating, especially understanding the
many regulations and rules. While a change in the 2017 NDAA
made much-needed improvements to the verification of veterans,
significant issues of concern still remain. They are detailed
in my written statement, but to name a few they are the
requirements around military spouse participation and veterans
not being located within a reasonable commute from job sites.
There is a rebuttal presumption that he or she does not control
the firm. However, I am very grateful for the VIP program in
Maryland that trains military veterans in government
contracting which Barbara Ashe spearheaded.
While I am also a woman-owned business, my fellow panelists
already touched on this program, so I will use the remaining
time to talk about the 8(a) business development program.
Civility obtained the 8(a) certification after being in
business for four years. I utilized my local SCORE chapter for
support. Do note, though, that the SBA Office of the Inspector
General reported that since 2010, there has been a consistent
decline in the number of small business owners participating in
the 8(a) program. There are many potential reasons for the
decrease in participation, but I would like to highlight a few
changes that would help.
The first is the requirement of the administrator to
approve the sale of an 8(a) firm, or transfer of 8(a) contracts
to another eligible 8(a) concern. This should be removed.
Obtaining the administrator's approval seems burdensome and
unnecessary. Unfamiliarity and--my apologies.
Recently, Civility was accepted in a pilot program referred
to as the 8(a) Accelerator, that was established by the Bowie
BIC University in Prince George's County, Maryland, to help
train up 8(a) firms, and the SBA Washington District office
collaborated in its development. The Business Opportunity
Specialists can only provide procurement assistance to 8(a)
firms, and Congress should explore expanding their portfolios
to include all SBA certifications, and the government would see
tangible results.
I lost a page and I am going to have to just move on.
Creating a pathway forward for all certified companies to
thrive in their businesses is important. However,
accountability and proper implementation of SBA's contracting
programs is necessary, and to ensure a level playing field. The
government met its 5 percent goal of contracting with women
once, and has never met its HUBZone goals. I urge the Committee
to think big when it comes to reauthorizing contracting
programs in order to strengthen small business growth.
This concludes my testimony and I am happy to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sayles follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Thank you. I am going to defer to the
Ranking Member.
Senator Cardin. Let me thank all of our witnesses. Very,
very helpful. I am glad that you are here, by the way. You
belong here. I had a chance to be with Fearless Solutions and
the work that you do in helping SBA with the HUBZones is an
important contribution, and it is great to see a small business
owner doing that.
And it is good to see a graduate from the VIP program that
is here. One of the things that we talk about, Mr. Chairman, is
providing the technical help and assistance so that, whether it
is a veteran-owned business or whether it is a women-owned
business or whether it is a disadvantaged 8(a) business, that
they have the technical help in order to understand how
entrepreneurship can work to their advantage and they can get
contracts. The VIP program, which started in Montgomery County,
by the Chamber, in which Ms. Sayles is a graduate, has been
now, I think, a national model, and the SBA is working with
them to be able to give that type of technical assistance to
veterans so that they understand how they can use the tools
that are available under the SBA.
But I want to get to the issues that all three of you have
raised, one way or the other, and that is how these programs
are working. The rule of two, which does not apply to 8(a) but
does apply to the women-owned small businesses, HUBZones, and
to the veteran businesses, Ms. Marino, I think you said that is
a real impediment to the programs that require the rule of two.
Are you all finding that to be the case, that because of the
requirements of having at least two businesses that it prevents
sole-source from really working for its intended purpose?
Mr. Sayles. I would like to speak on this, sir. When I
started Civility Management Solutions I had managed 128
employees, about $11.5 million, through seven different
agencies. I had great relationships. They knew that I brought
great work, that I could manage staff. However, as a woman-
owned small business that had no added value for me. It took me
to obtain, actually, the 8(a) program, of certified within four
years, that opened up the door, because they could not get to
me, even though there was the opportunity through the Woman-
Owned Small Business with a sole source. But yet I did not have
the past performance to compete, so that is when the
opportunity actually opened, was when I got 8(a), not because I
was woman-owned.
Mr. Dzirasa. I would like to echo that sentiment as well.
Saying we are HUBZone, both HUBZone and 8(a), received our
HUBZone certification prior to our 8(a) certification, we have
had the same issue, where 8(a) just becomes the easy path,
right. When there is a requirement and they need to get a
requirement done very quickly, it becomes a very fast way for
them to get the requirement awarded. And so even with the
HUBZone, people still, in lieu of that, would do the 8(a) award
and then double-count and get credit for both the 8(a) and
HUBZone, but not doing the HUBZone direct.
Ms. Marino. I was awarded a rather good-sized sole-source
contract from the U.S. Army out of the 410 Contracting Command
out of San Antonio, Texas, for SOUTHCOM. It was a $1.8 million
sole-source project. And the only reason that I was awarded
that is because I brought information to the contracting
officer, and taught her what the FAR allowed her to do, and I
was the only company that could perform, because I live in Key
West and my company is in Key West, from Key West to Miami.
There were no other companies that could meet this requirement.
It was a mechanical contract, air conditioning.
And she had pushback from her command in San Antonio, you
know, telling her that she could not award this sole source to
a woman-owned small business. And she said, ``Yes, I can. Here
is the FAR and I am going to do it.'' And so she really had to
educate her command on the regulations that she had the
authority to do this, and they agreed, and she did award it.
But had there been another woman-owned mechanical company with
the same capacity and past performance that I had in my town,
then she probably would not have been able to award it to me on
a sole-source basis.
So, yeah, there isn't one because we are a small town, but
that would hurt.
Senator Cardin. And under the set-aside, the sole source
under 8(a) does not have that same burden.
Ms. Marino. That is correct. That is correct. She has the
authority.
Senator Cardin. So when you say you want uniformity, I take
it you would like uniformity based upon the 8(a) rules on----
Ms. Marino. Well, for all of the socioeconomic set-aside.
Senator Cardin. Right.
Ms. Marino. Why are they different?
Senator Cardin. But you want us to comply to the standard
8(a) on sole source. Is that----
Ms. Marino. Yes. That is what we are saying, and that would
help with certification too. It is already there. It would
streamline everything. We all agree.
Senator Cardin. And another matter we are looking at is
increasing the dollar thresholds and to remove the option years
in the calculation. Do you find that to be an impediment in
regards to the benefits of these programs?
Ms. Marino. Can you--I do not understand the question.
Senator Cardin. The thresholds that are there----
Ms. Marino. Right.
Senator Cardin [continuing]. Apply to each year and the
option years, so, therefore, if you have a five-year potential
contract the threshold is actually one-fifth of the full
amount. There is interest in increasing that threshold because
of the dollar amounts of these contracts. I did not know if
that affected any of your businesses or not.
Mr. Dzirasa. I think so. We have seen that particular
issue, where obviously 8(a)s are easier to award. And if they
can stretch them out then they just have to go back and
continue to renew option after option after option. And so the
ability to have a larger threshold allows them to give more
room and more capacity on particular contracts.
We have found, in some cases, they just say the ceiling
just is not large enough. We have to put it on a different
vehicle, or we have to compete it, and so that delays their
process. So I do think it would greatly help with the increase
of capacity and the value of contracts.
Senator Cardin. I would think there might also be a problem
with a smaller number of year contract in order to comply with
the cap, whereas if the option years do not count towards the
cap you do have the predictability of a longer-term commitment
without being penalized, because of the dollar amount.
Thank you all very much.
Ms. Marino. Thank you.
Chairman Rubio. Thank you. All right. Ms. Marino, let me
ask you. I understand you were the person to be awarded a sole-
source contract under the Women-Owned Program.
Ms. Marino. Well, out of the U.S. Army, from SOUTHCOM. I do
not think it was the first sole-source contract ever awarded,
but for that agency and that contracting command it was.
Chairman Rubio. How were you able to win that award, and
what can SBA or Federal agencies do to help more women-owned
businesses win these types of awards?
Ms. Marino. Well, I had to educate the contracting officer
as to the clauses in the FAR that allowed her the authority to
sole-source this to my firm, and I got that information from
being a member of WIPP. They supported all the women-owned
small businesses, gave us basically instructions on what to
tell the contracting officer and show them their authority in
the FAR. So the contracting officer was not really aware of it,
so education, I think, for the contracting officers would be
helpful.
There was pushback, as I mentioned before, from the
command, the contracting command. Even they did not realize
that there was sole-source authority for the contracting
officer. So they did not realize it either.
I think it would also be helpful, not only education for
the contracting officers but also reward for the contracting
officers for achieving the goals, the Federal goals. There does
not seem to be any way to recognize contracting officers that
are doing a great job and hitting all the goals. There is
just--it is sort of--it does not seem to be any system of
rewarding that contracting officer for doing a good job.
Chairman Rubio. I think it just touches on something we
mentioned earlier, is that the contracting officers of the
various agencies and Federal entities are not even aware----
Ms. Marino. Right.
Chairman Rubio [continuing]. Of the opportunity to do this,
which is obviously an impediment to the program moving forward.
I think, more broadly, I guess just as a broad question,
you know, why is it important to be certified--for you, for
your business to have been certified in these two women-owned
small business categories? I think you have already answered
this somewhat in describing this opportunity, but did it
increase contracting opportunities or unique resources?
Ms. Marino. Being certified 8(a) opened up a world of
opportunity for me through the Small Business Administration.
Small Business Administration guaranteed my loans. The Small
Business Administration helped me with guaranteeing my bonds,
which is required in construction contracting. They provided
training. There was so much that I got from the SBA by being an
8(a) contractor.
I think it is important that WOSB contractors are also
certified by the SBA to not only get SBA support, which is just
critical for growth and for success, but also it eliminates
fraud. I think that the same sort of rigorous background check
that the woman is really running the company, working day-to-
day, signing the contracts, signing the checks, getting in the
field, doing the work is critical. It is not just a front for
another business. So I think certification is really critical.
Chairman Rubio. Mr. Dzirasa, we have talked in this
Committee, in previous hearings, about deficiencies in
technology broadly hampering the SBA's ability to manage
programs, but in particular the HUBZone program. In 2004, the
GAO found that the HUBZone map, the SBA's primary way of
communicating HUBZone locations to the public, was out of date.
It was inaccurate. In 2013, the inspector general also found
discrepancies in the historical map data, which the SBA keeps
on a series of Excel spreadsheets. So think about that for a
moment.
I just ask, how were you able to figure out that you were
located in a HUBZone?
Mr. Dzirasa. Yeah. So interestingly enough, when we were
first certified the map was reporting bad data in that
particular case as well. The pin was on the wrong side of the
street, and we knew it was a HUBZone. So we had to go justify--
--
Chairman Rubio. The pin was on the wrong side?
Mr. Dzirasa. Yeah. So it would show that it was not, but we
knew that it was----
Chairman Rubio. The pin, like an actual pin?
Mr. Dzirasa. Yes, on the legacy map, did not show that--so
the address was--there is a HUBZone kind of a square, and the
building was clearly in there, but the pin when you put in the
address would put it here and say you are not qualified, and it
would not allow you to move forward within the process.
That has been fixed, so we actually know that well. We were
one of the things that helped to fix that for SBA. But at that
point it was difficult. I mean, you had to push back.
Chairman Rubio. You had to go find whoever was in charge of
the pins and----
Mr. Dzirasa [continuing]. And move the pin. That is right.
Yeah. We had to get the pin moved.
Chairman Rubio. Our work here is done then.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Dzirasa. But in that particular case, right, if you do
not push back, the system would not allow you to move forward,
and it would not even allow you to start the application at
that time. And that has been cleaned up. It has taken, well,
obviously from 2004, that you mentioned, to we were awarded a
contract in 2016, and by 2017, in six months, we had the first
modernization MVP out the door. And so I think some of those
things are starting to trend in the right direction.
Chairman Rubio. Yeah. And Ms. Sayles, within the four prime
contracting programs at SBA there are different processes for
becoming certified for participation, as we have talked about.
You are in a unique experience of having--you have had
experiences with three of these four programs.
Mr. Sayles. Yes, sir.
Chairman Rubio. I am curious to know which of the three did
you find to be the easiest and which one was the hardest?
Mr. Sayles. Actually, the Department of Veterans Affairs
has improved theirs, because they are also online, but the
Certify.SBA.gov site has been fabulous. And as an 8(a) firm,
even going in and doing the self-certification for the woman-
owned and economically woman-owned small business, they are
able to pull that information that is already in the system
from me being an 8(a) certified company and apply it to the
process.
So some of the questions were ``Are you an 8(a) firm?''
Yes. And based off of that I answered less questions to get
through that certification process.
So, yes, and may I add that a lot of veteran service
organizations are in agreement with the VA certification going
over to the SBA office, so that they are all housed within the
same place, which should also add more simplification to the
certification process.
Chairman Rubio. We talked also, earlier in the hearing,
about the statutory award goal of 23 percent of contracts to
small businesses. The Scorecard is supposed to measure how well
agencies are complying with this goal, but as you may have
heard and seen and probably knew before, GAO reports found some
issues with this. In your opinion, having experience with
these, what does the Scorecard get right and what needs
improvement?
Mr. Sayles. Are you speaking to me, sir? My apologies.
Actually, I am not as well versed. I just do know that a lot of
community, as a whole, in the small business, do question
whether or not the Small Business Administration Scorecard is
accurate.
Chairman Rubio. Based on their interaction with these
agencies and in terms of knowing what they know about the way
these agencies perform----
Mr. Sayles. That is correct, and how the data is collected
and how it is produced for us all to review it. There are a lot
of entities of businesses, as well as organizations, that do
question whether or not the data is correct.
Mr. Dzirasa. Yeah. I would like to echo. I also think there
are questions about the double counting. So if you award a
contract to a particular entity that has multiple
certifications, they are allowed to count that they have
received credit for all of them, and so it is not clear. If
someone is woman-owned, HUBZone, and 8(a) and they do an 8(a)
sole-source, they get a triple count. So I am unclear if that
then bubbles up into all of those numbers, as far as them
meeting the goals or not. So it is unclear how factual that
data might be.
Chairman Rubio. And you are not in, obviously, a great
position to see every contract that is going out, but I know
that there is skepticism among many in the small business
community about whether, in fact, the numbers that are being
reflected are the ones that these agencies are meeting. And as
you have heard here in the testimony today, because that is a
holistic number. So if some agency is doing 33, then somebody
else can do less, and it often times depends on the types of
contracts they are awarding.
But I know we have heard great skepticism across that, that
even some of the reported numbers are not accurate, which is
why the transparency part of the Scorecard is important, so
people have confidence that these are the sort of priorities
that are being met and addressed.
Senator Risch, did you have questions?
Senator Risch. No, I did not. Thank you for holding this
hearing. It is an important hearing, and I know there are
issues being raised. I appreciate you doing this so we can
explore them. Thank you.
Chairman Rubio. I did want to ask one more question of Ms.
Marino. You are a participant in the 8(a) program. You have
access to--you have talked about this a little bit, all the
different components on the bonding capacity and so forth that
have made you eligible for. You also have access to training,
technical assistance, in addition to being able to compete for
the set-aside.
Since you are active in the small business community as
well, would this same type of training, in your view--on the
training part of it, which you may or may not have availed
yourself of heavily, but, I do not know. Maybe you did. But
would that be useful to other contractors that you know from
Florida or through the Women Impacting Public Policy?
Ms. Marino. So I did participate in 7(j) training, webinar-
based training that the SBA provides at no charge, and I found
that that training was sort of elementary. And really what
helped me move forward in my career and really gain contracts,
which is the object, right, was really more one-on-one
training, and, in particular, the Mentor Protege Program was
really, really helpful to me. I was in the program for two
years with a large Federal contractor, and in that two-year
period I learned what to do and what not to do, as a Federal
contractor, and I gained from them all sorts of documentation
that I needed moving forward, to be a successful Federal
contractor.
And the SBA really held my mentor's feet to the fire, to
make absolutely sure that they were giving me the tools that I
needed and really training me and bringing me along so that I
could succeed. And after two years in the program, sort of
little by little I started to fly on my own with small job--
$50,000, $100,000--that just sort of grew over time. It took a
long time but that meant the protege program was really the
best education for me, as a Federal contractor.
Chairman Rubio. And I would also imagine that these
contracts have a cumulative effect, in essence, each time you
complete one it sort of opens the door to other ones----
Ms. Marino. Yes.
Chairman Rubio [continuing]. Either by reputation on the
commercial side, outside of the government contracting----
Ms. Marino. Yes.
Chairman Rubio [continuing]. The building capacity, or the
ability to gain the confidence of those awarding these
contracts that you can actually do the work.
Ms. Marino. Exactly. If you do a good job----
Chairman Rubio. I think that is probably true for all of
you.
Ms. Marino. Yeah. Good evaluations are everything.
Chairman Rubio. Well, I want to thank you guys for being
here and for your patience. We had votes today and we made the
decision to ride it out until 3:00 p.m. Otherwise, you would
have seen people running in and out all the time. But we are--
is this our last hearing or do we have another reauthorization?
We have two more. Lucky me.
[Laughter.]
And you do not have to come to those. You can watch. It is
on like C-SPAN 14, whatever. But as we work through this
reauthorization it has really also been very educational to
kind of get into the structure of the agency and all of its
different programs, and find what it does well, hear these
stories about how these programs are making a difference, but
also to identify deficiencies and look for ways to authorize
them.
In a time when obviously there are a lot divisive issues in
American politics, small business is one that is not, and I
hope you sense from the questions here today and some of the
comments that I think we have a unique opportunity to do
something here that can actually pass, because it does not
really have a partisan component to it, or even an ideological
one. And it is something that the vast majority of Americans,
certainly members of the Senate, are supportive of. Everybody
has a small business in their state, more than one, obviously,
and many come from small business backgrounds as well. So I am
grateful for your input today because it will make a
difference.
The hearing record for this will remain open for two weeks.
Any statements or questions for the record should be submitted
by Wednesday, June 26th, at 5:00 p.m. It is possible that some
of the members that were not here or had to leave early might
have a written question. If you can answer it, it would be
great. It could be part of our record, and we can point back to
it as we do our work. Thank you so much.
With that the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:58 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]