- IMPROVING ANIMAL HEALTH: REAUTHORIZATION OF FDA ANIMAL DRUG USER FEES
[Senate Hearing 115-777]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-777
IMPROVING ANIMAL HEALTH:
REAUTHORIZATION OF FDA
ANIMAL DRUG USER FEES
=======================================================================
HEARING
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION,
LABOR, AND PENSIONS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
ON
EXAMINING IMPROVING ANIMAL HEALTH, FOCUSING ON REAUTHORIZATION OF FOOD
AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION ANIMAL DRUG USER FEES
__________
FEBRUARY 13, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
28-827 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION, LABOR, AND PENSIONS
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee, Chairman
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming		PATTY MURRAY, Washington, Ranking Member
RICHARD BURR, North Carolina		BERNARD SANDERS (I), Vermont
JOHNNY ISAKSON, Georgia			ROBERT P. CASEY, JR., Pennsylvania
RAND PAUL, Kentucky			AL FRANKEN, Minnesota
SUSAN M. COLLINS, Maine			MICHAEL F. BENNET, Colorado
BILL CASSIDY, M.D., Louisiana		SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
TODD YOUNG, Indiana			TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
ORRIN G. HATCH, Utah			CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas			ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska			TIM KAINE, Virginia
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina		MARGARET WOOD HASSAN,
New Hampshire
David P. Cleary, Republican Staff Director
Lindsey Ward Seidman, Republican Deputy Staff Director
Evan Schatz, Democratic Staff Director
John Righter, Democratic Deputy Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
STATEMENTS
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 2018
Page
Committee Members
Alexander, Hon. Lamar, Chairman, Committee on Health, Education,
Labor, and Pensions, Opening statement.........................
1
Murray, Hon. Patty, Ranking Member, a U.S. Senator from the State
of Washington, Opening statement...............................
3
Witness
Solomon, Steven, DVM, MPH, Director, Center for Veterinary
Medicine, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Rockville, MD.....
5
Prepared statement...........................................
6
IMPROVING ANIMAL HEALTH:
REAUTHORIZATION OF FDA
ANIMAL DRUG USER FEES
----------
Tuesday, February 13, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m. in
room SD-430, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lamar
Alexander, presiding.
Present: Senators Alexander [presiding], Isakson, Paul,
Young, Roberts, Murkowski, Murray, Casey, Bennet, Murphy,
Warren, Hassan, Smith, and Jones.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR ALEXANDER
The Chairman. The Senate Committee on Health, Education,
Labor, and Pensions will please come to order.
Today, we are holding a hearing on updating the Animal Drug
and Generic Animal Drug User Fee Agreements. Senator Murray and
I will each have an opening statement, then we will introduce
the witness. After the testimony, Senators will each have 5
minutes of questions.
Farmers and families in Tennessee want to have access to
the drugs that keep their animals and their pets healthy.
For example, I know an East Tennessee farmer who raises
calves. He checks on them several times a day, and when he
notices one is not feeling well, he pulls him aside and gives
him a drug. This farmer wants to ensure the drug he gives the
sick calf is safe for the calf and for our food supply.
We know that the human medical products we use are safe
because the Food and Drug Administration has approved them.
The way any farmer knows the drug he has given to his calf
is safe is the same: the FDA has approved it.
Similar to the User Fee Agreements this Committee
reauthorized last year for human medical products, this year we
need to reauthorize the Animal Drug and Generic Drug User Fee
Agreements.
These are agreements between the FDA and the animal drug
industry to pay user fees to help speed the approval of new
drugs for farmers and ranchers, families, and veterinarians to
keep their animals and pets safe and healthy.
These agreements are much smaller than the human drug user
fee agreements. The revenue FDA receives from the Animal Drug
User Fees is only about 3 percent of the revenue FDA receives
from the human drug program. However, they are still critical
to keeping our animals healthy and preventing outbreaks of
disease.
There are two agreements, one for new brand animal drugs,
which the FDA calls pioneer drugs, and one for generic new
animal drugs.
Last year, the FDA received 780 applications for new
pioneer animal drugs and 240 applications for generic new
animal drugs for review. While animal drugs are used to treat
almost every animal species, much of the drug development
focuses on the seven major species: horses, cattle, pigs, dogs,
cats, chickens, and turkeys.
I was telling Senator Murray while coming in about the
book, ``Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Society,''
that I read a few years ago by Jared Diamond, Ph.D. One of the
main things I took away from it was how few domesticated
species there are; maybe 14, 15, 16, something like that.
But these seven major species include both animals that are
common family pets, as well as the livestock that is our food
supply.
On average, the animal drug industry spends over $30
million a year to develop new products for farm animals, and
over $22 million a year for new treatments for our pets. And
according to the animal drug industry, it can take up to 8
years for a drug intended for use in farm animals to be
available for veterinarians and farmers, and over 6 years for
new pet medicines.
These agreements help bring these new medicines to the
veterinarians who write prescriptions for families to care for
their pets and treat diseases, such as cancer or heartworm
disease.
While these agreements are important to our family pets, we
also want to ensure the farmers and ranchers raising our food
supply are able to treat their animals with the safe drugs they
need. Farmers often use animal drugs to prevent outbreaks of
infectious diseases, to treat pain, or prevent swelling of
joints in animals.
Having safe and effective animal drugs is important to both
the consumer--that food-producing animals are safe to eat--and
the farmer or rancher that he has a product to treat his
animals and prevent outbreaks.
According to the Tennessee Department of Agriculture, the
cattle and calves industry and the poultry industry are two of
our State's largest agriculture sectors. Since the last
reauthorization of these agreements, the number of cattlemen in
Tennessee who have been Beef Quality Assurance Certified--
meaning they have proper training to administer animal drug
products--has increased from about 17,000 cattlemen to 23,000.
It is important that farmers and ranchers continue to have
access to new medicines to keep their animals healthy and
prevent infectious disease outbreaks.
These updated agreements have been carefully worked out
between the Food and Drug Administration and animal drug
industry with input from farmers and ranchers, food and feed
producers, veterinarians, and other stakeholders.
The FDA and the manufacturers of animal drugs held eight
meetings to discuss the pioneer drug agreement and six meetings
on the generic drug agreement.
Our Committee has held eight bipartisan staff briefings
over the last few months in preparation for reauthorizing these
agreements.
Today, we are going to hear from Dr. Steven Solomon, a
veterinarian and the Director for the Center for Veterinary
Medicine at the FDA about the agreements. One of the important
goals in the updated Animal Drug User Fee Agreements is for the
FDA to reduce approval times in certain areas.
These user fees are a critical funding source for the FDA
to do its job to expedite the review of safe and effective
treatments for animals.
If Congress does not do its job to reauthorize these
critical programs, more than 115 people, who work on reviewing
these drugs, will lose their jobs. This will lead to delays in
approving new animal drugs and bringing new treatments to
farmers, ranchers, veterinarians, and families. We have to do
this by August 1, 2018.
We hope to mark up these two important agreements by the
end of this month so we can move them to the floor, and this
Committee can continue our work on other important issues.
These agreements are essential to ensure the animal drugs
on the market are safe and effective, and keep farm animals and
pets healthy, and help keep our food supply safe.
I look forward to quickly reauthorizing them.
Senator Murray.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR MURRAY
Senator Murray. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Dr. Solomon, for joining us today.
As we begin to work to reauthorize the Food and Drug
Administration's Animal Drug and Animal Generic Drug User Fees,
I am optimistic that we can do this with the same bipartisan
spirit we brought to this important issue the last time the
Animal Drug User Fee, or ADUFA, were up for reauthorization.
The same bipartisan spirit we brought to this issue last
year when we passed the FDA Reauthorization Act and
reauthorized the user fees for prescription drugs, medical
devices, generic drugs, and biosimilars.
The FDA has a critical role in protecting public health and
ensuring the safety of food, drugs, and devices that families
in my home State of Washington and across the country depend
on.
Part of that role is to ensure that our Nation's animal
population is healthy. But the development of drugs for animals
presents a unique set of challenges and considerations.
One challenge is the sheer set of different health needs we
might use drugs for, from treating illnesses that might harm
people or the animal to preventing them.
Another is the sheer number of different animals we care
for from those that are commonly pets, like dogs, cats, and
horses, to animals we commonly rely on for our food supply like
chickens, and cows, and turkeys, and pigs.
To minor species that are not common, but are so important
to their owners, or may be critically important to protecting
public health.
Finally, we have to make sure the drugs approved are not
only safe for the animals, but also safe for the people who may
consume their meat and the environment around them.
The Animal Drug User Fee Agreements help the FDA maintain
needed resources and manages this important task which affects
our lives and our families in many ways.
Some of the ways are obvious and personal. When we go to
the vet with a furry family member who has an injured paw or a
runny nose, we want to know they are getting treatment that is
safe and effective.
Some are less obvious, but no less important. We want our
farmers and livestock producers to know that the products they
use are humane for their animals and safe for consumers. We
want to know how the drugs we give animals impact the larger
environment, so that we are not creating dangerous and
unintended negative consequences.
An important example of this is the work the FDA does to
ensure antibiotics are being used judiciously in animals to
avoid creating new resistant strains of bacteria that can harm
our families.
I am pleased the FDA continues to collect antibiotic sales
data and has taken valuable steps to drive down use of
antibiotics in our food and animals.
I hope to hear more from you, Dr. Solomon, about how we can
continue to better understand how antibiotics are being used in
our food supply chain through collaboration with the Department
of Agriculture.
As we work to reauthorize this important legislation, I am
optimistic the new agreements can bring more collaboration and
communication to the drug development process by bringing
regulators and sponsors together earlier to clarify
expectations.
Congress has historically reauthorized ADUFA with
bipartisan support, and I believe this Committee can build on
that track record if we keep our focus on ensuring the health
and safety of our families and animals.
I am confident the insight from our witness today, and the
stakeholders offering comments to our bipartisan discussion
draft released last week, will help us do that.
Thank you, Dr. Solomon. Again, I am looking forward to your
testimony.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Murray.
I want to thank Senator Murray and her staff, as well as
the majority staff, for working so well together over the last
couple of years on our user fee agreements.
They are complicated, and we were able to come to a
consensus about them last August, and I look forward to the
same kind of process here.
I am pleased to welcome Dr. Steven Solomon. He will have to
up to 5 minutes to give his testimony. He was appointed
Director of the Food and Drug Administration's Center for
Veterinary Medicine in January 2017.
Before he was appointed as Director of that Center, Dr.
Solomon served in various policy and leadership roles at the
FDA for almost 30 years.
He was Deputy Associate Commissioner for Regulatory
Affairs, the Assistant Commissioner for Compliance Policy, and
is a veterinary medical officer in the Center for Veterinary
Medicine.
Welcome, Dr. Solomon. Thank you for being here. We look
forward to your testimony. If you can summarize in 5 minutes,
we will then go to questions.
STATEMENT OF STEVEN SOLOMON, DVM, MPH, DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR
VETERINARY MEDICINE, U.S. FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION,
ROCKVILLE, MARYLAND
Dr. Solomon. Good morning, Chairman Alexander, Ranking
Member Murray, and Members of the Committee.
I am Dr. Steven Solomon, Director of the Center for
Veterinary Medicine at the Food and Drug Administration.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the FDA's
proposals for reauthorization of the Animal Drug User Fee Act
and the Animal Generic Drug User Fee Act.
As you mentioned, I recently returned to CVM as the
Director after working extensively in other roles in the FDA.
This is a very good time to be at CVM for a number of reasons,
including the fact that we are seeking the development of
significant and innovative new animal products. New animal
drugs offer the promise of longer and healthier life for our
pets and other companion animals.
For example, FDA has approved new oncology treatments for
dogs targeting canine-specific tumors. These drugs represent a
significant advance for veterinary medicine, which
traditionally relies on human oncology treatments.
In recent years, the FDA has improved innovative therapy
options that target bone changes in horses to treat a common
cause of performance-ending lameness.
New stem cell therapies offer great promise for future
veterinary treatments and cures. Meanwhile, approval of the
first generic version of a vital heartworm treatment has
alleviated a shortage of a critically important treatment for
dogs and provided an alternative for pet owners.
The FDA plays a vital role in animal agriculture by
reviewing safety and efficiency of new drugs for food-producing
animals such as cattle, pigs, and chickens.
For Food-producing animals, we also evaluate whether
products derived from treated animals are safe for human
consumption.
Awareness of the public health challenge created by
antimicrobial resistance has led to important changes in animal
agriculture.
For example, as an alternative to antimicrobials, the FDA
approved a new treatment to prevent mastitis in dairy cows. At
the same time, animal welfare awareness has grown and we have
approved the first drug to reduce pain in food producing
animals.
The FDA considers timely review of new animal drug safety
and effectiveness to be central to the agency's missions to
protect and promote human and animal health.
ADUFA and AGDUFA are highly successful programs that
enhance the availability of approved drugs for food producing
and companion animals. Before their enactment, the FDA CVM had
a large backlog of overdue submissions and sponsors had to
wait, on average, 500 to 700 days for drug review. However,
thanks to ADUFA and AGDUFA user fees, CVM eliminated the
backlog in applications and dramatically reduced review times.
Both programs enable the FDA to maintain an outstanding
scientific and technical workforce, improve timely
communication with drug sponsors, and achieve other
efficiencies in the drug approval process while maintaining
scientific standards for drug safety and efficiency.
However, without reauthorization, both programs will sunset
on October 1, 2018. Timely reauthorization is needed to assure
the FDA's ability to deliver continued high levels of
performance and ensure there are no disruptions to these
important programs.
The ADUFA IV proposal is built on the success of prior
ADUFA achievements and proposes changes to current performance
goals to further enhance review. In it, the FDA agrees to
maintain current performance goals for most applications and
submissions, and to add four new performance goals to enhance
the exchange of scientific information.
The FDA would slash the timeframe for reviewing categorical
exclusion and animal drug availability and combination
medicated feed requests by two-thirds. We also established new
goals for pre-submission conferences and tissue residue method
demonstrations.
ADUFA IV also includes an FDA commitment to work on
implementing the U.S.-European Union Good Manufacturing
Practice Inspection Mutual Recognition Agreement for animal
drug facilities.
The AGDUFA III agreement includes a significant additional
financial commitment from the animal generic drug industry that
reflects its growth. These resources would help significantly
decrease review times for multiple generic submissions and
provide greater review predictability.
Both the ADUFA and the AGDUFA recommendations require 100
percent electronic submission starting next year to facilitate
efficient review. Additionally, both programs include financial
recommendations to bolster the program's stability.
The ADUFA IV and AGDUFA III agreements produced with
considerable input from the FDA, industry, and other important
stakeholders build on the achievements of these highly
successful programs. They will ensure the FDA has the resources
needed to conduct timely reviews and assist drug sponsors in
fostering innovation, enhancing access to safe and effective
therapies for food-producing and companion animals.
The FDA looks forward to working with the Committee to
achieve a timely reauthorization of these important human and
animal health programs.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the ADUFA and
AGDUFA program.
I would be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Solomon follows:]
prepared statement of steven solomon
Good afternoon, Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and
Members of the Committee. I am Dr. Steven Solomon, Director of the
Center for Veterinary Medicine (CVM) at the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA or the Agency), which is part of the Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS). Thank you for the opportunity to
discuss FDA's proposals for the reauthorization of the Animal Drug User
Fee Act and the Animal Generic Drug User Fee Act for an additional 5
years (ADUFA IV and AGDUFA III).
I recently returned to CVM as the Director after more than 20 years
serving in other roles in FDA. This is a very exciting time for
veterinary therapeutics necessary to protect both animal and human
health. Advances in biotechnology are leading to the development of
innovative, new animal drug products and approaches that offer the
promise of a safer and healthier future for the people and animals we
serve.
According to the American Veterinary Medical Association, more than
half of American households include pets, most of whom are viewed as
part of their families. Overall, this includes approximately 70 million
dogs, 74 million cats--and a diverse assortment of birds, fish, and
other animals. Our companion animals are living longer as promising new
products are being developed to treat chronic and insidious diseases.
In recent years, FDA has approved innovative treatment options,
including two treatments for navicular disease in horses, one of the
most common causes of lameness. The drugs, for the first time, target
bone changes commonly caused by the disease. FDA has also approved new
oncology treatments for dogs targeting canine-specific tumors. The
drugs represent a significant advance for veterinary medicine which
traditionally relies on oncology treatments approved for humans to
treat cancer in animals. These approved animal drugs contain canine-
specific dosing instructions and safety information. Stem cell
therapies offer great promise for future veterinary treatments and
cures. Meanwhile, approval of the first generic version of a vital
heartworm treatment has alleviated a shortage of this critically
important treatment for dogs--and provided a safe, effective, and more
affordable alternative for pet owners.
FDA plays a vital role in animal agriculture by reviewing the
safety and efficacy of new drugs for food producing animals, such as
cattle, pigs, and chickens. When reviewing new animal drugs indicated
for food producing animals, FDA also evaluates whether edible products
derived from treated animals (e.g., meat, milk and eggs) are safe for
human consumption. Awareness of the public health crisis created by
antimicrobial resistance has led to important changes in animal
agriculture--and innovative new products. For example, as an
alternative to antimicrobials, FDA approved a new treatment to prevent
mastitis in dairy cows. Another innovative new approval was the first
drug to reduce pain in food producing animals.
FDA considers timely review of the safety and effectiveness of new
animal drug applications (NADAs) to be central to the Agency's mission
to protect and promote human and animal health. ADUFA and AGDUFA are
highly successful programs that facilitate the availability of approved
products for food-producing and other animals and foster a flexible,
risk-based review framework to accommodate innovative approaches to
drug development. Prior to initiating these user fee programs, FDA's
CVM had a large backlog of overdue submissions, and sponsors had to
wait on average 500 days for pioneer drug review responses and 700 days
for generic drug review responses. As a result of ADUFA and AGDUFA user
fees, CVM eliminated the backlog in applications and has dramatically
reduced the time needed to review animal drug applications and other
submissions. Both programs help FDA to maintain a stable scientific and
technical workforce, improve timely communications with drug sponsors,
and achieve other efficiencies in the drug approval process while
maintaining science-based regulatory standards for drug safety and
efficacy.
In my testimony today, I will provide the status of FDA's
reauthorization activities. I will also provide some information about
each program, our achievements to date, and our proposed changes.
Status of FDA's Reauthorization Activities
The ADUFA III and AGDUFA II provisions of the Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic (FD&C) Act will sunset on October 1, 2018. Timely
reauthorization is needed to ensure FDA's ability to deliver continued
high levels of performance and help ensure there are no disruptions to
these important programs. FDA began the reauthorization process on May
16, 2016, with public meetings for both programs. These meetings
included presentations by FDA and presentations and public comment by
representatives of different stakeholder groups, including regulated
industry, veterinary professionals, scientific and academic experts,
and representatives of consumer advocacy groups. Transcripts and
webcast recordings are available on FDA's website at https://
www.fda.gov/ForIndustry/UserFees/AnimalDrugUserFeeActADUFA/
ucm042891.htm for ADUFA and https://www.fda.gov/ForIndustry/UserFees/
AnimalGenericDrugUserFeeActAGDUFA/ucm270232.htm for AGDUFA.
Based on comments to a public docket and the Agency's own analysis
of program challenges, FDA developed a set of potential proposed
enhancements for ADUFA IV and AGDUFA III and began negotiations with
industry. AGDUFA III negotiations took place between August 2016 and
January 2017; ADUFA IV negotiations took place between October 2016 and
April 2017. Discussions with a broader group of stakeholders also
occurred throughout this process.
Negotiated recommendations were published in the Federal Register
in October for public comment. \1\ Final public meetings were held on
November 2, 2017, to discuss the ADUFA IV and AGDUFA III
recommendations and solicit input from stakeholders. The final
recommendations were transmitted to Congress in early January, and
include, for each program, the goals letter outlining performance
metrics, proposed legislative language, and a summary of public
comments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\
FDA, ``Animal Drug User Fee Act; Recommendations; Request for
Comments; Extension of Comment Period,'' Docket No. FDA--2011--N--0656,
October 25, 2017, 82 FR 49380-82, available at https://www.gpo.gov/
fdsys/pkg/FR-2017-10-25/pdf/2017-23172.pdf; FDA, ``Animal Generic Drug
User Fee Act; Recommendations; Request for Comments; Extension of
Comment Period,'' Docket No. FDA-2011-N-0655, October 25, 2017, 82 FR
49377-79, available at https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2017-10-25/pdf/
2017-23173.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ADUFA Background
The 5-year reauthorization cycles for ADUFA--and AGDUFA--have
supported continuous program innovation, evaluation, and improvement.
Through successive reauthorizations, program enhancements have evolved
and expanded to include extensive communication and consultation
between drug sponsors and FDA throughout drug development. ADUFA I
enabled FDA to increase the number of staff dedicated to animal drug
review by approximately 30 percent. ADUFA II included important
measures to enhance communications with industry, develop and implement
electronic submission capability for applications and submissions, and
added pre-approval foreign inspection goals. It also supported 10
public workshops on mutually agreed upon topics.
ADUFA III added review flexibility to shorten second-cycle review
and included extensive information technology enhancements. The early
information process has fostered drug product innovation and increased
the availability of safe and effective products. Early information
leverages existing data and informs the scope of animal studies
required to demonstrate the new animal drug's safety and effectiveness,
which helps move the project more quickly into clinical trials.
Under ADUFA III, FDA has made multiple enhancements to the
chemistry, manufacturing, and controls (CMC) technical section of the
NADA--one of the most complex components of the new animal drug
submission--which have reduced overall review time. The Agency now
permits the submission and review of early completed CMC information,
permits comparability protocols to be submitted as protocols without
substantial data in an investigational new animal drug (an INAD) file,
and permits certain prior approval manufacturing supplements to be
resubmitted as Supplements--Changes Being Effected in 30 Days (CBE-
30's).
FDA continues to improve communications, timeliness, and
predictability of foreign pre-approval inspections. As a result of
ADUFA III, sponsors may voluntarily submit a list of foreign
manufacturing facilities they anticipate including in their
applications subject to pre-approval inspections for the following
fiscal year. Six sponsors voluntarily submitted such lists in FY 2016,
allowing better planning for all parties involved and timely execution
of good manufacturing practice (GMP) inspections by FDA.
Also as part of ADUFA III, FDA agreed to two long-term goals.
First, we agreed to explore the possibility of pursuing statutory
changes to expand the use of conditional approval. FDA is continuing
work on the goal of exploring the feasibility of statutory revisions to
expand the use of conditional approvals to other appropriate categories
of new animal drug applications beyond the current FD&C Act authority
provided under the Minor Use and Minor Species Animal Health Act of
2004 (MUMS Act). CVM formed a Conditional Approval Working Group that
has conducted preliminary activities to evaluate the feasibility,
practicality, criteria, and potential requirements for expanding the
use of conditional approval to certain major uses in major species. FDA
is committed to continuing to explore through a public and transparent
process the expanded use of conditional approval consistent with the
Agency's mission to protect and promote public health. In our second
long-term goal, FDA agreed under ADUFA III to explore the feasibility
of statutory revisions that may modify the current requirement that the
use of multiple new animal drugs in the same medicated feed each be
subject to a separate approved application. The Agency held a public
meeting on March 16, 2015, to discuss this issue with stakeholders. In
FY 2016, CVM fulfilled its commitment as outlined in the ADUFA III
goals letter and provided written recommendations concerning the use of
multiple new animal drugs in the same medicated feed for consideration
through the Federal Register on May 2, 2016. \2\ This proposal formed
the basis for process changes being recommended in ADUFA IV.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\
FDA, ``Recommendations on the Regulation of Combination Drug
Medicated Feeds; Availability; Reopening of Comment Period; Request for
Comments,'' Docket No. FDA-2014-N-1050, April 29, 2016, 81 FR 25677-78,
available at https://www.regulations.gov/document'D=FDA-2014-N-1050-
0002; and FDA, ``Recommendations on the Regulation of Combination Drug
Medicated Feeds,'' May 2, 2016, available at https://
www.regulations.gov/docket?D=FDA-2014-N-1050.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ADUFA Performance
FDA continues to deliver predictable high levels of performance
against ADUFA goal commitments for timely review, as shown in Table 1.
Final FY 2016 performance data show FDA exceeded the 90 percent review
performance level for all seven submission types. In preliminary FY
2017 performance, FDA is currently exceeding the review-time goal for
all seven submission types.
Table 1: FDA Review Performance--ADUFA FY 2016: Percent of Submissions Acted on by Goal Date
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Application/
Goal: Act on 90
Submission Type
Filed
Percent Within
On Time
Overdue
Percent on Time
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Original NADAs
15
180 days
14
1
93
and
Reactivations
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Administrative
18
60 days
18
0
100
NADAs
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Non-manufacturing
0
180 days
0
0
----
Supplemental
NADAs and
Reactivations
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Manufacturing
324
120 days
322
2
99
Supplemental
NADAs and
Reactivations
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Qualifying
6
60 days
6
0
100
Labeling
Supplements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INAD Studies
181
180 days
181
0
100
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INAD Study
277
50 days
275
2
99
Protocols
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NADA = New Animal Drug Application; INAD = Investigational New
Animal Drug
Proposal for ADUFA IV
ADUFA IV builds on the success of prior ADUFA achievements. The
negotiated recommendations propose changes to current performance goals
to further enhance review.
FDA agrees to maintain the ADUFA III performance goals regarding
review of most original and administrative NADAs, investigational new
animal drug studies, non-manufacturing supplemental NADAs, and
reactivations. To enhance the exchange of scientific information, the
Agency and industry have agreed on four new performance goals in ADUFA
IV: reducing the timeframe for reviewing Categorical Exclusion requests
from 180 to 60 days for certain qualifying submissions; shortening the
review timeframe for combination medicated feed applications requiring
no data; scheduling pre-submission conferences within 60 days upon
FDA's receiving a complete agenda request; and for a product requiring
a tissue residue method trial, scheduling the method demonstration
within 120 days of receiving a complete request. The ADUFA IV
recommendations also include a provision requiring 100 percent
electronic submission starting in FY 2019 and a commitment by FDA to
work on implementing the U.S.-European Union GMP Inspection Mutual
Recognition Agreement for animal drug facilities.
Additionally, ADUFA IV offers the following recommendations:
Eliminating the Offset Provision, which will allow
any excess collections to be more readily available for use by
FDA for the process for the review of animal drug applications.
In conjunction with eliminating the Offset Provision,
for any fiscal year the Workload Adjuster is invoked in which
FDA had excess collections in the second preceding fiscal year,
provide for FDA to reduce the workload-based fee increase by
the amount of excess collections. If FDA did not have excess
collections in the second preceding fiscal year, FDA will
collect the full amount of the workload-adjusted fee revenue.
Continuing to authorize recovery of collection
shortfalls; however, provide for any fee increase to recover
shortfalls to be reduced by the amount of remaining prior year
excess collections not already applied for purposes of reducing
workload-based fee increases.
Modifying the Workload Adjuster base years from ADUFA
II (FY 2009 through FY 2013) to ADUFA III (FY 2014 through FY
2018) to ensure the adjuster adequately captures changes in
FDA's workload during ADUFA IV.
The ADUFA IV recommendations submitted to Congress include total
fee revenue estimates for FY 2019 of $30,300,000, which includes one-
time information technology funding in the amount of $400,000. The
proposed statutory language specifies base annual fee revenue of
$29,900,000 for each of FY 2020 through FY 2023; however, this amount
is subject to possible adjustments, including for inflation, workload,
and collections shortfall.
AGDUFA Background
AGDUFA I authorized FDA's first-ever generic animal drug user fee
program, launched in FY 2009, to provide livestock and poultry
producers and pet owners with greater access to safe, effective, and
more affordable generic animal drugs. Under AGDUFA I, FDA increased the
number of staff dedicated to generic new animal drug application review
by approximately 45 percent enabling the Agency to accelerate review,
eliminate a backlog of 680 applications, and create a more predictable,
streamlined process, including electronic submission capability.
Electronic submissions have grown from approximately 3 percent of
submissions in FY 2011 to 58 percent in FY 2017.
AGDUFA II included further enhancements. FDA added flexibility with
a second-cycle shortened review process for key submission types, such
as protocols, data submissions, and applications that significantly
impact the generic new animal drug approval timeline.
Qualifying submissions receive a significantly reduced second-cycle
review to shorten approval timelines. FDA also made multiple
enhancements to the CMC technical section, similar to the ADUFA changes
noted above.
AGDUFA II added a pre-approval foreign inspection goal to improve
communications, timeliness, and predictability of these inspections.
FDA also developed question-based review (QbR) for bioequivalence
submissions, and deployed a QbR for blood-level bioequivalence protocol
submissions. Additional templates to further enhance the review of
bioequivalence submissions are currently under development.
AGDUFA Performance
FDA continues to review sponsor submissions and deliver predictably
high levels of performance against AGDUFA goal commitments for timely
review, as shown in Table 2. Final FY 2016 performance data show FDA
exceeded the 90 percent on-time goal for all five submission types.
Based on preliminary analysis of FY 2017 performance, FDA is again on
track to exceed the review-time goals for all five submission types.
Table 2: FDA Review Performance--FY 2016: Percent of Submissions Acted on by Goal Date
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Performance Goal:
Submission Type
Filed
Act on 90 Percent
On Time
Overdue
Percent on Time
within
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Original ANADAs
16
270 days
16
0
100
and
Reactivations
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Administrative
1
100 days
1
0
100
ANADAs
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Manufacturing
156
270 days
153
3
98
Supplemental
ANADAs and
Reactivations
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
JINAD Studies
63
270 days
61
2
97
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
JINAD Protocols
22
100 days
22
0
100
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANADA = Abbreviated New Animal Drug Application; JINAD = Generic
Investigational New Animal Drug
Proposal for AGDUFA III
The AGDUFA III negotiated agreement includes a significant,
additional financial commitment from the animal generic drug industry
that reflects the program's growth. The agreement is designed to slash
review times for generic submissions and increase the predictability of
FDA's review process by providing CVM resources sufficient to keep pace
with actual costs. Review times for the following submission types will
be cut as indicated in Table 3 below: ANADAs (originals, reactivations,
and administrative); prior approval supplements; and JINAD data
submissions and protocols. Like the ADUFA IV recommendation, AGDUFA III
also would require 100 percent electronic submission starting in FY
2019.
Table 3: AGDUFA III Performance Goal Review Times (Complete 90 percent within the following number of days)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Application Type
Current Goal
AGDUFA III Proposal
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Administrative Abbreviated New Animal Drug
100
60
Application (ANADA)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANADA originals/reactivations
270
240 (180 day review + 60 day admin)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANADA reactivations (shortened review)
190
120 (60 day review + 60 day admin)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Prior Approval supplements (Chemistry,
270
180
Manufacturing, and Controls)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Generic Investigational New Animal Drug (JINAD)
270
180
data submissions
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
JINAD data submissions (shortened review)
90
60
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
JINAD protocols
100
75
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, AGDUFA III offers the following recommendations:
Eliminating the Offset Provision, which will allow
any excess collections to be more readily available for use by
FDA for the process for the review of generic new animal drug
applications.
In conjunction with eliminating the offset provision,
for any fiscal year the Workload Adjuster is invoked in which
FDA had excess collections in the second preceding fiscal year,
provide for FDA to reduce the workload-based fee increase by
the amount of excess collections. If FDA did not have excess
collections in the second preceding fiscal year, FDA will
collect the full amount of the workload-adjusted fee revenue.
Modifying the Inflation Adjuster from a fixed 4
percent in AGDUFA II to a variable inflation adjuster in AGDUFA
III, matching the inflation adjuster used for the ADUFA
program.
Modifying the Workload Adjuster base years from
AGDUFA I (FY 2009 through FY 2013) to AGDUFA II (FY 2014
through FY 2018) to ensure the adjuster adequately captures
changes in FDA's workload during AGDUFA III.
The AGDUFA III recommendations submitted to Congress include total
fee revenue estimates for FY 2019 of $18,300,000; in FY 2020 through FY
2023, this amount is subject to possible adjustments, including for
inflation and workload.
Conclusion
The ADUFA IV and AGDUFA III agreements, produced with considerable
input from FDA, industry, and other important stakeholders, build on
the achievements of these highly successful programs. They will help
ensure FDA has the resources needed to conduct timely reviews and
assist drug sponsors in bringing more animal drugs to the market. They
also will foster innovation and provide enhanced access to safe and
effective animal therapies. FDA looks forward to working with the
Committee to achieve a timely reauthorization of these important human
and animal health programs.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the ADUFA and AGDUFA
programs. I would be happy to answer any questions.
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Solomon, and thank you for
being here.
We will now go a 5 minute round of questions and we will
start with Senator Isakson.
Senator Isakson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for being here today. I have a couple of
questions, one on the Center for Veterinary Medicine's Draft
Guidance for Industry on No. 187.
It is my understanding that you have issued a policy that
will consider gene-edited animals as animal drugs regardless of
how minor or complex the edit is.
Is that correct?
Dr. Solomon. The regulatory framework under 187 is that
they are new animal drugs. However, many of these products, we
would be able to use enforcement discretion to and therefore,
not have to go through a review process.
For example, things like genetically altered fish that are
these little glow fish that you see, we did an evaluation of
those and found that they pose no human safety, no target
animal safety problems, and no environmental concerns.
Therefore, we used enforcement discretion and did not apply
those standards.
Similar, we apply other standards for animal models of
disease and other laboratory animals under that framework.
Senator Isakson. Again, I am not a scientific or a medical
person, so I want to make sure I understand.
If you approve a gene edit treatment for one type of
animal, it is approved for all animals.
Is that what you are saying?
Dr. Solomon. We base on the risk associated with the type
of animal and the gene editing it is. If it is associated with
a food-producing animal, then there is more review and we use
the regulatory framework of getting the data for a new animal
drug.
If we find no concerns on safety, then we are able to use
enforcement discretion and allow those to go to market without
a review process.
Senator Isakson. Has it ever come up as a trade issue with
the Europeans, or the Koreans, or others because it is like a
GMO, like a genetic modification?
Dr. Solomon. There are very few of these animals on the
market, so it has not been a trade issue, although, we
certainly understand there is great sensitivity on these
issues.
Senator Isakson. Are you issuing any conditional
modifications or conditional approvals at the Center?
Dr. Solomon. Conditional approvals were authorized by
Congress under the Minor Use and Minor Species Act of 2004 and
therefore, other than the species that Senator Alexander
mentioned before as the major species.
We have had four products get conditional approval. One has
gone through full approval process. It is on the market. It is
a product for fish. There is another one that is still under
review and two of the products could not make it through the
conditional approval process, which requires full efficacy
review at the end of 5 years.
Senator Isakson. I know rabies is controlled, to a certain
extent, by the disbursement of rabies medicine in the wild,
hoping it will be consumed by raccoons and other types of
animals that could carry rabies.
Do you have the same approval authority on those types of
drugs as you would any that is given to an animal?
Dr. Solomon. For veterinary biologics, like a rabies
vaccine, they are actually approved by Center for Veterinary
Biologics. That is part of the USDA, not the FDA for biologics.
That differs from where we are on human biologics, which
are approved by our Center for Biologics within the FDA.
Senator Isakson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Isakson.
Senator Murray.
Senator Murray. Thank you.
Dr. Solomon, animal drugs face additional development
challenges compared to human drugs. They can only be used for
their approved indications. They have to be assessed for their
impact on the environment, and they may need to be evaluated
for how they impact meat or other food products.
In addition, since animal drugs are approved for a given
species, there are often fewer subjects available for clinical
trials.
During the recent reauthorization of the human Drug User
Fees, Congress, FDA, and the industry worked to ensure the
agency is considering all scientific tools to demonstrate a
drug meets the gold standard of safety and efficacy like using
real world evidence and embracing alternative clinical trial
designs to overcome challenges in the human drug development.
I wanted to ask you, what has the agency learned from
previous animal and human drug user fee cycles that can help
address innovation and development challenges for animal drugs
under the FDA's current legal authorities?
Dr. Solomon. Thank you for that question.
We do work closely with our human counterparts on different
models of disease, and we have used many of those processes to
develop innovative drugs.
For example, the drug that we first produced for pain
relief in animals, you cannot ask an animal, ``What is your
pain score?'' as we typically do in humans.
We actually worked with the sponsors that the pain was
associated with a disease called infectious pododermatitis, it
is a disease called foot rot, where animals do not want to put
weight on it.
We developed weight mats to evaluate how much weight the
animal puts on this mat because if they are more pain free,
they are going to be able to be less lame and put weight on it.
Similarly, for diseases like Addison's disease, which is a
decreased level of cortisol, rather than trying to do
measurements of cortisol, which are very challenging, we use
surrogate points to look at the ratios of sodium and potassium.
We have many examples of how we use alternatives, including
using a lot of information from other countries. We recently
approved a drug for noise aversion in dogs. Once again, dogs
that go through thunderstorms, they can get high anxiety. They
can get very concerned. There are field trials in Europe of
animals getting the drug where there are fireworks, and we used
that data so we did not have to do those studies in the United
States.
Senator Murray. Very good.
The CDC estimates that over 400,000 people are sickened
each year by food that is contaminated with antibiotic
resistant bacteria. Bacteria exposed to suboptimal doses or
long durations of antibiotics are prone to develop resistance,
whether they are in a person or an animal. Everyone wants to
keep our animals healthy. But inappropriate, overuse of
antibiotics in food-producing animals can fuel resistance,
which can then hurt our families.
Now, the FDA has begun to bring down the inappropriate use
of antibiotics in food animals by eliminating nonmedical uses
on drug labels and bringing the use of antibiotics and feed
under veterinary supervision.
In November, the FDA reported that animal antibiotic sales
from 2015 to 2016 went down 14 percent. That is good progress,
but the threat of antibiotic resistance demands ongoing
vigilance.
I wanted to ask you, how is the FDA using its current
authorities to continue to reduce non-judicious use?
Dr. Solomon. It is a major public health challenge on
antibiotic, antimicrobial resistance. It needs judicious use
both on the veterinary side and on the human side.
As you mentioned, we did reduce all the products that had
growth promotion claims. They now have therapeutic claims. They
are also under use by veterinary oversight, which was critical.
The American Veterinary Medical Association just recently
issued some new definitions of antibiotic, antimicrobial
stewardship and good principles. We were very pleased to see
that come out there.
The American Association of Veterinary Medical Colleges has
created a curriculum that veterinary students can better
understand judicious use principles. We continue to look at
engaging the data that we need to better measure how we slow
the resistance of antimicrobial resistance by working with the
USDA and CDC. It is a very challenging issue to try and
measure. We need to look at trends over time; a critical public
health issue.
Senator Murray. Thank you very much. Appreciate it.
The Chairman. Before we go to Senator Paul, I wonder if
Senator Isakson wants to reclaim his remaining time to ask
about his dog Gracie's separation anxiety.
[Laughter.]
Senator Isakson. I wondered if he had any free samples of
that medicine, because I have a dog that needs it bad.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Solomon. I understand completely.
Senator Isakson. It would help my marriage a lot.
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. Senator Paul.
Senator Paul. We have become more interested in some of the
food additives, and how they become approved, and how long it
takes, because we have some companies that are interested in it
in Kentucky that sell algae that is high in omega-3 to feed to
cows to try to have more omega-3 in the milk, and the same with
chickens, and things like that.
This process and this algae are for sale in Canada and
Europe. They tell this company here, ``You need to do some
preapproval study that will cost half a million before you can
even get started.'' It is like, I do not know, it just seems to
take a long time.
I think some are estimating three to 5 years, but two and 3
years in the European Union. It is like, if it has already been
approved in the European Union, we are talking about feeding
salad to a cow. I mean, we are talking about feeding algae to a
cow, something that is naturally occurring.
Should it really take 5 years to figure this out and a
couple of extra years to have pre-study done? Is there
something we can do better? Can we look at foreign data more?
Are we looking at foreign data?
Dr. Solomon. Thank you for the question.
The approval process has several mechanisms for food
additives. Once again, it is important to recognize that for
our animals, that often the food that we give them is the sole
food that they consume, versus the varied diet that we humans
eat. And therefore, it is important to assure the safety for
the animals and also the human food safety associated with it.
We do have processes for food additive petitions, generally
recognized as safe notifications for food ingredients.
We do use foreign data when it is appropriate to the type
of growing conditions and for the type of feed stuffs we use in
the United States.
Senator Paul. Yes, but it seems to me if it is approved in
Canada and Europe, you could just look at their studies. A
committee could meet and over half the time, you could just
approve it. I mean, that is never happening. It still takes you
years and years and years.
They are being asked for even a protocol study before they
even do their study, and they are not even assured of even
getting to the study, because you are requiring that, and it is
already approved and being used all over the world.
I do not really think you are using the foreign studies the
way they ought to be used. I think you really ought to review
them and there is a good chance, I would say, a very good
chance you ought to be able to just look at them and approve
them.
Are you ever looking at foreign studies of things we are
doing in Europe or Canada, and just approving them without
making them do all the studies again?
Dr. Solomon. We do use data from other countries, as I
mentioned before, on the drug side of the house.
Senator Paul. Have you ever approved any food additive
without making them repeat all of the studies that are repeat
studies in our country?
Dr. Solomon. We need to assess the validity of the data
collected in another country and see how applicable it is to
the United States.
Senator Paul. We do not ever approve them just from the
foreign studies. We make them repeat the studies again. So, I
mean, that is a question.
For example, we are growing hemp now and hemp is, I think,
naturally high in omega-3.
If I want to feed the roots of a hemp plant to a cow, do I
have to go to the FDA to ask for permission to do that?
Dr. Solomon. Once again, if it is a new feed ingredient
that has not been evaluated for safety.
Senator Paul. It seems kind of crazy if it is not drug, if
it is just something that grows in the ground and we are going
to feed it to our cows, and somehow, I have to go through a 5-
year process to ask your permission to do it. I do not know.
I would think we ought to be able to do this better, Mr.
Chairman. We talk about ways to fix this. There has to be a way
to get them to look at foreign studies. They say they are going
to do it, but then they do not. Or they do it, and they still
make our companies repeat all of these studies.
There has to be a way we can speed this up. It puts us at a
competitive disadvantage. Really, we are talking about feeding
algae. We are talking about feeding something naturally growing
to animals as a supplement. And I think we have to figure out a
way to make the process better.
Do you have any suggestions or do you think we are doing a
good job doing this? I mean, three to 5 years seems like a long
time. It is longer than the rest of the world and you are
making a company, that has already gone through this process in
another part of the world, go through it again.
Really, if they have done 2 years in Canada or 3 years in
Europe, now we are doing three to 5 years on top of what they
have already done in other countries, and they are having to
repeat all of the same studies again.
I just think for something that is being ingested by
animals, it might be excessive.
Dr. Solomon. We continue to look at efficiencies in the
program. There has been a 150 percent increase in food added
petitions over the past several years. There has been a
threefold increase in generally recognized as safe petitions.
We want to use the foreign animal data, data used in other
countries when it is applicable to conditions in the United
States.
Senator Paul. Is the current process too long or is the
current process just fine?
Dr. Solomon. I think there are always opportunities for
improvement and we will continue to look at those.
Senator Paul. Thanks.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Paul.
Dr. Solomon, Senator Paul has raised this issue before, and
I have talked to him about working with our staff and with you
to see if we can appropriately address it in this legislation.
Would you be willing to work with Senator Paul and our
staff to see if there are improvements that we can make in the
area?
Dr. Solomon. We would be delighted to work with them.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Senator Paul, we will look forward to continuing the
discussion.
Senator Hassan.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking
Member Murray, for this hearing.
Dr. Solomon, good morning, and thank you for being here.
Dr. Solomon. Good morning.
Senator Hassan. Thank you for your work.
We often hear that the animal drug market and the human
drug market have many differences. For example, the animal drug
market is much smaller than the human drug market. And unlike
the human drug market, there are not really third party payers
in the animal drug market with probably a couple of small
exceptions here and there.
But as we consider reauthorizing the user fees, I think we
should also remain mindful of the unique considerations related
to animal drugs.
It would be helpful to me for context if you could walk us
through the main differences between these two markets, the
animal drug market and the human drug market, and explain why
it is important to understand these differences.
Dr. Solomon. Thank you.
As you put out, there is a significant difference in both
the payers for the market and the economics of the veterinary
pharmaceutical industry in developing these products.
We are very conscious of that need, so we work closely with
the sponsors very early in the developmental process to try and
get drugs that have unmet needs, and can help the food animal
populations and companion animals get to the market.
You also gave us incentives under the Minor Use and Minor
Species Act to try and bring many of those drugs where the
economics are even more challenging and bring you those.
We actually do work in the minor species area with the USDA
and other ones to actually have the studies done by academics
or other research centers, so that the sponsor does not bear
all the cost of trying to bring those products to market. So,
that helps a little bit in the minor use and minor species.
We also give a number of incentives such as the conditional
approval that we talked about, that allows up to 5 years to
demonstrate the efficacy of the product.
Senator Hassan. Right.
Dr. Solomon. We have a process to work closely with the
sponsors early in the process, make sure that they have a clear
understanding of the types of studies, trying and use different
approaches recognizing the difference in species and the
difference in production conditions, to try and develop the
work and get these products to market, which we share with the
industry.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you very much. That is very
helpful.
I also wanted to touch on something you raised in your
testimony. You point out how electronic animal drug review
submissions have grown in recent years. I know that both the
Animal Drug User Fee Agreement and the Animal Generic Drug User
Fee Agreement that have been agreed on by the FDA and industry
require now 100 percent electronic submissions starting in
Fiscal Year 2019.
Can you walk us through why electronic submissions are
important and how the FDA will facilitate this requirement?
Dr. Solomon. I step back to, as I said, I have recently
returned to CVM. When I was originally there, there used to be
large trucks backing up with volumes and stacks of paper to try
and deliver the new animal drug applications.
We would have to take those applications apart, give them
to the target animal safety, the people looking at efficiency,
looking at the human food safety.
By getting the electronic submissions, the data is all
available to all the technical submission sections. It becomes
a far more efficient process for reviewing the data.
Senator Hassan. That is really helpful to know. Thank you
and congratulations to you and everybody at CVM for making that
process move forward.
I want to finally just to touch on and follow-up on Senator
Murray's question about the interplay of antibiotic use with
animals and the impact on humans as well.
I am pleased with the work CVM has done to help
policymakers and other stakeholders better understand the sale
and use of antibiotics in animal agriculture, and particularly
CVM's collection and reporting of antibiotic sales and
distribution data for food producing animals by species.
A provision in the second reauthorization of ADUFA has been
instrumental in helping us better understand the role of
antibiotics in production agriculture. And your continuing
efforts to inform policymakers by ensuring that drug sponsors
also report estimates according to food producing species is a
natural and appropriate extension of the charge Congress gave
you when it enacted this provision.
Can you tell us more about what role this data, this
specific to food-producing species plays in helping the FDA
assess progress in instituting judicious antibiotic use
practices in veterinary settings?
Dr. Solomon. Trying to determine the progression and trying
to decrease the development of resistance is a challenging
scientific area. This is one data point is the sales data. That
does not equate to the actual usage data. We are working with
the USDA and others to try and get the actual data for what
people are actually using.
It also combines with information from our national
antibiotic resistance monitoring system where we measure
resistance that is happening both in people, through the CDC,
through the USDA with retail meat samples, and through animals.
We try and look at resistance patterns and changes.
These data points all need to come together to sort of
measure continued progress doing it. I think we are looking at
not single data points. We are looking at trends over time to
measure the impact of the actions we are taking.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Hassan.
Senator Smith.
Senator Smith. Thank you very much, Chairman Alexander and
Ranking Member Murray.
Thank you, Dr. Solomon, for being here today.
I wanted to talk with you a little bit about the One Health
approach, which I understand is something that your daughter in
veterinary school is interested in, which is very, very cool.
Dr. Solomon. Very much.
Senator Smith. In 2015, when I was Lieutenant Governor,
Minnesota poultry growers were hit really hard by the avian flu
epidemic, and 9 million birds were affected, around 100 farms
across the State. It was really devastating.
Now thankfully, this particular disease did not move from
animals to humans, but it did really raise the specter of that
and the concern for that.
I have, as I mentioned before we started, I have had an
opportunity to work with Senator Young on legislation that
would promote this One Health approach.
Could you talk a little bit about how you see that strategy
and how you are working on that as you think about this
reauthorization?
Dr. Solomon. I cannot speak to specific legislation, but
the concepts of One Health are really being ingrained.
If you just look at how we review animal drugs, we are
looking at target animal safety. We are looking at animal
health. We are looking at human food safety or human user
safety, so we are looking at the human aspects. And we have to
do environmental impacts; so all three of them are sort of
incorporated in One Health.
We have also designated a person within CVM to be the
monitor working on One Health because there are lots of
initiatives going throughout the country that are better
integrating human health, animal health, and environmental
impacts.
Senator Smith. I think sometimes it is difficult for us to
figure out how to do this kind of holistic approach.
What are some of the barriers you have to overcome to make
that happen?
Dr. Solomon. I think there has been a real change in
people's thinking about how they approach and tackle problems
like you described.
There is not simply an answer of, ``I am just going to give
a vaccine.'' Or, ``I am going to try and give an antimicrobial
to deal with it.'' There is recognition that there are a lot of
conditions that need to really tackle these complex issues.
By bringing the different scientific disciplines together,
bringing people together, I think it really creates an
integration and a holistic approach to better tackle these
problems.
Senator Smith. Thank you.
I would like to ask you a little bit about generic animal
drugs. You mentioned this briefly in your testimony.
As you noted in your testimony, more than half of American
households include pets, including both of my children's. And
spending on pets has doubled over the last 12 years, I
understand, with Americans paying nearly $10 billion for pet
medications and health-related pet products.
However, compared to the human drug arena, there have been
relatively few animal drugs that have generic substitutes. And
so, that means that American families and Minnesota families
are paying so much more for care for their pets.
Could you tell us a little bit about how you see this, and
what the FDA could do to help incentivize more generics?
Dr. Solomon. The generic animal drug industry is a
relatively new industry. It is really growing.
Over the past authorization, there was an increase in work
that was really positive. So, one of our measures is a workload
adjustment and it was tremendous. It was the highest of any of
the user fee agreements. We had over 50 percent increase in
workload, very positive signs that more generics are coming to
the market.
The current reauthorization significantly reduces
timeframes for getting these products to the market. So that
was something the generic drug industry and the FDA sat down,
negotiated, reduces timeframes so we can get more generic
animal drugs to the market.
Senator Smith. Great. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Smith.
Senator Murkowski.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I feel a little bit like a fish out of water
here in the HELP Committee talking about animal health and the
Center for Veterinary Medicine. We do not have a vet school in
Alaska. We wish we had one.
But I do have an issue that I would like to raise. I think
many on this Committee have actually heard me raise the issue
of genetically engineered salmon, whether in the HELP Committee
or certainly on the Appropriations Committee.
But as I look to what the CVM does--protect human and
animal health by ensuring the safety and effectiveness of
animal drugs, and then review new animal drugs--it really does
cause me to, once again, raise an issue that I feel very, very
strongly about, and I think it is fair to say most Alaskans
share the concern that we have.
Our FDA, that has approved, what I have called
``frankenfish,'' this genetically engineered salmon, but they
have approved it through the new animal drug pathway. Now,
there were millions--millions--of Americans who wrote-in to
oppose this approval, wrote into the FDA.
But effectively what we are talking about is the first
ever--the first ever--genetically engineered species of animal
that is approved for human consumption, and it was approved
through the animal drug route, which just does not make sense
to me.
I actually left my office, and I had to move my way through
about a dozen Alaskans who were back to visit me. They are the
Alaska longliners. They fish for a living. They are part of a
very important industry.
The seafood industry, in Alaska creates about $14.6 billion
in economic output and nearly 112,000 jobs nationally. In
Alaska, more than 63,000 direct jobs, over $4.6 billion comes
from the seafood industry. The Ranking Member here knows full
well the value of strong fisheries.
But when I came to say that I was going to be speaking on
the fact that you have the first-ever genetically engineered
species of animal approved for human consumption, approved
through an animal drug route, the fishermen said to me, ``Do
they not understand that you have animals, and you have
humans?''
I said, ``Well, apparently there is a distinction within
the FDA that somehow or other thinks that you can use the
animal drug pathway to signoff on, again, a genetically
engineered species that is designed for human consumption.''
You can tell I have a real issue, a real problem with this.
I have insisted--and I have spoken recently with the head
of the FDA, that if, in fact, the FDA is going to continue
down, what I believe is, a wrong-headed approach--at a bare,
bare minimum these species should be labeled as genetically
engineered salmon. And they should further require a third
party scientific review for the approval process for this fish,
and for any other future fish that might go through this type
of an approval process.
I think most are saying that, at a bare minimum, that is
what they would understand to be appropriate.
I have had conversations with colleagues who say, ``Well,
wait a minute. How is this issue of a G.E. salmon any different
than a genetically engineered crop?'' bringing in the broader
GMO debate.
What I would remind people is that genetically engineered
animals are not crops. A fish is not a piece of corn. And
recognizing that what we are doing here, or proposing to do, is
to introduce a new species into our markets, into our homes,
and quite possibly, contrary to what any environmental
assessment claims, into our ecosystems.
This is a significant issue. I believe a significant
problem and it is one, Mr. Chairman, that I will continue to
raise. I appreciate the opportunity to raise it in the context
with Mr. Solomon here today, as we are talking about
reauthorization of the FDA Animal Drug User Fees.
Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Murkowski.
Senator Jones.
Senator Jones. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Murray.
Dr. Solomon, thank you for being here.
Let me just kind of piggyback on what Senator Isakson said.
As somebody here who is new, I have two British Labs who are
having serious problems about daddy not being home for the last
6 weeks. But my wife will tell you I am having more problems
than they are, probably, with that.
I also want to thank you for your work on behalf, on a
personal note, for a son whose life's work has been working
with zoo animals. He is about to get a degree in zoo and
aquarium management, and he has done it ever since he was 5
years old. So, thank you for your work on that.
Most of my questions about user fees have all have been
answered. What I would like to just get from you a little bit
is as regard the budget and the funding for your department.
We just went through a budget process here in which we
finally came together in a bipartisan way to come up with a
budget, and hopefully may end the kind of high stakes budgeting
process that we have seen.
Could you just kind of give me a rundown on the priorities
for your department for the Center for Veterinary Medicine in
the coming year through the FDA funding?
Dr. Solomon. In the recently released President's budget is
some additional funding, $9.7 million proposed, to be able to
support the process of the ADUFA and AGDUFA. Part of that comes
from user fees. Some of it comes from budget authority.
It is critical, with the increased workload, that we keep
up with it. So, we were delighted to see that in there. That is
a critical component of it.
Senator Jones. Right.
Dr. Solomon. We also recognized that the evaluation of
drugs goes through the whole lifecycle.
We do a certain amount of studies that are based on limited
clinical data and the number of animals. We do a fairly
thorough review, but we also find--and it is not unusual in
human medicine--when you put the products on the market, there
may be increased opportunities to evaluate the safety of it.
We are continuing to look for opportunities to look at the
whole lifecycle, post marketing area in addition to the
preapproval area. We are also looking for opportunities in the
areas previously mentioned to improve our review of animal feed
ingredients because of the same concerns about the safety of
those products and getting them on the market.
Senator Jones. All right. Well, that is great.
That is really all I have, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Thank you, Dr. Solomon.
Dr. Solomon. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Jones.
Senator Murray, do you have any other questions or
comments?
Senator Murray. I do not have any additional comments,
except that I would say that I am really pleased with this
hearing and our work on moving this forward.
I also want to thank you on the progress we are making on
the cosmetics reform proposal too as well, which is critical to
moving forward.
The Chairman. Yes, Senator Feinstein, Senator Collins, and
you have all been working on that. Thank you for saying that.
Dr. Solomon, Senator Murray and I are operating under the
assumption that we need to get our work down and to the
President by August 1.
What happens if we do not?
Dr. Solomon. Failure to reauthorize would be very
disruptive. The industry is counting on this. There are
constant reviews. We get over 6,000 submissions a year to
review it.
Failure to reauthorize would have an impact on the 115
people that you talked about previously. We would have to give
notices 60 days prior to those folks if they were no longer
going to be able to have the funds to be able to support their
activities.
Failure to reauthorize has a tremendous effect on folks,
both the industry and how disruptive it would be. But trying to
recruit talented staff that we have there, they want to know
that there is a process and a stable work environment within
the Center for Veterinary Medicine.
The Chairman. Thank you.
You mentioned there are seven major species. Just out of
curiosity, how many domesticated species are there?
Dr. Solomon. I will have to get back to you on that one.
The Chairman. There are not many, right?
Dr. Solomon. There are a few. I have the same book you do.
I will have to go back and review it.
The Chairman. I would be interested.
Senator Warren, we are about to wrap up. Let me say the
closing words and then, if it is all right with you, I am going
to leave the final question and 5 minutes to you. Would you be
good enough to close the hearing?
Senator Warren. I plan to, thank you, if the witness feels
safe under those circumstances.
The Chairman. The hearing record--subject to Senator
Warren's 5 minutes of questions, and I appreciate her
willingness to do that--the hearing record will remain open for
10 days. Members may submit additional information for the
record within the time, if they would like.
Thank you for being here today.
The Committee will stand adjourned following Senator
Warren's questions. Thank you for doing that, Senator Warren.
Senator Warren. Thank you.
The Chairman. Senator Murray, thank you.
Dr. Solomon, thank you for coming today.
Dr. Solomon. Thank you.
Senator Warren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it,
and I appreciate this opportunity to ask a question.
I wanted to go back to the question about antibiotic drugs.
The FDA's job is to protect public health, and a big part
of that is making sure that drugs are safe, that they work. We
have been talking today about how the FDA does this work for
drugs that are used in animals. I want to focus on how the
drugs used in animals can also affect human health, and this is
about antibiotics.
Antibiotics are obviously extremely important for treating
bacterial infections, but as we know, they are becoming less
and less effective. Today, resistance has been seen in almost
antibiotics that have been developed.
The CDC estimates that 2 million people in the U.S. develop
antibiotic resistant infections every year that results in
about 23,000 deaths and adds about $20 billion in healthcare
costs to our already overburdened system.
Antibiotic resistance, we know, comes from the overuse of
antibiotics, and not just overuse in humans, but overuse in
animals.
Dr. Solomon, can you just get me started here by saying a
word about how the use of antibiotics in food animals can lead
to antibiotic resistance in humans?
Dr. Solomon. Thank you for the question.
The process is giving antibiotics to animals may cause
certain resistance in those animals in the gut of those
animals.
If, on the process of those animals being slaughtered, that
resistant bacteria gets on the meat, and then people consume
that, and it is undercooked, they may be able to get that
resistant microbe. Or, simply people that are handling the
animals----
Senator Warren. Wait, on someone's hands?
Dr. Solomon. Hands.
Senator Warren. Yes.
Dr. Solomon. I mean, we see problems. We have a current
problem with people feeding raw pet food to their animals, and
unfortunately, two children got very sick because that raw pet
food, as many raw products, had salmonella in it, and they got
very ill. So, handling raw products like that can get them
exposed.
Senator Warren. Okay. So, it matters if animals become
antibiotic resistant or have antibiotic resistant bacteria, and
that that then moves over into humans and threatens humans.
Now, I know that the FDA has taken a lot of steps to
address this issue, including requiring veterinarians to
supervise all antibiotic use in animals. This was meant to make
sure that food animal producers use antibiotics only when it is
medically necessary, like when the animal is sick or there is a
risk of disease, and not use antibiotics just to grow the
animals faster.
The 2008 ADUFA reauthorization also required the FDA to
collect data from drug manufacturers on the amount of
antibiotics they sold for use in animals.
Dr. Solomon, these data tell us how many antibiotics go out
the door from the drug company to the farm. But do these data
tell us how and when those drugs are actually used on animals?
Dr. Solomon. They do not. Right now, this is sales data and
how that equates to actual usage data, is data that we are
still trying to collect.
We are working with the USDA and doing some of our own
contract work to try and better understand the actual usage
data, and making sure that everyone is following judicious use
principles.
Senator Warren. Good. So, I am glad to hear that you are
trying to get better data.
In March 2017, the Governmental Accountability Office made
several specific recommendations for ways to improve this kind
of data collection by the FDA.
The GAO also recommended that the FDA work on establishing
duration limits on drug labels for certain antibiotics used in
animals. In other words, limits on how much of an antibiotic
can be used in an animal and for what specified time.
Along with Senator Feinstein and Gillibrand, and colleagues
in the House, I followed up with a letter to then Secretary
Price about the department's work to implement those
recommendations. I never received a response to that.
Dr. Solomon, I would like to follow-up directly with you
and submit some written questions for the record after this
hearing about your progress on the GAO's recommendations.
Will you commit to answering those questions?
Dr. Solomon. Yes, we would be delighted to work with you
and get answers to those questions.
Senator Warren. Good. I do appreciate it.
I look forward to hearing more from you about how you are
responding to the GAO's recommendations and in trying to track
your progress on this issue.
With 2 million people in the United States developing
antibiotic resistant infections every year, it is clear that
more work needs to be done and I look forward to continuing to
work with the FDA to build on its earlier policies to collect
better data and to make sure that we have more careful use of
antibiotics.
Thank you.
Dr. Solomon. Thank you.
Senator Warren. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Murray. [presiding]. Thank you.
I believe Senator Roberts is on his way. Is that correct or
not? How far out is he? A couple of minutes.
What I will do on behalf of the Chairman is to recess for 2
minutes until Senator Roberts comes. If you would not mind
waiting, Dr. Solomon, we will let him reconvene and ask his
questions and close out the Committee hearing.
I apologize. Thank you.
[Hearing recessed at 11:01 a.m.]
[Hearing resumed at 11:04 a.m.]
Senator Roberts. [presiding]. The HELP Committee now
resumes its session.
Dr. Solomon, thank you for coming. I appreciate it very
much. It is not often that we have a coup like this, but every
once in a while, something like this takes place.
In the last user fee agreement, sir, the FDA agreed to
explore the expansion of conditional approvals and develop some
recommendations by September 2015.
The FDA missed that deadline and in the new user fee
agreement, there is no commitment or extension of this timeline
to continue working on this issue.
However, it is my understanding there was supposed to be a
meeting last week to lay out a process to move forward on this
issue.
Can you share some insight on what happened at this
meeting? Was there a new timeline agreed to? And if not, what
would be a reasonable timeline for the agency to publish
recommendations and issue guidance?
Dr. Solomon. Thank you for the question.
Senator Roberts. I am suggesting 1 year or 2 years at
least.
Dr. Solomon. Just to step back. The conditional approval
was authorized under the Minor Use and Minor Species Act, which
allows products to demonstrate efficacy, not at the time that
the original safety evaluation takes place, but up to 5 years
later, and then the product has to come in.
There was a proposal from industry to expand that from
conditional approval for minor species to conditional approval
for major species.
We worked with industry on that proposal. We had a series
of meetings associated with it. We reached a lot of common
understanding, but there were still some areas of disagreement.
Unfortunately, we got caught up in the new authorization
process. When I came in, which was January of last year, and
found out that we had not finalized that work, I met with the
animal health industry, gave my commitment to work on that
issue because I think it had some opportunity for us to be able
to treat some significant health conditions and some areas of
drugs that had difficult efficaciousness.
We held a meeting last week to outline proposals. I
reconfirmed my commitment with them. They asked for us to work
on this expeditiously. We agreed to work on it, so we are
appointing a committee, both within CVM and the animal health
industry to work on it.
We need to revisit where we were before and make sure we
still have a common understanding of that process, and then we
need to work on areas that we still have some challenges, which
include the issues of can a product, an animal drug product
have both an approved indication and a conditional indication
on the same label.
We are committed to expeditiously work with this issue and
bring back recommendations to the Committee, and work with the
Committee on that area.
Senator Roberts. Dr. Solomon, every once in a while, I am
asked, ``When are we going to get a farm bill?'' since I have
the privilege of being the Chairman of the Senate Agriculture
Committee.
My answer, rather than a specific date, I do not go beyond
that in terms of years, but I say, ``Sooner than later.''
Can I at least elicit that kind of a response from you?
Dr. Solomon. We are committed to work on it and it will be
sooner rather than later.
Senator Roberts. All right. Thank you, sir.
Recently, Commissioner Gottlieb told this Committee, we
should consider how to create incentives for the development of
animal drugs including a breakthrough therapy designation. This
is something that has been successful on the human side and was
recently expanded to devices under the 21st Century Cures Act.
Given the numerous expedited pathways for human drugs, do
you agree with Commissioner Gottlieb that this is something we
should explore also on the animal side?
Dr. Solomon. There are a large number of unmet animal
health needs that need to be worked at. There are significant
conditions on there, and I think it is important that we
explore any opportunities to try and address the significant
animal and public health issues, and drugs that can help fill
those needs appropriately.
Senator Roberts. Let me just say that I can speak for
virtually every member of the Senate Agriculture Committee in
our eagerness to working with you and my colleagues on this
Committee, of course, to see if this is something we could move
forward with these agreements.
The growing use of guidance documents for government wide
has been a concern to me for quite a while. Now, I recognize
that the FDA has long used guidance documents and that they are
integral to providing, certainly, to the industries that the
FDA regulates, especially when good guidance practices are
followed.
Currently, CVM has a couple of very old draft guidances on
adverse event reporting from 2001 and 2006. The regulations
referenced in these documents were written prior to the
electronic reporting of adverse events. And as a result, the
companies are being told to continue managing disharmonized
systems for adverse event collection and reporting. The
technology and systems have evolved over the past decades. The
regulations and guidance need to follow.
Will you work to withdraw or update and reissue these
items?
Dr. Solomon. There are a number of outdated items. Under
the regulatory reform, we collected a number of ideas from
industry and also going internally to look at older guidances
and regulations that may no longer be needed. So, we hope to be
able to update those.
Senator Roberts. I want to talk for just a moment about
applicant burden reduction. The FDA's drug center on the human
side, CDER, does not routinely require the submission of all
raw data of new drug applications.
However, the Center for Veterinary Medicine has expanded
their data collection requirements over the years to include
nearly all raw data associated with the study.
This requirement seems overly burdensome, not only for
innovators, but also for the agency to review. It also appears
contrary to the agency's effort to expand electronic
submission.
What, if any, efforts have you considered to streamline and
standardize the process of submitting study reports as a risk-
based approach to audit specific studies been considered?
Dr. Solomon. Thank you.
We did understand that under our regulatory reform, we got
some input from the industry about the use of raw data. We have
a workgroup that is evaluating this and try and make the
appropriate decisions on what data is valuable and critical to
determine the safety, human food safety and the environmental
impact of products, and where we do not need all the data.
Senator Roberts. I want to talk just a moment about
electronic submissions.
The new agreement requires 100 percent of applications to
be submitted electronically by October. You mentioned in your
testimony that last year, the electronic submissions for
generic applications were at 58 percent.
My question is: is this a realistic goal? How is the agency
going to assist applications with this process?
Dr. Solomon. We negotiated this agreement with the generic
animal drug industry recognizing that they had a far longer way
to go than the pioneer industry.
We have committed to also assist them with this process to
help facilitate and give them any assistance. We also got some
funding to help facilitate the electronic entry of these.
We will continue to work with the industry on this area,
but it makes a far more efficient review process.
Senator Roberts. Dr. Solomon, I want to thank you for the
work that you do. As I look over the rest of these questions, I
do not see any reason why we cannot submit then for the record
and simply adjourn the Committee, and let you go about your
business.
Dr. Solomon. Thank you.
Senator Roberts. Thank you, sir.
The hearing record will remain open for 10 days. Members
may submit additional information for the record within the
time, if they would like.
Senator Roberts. The Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:13 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[all]