- TRANSPORTATION, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
[Senate Hearing 115-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
TRANSPORTATION, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
----------
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 18, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 2:34 p.m. in room SD-192, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Susan M. Collins, chairman of the
subcommittee, presiding.
Present: Senators Collins, Blunt, Capito, Daines, Reed,
Schatz, and Murphy.
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
Office of the Secretary
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE DR. BEN CARSON, SECRETARY
opening statement of senator susan m. collins
Senator Collins. The subcommittee will come to order. Good
afternoon. Today I am pleased to welcome the Secretary of
Housing and Urban Development, Dr. Ben Carson, to review the
Department's fiscal year 2019 budget request. I am also very
pleased to be joined once again by my friend and our ranking
member, Senator Jack Reed.
In prior years, this subcommittee has faced the threat of
sequestration looming over our deliberations. Fortunately, the
budget agreement reached in February established new budget
caps for fiscal year 2018 and 2019 that will enable us to
continue to make investments in housing and community
development programs that are critical to millions of
vulnerable Americans.
The recently enacted fiscal year 2018 omnibus provided
$52.7 billion for HUD, which is $4.7 billion above the fiscal
year 2017 level. Increased funding will support critical
infrastructure investments in communities through the HOME
Community Development Block Grant and public housing programs.
It also funds rental assistance for low-income families and
seniors who would be at risk of homelessness without these
programs.
The Administration's budget request for HUD is $41.2
billion, a reduction of $11.5 billion and nearly 22 percent
below this year's enacted level. It includes several proposals
that were rejected as part of the fiscal year 2018
deliberations, and I anticipate that many of these same program
eliminations will once again be rejected.
The request reflects a significant divestment, and in some
cases abdication, of the Federal role in housing and community
development. The request assumes that State and local
governments have the ability to make up for the loss of Federal
resources, but fails to identify just how this would be
possible. Similarly, while I'm a strong advocate for public-
private partnerships, which are also part of the Secretary's
agenda, these partnerships do require public investments, which
often are not included in the budget request.
Two of the programs that the administration has once again
requested the elimination of are the CDBG and HOME programs.
They are specifically designed to leverage funds to advance
locally driven priorities. CDBG provides flexible funding to
States and localities for critical water and sewer
improvements, public services for the elderly, job training
programs, and countless other worthwhile projects that serve
low- and moderate-income communities. This program has been
remarkably effective over the years because it is so flexible,
and it enjoys widespread support among Members on both sides of
the aisle.
Since 2005, CDBG has assisted nearly 1.5 million homeowners
with services such as rehabilitation, down payment assistance,
and lead abatement. It has helped to create or retain more than
400,000 jobs, and it has benefited more than 45 million people
through infrastructure improvements. HUD's own fiscal year 2019
performance plan shows that eliminating CDBG along with HOME
would reduce the number of units the Department expects to make
healthy, physically safe, and lead-safe by two-thirds. This
essential resource for State and local governments lies at the
heart of HUD's community development mission, and eliminating
it would have a very real and significant effect on the lives
of millions of Americans.
The HOME program is equally important for leveraging
private dollars and promoting locally driven development. This
program allows local governments to acquire, rehabilitate, and
construct affordable housing and provide rental assistance for
low- and very-low-income households.
With every State suffering from a lack of affordable rental
housing, we cannot simply afford to lose a program that has
been successful in bringing private investment to the table.
The budget request also proposes steep cuts to HUD's rental
assistance programs. Funding for Section 8 voucher renewals is
nearly $900 million below current levels, and the requests only
provide 70 percent of the funds necessary for oversight,
management, physical inspections, and assisting tenants with
locating housing.
Again this year, the request does not include funding for
any new HUD-VASH vouchers. Those are the vouchers that are used
to help homeless veterans. These vouchers have been critical in
reducing veterans' homelessness by 46 percent since 2010.
Some of the proposed reductions to rental assistance would
require withholding inflationary rent increases to property
owners. Other savings are assumed from a legislative proposal
that has yet to be submitted to Congress. While these reform
proposals fall under the jurisdiction of the Banking Committee,
the funding request to this committee prematurely assumes that
they will be enacted.
The Administration's request for public housing programs is
a dramatic shift from current policy. The budget proposes to
rescind the fiscal year 2017 funding for the Choice
Neighborhoods Initiative, including funding that was recently
awarded to Lewiston, Maine.
I would say parenthetically that I had a roundtable with
people in Lewiston recently who were so excited about the grant
for the Choice Neighborhoods program because they saw it as
revitalizing an entire neighborhood, and that would attract
other people to the neighborhood, it would cause children to
grow up in a far better environment, it was aimed at not only
rehabilitating housing, but also creating more jobs and a more
exciting, vibrant neighborhood in which people could live.
The request also proposes the elimination of the Public
Housing Capital Fund, while only funding the Operating Fund at
54 percent of projected needs. Any potential benefit from
consolidating the Operating and the Capital Funds into a single
funding stream is undermined by reducing the overall funding
level. Neither residents nor taxpayers are well served by
subsidizing poor quality housing.
The Administration's request for public housing, while
inadequate, does acknowledge a broader role for the Rental
Assistance Demonstration, or RAD, program to enable public
housing units to convert to project-based Section 8. RAD, which
was created by this committee in 2012, has already leveraged
more than $5 billion in new private and public funds and
facilitated a level of construction that would have taken the
public housing authorities nearly 50 years to accomplish
through the Public Housing Capital Fund.
More important, the RAD program has achieved these goals
without increasing HUD's budget. The administration's request
to eliminate funding for the Capital Fund would have, however,
substantially reduced the intake of public housing into RAD
from nearly 100,000 units per year to only 30,000 units.
While I am deeply troubled by some of the budget proposals,
I also believe that there are areas where HUD and this
committee clearly share common interests. These include
reducing the risk of lead paint exposure, reducing regulatory
burdens on public housing authorities, supporting the RAD and
Moving-to-Work programs, promoting self-sufficiency and
addressing generational poverty, strengthening public-private
partnerships, and continuing our efforts to reduce
homelessness.
Mr. Secretary, I very much look forward to hearing from you
on these issues.
And I now turn to Senator Reed for his opening statement.
statement of senator jack reed
Senator Reed. Thank you, Chairman Collins. During the last
4 fiscal years under your leadership, we have worked diligently
to make investments in homeless assistance, affordable housing,
and economic development programs in Rhode Island, Maine, and
all across the country. I want to thank you very much for that,
Madam.
As a result of the recent budget agreement, the fiscal year
2018 Omnibus increased funding for CDBG and HOME by more than
$700 million combined, rejecting the President's proposed
elimination of these critical infrastructure programs. We were
able to make significant strides to expand housing assistance
for our Nation's most vulnerable. In the fiscal year 2018
Omnibus alone, we were able to: create more than 40,000 new
Housing Choice Vouchers for people with disabilities, fund the
construction of 2,600 new housing units for the elderly and
people with disabilities, reduce lead hazards in over 12,900
homes, provide $80 million in new resources to address youth
homelessness, and target $50 million in new funding to rapidly
house and serve victims of domestic violence.
I look forward to continuing our work this year and thank
you for your ongoing commitment to HUD programs and to people
everywhere. Thank you, Madam.
Secretary Carson, thank you very much for joining us today.
Thank you for taking the opportunity to sit down yesterday with
me. I appreciate it very much.
Last year, you came before this subcommittee and discussed
how the fiscal year 2018 budget request attempted to serve the
most vulnerable and promote greater operational efficiencies
without displacing families. However, much like last year, the
fiscal year 2019 budget request before us seems to fall short
of these goalposts and these objectives. In this budget, the
President proposes to cut HUD programs by 22 percent, an
astounding $11.5 billion below fiscal year 2018. This includes
the elimination of critical infrastructure programs like Choice
Neighborhoods, HOME, and the Community Development Block Grant,
programs that give State and local leaders the leverage to spur
affordable housing and community development and to create
jobs.
The budget also proposes to eliminate public housing
capital grants and to starve public housing agencies' operating
budgets by only providing 54 cents for every dollar required to
manage our Nation's public housing stock, crippling the
industry's ability and incentive to preserve the existing 1.1
million public housing units nationally.
The budget goes even further, cutting an additional $2
billion from other popular programs with tremendous bipartisan
support, including SHOP, Section 4, and homeless assistance
programs that serve our veterans, youth, and those with
disabilities. Mr. Secretary, those cuts don't appear to be
arbitrary. They pose a real threat to already vulnerable
populations, many of which are elderly or disabled and could
leave tens of thousands of people homeless.
While I appreciate your commitment to continuing
initiatives that encourage self-sufficiency and improve the
housing conditions for a portion of the Nation's low-income
residents, this budget fails to make the necessary investments
to meet the goals set forth in HUD's mission or even new
strategic plan developed under your leadership. These cuts
signify a halt to affordable housing construction and job
retention across the country at a time when there are more than
550,000 people experiencing homelessness. They also indicate
the Department's desire to reduce its footprint in affordable
housing and community development, while also eliminating
tangible incentives for the private sector to fill the gap.
Similar to last year's budget proposal, this budget request
contains a number of rent and preservation reforms that would
impose significant rent burdens on low-income assisted
households. I find it disconcerting that all of these reforms
are targeted to shift the cost burden to tenants and leave
property owners with little-to-no upfront capital or operating
assistance to make long-term preservation a viable option.
Instead, we should be looking at a budget request that
reflects the necessary funding for the bricks and mortar that
give our homeless veterans and elderly neighbors a modest place
to call home, a budget that improves the physical living
conditions for families or people with disabilities who cannot
move or wish to stay in their homes. We should be looking at
investments that spur job creation, stabilize communities, and
help move people through the housing continuum so that we can
move the needle on serving our hardest-to-house Americans.
I don't think that you can truly deliver on your promises
to improve the self-sufficiency of HUD-assisted residents and
protect our children from the harmful effects of lead-based
paint under this budget, because it fails to first meet the
most basic need of those very same families, which is a decent,
safe, and sanitary place to call home. A budget, which fails to
adequately protect housing for the 5 million families currently
served through HUD's rental assistance programs, cannot
possibly give these families any real chance at improved
economic or health outcomes.
Before I close, I would be remiss if I did not mention my
concern regarding recent allegations of improper expenditures
at the Department under your leadership. In my oversight
capacity on this subcommittee, I want you to know that I take
these issues very seriously, which is why I've joined my
colleagues in asking the HUD Inspector General and GAO to
investigate these matters. I look forward to the outcomes of
these reviews.
Once again, thank you, Mr. Secretary, for coming before us
this afternoon. We look forward to your answers.
Secretary Carson. Thank you.
Senator Collins. Mr. Secretary, we look forward to hearing
your testimony.
summary statement hon. ben carson
Secretary Carson. Okay. Well, thank you very much, Chairman
Collins and Ranking Member Reed, and members of the
subcommittee. I'm delighted to be here today to discuss the
work that we do at the Department of Housing and Urban
Development and my plans for fulfilling our mission with
fidelity to our congressional mandate and the best interest of
the American people.
The President's 2019 budget proposes more than $41 billion
for HUD, a 1.4 percent increase over last year's request. We
believe this is sufficient to effectively administer our core
programs, continuing needed assistance to those individuals and
families whom we currently serve, our most vulnerable
populations, especially the elderly and persons living with
disabilities.
In addition, the requested level of funding for the Housing
Choice Voucher Program will continue to support the same number
of households as we currently serve and should not result in a
termination of any housing vouchers. HUD's budget would also
make a significant investment to continue the fight to end
homelessness. Our budget proposes a record $2.4 billion to
support thousands of local homeless assistance programs across
our country.
As a doctor for many years, I'm all too familiar with the
effects of lead exposure on the developing brain. As a result,
we are requesting $145 million to ensure that homes are free of
lead-based paint hazards and other dangerous contaminants,
especially for families with small children.
I also recognize that we, as a department, need to do a
better job to ensure the funds that we spend not only meet our
requirements, but respect that these funds ultimately belong to
the public. Consequently, I have directed HUD's new chief
financial officer, Irv Dennis, to design and implement a
transformation plan and lead an internal task force within HUD
to combat waste, fraud, and abuse. Irv has made more--has more
than 36 years of private sector experience, and is the perfect
person to bring that kind of business acumen to the task.
Ms. Chairman, in spite of the billions of dollars we've
spent as a Nation trying to keep pace with the capital needs
for our public housing stock, it hasn't worked. In fact, we're
falling further and further behind. This budget recognizes that
we need another way. HUD is proposing to pivot from the current
financially unstable public housing model and, working with
public housing authorities, seek a new way to produce and
preserve affordable housing that so many families need.
We're asking for the authority to give local public housing
authorities the flexibility to use their operating funds to
support their capital needs. And we're proposing to convert
many more distressed public housing units to a project-based
Section 8 financing model through a rental assistance
demonstration, or RAD.
To date, as was mentioned, RAD has stimulated more than $5
billion in private investments to preserve this housing. Simply
put, RAD is working. The budget proposes to open the door wider
and allow more public housing authority to participate in this
innovative approach.
HUD is also supporting sustainable homeownership through
programs at the Federal Housing Administration. Building
household wealth through homeownership remains a keystone to
helping Americans climb the economic ladder of success. That's
why we've taken several steps to ensure FHA can continue to be
a reliable source of mortgage financing for years to come. And
I should mention it would be an incredibly wonderful thing if
we had an FHA Commissioner.
I'm also here today to repeat a request that you've heard
from us for many years now from several administrations. We
absolutely need to invest in FHA's information systems. FHA is
built on a mainframe that is over four decades old. Staff at
our homeownership centers still work on paper case files,
creating inefficiencies and posing numerous quality control
issues.
Ms. Chairman and members of this subcommittee, last year
was one of the most destructive in our Nation's history in
terms of natural disasters, with three devastating hurricanes
and destructive wildfires and mudslides in California. HUD is
already supporting the long-term recovery that is taking shape
in Texas, Florida, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
Clearly, we have a lot of work ahead of us.
Since last September, Congress has appropriated more than
$35 billion through HUD's Community Development Block Grant-
Disaster Recovery program. To date, we've allocated the $7.4
billion appropriated in September and the 28 billion
appropriated in March by the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018.
Nearly every program office at HUD has staff working on
disaster recovery, many of whom have volunteered to travel
disaster-stricken areas to serve on the front lines. My prayers
are always with those who are still struggling to recover. We
will continue to stand with them throughout the recovery
process.
HUD's essential mission is to provide safe, fair, and
affordable housing for the American people. Our mission also
supports opportunity and self-sufficiency so that families can
move toward economic independence. I am eager to work with
Congress and all the members of this committee to achieve what
I believe are our common goals to better serve our fellow
Americans.
Thank you.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Benjamin S. Carson, Sr.
introduction
Chairman Collins, Ranking Member Reed, and members of this
subcommittee, thank you for inviting me here today to discuss the
President's fiscal year 2019 Budget request for the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD). As you know, HUD's fiscal year
2019 Budget request is inclusive of the budget addendum that the
Administration submitted to Congress.
I also want to thank the members of this subcommittee for your
support as HUD and other Federal agencies continue to work to ensure
full recovery of the states and territories impacted by last year's
natural disasters.
accepting our challenge
The President's Budget lays out a vision for a Federal government
that is efficient, effective, accountable, and provides for a strong
national defense and economy.
It also reflects the fact that we must better serve the American
people by tackling our staggering $20.6 trillion national debt. This
requires tough budgetary choices. Our children's and grandchildren's
futures depend on it.
At HUD, we believe the requested level of funding--$41.244
billion--is sufficient to effectively administer our core programs,
particularly as we are committed to running our programs more
efficiently, spending every tax dollar with which we are entrusted
wisely. I have directed HUD's new Chief Financial Officer, Irv Dennis,
a Certified Public Accountant with more than 36 years of experience, to
put the controls, systems, and processes in place to ensure we do just
that.
Even within this context of fiscal restraint, it is important to
note this year's Budget request represents a 1.4 percent increase over
last year's request.
budget highlights
The Budget proposal ensures that HUD continues to serve the most
vulnerable in our society--half of HUD-assisted households are elderly
or living with disabilities. Our budget anticipates the adoption of
forthcoming proposed legislative reforms and will not increase rent
payments for currently served elderly or disabled households. In
addition, the funding level for the Housing Voucher program would
support the same number of households as currently assisted and should
not result in the termination of any housing vouchers.
HUD's Budget also makes a significant investment in the fight
against homelessness. The Department's Point-in-Time count, conducted
in January 2017, indicated homelessness was on the rise for the first
time in a decade, primarily driven by high-cost housing markets along
the east and west coasts. Our Budget proposes spending $2.383 billion,
a $133 million increase over last year's request, and includes $40
million for rapid re-housing targeted to communities with high rates of
unsheltered homelessness.
Additionally, as a neurosurgeon, I am all too familiar with the
effects of lead exposure on the developing brain. As a result, we are
requesting $145 million to ensure that homes are free of lead-based
paint hazards and other dangerous contaminants, especially for families
with small children. This is an 11.5 percent increase over last year's
request.
refocusing our efforts
The centerpiece of this year's Budget proposal is our promotion of
economic opportunity and self-sufficiency.
For too many years, we have measured the effectiveness of housing
and other anti-poverty programs by the number of Americans
participating in them. With this Budget, we propose measuring success
by the number of people we help to exit the programs with positive
outcomes. To help transition the people HUD serves towards economic
independence, we are requesting $75 million for the Family Self-
Sufficiency program and $10 million for Jobs Plus.
We are also requesting funding to evaluate the EnVision Center
Initiative, a demonstration that will leverage public-private
partnerships to connect individuals and families living in HUD-
assisted housing with job-training, education, health and wellness, and
other streamlined services that lead to self-sufficiency.
HUD is also beginning to pivot from the current, financially
unsustainable model of public housing and will be working with Public
Housing Authorities (PHAs) to find the best way to support assisted
families through other housing platforms. It was a difficult decision
to not request funding for capital improvements in Public Housing.
Instead, we've asked for PHAs to have the flexibility to use operating
funds for capital needs. This will allow PHAs to function more like
every other multifamily building owner in America. We also believe that
encouraging states and localities to bring more resources to the table
helps ensure that PHAs are empowered to make decisions at the local
level that best address the needs of their communities.
As part of the transformation of public housing, HUD is committed
to providing new strategies and enhancing existing tools so that PHAs
are provided with additional options to operate their portfolios. For
example, HUD is developing a streamlined process to allow PHAs to
convert public housing assistance to vouchers where this would save
taxpayer money and give families more choice in deciding where to live.
HUD is proposing to convert an expanded number of units in our
nation's housing stock to project-based Section 8 ownership via the
Rental Assistance Demonstration (RAD). RAD is a program that multiplies
the impact of private and other investment in order to rehabilitate
aging affordable housing across the country. In order to stretch those
dollars further, HUD is requesting $100 million specifically for RAD
and supports lifting the cap on RAD units so more communities can
participate. To date, PHAs and their partners have raised $5 billion to
improve and recapitalize 88,000 public housing units at revenue neutral
rent levels. This would have taken decades to accomplish through
traditional public housing funding streams.
rent reform
HUD spent the past year examining its main rental programs--Housing
Choice Vouchers, Project-Based Rental Assistance, Public Housing,
Section 202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly, and Section 811
Supportive Housing for Persons with Disabilities--with the goals of
improving resident outcomes, decreasing administrative burdens, and
maximizing public investment.
As a result of this work, HUD's Budget proposal is based on a
legislative package to modernize and streamline existing rental
assistance programs. Our plan will simplify program administration,
encourage work and stable family formation, increase local control and
choice, promote fiscal sustainability, and protect currently assisted
elderly and disabled households from adverse impacts.
Features of the plan include establishing mandatory minimum rents;
simplifying rent calculations; increasing tenant rent contributions
while protecting the most vulnerable current tenants, primarily the
elderly and disabled; incentivizing work by limiting income
recertification for all households to once every 3 years; providing a
hardship exemption for tenants who are unable to pay their rents; and
giving PHAs and property owners the option to choose alternative rent
structures that work best for their communities.
federal housing administration
HUD is also laying a better path to homeownership through programs
at the Federal Housing Administration (FHA). Building equity in a home
remains a critical component of helping Americans climb the economic
ladder of success. But we don't do the families we serve any favors if
we facilitate lending that is unsustainable--not to mention the
taxpayers who stand behind our $1.2 trillion book of business.
That is why we have taken several steps to ensure FHA can play a
viable role in mortgage lending for years to come. One of the first
actions the Trump Administration took was to pull back the prior
administration's proposed mortgage insurance premium decrease for FHA.
Our analysis shows this was the absolute right decision: had the
premium reduction gone forward, FHA would have found itself below its
statutory 2 percent minimum capital ratio requirement.
We also acted swiftly to improve the health of the Mutual Mortgage
Insurance (MMI) Fund by placing FHA's reverse mortgage program, the
Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (HECM) program, on a more financially
sound footing for new books of business. HECM has been a drain on the
MMI Fund, depleting it of $11.7 billion since 2009. We are monitoring
this program closely to determine what additional changes are
warranted, while simultaneously expecting to face continued losses due
to older, existing loans in the portfolio.
Another change we made recently involves protecting the taxpayers
who make FHA insurance possible. A few months ago, we made ineligible
for FHA insurance properties encumbered with Property Assessed Clean
Energy (PACE) obligations. Prior to this decision, PACE obligations had
effectively been given priority lien status over FHA-insured mortgages,
which presented unacceptable risks for taxpayers.
Managing our risk also involves operating a stable technology
platform for FHA. HUD can no longer defer this important investment.
FHA is built on a mainframe that is over four decades old. Staff at our
homeownership centers still work on paper case files, which not only
presents inefficiencies, but also poses numerous issues for quality
control.
That is why HUD has proposed up to $20 million to fund targeted
improvements in single-family Information Technology (IT) and allow FHA
to better interact with a modern financial system. To offset the cost
of this critical investment, the Budget proposes a modest fee of no
more than $25 per loan that would apply on a prospective basis and
expire after 4 years. It will take the cooperation of government and
private sector lenders to make this needed investment, but I am certain
it is one that will lead to mutually-beneficial outcomes.
Another important source of affordability for millions of Americans
is manufactured housing. Today, it accounts for about 10 percent of the
market, and an even greater share for those in rural areas. As the
agency that implements the Federal laws governing the quality, safety,
and affordability of manufactured housing, HUD has a key role to play
here. We have instituted a regulatory review of all manufactured
housing rules with an aim towards reducing undue burdens on production.
We must strike the right balance between ensuring the availability of
such homes and protecting the families who will reside in them.
disaster recovery
It is important to note the ongoing disaster recovery efforts
underway at HUD. Since last September, Congress has appropriated $35.4
billion in long-term disaster recovery funding under the Community
Development Block Grant--Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) program. The
initial amount of $7.4 billion has been fully allocated and related
guidance has been issued. On April 10, the Department allocated the
full $28 billion contained in the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 and
will issue the related guidance in the coming months. HUD will work
with each grantee to ensure the funding is spent in accordance with
Congress' intent.
HUD has also provided ongoing relief to homeowners in the
Presidentially Declared Major Disaster Areas. This includes the
recently announced ``Disaster Standalone Partial Claim,'' a new option
that covers up to 12 months of missed mortgage payments through an
interest-free second loan on the mortgage, payable only when the
borrower sells the home or refinances the mortgage. In addition, the
moratorium on foreclosure actions against insured borrowers in Puerto
Rico and the Virgin Islands has been extended until May 18, 2018. Other
resources, including forbearance and loan modification options,
continue to be available as well. HUD continues to provide technical
assistance to mainland PHAs and displaced residents.
Nearly every program office at HUD has staff working on disaster
recovery, many of whom have volunteered to travel to disaster-stricken
areas and serve on the front lines. My prayers are always with those
who are still struggling to recover.
HUD has a government-wide mission to coordinate housing recovery,
not just for HUD-assisted households, but for all Americans who are
impacted by disasters. We continue to take this obligation seriously
and are committed to supporting the communities as they rebuild.
conclusion
HUD is committed to safe, fair, and affordable housing for the
American people. It also acts as a stepping stone to opportunity and
self-sufficiency so that families can graduate from assisted housing to
economic independence. President Trump's proposed fiscal year 2019
Budget will enable HUD to fill this role, now and in the future,
through reforming and refocusing our programs and necessitating careful
stewardship of taxpayer dollars.
I am eager to work with Congress and all the members of this
Committee in achieving these worthy goals to better serve our fellow
Americans.
Senator Collins. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary.
I see that we have been joined by the ranking member of the
full committee, Senator Leahy. And I wondered if the Senator
would like to make a statement before we turn to questions.
Senator Leahy. That's okay. Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I don't now have questions. Thank you.
Senator Collins. Thank you.
CDBG
Secretary Carson, once again this administration has
proposed to eliminate the Community Development Block Grant
program. I will tell you that it is the most popular program
that this committee deals with in HUD. We hear from virtually
every member of the Appropriations Committee asking us to fully
fund this program. And one reason is that it's been shown to be
so effective at the State and local level, and it supports
projects that are truly community devised and driven rather
than a Washington-dictated approach.
I know that the budget was put together before you knew
what the budget caps were going to be for this year. And I also
know, and I commend you for this, that, as Secretary, you have
visited numerous communities to look at HUD's programs and to
see whether or not they are working. Every dollar that's
invested in the CDBG program leverages almost 4 additional
dollars through other sources, and, as I said, it's really
locally driven, which makes it effective as well.
Are you still wedded to the elimination of this program now
that you know that we've got a higher budget cap for this year
than may have been anticipated when the budget was drafted?
Secretary Carson. Well, thank you very much, Madam
Chairman, first of all, for your incredible service to our
country and not missing a vote in over 6,000 votes, the Cal
Ripken of the Senate. It's very impressive.
Senator Collins. Thank you.
Secretary Carson. And for your care for the people.
You know, in going around the country and visiting various
programs, you know, you might be shocked to know that I don't
disagree with you or Senator Reed about the effect of some of
these programs and how important they are. But the issue really
comes down to one of, do we experience a little pain now so
that we're sustainable in the future so that our children and
our grandchildren are not completely overwhelmed by debt, or do
we look at it another way?
And so, you know, the fact of the matter is whatever funds
we have, obviously, we're going to use them very efficiently
and very effectively. We're going to recognize that we have an
obligation to the taxpayers. Without question, the more money
we have, the more people we can help. But, you know, I think we
have to at some point come to balance this because at the rate
that we're accumulating debt, by the year 2048, every dime that
government takes in will be used to service the debt, there
will be no money for any programs. We won't be talking about
reductions, we'll be talking about bankruptcy.
Senator Collins. Well, this is a program that helps
generate economic activity and create more jobs. And in that
sense, it helps produce more revenue for the Federal
Government. So I look forward to continuing to talk to you
about that.
LEAD
You mentioned in your opening statement that, as a doctor,
you share our concern for protecting children from the dangers
of exposure to lead. And I know you know far better than we do
about the impact on developing brains. Maine is a State with
the oldest housing stock in the Nation, so we have a lot of
lead paint. I am excited about the progress that we can make
with the increased funding for lead grants that is included in
the omnibus bill. But there's a way to stretch those dollars
even further that I just want to raise with you.
I mentioned that last month that I participated in a
roundtable discussion in Lewiston, Maine, and there were owners
of low-income properties, affordable housing, and contractors
who told me that the peeling, chipped windows in older homes
are a major source of exposure to the children, to lead
exposure to the children, living in those apartments, and that
right now what happens under the lead abatement program is the
people are cleared out for a while, but they sand that lead
paint off, which produces a cloud of inhalable lead particles,
so it even makes it worse. And the answer really is new
windows, and the reason the answer is new windows is these
windows are leaky, they're highly energy inefficient.
And a lot of cities, such as Lewiston, receive both the
lead grants from HUD and Department of Energy weatherization
assistance grants. So it seems like if we could coordinate
those two programs, we could actually replace the windows,
eliminate the lead hazard and the hazard that results in the
repair and refurbishment of those windows, and end up in far
more energy-efficient apartments.
Secretary Carson. Right.
Senator Collins. So this is an example where it seems like
the Federal Government is not working well within the two
agencies to coordinate these programs. Do you have any thoughts
on this issue? I realize I'm going over my time, so----
Secretary Carson. Sure. I have a lot of thoughts on this
issue, but, you know, I could talk about this all afternoon,
the impact. And I'm just thrilled that you're concerned about
this.
And, Senator Reed, you know, we've talked about this.
The cost to the individual in terms of their potential is
incalculable, but the cost to society long term, six and seven
figures per child, and it makes absolutely no sense. I love
your idea about combining our efforts. We're doing that in
several areas now, but we'll look into that one as well.
Senator Collins. Thank you.
Senator Reed.
Senator Reed. Madam, I'll yield for Senator Leahy.
Senator Collins. Senator Leahy, Senator Reed has yielded to
you.
Senator Leahy. All right. Thank you. Thank you both, from
both ends of New England.
BUDGET CUTS / RECISSIONS
Secretary Carson, you've heard a lot of concerns from here
on the Hill. The Administration has proposed elimination of
Community Development Block Grants, the HOME Investment
Partnerships, the Rural Capacity Building Grants, and harsh
rental reforms. I could go on and on. We had members of this
subcommittee express strong concerns last year when you said
you wanted to eliminate these vital programs, and now you're
back here saying the same thing.
And, frankly, the questions I get back home, are you folks
just totally tone-deaf to what's going on? I mean, you order a
$31,000 dining room set using taxpayers' money, $31,000. I
don't even know what that could look like. But $31,000, I'll
tell you, is double the extremely low-income limit to access
Section 8 assistance for an individual in Addison, Bennington,
Caledonia, Essex, Lamoille and others counties in Vermont. A
$31,000 dining room set is more than double their annual
income.
Despite the fact that the President signed the bipartisan
budget agreement and gave his word that he backed it, now the
press is reporting that he's considering going back on his word
and sending a package of rescissions to Congress to undo the
spending decisions based on that deal. We Vermonters think when
you make a deal you keep it.
And you and I have different visions of what should be in
the budget for the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
The Congress, in a bipartisan vote, the House and Senate
clearly rejected the President's proposed cuts. So given the
fact of the difference between the vision Congress has for the
Department and yours, have you or anyone on your staff
recommended or do you plan to recommend to the President or OMB
that we rescind any of the money we recently appropriated for
housing and community development programs?
Secretary Carson. Well, as I mentioned to you, I recognize
the benefits of many of these programs. And there's a tension--
--
Senator Leahy. That's not my question. My question, is have
you or anyone on your staff recommended or plan to recommend to
the President or OMB that we rescind any of the money we
recently appropriated for housing and community development
programs? That's an easy yes or no answer.
Secretary Carson. I have not talked to anybody this week
about that, but throughout the process----
Senator Leahy. Have you or anyone in your Department
proposed to the President or OMB that we rescind any of this
money? I don't care if it's this week or last week or any other
time, have you?
Secretary Carson. I have talked many times about
particularly protecting the elderly and the disabled and making
sure that we don't have multiple conversations about it.
Senator Leahy. Okay. Let me try it in English. Have you or
anyone in your Department recommended that we rescind any of
the money we recently appropriated for housing and community
development proposals?
Secretary Carson. The proposal to rescind things has come
up during the last week, and I already said that I have not
spoken to anybody about that.
Senator Leahy. Do you intend to recommend any rescissions?
Secretary Carson. I imagine we will be engaged in
discussions, yes.
Senator Leahy. What would you recommend to rescind?
Secretary Carson. I would recommend that we think about not
only what is going on today, but what will be going on 30 years
from now.
Senator Leahy. Okay, but we're dealing with this year's
budget. What would you talk about rescinding in this year's
budget?
Secretary Carson. I think, again, I hope no one here is
tone-deaf, but clearly there's----
Senator Leahy. We're not--we're not tone-deaf to a clear
definitive answer, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Carson. Someone has to be concerned about what's
going to happen in the future. Someone has to.
Senator Leahy. Good. I'm concerned about the future. What
are we doing this year? Are you going to be recommending any
rescissions?
Secretary Carson. I will continue to advocate strongly for
the disabled, the elderly, and the most vulnerable people in
our society.
Senator Leahy. Well, you didn't last year in the proposals
you made. So let me ask you one more time, do you intend to
recommend any rescissions in this year's budget?
Secretary Carson. And let me just say one more time, I will
continue to advocate strongly for the most vulnerable people in
our society, absolutely.
Senator Leahy. I'll just note for the record, Madam Chair,
he is not answering the question and has no intention to answer
the question apparently, or maybe doesn't know how to answer
the question. I yield my time.
Senator Collins. Senator Blunt.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Chairman.
And, Secretary Carson, thank you for being here. Thank you
for being willing to serve.
FAMILY SELF-SUFFICIENCY
I have a couple of questions. One, Senator Reed and I have
legislation that we have probably all three talked about, not
at the same time, but I think he's talked to you and I've
talked to you about the Family Self-Sufficiency ideas that we
have to make that program----
Secretary Carson. Yes.
Senator Blunt [continuing]. Work more smoothly. One of the
things it would do would be to combine two different Family
Self-Sufficiency Programs: one is under the Housing Choice
Voucher Program, the other is under the Public Housing Program.
There's really no reason to have two programs or them to run in
a dramatically different way than they currently run. It would
also expand the scope of Family Self-Sufficiency to where
things like efforts to get a GED and efforts to increase
education and workplace capacity could be included under those
Family Self-Sufficiency Programs. And I think the third thing
that we would do there is allow privately owned properties to
also be part of a rental program. Obviously, it would be great
to have your support of that and your enthusiastic
implementation if we get it done. But I would like--my first
question would be a reaction to that legislation that I know
you've had a chance to look at.
Secretary Carson. Yes. Well, first of all, thank you for
advocating for that. I've enjoyed the discussions you and I
have had about that. And I would strongly support the
amalgamation of the Family Self-Sufficiency Programs. It would
save us a lot in administrative costs and it just makes sense.
It's a logical thing to do.
Senator Blunt. And what about the private rental property
being included under that program?
Secretary Carson. I would be very amenable to such a thing.
Senator Blunt. And I'm assuming the education things also.
Those are sort of the three components?
Secretary Carson. Well, in fact, I would go so far as to
say if you give somebody a good education, it doesn't really
matter what their socioeconomic background is, they write their
own ticket. And it's something that we really need to spend
much more time emphasizing.
Senator Blunt. Well, and you certainly are a great example
of what education can mean in the changing the trajectory of a
family, and we honor you for doing that.
PHA FLEXIBILITIES
Last year, we gave you the authority to waive some of the
limitations for public housing agencies, we gave you that
authority again this year, and allow them to use more capital
and operating funds for public safety. You may have addressed
that briefly in your testimony, but the question would be, do
you intend to waive those regulations again this year? And do
you have any particular examples of where public safety
spending has made a big difference in whether housing authority
was working or not?
Secretary Carson. Yes. It's a very important issue and
vitally important that we give them that flexibility. I have
had an opportunity to see a number of places, particularly in
Detroit, where they were able to use some of the funding to put
lighting in, to put cameras in, and the police say it has
drastically decreased the criminal activity in those areas,
provided much more safety. So I think these are excellent uses
of the money.
Senator Blunt. All right. And so you are continuing to
encourage that. I think the reason the Congress gave you that
authority is so you could use it, and glad to see that you're
doing that. And thank you for your attendance today.
Secretary Carson. Thank you.
Senator Blunt. Madam Chairman, I'm done with my questions.
Senator Collins. Thank you very much.
Senator Reed.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT DISASTER RECOVERY
Senator Reed. Thank you very much, Madam Chairman.
And thank you again, Mr. Secretary. We had a chance to
speak in my office, and we brought up the topic of the CDBG-
Disaster Relief. You indicated that you had published the
allocations--and I applaud you for doing that--but, as we
recognized, until those allocations are published in the
Federal Register and the allocation plans have been vetted and
reviewed by HUD, States and localities cannot begin to obligate
funding for their recovery activities. When do you anticipate
publishing the final allocations in the Federal Register so
that grantees can move forward with the recovery process?
Secretary Carson. Those are in the process of being
completed at this point. And the other thing that we've
committed to, recognizing how long it has taken in the past to
actually get the funds to the people who need them, is we have
a 90-day review period; we're trying to shorten that to 45 days
or less.
Senator Reed. I'll emphasize the obvious. It has been a
long time since the storms broke, particularly for those people
who have been put out of their homes literally. This money
might not reach these communities until this summer. And
ironically, as they repair their homes, they'll also be
anticipating a new hurricane season, which starts roughly
around September. I urge you with all deliberate speed to get
those allocations published.
Secretary Carson. No, you're absolutely right. And one of
the reasons that it took longer for the first traunch, the 7.4,
is because we weren't sure what else was coming along. The
process has been completed now, and the $28 billion has already
been designated. Even though we have until the end of this year
to do it, it's already been done, and we're going to be working
very hard to get that to people.
Senator Reed. We also provided, Mr. Secretary, $15 million
for technical assistance and capacity building so that
applicants can respond quickly and develop and execute their
allocation plans, particularly in the communities that were
hardest hit in 2017.
Secretary Carson. Absolutely.
Senator Reed. What's your strategy for deploying this
funding for technical assistance and capacity building? As we
discussed in my office, there are some areas that probably need
not only more help, but also longer term help, so that they
develop feasible allocation plans and subsequently meet their
long-term recovery goals. Can you comment on that?
Secretary Carson. Well, you're exactly correct about that.
And one of the things that we're doing now is making sure not
only that we get the technical assistance to the disaster area
immediately, which we've done with all of these, but to have
it--have them maintain their presence, particularly in
situations where they have not experienced this kind of
disaster before. In the places where they have a lot of
experience with it, not so much, but we're not going to treat
them all the same.
Senator Reed. The other point is that these disasters are
occurring much more frequently. It seems that a 100-year flood
is now seemingly a 20-year flood.
Secretary Carson. Yeah.
Senator Reed. However, HUD's Office of Disaster Emergency
Management has never been fully operationalized. We all
anticipate that unfortunately these types of natural disasters
are going to happen with greater frequency. What are you doing
to increase this office's capabilities, and develop a more
permanent disaster and resiliency effort at HUD?
Secretary Carson. Sure.
RESILIENCY
Senator Reed. Mr. Secretary, you speak very eloquently
about the future. One of the ways we have to deal with these
disasters in order to save money as well as maintain quality of
life is to focus on resiliency, not just reconstruction. Can
you give us an idea of how you're going to reorganize the
Department to accomplish those goals?
Secretary Carson. Yeah. Well, you know, we have 23 people
there right now who are essentially full-time because of the
length of time it takes to deal with these disasters. We are
looking to actually increase that number. We're looking for
people right now. The problem is the people are so good at what
they do, people are trying to pick them off from us. So we have
to try to maintain as well as increase that area.
Resiliency is really the key. We have learned that. And
that's why, you know, there's been so much emphasis on
mitigation with Congress and with the agencies themselves.
We'll continue to emphasize that.
You know, a very good example of that is Florida. The
reason that Florida didn't experience as much damage as some of
the other places is because of the mitigation that took place
after the last set of hurricanes there. So it actually does
work.
Senator Reed. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Senator Collins. Thank you, Senator Reed.
Senator Daines.
Senator Daines. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
And thank you for testifying before the committee,
Secretary Carson. Secretary Carson, it was truly wonderful to
have you out in Montana last summer.
Secretary Carson. God's country.
Senator Daines. Yeah, it is. At least we know He vacations
there for sure.
[Laughter.]
Senator Daines. We got to experience firsthand beauty, of
course, that part of our State, but also the affordable housing
challenges in my home State. When you took your position at HUD
nearly a year ago, you expressed a vision for your agency's
facilitation of individual self-sufficiency through empowerment
as well as economic opportunity.
Secretary Carson. Right.
Senator Daines. Today I'm very pleased to see you have made
good progress in that mission through the President's fiscal
year 2019 budget proposal. Now it's up to Congress to
complement your vision by providing a partnership for the sake
of vulnerable Montana families that don't feel empowered,
rather, they feel somewhat stuck.
HOUSING COUNSELING
The research is very definitive showing that housing
education and counseling creates homeowners who are able to
purchase and sustain homeownership. HUD's involvement in this
process is key. I remember I think it was Milton Friedman that
says nobody washes a rental car. Moving people to homeownership
is so important, it's part of really the human condition.
And so HUD's involvement, and as a kid who grew up as a son
of a homebuilder, I know it's very important, especially a
State like Montana, where housing counseling agencies cover
very large rural areas.
My question for you, Secretary Carson, is, what is the
Administration's commitment and envisioned role in housing
counseling agencies and intermediaries, such as NeighborWorks
Montana?
Secretary Carson. Well, thank you for that question because
it gives me an opportunity to tell you how much I appreciate
the effect of housing counseling agencies. You know, we've been
able to demonstrate that people who receive housing counseling
default at a rate of one-third less than those who did not
receive it. So these organizations are vitally important. And
we are obviously funding them to a very significant extent.
There are like 2,100 around the country.
And the key thing is really getting people to take
advantage of them and disseminating the information both
through social media, through electronic media, through print
media. And it would be very nice, obviously, if some of the
loan officers themselves would make people cognizant of these
things, and some of them do. That's something that we just need
to continue to push it. I think it makes a big difference.
WORK REQUIREMENTS
Senator Daines. I'm going to switch gears to talk about
work requirements. The Federal Government spent over $700
billion in low-income assistance, and on April 10th, President
Trump issued Executive Order 13828, which would strengthen work
requirements for low-income assistance programs. What action do
you envision HUD taking in response to this Executive order?
Secretary Carson. Well, you know, interestingly enough,
there were already work requirements in place since 1998, which
Clinton signed. And I am delighted that the President has
signed this order because it tries to bring uniformity
throughout the agencies, consistency, so that we don't have one
fighting against another.
The whole concept of work and self-sufficiency is
incredibly important. I don't think anybody on either side
would disagree with that. The problem has been the impediments
inherent in the system so that, you know, when a person begins
to earn more money, they are penalized in terms of their rent,
and we begin to pull their support as they climb the ladders of
self-sufficiency. Those are things that we now recognize and
are ameliorating.
ENVISION CENTER
Senator Daines. Last question, and I'm out of time. I want
to talk about your Envision Center initiative. Could you share
the approach used by HUD to attract private industry
involvement in your Envision Center initiative?
Secretary Carson. Well, the whole concept behind Envision
Centers is bringing under one roof the need and the resources.
And the first one is due to open up in Detroit soon. Two more
have already sprung up as a result of the publicity that the
first one has gotten. And we've had no difficulty at all
attracting people who want to be involved because they
recognize that this is going to be a source of employees for
them and workers for them.
Senator Daines. Montana is a long way from Detroit, Mr.
Secretary, but I wonder if we could get an Envision Center in
Montana, given your early successes.
Secretary Carson. Well, we're coming your way. And there
are some people that I met in your area who are going to be
very supportive.
Senator Daines. Right. Thank you.
Secretary Carson. Thank you.
Senator Collins. Thank you, Senator.
Mr. Secretary, before I call upon Senator Schatz, I'll just
remind you that Maine comes before Montana, not only in the
alphabet, but in every good HUD program that is out there.
[Laughter.]
Senator Daines. I yield to the chair.
Senator Collins. Wise man.
Senator Schatz.
Senator Schatz. Thank you very much.
OFFICE OF FAIR HOUSING AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY ENFORCEMENT
Thank you, Secretary, for being here. On March 28th of
2018, the New York Times described--described how HUD has
rolled back enforcement actions aimed at reversing racial and
ethnic discrimination in federally subsidized housing projects
during your tenure. And in particular, the article highlights
an investigation opened in 2016 into claims that Facebook
encouraged discriminatory practices by allowing advertisers to
exclude certain ethnic groups from viewing ads for housing
sales and rentals.
The article then goes on to describe how your aides ordered
the Office of Enforcement to halt its investigation, which was
then followed by a letter from Assistant Secretary Farias
terminating the Facebook investigation without explanation. And
despite the decision not to investigate these claims, a recent
investigation released in November of 2017 found that Facebook
continues this practice to this day.
Were you involved personally in the decision to terminate
the Facebook investigation?
Secretary Carson. I give all of my people the degree of
independence that they need. But I will tell you that----
Senator Schatz. So whose decision was this?
Secretary Carson. I think we jointly agreed that was an
appropriate thing to do at that time----
Senator Schatz. What does that mean, you have a hierarchy
and there are certain authorities, Assistant Secretaries and
professional staff. Was this your decision? Was this a GC?
Secretary Carson. Well, the Secretary is responsible for
all decisions regardless of who makes them.
Senator Schatz. But who made the decision?
Secretary Carson. The decision was made at a level other
than myself, but I gave permission for the decision to be made.
Senator Schatz. And what level is that?
Secretary Carson. The Assistant Secretary.
Senator Schatz. Okay. And on what basis?
Secretary Carson. Well, on the basis that some of the suits
that were being pursued, we didn't really have time to study
them, so we wanted to really pull them back and have a chance
to study them. And we have actually reopened the Facebook case
after having an opportunity to study it.
Senator Schatz. The investigation is open again.
Secretary Carson. It is.
Senator Schatz. Is this the first we're hearing about it?
Secretary Carson. It may well be.
Senator Schatz. Okay. Well, I think the committee, both
this Committee on Appropriations for THUD as well as the
Banking Committee, is going to want to understand where you are
in this investigation and what you plan to do because that was
my whole line of questioning, is, where is the paper trail? Who
is making decisions and on what basis? But I'm happy to see
that the investigation has been reopened.
Secretary Carson. We were very concerned when we began to
uncover the facts.
AFFORABLE RENTAL HOUSING
Senator Schatz. Thank you very much. Mr. Secretary, HUD
working with lenders has had success supporting multifamily
development with a very strong credit performance and some of
the lowest delinquency rates in the industry. How do you see
HUD's role in the multifamily mortgage markets to help increase
the supply of affordable and workforce rental housing?
Secretary Carson. Well, the role of Federal Housing
Administration (FHA) obviously is a key role in terms of
affordability and helping people to realize the American dream.
You know, the FHA really acts more like an accordion. When
credit is relatively easy, then we tend to shrink, and when
credit is very difficult, we tend to expand. And obviously we
tend to focus more on first-time, you know, homebuyers and
minorities and people who have been disadvantaged in the past.
POVERTY AND FAMILIES
Senator Schatz. My final question for you has to do with
the recent Executive order calling for significant reforms to
welfare programs. And I'm going to try not to--because we only
have 53 seconds remaining--not to get into a kind of
ideological conversation about these programs, because here you
are, Secretary of HUD, here we are talking about funding for
HUD. So we've already kind of stipulated that we think the
government ought to be in the role of at least assisting people
to find housing. But I want to quote for you one part of the
Executive order, which said that many Federal programs
perpetuated poverty and weakened family bonds and traps many
recipients, especially children in poverty.
Do you have data, does the Department have data, to back up
that assertion?
Secretary Carson. We will be happy to make that data
available to you and your staff, absolutely.
Senator Schatz. Do you have any of that data off the top of
your head? If this is administration policy, it seems to me
that there should be something behind it.
Secretary Carson. Well.
Senator Schatz. I understand the sort of difference between
the parties as it relates to the social safety net----
Secretary Carson. Let me give you an example.
Senator Schatz. But that's a pretty strong statement, and I
don't want an anecdote, I want rigorous analysis that shows
that these programs actually trap people and weaken family
bonds. But that is not my understanding of the data.
Secretary Carson. Let me give you a very good example of
that. Because the rent structure goes up when a person is added
to the household, like a spouse or another contributing adult,
it disincentivizes family unity. That's one example.
Senator Schatz. Okay. That's actually not at all
unreasonable. I'm not sure that's what's contained in the
Executive order. I'm not sure that's the thrust of the
Executive order. But if that's how it's going to be interpreted
to make sure that we don't provide perverse disincentives for
family unity, we can work together on that.
Secretary Carson. Sounds good.
Senator Schatz. Thank you.
Secretary Carson. Okay.
Senator Collins. Senator Capito.
Senator Capito. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
And thank you, Madam Chair and Ranking Member, for this
hearing today.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT DISASTER RECOVERY
Mr. Secretary, I want to thank you for your leadership
through the Department on the CDBG Recovery Assistance program.
You and I have talked about this particularly our West Virginia
flood recovery.
Secretary Carson. Yes.
Senator Capito. And I know that you faced a time crunch in
your Department this year to allocate those funds, and your
work is greatly appreciated.
One of the things that's sort of mystified us in our office
and our State authorities, including our Governor, has been the
best and most effective way to estimate the damage, not just at
the present, but then going forward. And I would say if you
would have any thoughts on that, I'd be interested to hear your
thoughts.
Secretary Carson. Yes. Well, first of all, thank you so
much for the conversation we had earlier.
One of the things that we've discovered is that putting
people on the ground immediately, even though we're not
traditionally the first responders, FEMA and SBA are, we have
an opportunity to work directly with them in terms of that
assessment, and then to continue that over the course of time,
but also to add into the equation people in the local
government who are familiar with the situation and tenants
themselves. All of those things I think give us a much better
and a much quicker assessment of what the unmet needs are.
Senator Capito. Are you doing that now?
Secretary Carson. Absolutely.
Senator Capito. So did you do that like during Harvey and
that worked more efficiently.
Secretary Carson. Yes. It's still going on.
Senator Capito. It's still going on.
Secretary Carson. Yes.
Senator Capito. The other question recently was announced,
the latest round of fund for mitigation. West Virginia received
106 million. Mitigation, when I think about it, I think you and
I talked about this the other day, when I think about
mitigation, I think a lot of us think about mitigating the
streams and mitigating the waterways, the dams, and all the
levies and structures of that nature. With HUD's involvement in
mitigation, what does mitigation mean to HUD in terms of these
funds?
Secretary Carson. It means when you repair and
rehabilitate, you do it----
Senator Capito. Your housing? You're speaking about here
buildings?
Secretary Carson. It can be housing, it can be trenching
waterways, and it can be a whole series of infrastructural
things as well. But you do it in a way that gives you
resistance when that situation arises again.
Senator Capito. So I guess just in terms of clarification
in terms of the funding that's going to be coming and the
ability for the State to use this funding, I just want to
clarify with you now, when you mention trenching, you are
saying that HUD dollars can go to waterways and other ways if
that's the mitigating factor in terms of preventing the next
flood.
Secretary Carson. Absolutely. Mitigation funding is meant
to be flexible so that it can--because it's going to be
different in each location.
Senator Capito. Well, that's actually very good news for
where we live. We have a lot of hills and valleys, and our
valleys lots of times are creeks and other things that feed our
larger water--our rivers, and get so jammed up with debris and
other things----
Secretary Carson. Absolutely.
Senator Capito [continuing]. That that becomes the problem.
Rather than the amount of rainfall, there's no place for it to
go.
Secretary Carson. Absolutely.
Senator Capito. And so that's an issue.
OPIOIDS
Another issue for us in the State is opioid and opioid use.
And we have the highest rate of deaths resulted from overdose
than any other State in the Union. And it's a troubling, tragic
thing for all of us, and particularly in my State. What is HUD
doing to try to coordinate with other entities and also on the
ground with housing authorities to help in this issue?
Secretary Carson. Well, as you know, you know, the
President declared it a national health emergency.
Senator Capito. Right.
Secretary Carson. And we have a multiagency council
focusing on it. One of the things that HUD is doing is
providing significant funding, over $505 million, in the
Continuum of Care program devoted toward people who have
substance abuse problems. We also recognize that prevention is
a key part of it. And through things like the Envision Centers,
providing or disseminating information that will help people to
recognize the consequences of what's going on before they get
involved, I think will make a huge impact.
Senator Capito. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Senator Collins. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Murphy.
CRUMBLING FOUNDATIONS
Senator Murphy. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman.
Welcome, Mr. Secretary. Mr. Secretary, I wanted to bring to
your attention a really pressing issue in Connecticut that I
know the Department is aware of, but I don't know whether or
not there's a way to get you more involved in it, and that is
an issue in Connecticut that has come to be known as crumbling
foundations. We have in our State up to 34,000 homes that were
made with a faulty kind of foundation due to the presence of a
mineral called pyrrhotite, and it's caused these foundations to
slowly fall apart.
Insurers refuse to make good on claims because it is a very
sort of long-lasting problem that doesn't happen all at once.
FEMA has twice denied our Governor's request for Federal
disaster declaration. As I said, we're talking about 35,000
homes in Connecticut. And our worry, given that this was a type
of foundation that was built potentially throughout the region
over a period of 10 to 15 years, is that there could be many
other States that are subject to this problem as well.
I wanted to bring it to your attention and ask that you and
I have a further dialogue about it to see if there are some
creative ways that HUD and HUD's expertise could help us deal
with this problem going forward. Part of the issue is that the
manufacturer of the concrete didn't violate the law because
there were really no regulations regarding the kind of
materials that you put into it.
So I wanted to get your commitment to have a further
conversation about it to hear some of my ideas on how HUD could
be helpful and to see if there are ways that we can work
together.
Secretary Carson. That problem was actually recently
brought to my attention by the staff. We've already started
focusing attention on that. It's a very valid issue. And, yes,
we will be very happy to work with you on that.
Senator Murphy. Great. And I would be, of course, happy to
host you in Connecticut at some point to take a look at this
problem for yourself.
SECTION 811
Second, I wanted to turn to some good news in the fiscal
year budget, which is a fairly dramatic increase in 811
Mainstream vouchers, which are supportive housing vouchers.
There is $505 million in this budget, it's an increase of $385
million from fiscal year 2017. It's good news, but it's also a
challenge for the Department to be able to get those vouchers
out the door in a short period of time.
And so my question is twofold: one, what steps are you
taking to make sure that those vouchers get to the people that
need them as soon as possible; and, B, have you thought about
ways to perhaps target some individuals who both have mental
illness and substance abuse? Is there a way to use these
housing vouchers to perhaps assist in other efforts underway to
try to tackle the opioid epidemic?
Secretary Carson. Well, we're looking for every way
possible to cut down on the regulatory burden to get the
vouchers to where they need to be much more quickly. Also, as I
mentioned before, we're going to make every effort to use every
dollar that has been allocated efficiently. This is going to be
the first opportunity in a number of years to provide some
additional units for the elderly. Without question, we're going
to be doing that.
And when it comes to substance abuse among the elderly,
it's a much more significant problem than anybody had thought
until recently, primarily because of the prescription drug
problem, and we're working on that as well.
Senator Murphy. Great.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Collins. Thank you, Senator.
VA MORTGAGE MALFEASANCE
Mr. Secretary, I'm very concerned about a business practice
among a segment of mortgage lenders known as home loan
churning. And what is happening is these mortgage lenders are
targeting VA loan programs with an onslaught of mortgage
refinancing offers, and often our veterans and military
personnel are being convinced to refinance over and over again
a loan in a single year, which has no financial benefit to
them, and, indeed, is costly to them by the time they pay the
additional fees. In fact, the fees attached to the refinancing
deals can often increase the overall loan amount. Ginnie Mae
has described this behavior as, quote, borderline predatory in
nature.
Could you update our subcommittee on what efforts Ginnie
Mae is taking to weed out these bad actors?
Secretary Carson. Absolutely. And let me just mention we
still don't have a Ginnie Mae president. I'm just mentioning
that.
Senator Collins. You're right bringing up these
appointments.
Secretary Carson. Ginnie Mae has sent out notifications to
the nine lenders who were acting inappropriately, let's put it
that way, and, you know, resolutions are well underway. Two of
them, you know, are in a place where they've been relegated to
doing only, you know, custom pools because they can no longer
be included in the benefits that Ginnie Mae offers. And, you
know, I think this is well accepted. We've already seen an
uptick in Ginnie Mae securities. People like what they see.
Senator Collins. Good. I'm very glad to hear that because
it's such unacceptable behavior----
Secretary Carson. It is, particularly with our veterans.
Senator Collins. Exactly.
Secretary Carson. Yeah.
Senator Collins. And for them to be allowed to participate
in the VA lending programs is just--and in Ginnie Mae is just
not appropriate.
Secretary Carson. Right.
HOMELESSNESS
Senator Collins. For the first time in 7 years, the
nationwide rate of homelessness actually rose last year, and it
rose by double the national amount in my State of Maine. And I
was both surprised and disheartened by that increase because
we've made reducing homelessness a real priority both for the
Department and for this subcommittee.
Now, most of the nationwide increase we found is
concentrated in a few large cities, and it's really an
affordability issue. But I can tell you from personal
experience that even smaller cities, like Bangor, Maine, and
Portland, Maine, are seeing a growing number of people living
on the streets, and we're seeing situations where shelters just
can't take in any more people. They're setting up cots in
Portland City Hall to try to make sure that people have
shelter.
We know that the Housing First model has been successfully
used to reduce homelessness in many communities, and that the
Department's embrace of the solution of Housing First has not
only allowed us to improve lives, but it also saves taxpayer
dollars. You see that there are far fewer calls to the police,
that there are far fewer trips to the emergency rooms if people
have shelter and an apartment that they can come home to each
day. So recognizing that, I believe the Department and this
subcommittee both agree that Housing First is sound policy.
Do you have any thoughts on other actions that the
Department can take to respond to this recent spike in
homelessness?
Secretary Carson. Sure. Well, first of all, the Point-in-
Time was conducted in January of 2017 and looks at the year
2016, and the spike appears to be bicoastal in nature.
Actually, if you look at the middle of the country,
homelessness continues to go down. Many communities are
claiming victory over homelessness, particularly with our
veterans. But the places where it is spiking, it's very, very
troubling because a lot of the cost of housing is going up
faster than people's income.
What we're really doing is looking at the homelessness
programs, and there are a lot of them. You know, we support
through Continuum of Care more than 7,000 homeless programs,
but we like to look at the results, not the longevity or legacy
of the program, but what kind of results are they getting? And
then to support those programs. And the Housing First model
seems to work quite well, particularly when you add to it
Housing Second and Third. Housing First, you get them off the
street; Housing Second, you diagnose why they were there in the
first place; and Housing Third, you fix it if you can.
Of course, there are those individuals who are disabled,
who are mentally incapable of caring for themselves, who are
very elderly. I think as a compassionate society, we just have
an obligation to take care of those people in the most
efficient, effective way that we can.
Senator Collins. Thank you.
Senator Reed.
Senator Reed. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
LEAD
Mr. Secretary, we all understand the effects of exposure to
lead-based paint hazards, and you have a perspective on this
matter which is unique, as a very skilled and recognized
physician. We included $25 million in fiscal year 2017 for
grants to public housing agencies to address the lead-based
paint hazards. When can we expect these grants to be awarded?
And do you expect, based on the demand you've seen already,
that there will be a need for additional investment in fiscal
year 2019?
Secretary Carson. Well, thank you very much for that
allocation; it helps. It's being distributed through a
competitive process, and that has been put in place now, so we
should see the dissemination in a very short period of time. Do
we need more? You know, as long as we have, you know, the lead
problem, we do need more. Of course, you know, I go back to the
tension that exists between the future and the present, but
whatever we have, we're going to take care of as many people as
we possibly can.
Senator Reed. No, I appreciate that. One point is there's
not only tension between the present and the future, but also
between expenditures and revenue. If you cut expenditures and
revenue simultaneously, you might not solve the problem. Both
sides of the ledger have to be addressed.
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
Let me quickly switch gears if I can, Mr. Secretary, and
amplify what the Chairman said. There's not only a homelessness
crisis; there is also an affordability crisis throughout the
country for housing. We see it acutely in Rhode Island, and
it's affecting everybody. People aren't able to buy homes.
People are now being squeezed out of the rental market because
the rents are going up so much. It's particularly difficult for
seniors because many are retired and living on fixed incomes.
What strategy do you propose to employ to create and develop
more effective elderly housing, particularly in places such as
Rhode Island, which has a significant elderly population, that
lives on fixed incomes.
Secretary Carson. Well, in our Innovations Division is
looking at different models, not just in this country, but in
other countries as well. You know, sometimes it may mean shared
common spaces, you know, with your own private bedroom, similar
to some of the things that we see in universities. And it
becomes increasingly important because we're getting to a point
where a lot of the baby boomers are going to retire, a lot of
them should have retired already, but they couldn't because
they didn't have the financial wherewithal to do so, and
they're not going to develop it either. So we are going to have
to come up with things that actually work, and it's going to
have to be innovative.
Senator Reed. I was recently with Senator Nelson in
Melbourne, Florida. We were dedicating a facility that had been
renovated with support from HUD and private investment, and
there was a woman who spoke so eloquently about--she didn't
disclose who it was initially--someone who worked hard all of
her life, raised kids, but, in a tough market, was vulnerable
to any type of setback. Her home was destroyed by a storm in
Florida, and she actually lived in a tent where she couldn't
refrigerate her insulin--and I don't have to point out to you
the effects, Doctor----
Secretary Carson. Yeah.
Senator Reed. She found herself in a situation where she
had to be rushed to the hospital. She was desperate, and she
was someone who her entire life had done all she could, she
played by the rules, et cetera. Mercifully, there was someone
there that was able to connect her with this subsidized
housing. She was a senior, and she's now in a place where she
can literally survive. We've got so many of those cases out
there, and we have to do a lot more. So, again, I do recognize
your argument of the future versus the present and the next
generation, but there are some compelling needs that we can and
must fulfill. I salute the Chairman for her great effort in
putting a budget together last year that at least goes part of
the way to making sure we fulfill this obligation.
Secretary Carson. Sure.
Senator Reed. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Carson. And I do appreciate that very much. And I
would just add that the third component is creating a pathway
to self-sufficiency. If we put all those things together, I
think we'll be successful.
Senator Reed. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Thank you, Madam.
Senator Collins. Thank you very much, Senator Reed. It's
always been a pleasure to work with you and develop these joint
funding bills, which really is the way that it should be.
And we look forward to working with you, Mr. Secretary, as
the appropriations process continues.
Secretary Carson. Thank you.
Senator Collins. I very much appreciate your being here
this afternoon. And we look forward to working with you and
your staff.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
The hearing record will remain open for additional
questions until next Friday, April 27, 2018. I had a few that I
didn't get to myself.
[The following questions were not asked at the hearing, but
were submitted to the Department for response subsequent to the
hearing:]
Questions Submitted by Senator Susan M. Collins
reduced funding for section 8 voucher administration fees
Question. Mr. Secretary, many Public Housing Agencies, including
those in Maine, have expressed strong concerns with the proposal to
reduce funding for Section 8 voucher administrative fees to only 70
percent of their needs in the 2019 budget request. Use of these funds
includes waitlist management, eligibility determination, income
verification, voucher issuance, participant orientations, and
inspections. Lack of funding will lead to reduced staff at P.H.A.s and
prevent them from issuing vouchers and assisting low-income households
find housing.
In light of the reduced funding request for administrative fees,
what steps is HUD taking to reduce the burdens and costs of
administering this critical source of rental assistance?
Answer. As part of its implementation of the Housing Opportunities
Through Modernization Act of 2016 (HOTMA), the Department will issue a
proposed rule that includes provisions that are intended to streamline
and reduce burden for PHAs. For example, HUD is proposing streamlined
requests for exception payment standard (EPS), reduced reporting
requirements, flexibility on establishing utility allowances, and
allowing alternative methods for the confirmation of the repair of
noted Housing Quality Standard deficiencies. These provisions will
complement HUD's 2016 Streamlining Notice (Notice PIH 2016--05), which
simplified the processes associated with the annual reexamination of
income, the earned income disregard calculation, and family declaration
of total assets; streamlined utility reimbursements; and provided the
ability to employ biennial HQS inspections.
fha-it fees
Question. Mr. Secretary, you referred to the need for additional
investments in the Federal Housing Administration's information
technology systems. Concerns regarding F.H.A. and HUD's I.T. more
broadly, including cybersecurity, have been expressed by the Inspector
General's office as well as G.A.O. In response to these needs, the
budget proposes to charge mortgage lenders a $25 fee for each mortgage
insured by F.H.A. The budget estimates this fee will raise $20 million
per year over the next 4 years for F.H.A.'s I.T. improvements.
Has HUD identified which critical I.T. investments these funds
would be used for?
Answer. The requested FHA Single Family IT Fee of $20 million per
year over 4 years would generate $80 million to modernize critical FHA
systems, improving risk management and data integrity. The funding
would allow for an update to the systems for FHA origination,
underwriting, servicing, asset management, and counterparty management
activities. The updated systems would allow FHA to align with approved
lenders by complying with modern mortgage industry standards and would
help protect the Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund by providing front-end
risk assessment prior to endorsement. In addition, it would allow FHA
to decrease its maintenance costs over time, supporting a shift to
modern programming languages and systems management.
FHA Single Family also has several short-term needs that will allow
the Department to update urgent IT security needs, resolve audit
findings and implement critical policies.
FHA Single Family Information Technology Priorities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Project
Capability to be Realized
Cost Estimate
Time to Build
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FHA Insurance Originations Network of
FIONA implementation will increase
$43 Million
3 years
Applications (FIONA).
FHA's efficiency, reduce costs,
improve data analytics and risk
management, strengthen the
security of sensitive PII and
keep FHA in sync with the larger
mortgage industry..
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Single Family Asset Management Roadmap....
Single Family Asset Management IT
$26.7 million
3 years
Modernization will enable
improvements in Real Estate Owned
(REO) disposition and the overall
claims management process..
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FHA Lender Activities System Migration,
Automate the enforcement business
$7.3 Million
1 year
Mortgagee Review Board Integration &
processes and integrate the
Enforcement Automation.
activities of the Mortgagee
Review Board into a consolidated
lender oversight technical
infrastructure..
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FHA Single Family Short-Term Information Technology Needs
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Project
Capability to be Realized
Cost Estimate
Time to Build
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FHA Condominium Policy Update Systems
Modifications to specific systems
$1.8 Million
1 Year
Modifications for Compliance.
(e.g., CHUMS) to comply with
changes once the FHA Condominium
Policy Updates go into effect..
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FHA System Interface with Treasury's Do
The creation of an interface
$500,000
1 Year
Not Pay System.
between FHA's Origination System
and Treasury's Do Not Pay system.
This will provide lenders and
Housing with the data to
determine eligibility for
borrowers who are delinquent on
child support payments subject to
Federal offset. This interface
will be in addition to the
existing CAIVRS interface which
will remain in place..
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Update FHA Origination Systems for HUD IT
Updates and enhancements to
$1.4 Million
1 Year
Security Policy Compliance.
existing FHA IT systems to ensure
security compliance. This allows
FHA to resolve an outstanding
audit finding. This will also
upgrade CAIVRS system to collect,
log, and generate audit logs,
which will satisfy the security
audit finding..
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reverse Mortgage System Enhancements......
Enhancements to the Reverse
$1.5 Million
1 Year
Mortgage System will allow FHA to
improve the management of HECM
portfolio..
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------
Questions Submitted by Senator Roy Blunt
fha--property assessed clean energy (pace)
Question. Last year HUD, through Federal Housing Administration,
made the decision to stop insuring mortgages with Property Assessed
Clean Energy (PACE) assessment.
Can you share the feedback that the agency has received on this
decision?
Answer. The agency has generally received positive feedback on this
decision and recognition that such a position is consistent with
requirements of other market participants.
Question. What, if any impact, will it have on decisions that
states have made regarding property taxes and PACE?
Answer. While it is not clear if FHA's decision has or will have a
marked effect on decisions by states regarding PACE, states may
consider this action when determining whether to move forward with
legislative plans for PACE or adjust any current PACE programs.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Steve Daines
cdbg-dr
Question. HUD recently announced the largest release of CDBG-DR
funds ever in the history of the program.
What is the timeframe for the actual release of these funds?
Answer. The $28 billion of CDBG-DR funds appropriated on February
9, 2018 included funds for addressing unmet recovery needs from 2017
disasters and mitigation purposes. HUD will publish several Federal
Register Notices describing how grantees can access and use the funds.
The publication of the Federal Register Notice for the $18 billion in
unmet recovery needs is projected for June 2018. The Department
anticipates the publication of the Federal Register Notice for the
CDBG-DR mitigation funds in the Fall of 2018.
To access the CDBG-DR funds, grantees must submit an action plan to
HUD that describes how they will use the funds. The grantees must also
provide documentation that will enable HUD to certify to their
financial proficiency and capacity. After HUD reviews the proficiency
and capacity documentation and approves the Action Plan (within 45 days
of receipt of Action Plan), HUD will execute a grant agreement.
Question. Are the regulations already in place, or are they still
being developed?
Answer. All CDBG-DR grantees must submit an action plan to HUD that
describes how they will use the funds and also provide documentation
that will enable HUD to certify to their financial proficiency and
capacity. After HUD reviews the proficiency and capacity documentation
and approves the Action Plan (within 45 days of receipt of Action
Plan), HUD will execute a grant agreement for the appropriated funds.
disaster--puerto rico
Question. In regards to Puerto Rico, most of the media attention
has been focused on the restoration of electricity, but equally
important have been the efforts to restore the communication
infrastructure on the island.
Will CDBG funds be available for the continued restoration of
broadband and other telecommunication technologies?
Answer. The Department believes broadband and telecommunications is
a critical party of recovery. CDBG-DR grantees are required to include
installation of broadband infrastructure in any CDBG-DR funded
substantial rehabilitation or new construction of a building with more
than four rental units, unless generally infeasible. Further, CDBG-DR
funds may be used to assist small businesses consistent with the
requirements set forth in HUD's February 9, 2018 Federal Register
notice.
Question. Do you feel that the government of Puerto Rico has
established the right protocols to receive the billions of dollars
appropriated in the recently passed storm supplemental?
Answer. Public Law 115-123 which includes the $18 billion
allocation to Puerto Rico, requires the Secretary to certify that the
grantee has in place proficient policies and procedures prior to
obligating the CDBG-DR grant, including:
1. For financial controls and procurement processes;
2. To prevent the duplication of benefits;
3. To ensure the timely expenditure of funds;
4. To maintain a comprehensive disaster recovery web site; and
5. To detect and prevent waste fraud and abuse.
HUD implements this direction by requiring grantees to submit
policies and procedures in each of the statutory areas cited above, but
also requires grantees to provide a legal opinion as to the proficiency
of the procurement processes, the grantee's most recent consolidated
financial report (CAFR), and the grantee's assessment of its own
financial standards, using the Department's Financial Management and
Grant Compliance Certification criteria. If the grantee cannot
demonstrate proficiency, HUD will not issue a grant agreement. However,
HUD will also provide technical assistance to grantees to build the
capacity necessary.
Question. What, if any, controls do you have in place to ensure
this $18 billion is administered to the People of Puerto Rico in an
efficient and productive manner?
Answer. Public Law 115-123 also requires the Department to design
and implement an internal control plan to address known internal
control risks related to disaster funding provided under the act. The
Internal Control Plan describes HUD's additional controls for this
appropriation (implemented post-Hurricane Sandy) including revised
policies to require high risk grantees to enter supporting
documentation for grant draws and increasing the frequency of HUD
voucher reviews, decreasing the of draw-down amount that would trigger
HUD review before payment for high risk grantees, and requiring HUD-OIG
fraud prevention training for all grantees.
HUD will also continually review capacity. If HUD determines that
the grantee has not carried out its CDBG-DR activities and
certifications in accordance with HUD requirements, HUD will determine
whether the grantee has capacity to carry out its activities and apply
corrective or remedial actions, which may include termination,
reduction, or limitation of CDBG-DR payments.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Lindsey Graham
moving to work
Question. The Moving to Work (MTW) program is a demonstration
program for Public Housing Authorities (PHA) that allows an innovative
use of Federal dollars to meet a community's unique housing needs.
Are there common successful strategies coming out of the MTW
program across participating PHAs? What does the Department of Housing
and Urban Development see as the future of MTW?
Answer. The vision for the MTW program is to learn from
participating PHAs' experiences to improve the delivery of federally
assisted housing and promote self-sufficiency for low-income families
across the nation. As a next step toward this goal, HUD is developing a
program delivery model for the MTW expansion, informed by public input,
that standardizes a menu of MTW flexibilities for the new participating
PHAs and simplifies and streamlines HUD oversight. The MTW expansion is
paired with a rigorous demonstration that will test specific
flexibilities.
Over the years, HUD has taken several steps to identify promising
approaches of MTW interventions. In 2015, HUD engaged the Urban
Institute to conduct a retrospective, third-party evaluation of the MTW
Demonstration Program. We expect to have the results of this research
by the end of 2018. This evaluation will look back on the over 20-year
history of MTW and seeks to answer the questions: What can we learn
from MTW initiatives about how to deliver Federal housing assistance to
achieve the goals of cost efficiency, client self-sufficiency, and
increase housing choice? What are the risks and opportunities inherent
in MTW flexibility? How has the housing assistance provided by MTW
agencies changed over time? While answering these questions with
incomplete historical data is difficult, the Urban Institute has
conducted a comprehensive review of available information to inform the
future of MTW.
HUD has already identified several successful MTW strategies that
are now available to all public housing authorities. In recent years,
Congress has directed HUD--first, in the Appropriations Act of 2014 and
then in the Housing Opportunity through Modernization Act of 2016
(HOTMA)--to make changes to its programs to reduce the regulatory
burden on public housing authorities and associated costs, as well as
give agencies more flexibility in how they serve their communities. In
response, HUD published the Streamlining Rule (PIH Notice 2016-05), and
has published or plans to publish various HOTMA implementation Notices.
Many of these Congressionally directed changes came from common and
successful activities implemented by many PHAs in the MTW
demonstration.
The following provisions in the Streamlining Rule were first
implemented by MTW agencies: self-certification of assets under $5,000;
biennial unit inspections and/or alternate inspections for HCV and PBV,
HQS re-inspection fee, and increase of payment standards (120 percent)
for the reasonable accommodation of persons with disabilities.
The following HOTMA provisions were first implemented by MTW
agencies: less frequent income recertification for those on a fixed
income, increased Project Based Voucher (PBV) total units allowed in a
PHA portfolio from 20 percent to 30 percent, increased PBV project unit
cap within a development to the greater of 25 percent or 25 units per
project, owner-maintained site-based waiting lists for PBV, creation of
a Capital Fund replacement reserve, and allowing up to 20 percent of
the Operating Fund to be transferred to the Capital Fund.
The Department continues to propose innovative MTW initiatives for
all public housing authorities. Several of the provisions in the Making
Affordable Housing Work rent reform proposal have been implemented by
MTW agencies: changing the rent calculation from adjusted to gross
income; less frequent income recertifications; delineating work-able
from elderly and disabled renters; providing alternative rent options,
including tiered, stepped and additional choice rents; and work
requirements.
Finally, through the MTW expansion, 100 MTW agencies will be
designated by cohort over 7 years. As required by the 2016
Appropriations Act, HUD will study certain policies, based on the
advice of a Federal Research Advisory Committee. HUD convened the
Committee several times in 2016 and 2017, and based on the Committee's
advice, HUD will study the following policy changes through the MTW
expansion: MTW as a flexibility, rent reform, work requirements, and
landlord incentives.
Lessons learned from the current and soon-to-be designated MTW
agencies will be used to inform future policy making.
Question. Can MTW be expanded to areas with low Public Housing
Assessment System (PHAS) or the Section Eight Management Assessment
Program (SEMAP) scores on physical indicators that result from a
reduction of capital fund dollars? Often these PHAs have demonstrated
their managerial and financial ability and could benefit from MTW in
spite of their capital challenges.
Answer. HUD can only designate additional agencies as MTW agencies
through the direction of Congress. Historically, Congress has assigned
both low-performing and high-performing agencies to participate in the
MTW demonstration program. The current expansion detailed in the 2016
Appropriations Act authorizes HUD to expand the MTW demonstration
program by an additional 100 agencies and provides that the agencies
selected must be high performers in either the Public Housing
Assessment System (PHAS) or the Section Eight Voucher Management
Assessment Program (SEMAP), meet certain size and site selection
requirements, and represent geographic diversity across the country.
Therefore, to be selected for the current expansion, agencies need to
be high performing in either the public housing or voucher programs.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator John Hoeven
cdbg funding
Question. As you know, the president's budget proposes eliminating
funding for the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG). While I
understand the need to reign in our debt and deficit, I worry that many
communities in North Dakota and across the nation that rely on CDBG
will be losing a valuable tool which helps assist them with a variety
of needs, including affordable housing for vulnerable and low-income
individuals, economic development, and infrastructure.
Also, within the CDBG program is the Indian Community Development
Block Grant (ICDBG), which has been a valuable program within our
reservations.
How can we ensure that communities will continue to have Federal
support that will enable them to adequately address the challenges they
face locally?
Answer. HUD believes states and local governments are uniquely
situated to engage public, private, and philanthropic partners and to
coordinate efforts to effectively address affordable housing and
community development needs within their jurisdictions.
Question. Does the administration support proposals that would help
foster the types of community development projects and activities that
are currently supported through CDBG?
Answer. Given a consistently constrained Federal budget, improving
access to private investment for affordable housing and infrastructure
improvements in communities suffering from chronic dis-investment is
key to improving housing availability and promoting community
development. Opportunity Zones offer a channel for private investment
to flow into state-designated areas in which tax-advantaged private
equity can catalyze community development, including mixed use and
housing projects. The Department is working with the Department of
Treasury to understand the emerging Opportunity Zone requirements and
to consider how to align available HUD resources to best support
investment in designated Zones.
Question. It is my understanding that the president's budget
request calls for certain affordable housing programs be turned over to
state and local governments. How do you envision such a transition will
take place, and have you given consideration to the fiscal challenges
that state and local governments could face in finding the necessary
means to fund these projects?
Answer. The Budget does not call for individual programs to be
turned over, but rather devolves the broad responsibility, allowing
state and local governments to craft programs that fit with their
unique local community development needs and resource constraints.
jeremiah program
Question. Recently, a Minnesota-based nonprofit called the Jeremiah
Program opened a new 20-apartment affordable housing facility for
single mothers in Fargo, North Dakota. In the spirit of hope, its
founders created the Jeremiah Program to be about so much more than
just housing. The Jeremiah Program helps single mothers and their
children get out of the cycle of poverty by making available to mothers
the tools necessary to excel in education, career, and life as well as
providing access to early education for their children.
Programs like these in North Dakota and across the country can
serve as effective models to follow and emulate. I would like to invite
you to visit North Dakota at your convenience so that we can
demonstrate to you the work being done in my home state at facilities
like the Jeremiah Program.
Will you commit to work with my staff to find a convenient time to
visit North Dakota?
Answer. Expanding access to affordable housing is a high priority
for Secretary Carson. HUD staff will reach out directly to your
congressional office to discuss a potential visit to the state of North
Dakota.
homeownership rates
Question. As Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, can you
speak about specific policies you have promoted to help increase
sustainable homeownership rates? How do you envision addressing
challenges related to affordable housing moving forward?
Answer. Fundamental to our mission at HUD is providing American
families with opportunities to build equity in their homes and climb
the economic ladder. FHA makes homeownership possible for millions of
first-time, low-to-moderate income and minority borrowers. In order to
serve families for generations to come, however, FHA must be
financially and operationally sustainable, which means taking steps to
protect taxpayers who stand behind its $1.3 trillion portfolio. That is
why one of the first things this administration did was to suspend a
planned premium reduction announced by the prior administration. Our
analysis shows that had the premium reductions taken effect, the Mutual
Mortgage Insurance Fund capital ratio would have fallen below FHA's
statutory minimum capital ratio of 2.00 percent to 1.76 percent. We've
also taken steps to put the Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (HECM)
program on a more fiscally sustainable path, and further changes will
be necessary. Since 2009, the HECM program has drained $14.5 billion
from the MMIF. We must protect seniors who depend on HECM to age in
place, while also ensuring that the homebuyers who depend on FHA's
forward program and, ultimately taxpayers, do not have to bail out the
HECM program. In addition, we've reversed a short-lived policy that
allowed FHA to insure mortgages encumbered with Property Assessed Clean
Energy (PACE) assessments. FHA took this action because PACE
obligations represented a potential increase in losses for the MMIF due
to the priority lien status of PACE obligations in the event of
default. FHA remains concerned with PACE assessments that are placed on
FHA loans after endorsement, and we are monitoring this practice to
determine if further action is warranted. Finally, we have worked to
educate Congress and the public on the need to upgrade FHA's technology
platform, which creates serious financial and operational risks. Not
only is it built on a 40-year-old mainframe system, but it is also
heavily dependent on paper case files for endorsements and processing.
FHA is developing a detailed roadmap to help guide our efforts, which
we look forward to sharing with you, and has requested $20 million in
budget authority for fiscal year 2019--fully offset by a modest fee of
no more than $25 per loan--to begin needed implementation of an IT
upgrade.
With regards to affordability, HUD has been deeply engaged in the
Administration's efforts to identify and remove unduly burdensome
regulations that can increase costs to homebuyers and renters. One
opportunity is condominiums--traditionally a mainstay of affordable
housing for both the first-time homebuyer and seniors. We're in the
process of revising our regulations on FHA insurance for condominiums,
including project approval requirements. We anticipate that the updated
condo project approval requirements and other changes to the
regulations will make FHA policy more flexible, less prescriptive, and
more reflective of the current market than existing requirements. HUD
is also in the middle of a top-to-bottom review of its manufactured
housing rules to assess their compliance costs and whether those costs
are justified against the backdrop of the nation's shortage of
affordable housing. Manufactured housing plays a vital role in meeting
the nation's affordable housing needs, providing nearly 10 percent of
the total single-family housing stock. It's estimated that more than 22
million American households reside in manufactured housing.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Jack Reed
lead safe housing rule
Question. The fiscal year 2017 Omnibus required HUD to issue
guidance to maintenance and property management staff of public housing
agencies (PHAs) clarifying their obligations under the Lead Safe
Housing Rule. The bill also required HUD to update guidance and amend
regulations in order to incorporate zero-bedroom units under the Lead
Safe Housing Rule and to make those same units eligible for HUD's lead
hazard reduction grants.
What progress has been made to update and issue guidance to PHAs
and grantees on their duties to comply with new changes in law and to
incorporate zero-bedroom units into Notices of Funding Availability?
Answer. Regarding updating and issuing guidance to public housing
agencies (PHAs) on their duties to comply with new changes in law,
HUD's Office of Public and Indian Housing (PIH) and its Office of Lead
Hazard Control and Healthy Homes (OLHCHH) issued updated Guidance on
HUD's Lead Safe Housing Rule Pertaining to Elevated Blood Lead Levels
for the Public Housing, Housing Choice Voucher, and Project-Based
Voucher programs, on August 10, 2017 (the joint notice is posted at
www.hud.gov/sites/documents/17-13PIHN_OHHLHC17-01.pdf). The guidance
clarifies PHAs' obligations under the Lead Safe Housing Rule (LSHR; 24
CFR 35, subparts B R), including specifying their obligation for their
programs for that rule to cover zero-bedroom pre-1978 dwellings units
in which one or more children less than 6 years of age reside or are
expected to reside, reflecting the amendment of the Residential Lead-
Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992 (42 U.S.C. 4851-4856) (``Title
X''), specifically of 4851b(27), by the Consolidated Appropriations
Act, 2017, Division K, Title II, 237.
OLHCHH issued policy guidance for its active lead hazard control
grants on August 25, 2017, stating that zero-bedroom units in which one
or more children less than 6 years of age reside or are expected to
reside are eligible for enrollment in the grantee's program (guidance
is posted at www.hud.gov/sites/documents/PGI-2017-
03.0BedroomUnits.pdf). Additionally, OLHCHH is including in its draft
scope for its fiscal year 2018 lead hazard control NOFA, to be
published this summer, that zero-bedroom units are eligible for
enrollment, and will do so for future lead hazard control NOFAs.
Finally, OLHCHH is drafting an amendment to the Lead Safe Housing
Rule that will cover the amendment to Title X by changing the
definition of ``target housing'' at 24 CFR 35.110. This amendment will
incorporate zero-bedroom units in which one or more children less than
6 years of age reside or are expected to reside into all HUD's housing
assistance programs covered by the Rule.
Question. In the fiscal year 2017 Omnibus, we directed HUD to
improve its data collection and its analysis of actions, which PHAs are
taking to comply with the Lead Safe Housing Rule, because HUD was
unaware of how many subsidized units contain lead-based paint hazards.
In order to effectively prevent incidences of elevated blood lead
levels in HUD-assisted housing, we must know where lead-based paint
hazards exist and intervene accordingly. Last month, you submitted a
report to this Subcommittee on preliminary findings in public housing,
but I would like to better understand your efforts across the assisted
housing portfolio.
What progress has HUD made to improve data collection and analysis
on the scope of lead hazards in HUD-assisted housing?
Answer. The Office of Public and Indian Housing (PIH) has continued
to work with PHAs identified as possibly lacking lead-based paint
inspections for public housing properties. Additionally, PIH's Real
Estate Assessment Center (REAC) sends regular reports to the Office of
Field Operations identifying instances of peeling or deteriorated paint
in pre-1978 public housing properties. This information is available to
PHAs in their inspection reports and is also provided to HUD field
offices to inform their monitoring and oversight of PHAs.
PIH is also currently conducting the Uniform Physical Condition
Standards for Vouchers (UPCS-V) Demonstration Program, to develop and
evaluate an improved inspection standard that could be applicable to
Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) units. As part of that demonstration, PIH
is considering whether it is feasible for the reporting system to have
the capacity for HUD to collect inspection-level details for all HCV-
assisted units.
The Office of Multifamily Housing Programs (MF) is working with the
Office of Strategic Planning and Management and the Office of Lead
Hazard Control and Healthy Homes to explore how to track lead hazard
evaluation and control in multifamily projects with project-based
rental assistance units. Additionally, REAC sends regular reports to
MF's Office of Asset Management and Portfolio Oversight identifying
instances of peeling or deteriorated paint in pre-1978 multifamily
properties. This information is available to multifamily owners and
agents in their inspection reports and it is also provided to HUD field
offices to inform their monitoring and oversight of owners and agents.
Question. In February, EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt convened a
meeting of the President's Task Force on Environmental Health Risks and
Safety Risks to Children in order to discuss a coordinated Federal
effort to combat lead poisoning.
What is HUD's role on this task force, and how will this
coordinated effort inform the Department's implementation of the
directives to improve the oversight and enforcement of the Lead Safe
Housing Rule, which were included in the fiscal year 2017 Omnibus?
Answer. HUD is a member of the President's Task Force on
Environmental Health Risks and Safety Risks to Children, and has been
an active participant in its wide-ranging activities to protect
children's health and safety since the Task Force's inception in 1997.
Secretary Ben Carson was pleased to accept the invitation from Task
Force Co-Chair Administrator Scott Pruitt to participate in the
February 15th meeting on the Federal effort to combat lead poisoning.
The Secretary joined with the other members in committing to expedite
developing and implementing their own Departments' and Agencies' action
plans to eliminate childhood lead exposures, and doing likewise for the
coordinated Federal effort.
As part of the coordinated Federal effort HUD will increase
collaboration among HUD's offices involved with lead safety in its
housing assistance programs, and prioritize collaborative efforts
between HUD and partner agencies such as the Environmental Protection
Agency (particularly its National Program Chemicals Division and its
Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assistance) and the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (particularly its National Center for
Environmental Health/Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry).
u.s. interagency council on homelessness (usich)
Question. Under the Trump Administration, the U.S. Interagency
Council on Homelessness (USICH) has started working with Federal
agencies to revise Opening Doors. HUD has also revised its own
strategic plan, which includes a goal to reduce the average length of
homelessness. However, it remains unclear how the revised Federal
strategic plan and HUD's new strategic plan will complement each other
or impact the recent investments in the fiscal year 2018 Omnibus to
address homelessness among youth, veterans, and victims of domestic
violence.
How has HUD worked with USICH on this revised Federal strategy, and
how will these changes impact your implementation of the new homeless
assistance investments, which were provided in fiscal year 2018?
Answer. Coordinating the Federal response to ending homelessness
helps communities and their leaders more effectively and efficiently
work to end homelessness by breaking down silos and supporting the
integrated use of funding so that resources are not duplicated. As
such, HUD has been working closely with USICH, other Federal partners,
and communities to revise the Federal Strategic Plan to Prevent and End
Homelessness.
The revised Federal Strategic Plan will continue to be a focus on
ensuring homelessness is a rare, brief, and one time experience and
that states and communities are able to sustain an end to homelessness
through proper intervention, assistance, and services. While the
Federal Strategic Plan is still under interagency review, we anticipate
the plan will be supported by areas of increased focus that include
creating solutions for unsheltered homelessness, tailoring responses to
rural communities, helping people who exit homelessness find employment
success, and strengthening prevention and diversion practices. The
goals identified in HUD's Strategic Plan align closely with this work
and will allow fiscal year 2018 Homeless Assistance Grants funding to
support a coordinated Federal response to ending homelessness.
Over the next year, HUD intends to:
--Roll out a Strategy to Increase Capacity of Rural Communities to
End Homelessness. Through this strategy, HUD will build
meaningful partnerships within HUD, with our Federal partners,
private partners, and communities to address the unique
challenges of rural areas, and roll out a technical assistance
plan focused on solutions to these challenges and building
capacity within rural communities. Additionally, HUD will
explore legislative fixes needed to better address the needs of
our partners in rural communities, while evaluating non-
legislative barriers that are impeding efforts to address their
needs.
--Implement an Encampment and Unsheltered Homelessness Initiative.
This initiative will enable HUD to work with communities that
have large numbers of people living in unsheltered locations to
respond and permanently house these individuals. It will also
enable HUD to deepen its understanding of the demographics,
characteristics, and needs of people experiencing unsheltered
homelessness and better utilize existing Homeless Assistance
Grant Program funding as a result. It will also further HUD's
work on ending chronic homelessness, something only three
communities have accomplished to date.
--End Veteran Homelessness. HUD will continue to encourage Continuums
of Care (CoCs) to prioritize veterans experiencing homelessness
who are not eligible for Veterans Affairs (VA) services for CoC
resources. For veterans who are eligible for VA services, we
will continue to work with USICH and the VA to appropriately
utilize Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing (HUD-VASH) and
Supportive Services for Veteran Families (SSVF) resources for
veterans experiencing homelessness. This effort will include
working with Public Housing Authorities (PHAs) where HUD-VASH
vouchers have been underutilized to fully utilize those
resources.
--End Youth Homelessness. HUD will implement the lessons learned from
its implementation of funding for the first two cohorts of
communities in the Youth Homelessness Demonstration Program
(YHDP) to implement fiscal year 2018 YHDP and carry the work
forward to 25 additional communities, helping them create and
implement a system that will end youth homelessness in their
community that is heavily informed by the voices of young
people with lived experience of homelessness.
--Support Survivors of Domestic Violence. HUD intends to use the $50
million provided by Congress in fiscal year 2018 to serve
survivors of domestic violence, in part, to increase rapid re-
housing resources dedicated to survivors, which is a critical
component of ensuring homelessness, when it occurs, is a brief
occurrence. This funding will also help communities end
homelessness amongst families.
housing for the elderly
Question. The fiscal year 2018 Omnibus provided $105 million to
construct new affordable housing for the elderly. It is essential that
HUD use this funding effectively to develop safe, clean housing for our
nation's seniors.
What is HUD's target date to issue a Notice of Funding Availability
for this funding, and how will HUD ensure that new quality affordable
housing is developed in areas that need it most?
Answer. HUD was provided $10 million in the 2017 Appropriations Act
for either capital advances for new Section 202 Supportive Housing or
Senior Preservation Rental Assistance Contracts (SPRACs). HUD has
allocated $5 million for SPRACs, leaving $5 million for new capital
advance awards. The 2018 Appropriations Act provided HUD an additional
$105 million for new capital advance awards. The 2017 appropriation
allowed HUD to conduct necessary research and prepare draft materials
for issuing a NOFA for new capital advance awards. HUD is using a two-
NOFA approach to award the total amount designated for new capital
advance awards.
The first NOFA will be published later this fiscal year, making
available the $5 million designated from the 2017 appropriation as well
as a portion of the 2018 appropriated funds. The second, similar, NOFA
for the balance 2018 funds will be published once the application
period for the first NOFA ends. HUD anticipates publishing on
Grants.gov notifications that both NOFAs will be available, with
projected application deadlines, so that applicants will be aware of
both funding opportunities. HUD tentatively anticipates that both of
these notifications will be published in June 2018.
This two-NOFA approach will allow HUD to award a portion of the
funds quickly so that sponsors may begin construction on projects that
are ready to proceed (first NOFA), while also allowing sponsors to
apply for projects which require additional time to plan (second NOFA).
HUD anticipates that analysis of the need for quality affordable
housing for seniors, based on research provided by HUD's Office of
Policy Development & Research, will be both a threshold and a scoring
criterion in the NOFAs.
The traditional capital construction model for the development of
new senior housing can be costly. As our elderly population increases
across the country, demand for additional affordable senior housing
will rise, and it will be essential to identify effective methods for
building new units.
Initial evaluations of the Project Rental Assistance model within
the Section 811 Housing for Persons with Disabilities program have
shown promise in improving the effectiveness of developing new
affordable supportive housing.
Housing for the Elderly
Question. The traditional capital construction model for the
development of new senior housing can be costly. As our elderly
population increases across the country, demand for additional
affordable senior housing will rise, and it will be essential to
identify effective methods for building new units.
Initial evaluations of the Project Rental Assistance model within
the Section 811 Housing for Persons with Disabilities program have
shown promise in improving the effectiveness of developing new
affordable supportive housing.
Should the Project Rental Assistance model be utilized to increase
the supply of affordable senior housing?
Answer. HUD is still in the process of evaluating the 811 Project
Rental Assistance program. The second phase of the evaluation, which is
underway, will assess the effectiveness of this new model of housing
assistance. The evaluation will assess the program's impact on
participants' quality of life, housing, neighborhood, supportive
services, and healthcare outcomes; and its cost compared to similar
participants in four matched comparison groups. The four comparison
groups are people served in the traditional Section 811 program, in the
voucher program for Non-Elderly persons with Disabilities (NED), in
other HUD programs, and Medicaid beneficiaries not assisted by HUD. We
anticipate results from the Phase II evaluation to be released in April
2019 and will explore their implication for senior housing as well as
housing for persons with disabilities.
fha-it spend plan
Question. In 2017, the HUD Inspector General reported on the
Federal Housing Administration's (FHA) inability to effectively respond
to changes in business processes as a result of outdated and
unautomated information technology (IT) systems. As a result, we
included $4 million in the fiscal year 2017 Omnibus to make
improvements to FHA's IT systems and provided an additional $7 million
in the fiscal year 2018 Omnibus to enhance HUD's cybersecurity.
However, HUD has not submitted a plan to the Subcommittee on its
intended use of this funding.
What is the cause for the delay in submitting an IT spend plan on
these necessary FHA and cybersecurity improvements, and when can we
expect HUD to submit this plan to the Subcommittee?
Answer. The timing for developing, preparing, reviewing and
internally approving the fiscal year 2017 plan took longer than
anticipated. The HUD Office of the Chief Information Officer
collaborated closely and extensively with the Office of Housing and the
Office of Public and Indian Housing to review alternatives and
determine the best use of these funds in compliance with the statutory
conditions in the appropriation. The fiscal year 2017 expenditure plan
was submitted on May 30, 2018. We expect to submit the fiscal year 2018
expenditure plan, including the $7 million for cybersecurity
expeditiously. OCIO staff have discussed specific activities and will
be positioned to make a final determination by June 2018. HUD
anticipates submitting the fiscal year 2018 plan to Congress shortly
thereafter.
sexual harassment in housing
Question. As part of the 50th anniversary of the Fair Housing Act
of 1968, the Department of Justice and HUD announced a new initiative
to combat sexual harassment in housing, which will include sexual
harassment training with public housing agencies (PHAs).
What is HUD's strategy to deploy this training to PHAs, and how can
other housing providers participate in these trainings? Additionally,
how will HUD balance its obligations under the Fair Housing Act and
this new initiative in order to combat sexual harassment in housing?
Answer. HUD is working with a technical assistance provider that is
developing training for various PHAs and private landlord audiences.
HUD conducted the first training for PHA executive directors and
commissioners on May 3, 2018. PHA employees and private landlords will
be trained by the end of fiscal year 2018. This initiative will also
provide educational information to PHA residents and Housing Choice
Voucher participants regarding their rights and will be included in
HUD's annual national media campaign.
HUD anticipates tailoring training to other assisted housing
providers in the future.
The Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity (FHEO) Office of Enforcement
and Programs (E&P) enforces the Fair Housing Act and is not responsible
for conducting this training initiative. FHEO's Education and Outreach
Division, in the Office of Policy, Legislative Initiatives and
Outreach, is coordinating the PHA training and co-leading the
Department of Justice's initiative. Through this coordinated effort,
HUD hopes to prevent further harm and to ensure that victims of sexual
harassment are aware of their right to file a Fair Housing Act
complaint if victimized.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Patty Murray
homelessness
Question. Secretary Carson, the fight against homelessness remains
my top priority as a member of this Subcommittee. I thank the Chairman
and Ranking Member for continuing to be such strong allies in this
fight, and I was pleased that we were able to increase investments to
combat homelessness in the spending bill passed last month. I am
particularly thankful for resources dedicated to assisting survivors of
domestic violence who are experiencing homelessness.
But my home state of Washington continues to face a difficult
housing landscape. The City of Seattle and King County have been
operating under states of emergency regarding homelessness since late
2015, and other cities and communities in Western Washington are
experiencing similar, sustained rent increases. In Central and Eastern
Washington, new housing supply is just not being built fast enough to
impact a near-zero vacancy rate.
Our state government and local communities are stepping up by
increasing their housing levies, implementing innovative strategies,
and dedicating additional resources. HUD needs to be stepping up, too.
Does the Administration recognize homelessness and a lack of
affordability to be serious problems that require strong, coordinated
action?
Answer. HUD has been working strategically with its Federal, State,
and local partners to identify how to more efficiently use existing
resources and policies to improve housing affordability. As HUD is
engaged in this collaboration, it has clearly communicated to
communities that they should also forge strategic partnerships with
homeless assistance and mainstream benefit providers within their
communities. These relationships broaden the communities' understanding
of the scope of the homeless community and what housing and services
they need to end their homeless experience. This kind of cooperation
allows communities to use existing resources in a more efficient and
strategic manner. By shifting resources from lower performing projects
and focusing on better prioritization of resources, individuals and
families experiencing homelessness receive more tailored housing and
services.
In addition to encouraging communities to build robust local
partnerships, HUD will continue to promote evidence-based policies.
Housing First follows a basic principle--that everyone is ready for
housing, regardless of the complexity or severity of their needs. Not
only is there a strong body of research supporting this approach, HUD
has seen that those communities demonstrating the greatest success in
ending homelessness consistently report that they have implemented and
received broad community support for a Housing First approach.
Another proven strategy is targeting permanent supportive housing
resources to individuals and families experiencing chronic
homelessness. Research indicates that using permanent supportive
housing to support the chronically homeless results in more long-term
stability for clients and costs savings for communities, such as
lowering the use of local institutions like jails and hospitals.
Coordinated entry is another strategy that encourages a focus on
the people being served while carefully using resources to end
homelessness. Coordinated entry has opened doors for better
coordination with homeless assistance providers as well as mainstream
benefit providers. It also ensures that all people seeking assistance
have equal access to opportunities and are assessed for services in the
same way. HUD strongly believes that every person seeking assistance
deserves the same opportunity as anyone else seeking services in the
community and that communities should follow a well-documented
prioritization process to ensure that resources are allocated fairly.
HUD will continue to use performance to drive results as well. As
communities use data to inform decisions about what projects to fund
and for which homeless population--including where those funds should
be spent--they are able to better use limited resources to serve
individuals and families experiencing homelessness in a more meaningful
way.
The policies mentioned above are all evidence-based practices that
have proven to be helpful for communities to better serve those
experiencing homelessness in their areas, while using resources in the
most efficient manner. HUD will continue to look for evidence-based
practices and implement them as appropriate.
Finally, HUD has a long history of creative public-private
partnerships. Many projects today have a healthy blend of public and
private supportive service options that often rely on local and State
health and mental health services coupled with privately funded housing
and employment specialists. Similarly, assistance with housing is often
done in partnership with public housing authorities and other State and
city resources along with non-profit housing developers and providers
partnering to identify how to prioritize the housing and service
resources to best meet the needs of individuals and families
experiencing homelessness in their communities. These partnerships
create critical leverage for maximizing the use of resources.
Question. If so, how can this Administration continue to propose to
cut HUD's budget by almost 15 percent and eliminate many programs that
keep families housed, which would only make the homelessness crisis
worse?
Answer. HUD continues to work strategically with its Federal,
State, and local partners to identify how to more efficiently use
existing resources, despite limited resources.
As HUD collaborates with partnerships and communities, we strongly
encourage the use of strategic partnerships with homeless assistance
and mainstream benefit providers within their communities. These
relationships broaden the communities' understanding of the scope of
the homeless community and what housing and services they need to end
their homeless experience. This kind of cooperation allows communities
to use existing resources in a more efficient and strategic manner by
shifting resources from lower performing projects and to focus on
better prioritization of resources. The end result is that individuals
and families experiencing homelessness receive more tailored housing
and services.
Also, to encouraging communities to build robust local
partnerships, HUD will continue to promote evidence-based policies such
as Housing First, permanent supportive housing, and coordinated entry.
Through these efforts and utilizing performance and data to drive
results, communities can use limited resources to serve individuals and
families experiencing homelessness in a more meaningful way.
fair market rent adjustments
Question. Mr. Secretary, one of the issues I raised with you last
year at your budget hearing was an ongoing difficulty in calculating
accurate Fair Market Rents, particularly in the Puget Sound and other
parts of my state experiencing record rent increases. I'd like to thank
you and your staff for being responsive this year and for addressing
this issue in a collaborative way with King County. It's very important
that HUD continues to work closely with local housing authorities to
make sure resources are directed most effectively
Given that cities like Vancouver, Washington, Tacoma, and Seattle
continue to see huge year-over-year rent increases, I know this will be
an ongoing discussion to make sure the Department's numbers reflect the
reality on the ground.
Secretary Carson, will you commit to continuing to work together
and to listen to Washington's housing authorities to make sure that
Fair Market Rents and the Renewal Funding Inflation Factor accurately
reflect local rent costs?
Answer. HUD commits to working with all public housing authorities
to produce accurate Fair Market Rents (FMRs) and to use the annual
change in each area's FMR to produce accurate Renewal Funding Inflation
Factors (RFIFs). Recently, HUD issued a notice seeking comments on
potential RFIF methodology changes related to the use of ad hoc surveys
and PHA-sponsored local rent survey data in calculating FMRs. HUD will
continue to seek comments from all interested parties, including those
PHAs that have engaged in a local survey program and those PHAs that
have not supplied local survey data, to ensure that FMRs and RFIFs
reflect local rent costs as accurately as possible.
hud-vash
Question. The HUD-VASH program is a highly-targeted and effective
tool to address the unique needs of our nation's veterans. I've heard
from veterans in my home state who would not be able to get their lives
back on track were it not for this program, so I was disappointed to
again see the Department fail to request new funding for additional
vouchers, particularly when HUD's own data showed a year-over-year
increase in the number of homeless veterans nationwide for the first
time since 2010.
I know that VA is your partner in administering this program, and I
will have some questions for that agency at its budget hearing. Late
last year, a number of my colleagues and I wrote to former Secretary
Shulkin to hold him accountable for a VA attempt to shift resources
away from the important case management services that are essential to
this program. Ultimately, we were able to get a clear statement that
the HUD-VASH money would not be reallocated, but the prospect of these
cuts was very troubling.
Why does HUD continue to request no new resources for HUD-VASH?
Does the Department think that we have met our obligation to our
veterans, so no additional vouchers are necessary? Do you disagree with
your Department's data that this problem has not been solved?
Answer. The total number of homeless veterans has decreased by
nearly 50 percent since 2010, and despite a 1.6 percent increase in the
estimated number of homeless veterans based on the 2017 PIT count, most
communities across the country showed a decline in veteran
homelessness. Sharp increases in a few areas with extremely high
housing costs led to the overall increase. Based on an analysis
conducted jointly by HUD and the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA),
it was determined that the turnover of existing HUD-VASH vouchers and
the fiscal year 2017 appropriation of $40 million is sufficient to meet
the current demand of VA referrals of veterans that are experiencing
homelessness and require the intensive services and support of a HUD-
VASH voucher. Additionally, VA and HUD are currently working on a HUD-
VASH reallocation strategy to recapture vouchers from Medical Centers
and PHAs that no longer have the need to support their existing HUD-
VASH resources and reallocate them to communities with increased need.
Question. In working with the VA on this program, is HUD receiving
the collaboration it needs for continued success? Has there been any
interruption on the ground in the services VA provides to match with
HUD's vouchers?
Answer. The partnership between HUD and the VA for the
implementation of HUD-VASH has been extremely successful. This is true
at both the Headquarters level as well as the local level between HUD's
housing agency partners and the local VA Medical Centers. Communication
between the Departments is ongoing and we have regularly scheduled
conference calls to resolve issues, analyze data to determine trends,
discuss policy improvements, and plan for future allocations. As you've
indicated, the VA case management services are a critical part of HUD-
VASH so in some cities where the VA has had difficulty in achieving
full staffing levels or where there is a high attrition rate of case
managers, referrals of veterans can be delayed, resulting in lower
utilization rates.
ensuring adequate resources
Question. Mr. Secretary, when we held this hearing last year, you
had just recently begun serving as HUD Secretary, and you indicated
that parts of the President's budget were determined before you were
confirmed. This year, you must have been fully involved in developing
the budget request, but it doubled down on cuts, asking for a funding
reduction even larger than last year. With rents rising and an
increased need for new affordable housing, I do not see how it is
possible for HUD to fulfill its essential role with so few resources.
The Department's request zeroes out or effectively eliminates a number
of important programs, from CDBG to HOME, including the Public Housing
Capital Fund that is used to maintain the public housing we already
have.
To solve problems of homelessness and affordability over the long
term, we need to increase the number of affordable units. Affordable
development requires a mix of public and private funds, collaborations
that have been going on for a long time now. As I hear from many of my
constituents working on this issue, pulling together these projects is
not easy, but it is essential. The Low Income Housing Tax Credit is
essential to getting private capital involved in these projects, but
the Community Development Block Grant and HOME programs are also
indispensable parts of the financing of so many affordable housing
projects in Washington state. Yet the Administration proposes to
essentially zero them out.
I understand that 25 percent of Low Income Housing Tax Credit deals
also have HOME dollars in them. Has HUD done any analysis on the impact
your proposed cuts to HOME would have on the use of the Low Income
Housing Tax Credit and affordable housing production more broadly?
Answer. HUD has not conducted specific analysis of the impact that
the elimination of the HOME Program would have on the viability of
LIHTC projects. The Administration believes that, in the absence of
HOME funding, states and local governments would create new funding
mechanisms (e.g., state or local housing trust funds with dedicated
funding streams) to provide gap financing for LIHTC projects.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Richard J. Durbin
uninhabitable conditions of phas
Question. Secretary Carson, I know you are familiar with the man-
made housing crisis that the communities in Cairo and Thebes, IL,
continue to feel the effects of. After decades of mismanagement and
neglect, hundreds of people living in public housing in Alexander
County, many of them children, were subjected to unimaginable living
conditions. Their units overrun with rodents, bed bugs, roaches, crime,
mold, asbestos, and lead. It has been more than a year since HUD told
185 families that they must relocate from the Elmwood and McBride
housing complexes in Cairo, Illinois, and around 35 of those families
are still in the process of finding safer housing. This is a difficult
task as the low housing inventory in the town means that many relocated
residents will be forced to leave their community. And now, as of
February, your Department announced that 28 families living in the Mary
Alice Meadows and Sunset Terrace housing complexes in nearby Thebes,
Illinois, also will be forced to find new housing. For at least one of
the families currently living in Thebes, this will be their second
relocation as they were first relocated to Thebes after being forced to
leave their public housing unit in Cairo. The strength and resilience
of these families and their communities in the face of this undeserved
situation is inspiring. But I have a number of questions and frankly
concerns about how HUD is handling the ongoing relocation effort.
Senator Duckworth and I sent you a letter two weeks ago raising a
number of concerns.
When can Sen. Duckworth and I expect to receive a response to the
concerns we raise in our letter?
Answer. The Department provided a response on April 20, 2018, which
is also attached here.
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
WASHINGTON, DC 20410-1000
APR 20 2018
The Honorable Tammy Duckworth
United States Senate
Washington, DC 20510
Dear Senator Duckworth:
Thank you for your letter dated April 4, 2018, to Secretary
Benjamin S. Carson Sr., regarding the operations of the Alexander
County Housing Authority (ACHA). In your letter you asked a series of
questions regarding the decision to relocate residents from the Mary
Alice Meadows and Sunset Terrace public housing properties in Thebes,
Illinois.
Thebes Living Conditions
ACHA submitted an initial Section 18 inventory removal application
to the Special Applications Center (SAC) for the 46 units in Thebes.
The HUD ACHA team will continue to work with the SAC on finalizing the
Section 18 application to have an approvable Section 18 inventory
removal application. The Department's primary concern is with the
health and safety of the residents and the ability to provide safe and
decent housing for the HUD assisted residents. The decision to submit a
Section 18 application was based on ACHA's financial situation and the
ability to maintain the properties in acceptable physical condition, as
well as the available resources to help relocate the families. Based on
the physical needs and the amount of capital funds available to ACHA,
it was determined the two Thebes properties are not viable and it would
be more prudent to focus ACHA resources on maintaining the remaining
155 units in ACHA's inventory in Cairo. The HUD ACHA team relied on an
initial physical needs assessment of the entire property in December
2015 completed by a local architectural firm and an additional limited
rehabilitation assessment completed in September 2017 by another local
engineering firm regarding the costs to rehabilitate ten vacant units
at Thebes. These reports are enclosed.
At the time of the Section 18 application there were 31 occupied
units at Thebes and an additional four families had relocated from the
Thebes properties since vouchers became available for Elmwood and
McBride residents in 2017, bringing the maximum total number of
households eligible for tenant protection vouchers at Thebes to 35.
Tenant Needs and Census
ACHA's occupancy records indicate there are 31 occupied units at
Mary Alice Meadows and Sunset Terrace. After on-site confirmation,
three of those 31 units are vacant and/or abandoned, leaving 28
occupied units. The 28 households are made up of 72 individuals, 39 of
whom are children; 31 of those children are school aged between 6-18
years of age.
Based on interviews with the families residing at Thebes, 25 of the
28 households have expressed a desire to relocate and are actively
working with relocation staff; three of the 28 have been unresponsive
to relocation outreach efforts. All 28 families have been made aware
that they need to relocate. ACHA is offering units within Cairo at
other ACHA public housing sites. ACHA has not set a final move-out date
for the residents of Thebes and will work with each family individually
to meet their relocation needs. Neither ACHA nor HUD staff have been
made aware of any special circumstances or considerations needed for
the households living in Thebes.
Under the authority for the Section 18 application for Elmwood and
McBride, Menard County Housing Authority (MCHA) was issued 238 TPVs for
residents that lived in Elmwood and McBride up to 2 years prior to the
decision to relocate those residents.
Based on the availability and need for vouchers for the residents
of Elmwood and McBride, MCHA has adequate TPV budget authority to serve
all the affected residents at Elmwood and McBride and provide the 35
vouchers necessary for the relocation of the Thebes residents. MCHA
amended its Administrative Plan on February 13, 2018, to reflect the
availability of existing TPV budget authority to serve the residents
affected by the decision to relocate residents currently living in
Thebes.
ACHA also has an existing mobility contract with Quadel Consulting
and Training, LLC that runs through June 2018 and HUD has a technical
assistance contract with CVR and associates to assist ACHA with
relocation services. Additionally, there is enough funding for
relocation to serve the residents of Elmwood, McBride and those
residing in the properties in Thebes. ACHA requested an amendment from
HUD to use relocation budget authority to serve the residents of Thebes
that has been approved. There are enough budget resources to
successfully provide relocation and mobility services for all residents
affected by the relocation of Elmwood, McBride, Mary Alice Meadows and
Sunset Terrace. Relocation and mobility counselors have spent at least
one day per week at Thebes to help support the relocation efforts for
those residents and have scheduled multiple counseling sessions with
Thebes families throughout the last few weeks at the Cairo main office.
Thebes Expression of Interest
ACHA received no expressions of interest as result of the
solicitation for the properties at Thebes. Based on the lack of
interest, ACHA will proceed with a Section 18 application for inventory
removal of the Thebes properties.
ACHA Transition
HUD is engaging the local community regarding transition options.
Options under consideration are returning ACHA to local control or
transferring all remaining assets to a third-party entity. HUD staff
continues to meet with the Alexander County Board to determine their
interest and capacity to resume their role under Illinois statute.
Based on these discussions, HUD will develop a detailed transition
plan. Whatever option HUD determines to be the most effective ill
provide a vehicle for administration and oversight of the demolition of
the properties slated for inventory removal.
I hope this information is helpful.
Sincerely
Len Wolfson
Assistant Secretary for
Congressional and
Intergovernmental Relations
Enclosures
Question. Will you commit that your staff will provide regular and
substantive updates to my staff and Sen. Duckworth staff moving
forward?
Answer. HUD looks forward to continuing working closely with your
office to share information through regularly scheduled biweekly calls
with your staff.
Question. One of our highest priorities should be ensuring the
health and safety of the families who are being relocated. Both my and
Senator Duckworth's offices have received disturbing reports of
increasingly dangerous and unsanitary living conditions faced by the
remaining families who have not yet relocated from public housing in
Cairo and Thebes. Not only have we been hearing that the existing
rodent and cockroach infestations have run rampant as there are
increasingly fewer occupied units for them to seek out warmth, but many
of the buildings continue to be plagued with severe plumbing issues and
there are issues with unsecured trash littering the grounds. And the
safety concerns posed to residents by improperly secured vacant units
cannot be overstated. My staff has been told about one mother who is
living with her children in a unit in Thebes that is next door to a
vacant unit currently being used by trespassers as an active meth lab.
Secretary Carson, do you believe HUD is doing an adequate job
ensuring the health and safety of residents who currently live in Cairo
and Thebes public housing units?
Answer. HUD continues to address immediate health and safety issues
for ACHA properties, with emergency maintenance (i.e. plumbing and
electrical work orders). In instances where ACHA cannot make adequate
repairs to units, families have been relocated to other ACHA units that
are safe and healthy.
Question. Will you commit to ensuring that additional funds be made
available to address the criminal activity, vandalism, and personal
safety concerns currently faced by residents living in public housing
units in Cairo and Thebes?
Answer. HUD and the ACHA team will continue to work with local law
enforcement officials regarding crime and public safety at ACHA
properties. ACHA has applied for HUD Safety and Security grants to
address public safety in Alexander County.
Question. While it is obvious that many families living in Thebes
are not living in safe or healthy conditions, families living there are
still required to pay rent. When my staff raised this issue with your
staff on a phone call yesterday, the explanation we got as to why HUD
was not abating rent for residents in Thebes units was, ``there is
value in shelter.''
Secretary Carson, can you tell me what value you think is fair to
charge the mother who is raising her children next door to a meth lab?
Answer. HUD and ACHA recognize the need to adjust rents based on
the property conditions. The HUD ACHA team has taken necessary steps to
properly secure the vacant units in Thebes that have been accessed by
trespassers to alleviate the safety concerns raised by the residents.
Question. Can you commit to me that HUD will abate rent for the
families who are still living in Thebes units until they can be
relocated to safe housing?
Answer. HUD and ACHA recognize the need to adjust rents based on
the property conditions and will continue to do so.
Question. Senator Duckworth and I sent you a letter at the
beginning of the month. In this letter we raised a number of questions
regarding how HUD reached its decision to relocate residents from
Thebes units and how the relocation of Thebes residents would impact
the resources available to the remaining families who have not yet
relocated from public housing units in Cairo.
While I am certainly looking forward to reading the full written
response to my letter, can you commit two things to me today: families
who are being relocated from public housing units in Thebes will have
complete access to mobility and relocation specialists to assist them
in securing safe housing; and resources used to assist families being
relocated from Thebes public housing will not negatively impact
families who are still in the process of relocating from Cairo public
housing?
Answer. Yes. HUD is committed to providing the same relocation
services for the families at Thebes, and ACHA has the necessary
resources to assist all families. No family will be negatively
impacted.
Question. Your staff has been adamant that it is HUD's intention to
release Alexander County Housing Authority from receivership by the end
of 2018, less than 3 years after taking it over. What is less clear to
me is what the Department's plan is to do that. My concern is this.
Last year, my home town of East St. Louis was released back to local
control after a transition period that lasted several years. If HUD
does in fact exit Alexander County Housing Authority by the end of
2018, this provides very little time to restore their financial health
or provide sufficient technical training for new local board members.
Should HUD release Alexander County Housing Authority back to local
control, how will the Department ensure that history will not repeat
itself in the form of financial mismanagement, fraud, and failed
oversight?
Answer. The Department is currently assessing options for
repositioning the 155 units that will remain in Cairo. As with any
other HUD receivership, HUD will make certain that proper oversight and
controls are in place to prevent the conditions that led to the need
for the receivership.
Question. If becomes clear by the end of 2018 that it would not be
responsible for HUD to release ACHA back to local control, is HUD
prepared to continue holding ACHA in receivership to ensure residents
are not harmed by HUD's premature exit?
Answer. In assessing the options for ending the receivership in its
current form, the Department will weigh all considerations before
making that decision. Any decision will take into account the long-term
health and safety of the residents and HUD's confidence that the entity
operating the housing authority has the capacity to do so. HUD will
continue to be involved with ACHA as long as necessary to meet the
community's needs, the needs of the housing authority and, most
importantly, its residents.
poor living conditions in public housing
Question. During your confirmation hearing and in your response to
a letter I sent you before you were confirmed, you expressed an
understanding of the importance of addressing lead in housing. I very
much appreciate hearing your commitment to work with me on this issue.
HUD's current visual inspection standard for identifying the presence
of lead in Section 8 housing is completely ineffective and
unacceptable. American families, including many in my home state of
Illinois, should not have worry about whether their children are going
to be poisoned or made ill because of their housing. I appreciate that
HUD stepped up by aligning its poisoning prevention definition in
accordance to the CDC guidelines. But, as you know, more has to be done
to help families who may be exposed to lead poisoning. I hope you'll
use the recent increase in funding Congress provided to HUD in the
omnibus to take these critical steps.
Can I get a commitment from you that you will take steps to conduct
risk assessments for the families with children under the age of 6
before they move into their new housing?
Answer. HUD appreciates the additional funding for its lead hazard
control grant program provided in the Consolidated Appropriations Act,
2018 (Public Law 115-141). The Department is using that additional
funding to substantially increase the number and amount of awards it is
making available in the fiscal year 2018 notice of funding availability
for its lead hazard control grant program, to be published this spring,
and with grants expected to be awarded this summer. HUD has used its
statutory authority under the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard
Reduction Act of 1992 (42 U.S.C. 4851-4856) (``Title X'') to require,
under its Lead Safe Housing Rule (LSHR) (24 CFR 35, subparts B R), that
risk assessments be conducted in many of its housing assistance
programs, including public housing, project-based rental assisted
housing, project-based voucher housing, and multifamily housing having
HUD Federal Housing Administration mortgage insurance, when the housing
into which families will move is older, generally, built before 1978.
HUD does not have statutory authority to require risk assessments
for its Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) program regarding pre-1978 housing
units in which a child under age 6 resides or is expected to reside,
although the Rule requires, before the family moves in, a visual
assessment for deteriorated paint, stabilization of such paint, and if
the amount of deterioration is more than de minimis, passing a
clearance examination. Before deciding whether HUD would request the
significant statutory change to obtain authority to require risk
assessments of such housing units, the Department would need to conduct
and evaluate the results of a statistically rigorous study on the
impact of risk assessments on leasing times and availability of housing
for extremely low-income families. At this time, such a study has been
neither funded nor designed. In addition, every major study published
to date regarding assisted families access to opportunity neighborhoods
has cited the time required to complete HUD required inspections as a
major obstacle to landlord participation in the HCV program. The HCV
inspections process typically takes 15 days to complete, adding a lead
risk assessment would add a minimum of 5 to 15 days to the HCV approval
process. In tight rental markets where there is high demand for rental
housing there is no incentive for landlords to hold their units for an
additional two weeks to accommodate an additional inspection
requirement. Additionally, HUD could also study alternatives to the
risk assessment model, such as targeted dust sampling, that may achieve
similar level of protection as a full risk assessment for a smaller
cost and shorter waiting time. Without the suggested study on the
impact of risk assessments on leasing times and availability of housing
for extremely low-income families, HUD cannot unequivocally support a
new statutory requirement that would mandate a traditional risk
assessment prior to move in of HCV voucher holders.
Question. Can you work to create process at HUD that provides the
necessary resources to help families relocate immediately--without
facing any penalties or loss of future assistance--if lead hazards are
found in a home?
Answer. As indicated in HUD's response to the previous question,
the lack of housing options is often a significant barrier to
relocation for low, very-low, and extremely-low income families.
Furthermore, controlling lead hazards in HUD-assisted housing increases
the supply of lead-safe housing. The approach of the Lead Safe Housing
Rule (LSHR) is to try to ensure the family's safety and health with as
little disruption as possible. This may require temporary relocation
during lead hazard control, for protecting the health of the residents,
but the preference is to avoid displacement, and the vast majority of
lead hazard control projects are undertaken without displacement.
In cases of housing assisted by HUD's Office of Public and Indian
Housing (PIH) where lead hazard control of public housing, project-
based voucher housing, or housing choice voucher (HCV) units, is not
completed within the timeframes established by the LSHR, a public
housing agency may use Housing Choice Vouchers (HCV) administrative fee
revenue to assist with temporary relocation; the families are not
penalized and do not lose future assistance. Similarly, in those cases
where temporary relocation is infeasible, and the families must be
displaced, they are not penalized and do not lose future assistance.
In cases of housing assisted by HUD's Office of Multifamily Housing
Programs (MF) where lead hazard control of project-based Section 8
assisted units is not completed within the timeframes established by
the LSHR, MF has a process in place under which residents can relocate
immediately through a ``Section 8 pass-through lease.'' This process is
covered in HUD handbook 4350.1, ``Multifamily Asset Management and
Project Servicing,'' chapter 38, section 38-32 (www.hud.gov/sites/
documents/DOC_24956.doc). An owner with a resident under a project-
based Section 8 Housing Assistance Payments contract whose unit was
rendered uninhabitable may temporarily lease a unit in another
building, provided it meets the Uniform Physical Condition Standards or
Housing Quality Standards. For pre-1978 units, these standards include,
respectively, a risk assessment or a visual assessment for deteriorated
paint, and remediation of problems identified, prior to move-in. In
these cases, the owner can sign a temporary lease on behalf of the
displaced Section 8 resident and begin to voucher for the contract rent
for that temporary unit. The owner then pays no more than the contract
rent on the temporary dwelling until the resident's permanent rental
unit has been restored to habitable condition and the owner notifies
the resident that they may resume occupancy of their former unit. While
MF can allow the use of PBRA funds to cover the lease costs of
relocation housing, the relocation costs must be covered by the owner
of the housing rendered uninhabitable. The resident is still
responsible for the resident's share of the temporary rent. HUD
requires the property owner to cover the resident's relocation costs to
the temporary unit.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Dianne Feinstein
hud-vash vouchers
Question. Secretary Carson, the 2017 Point-In-Time (PIT) Count from
your Department found approximately 553,700 individuals' nationwide
experiencing homelessness on any given night in January 2017, a net
increase of 3,800 people experiencing homelessness as compared to 2016.
California communities represented seven of the ten largest
increases in homelessness nationally since 2016.
More specifically, the HUD PIT Count found an increase of 1.5
percent in homeless veterans. For example, Los Angeles County reported
the largest increase in veteran homelessness in the country,
documenting 1,748 more homeless veterans in 2017, an increase of 64
percent from 2016.
How is the Department working with the VA to ensure that the HUD-
VASH vouchers are utilized in areas close to VA facilities where
veterans may be receiving care and case management services?
Answer. PHAs cannot steer veterans to lease units in specific
locations, but because case management is required, the VA case manager
ensures the veteran will live in those areas that are accessible to
case management services. HUD works with PHAs and VA Medical Centers to
ensure that allocated HUD-VASH vouchers are leased and veterans are
able to access the services they need.
Question. When veterans in a specific area have lower than average
success in obtaining housing when compared to veterans participating in
HUD-VASH nationally, what does HUD do to assist those veterans in
finding housing options?
Answer. It is often more difficult for veterans in high-cost, low
vacancy markets or markets with limited housing stock to compete for
limited affordable housing. Under the operating requirements of the
HUD-VASH program, PHAs must have a minimum voucher search term of 120
days (unlike the minimum 60 days under the regular voucher program).
PHAs are also able to allow for unlimited extensions of this term to
allow families as much time as is needed to find and secure an
acceptable unit. Using the broad waiver authority authorized under HUD-
VASH, HUD has approved exception payment standards for some PHAs
specifically for the HUD-VASH program. These higher payment standards
give the veteran more buying power, especially in high cost markets. To
create more long-term affordable housing options and reduce the time
veterans search for housing, HUD encourages converting tenant-based
HUD-VASH vouchers to project-based voucher assistance where
appropriate. Additionally, the process of converting HUD-VASH from
tenant-based to project-based was streamlined under HOTMA by not
requiring HUD approval to convert the vouchers. HUD routinely works
with the VA and our partners at the United States Interagency Council
on Homelessness (USICH) to find community-specific solutions and
leverage any available community resources. For example, a common
obstacle faced by veterans during the lease-up process is a lack of
funds for security deposits and other move-in costs. HUD, VA, and USICH
work together with the local communities to identify organizations that
can step in and assist the veteran with these expenses.
Question. What is HUD's position on allowing Public Housing
Authorities to have the ability to transfer, with HUD approval, HUD-
VASH vouchers from one housing development to another?
Answer. PHAs are able to use the portability provision to allow
veterans to move and continue utilizing their HUD-VASH vouchers as well
as receive the required case management from the VA medical center.
However, PHAs do not have the authority to transfer HUD-VASH vouchers
that are not being utilized between PHAs. To address the changing needs
of homeless veterans across the country, HUD and VA are working
collaboratively to develop a process for recapturing unused HUD-VASH
vouchers from communities that no longer need them and reallocating
these vouchers to current high-need communities.
homeless children and youth
Question. In sharp contrast to HUD's homeless numbers, public
schools and Head Start programs report significant increases in
children, youth, and families who are homeless.
You won't see most of them on the streets. They bounce between
couches and floors, motels, and if they're lucky, shelters. They move
from place to place, wherever they can find a place stay. These are
dangerous and unhealthy situations that are just as bad as, or worse
than, being outside. They put children and youth at risk of
trafficking, abuse, and neglect.
Do you agree that communities should be allowed to at least triage
these children and youth, and serve them with HUD homeless assistance
funds when appropriate?
Answer. HUD is strongly committed to ending homelessness as set
forth in the Federal Strategic Plan to Prevent and End Homelessness,
including ending homelessness for youth. HUD's current definition of
homelessness, which was expanded through the HEARTH Act, includes many
youth living in situations you mention in your question. Among other
things, the current eligibility requirements for HUD's Continuum of
Care (CoC) and Emergency Solutions Grants (ESG) programs balance the
need to serve people with a diverse array of circumstances with the
need to target assistance to people with the highest needs all while
ensuring that each person receives the best combination of housing and
supportive services tailored to their situation.
Since HUD began implementing the expanded definition, however,
there has been confusion about who meets the criteria and who can be
served with HUD funding. HUD has worked to dispel misinformation with
training and communications. To clarify, in addition to individuals and
families living in places not meant for human habitation, emergency
shelter, or safe havens, HUD's definition of homelessness includes
those households residing in transitional housing, hotels and motels
paid for by charitable organizations or by a unit of government, living
temporarily with friends or family but must leave within two weeks, and
finally those households fleeing or attempting to flee domestic
violence. It is important to make clear that no youth should ever have
to sleep in an unsheltered location or in a place where they are
trafficked or fearful of abuse. People facing these circumstances that
have no other alternatives should be able to access, at a minimum, our
emergency shelter services, but may also be eligible for programs like
transitional housing, rapid re-housing, and permanent supportive
housing.
Young people who meet HUD's current definition of homelessness
should be assessed and prioritized locally for assistance through HUD's
homeless assistance programs. Unfortunately, HUD does not have
sufficient funding to serve all persons who meet our definition of
homelessness and need our assistance. In addition to using dedicated
homeless resources, HUD encourages communities to maximize their use of
mainstream housing service programs--particularly housing choice
vouchers--to serve as many people experiencing homelessness as possible
and many public housing agencies have adopted a preference for people
experiencing homelessness in their jurisdictions.
In addition, HUD's ESG program serves people who are at risk of
homelessness, which includes people who qualify under the Department of
Education's definition of homelessness and other Federal agencies'
definitions and who have no other resources or support networks to
obtain housing. ESG resources are also prioritized based on need, and
when communities use them to serve people at risk of homelessness, they
should identify those individuals who are doubled up or couch surfing
who have the highest level of need. ESG can provide a flexible
combination of housing assistance and supportive services tailored to
meet these needs.
Many people face unstable housing situations, including
overcrowding, doubling up, or paying too high a proportion of their
income for rent. Providing mainstream housing assistance and improving
the supply of affordable housing is the best way to meet their needs,
and we encourage all of HUD's programs as well as locally or privately
funded housing providers to coordinate with their local homeless
assistance community.
moving to work demonstration
Question. Moving to Work (MTW) is a demonstration program for
Public Housing Authorities that gives them more flexibility in how they
use Federal funds, allowing them to better tailor their programs to
meet local needs.
In the fiscal year 2016 Omnibus, Congress approved a large
expansion of the MTW program, allowing 100 additional public housing
agencies to join.
But in California, many Public Housing Authorities in the state
face challenges as they struggle to keep pace with the growing housing
affordability gap and need interventions and the flexibility provided
by the MTW program in order to counter extremely high costs of living
and rapidly-changing rental markets.
Can you provide an update on where HUD is in the process of
implementing the most recent expansion of the MTW program?
Answer. Thank you for your interest and support of the expansion to
the MTW demonstration. HUD is developing guidelines, informed by public
comments, to govern the expansion of the demonstration. MTW agencies
will be designated by cohort over 7 years and, as required by the 2016
Appropriations Act, HUD will study and learn from these agencies in
order to improve the future delivery of federally-assisted low-income
and affordable housing. The 2016 Appropriations Act required the
Secretary to establish a research advisory committee to advise the
Secretary with respect to specific policy proposals and methods of
research and evaluation for the demonstration. From 2016--2017, HUD
convened the MTW Research Advisory Committee and received its
recommendations. HUD intends to take the advice of the Committee;
therefore, the first cohort will evaluate the overall impact of MTW as
a flexibility and focus on the smaller PHAs (under 1,000 units), and
the second cohort will evaluate rent reform alternatives and PHAs of
all sizes will likely be invited to apply. Two additional cohorts will
(separately) study work requirements and landlord incentives, as
suggested by the Committee.
In January 2017, HUD published in the Federal Register for public
comment the draft MTW Operations Notice, which establishes requirements
for the implementation and continued operation of the expansion of the
MTW demonstration program. HUD received over 800 comments and will
publish an updated Operations Notice for a 30-day public comment period
this Spring.
The following is our anticipated timeline for MTW expansion
implementation through the designation of the second of the four
planned cohorts:
Summer 2018:
--Publish revised MTW Operations Notice for a second round of
public comments, and revise again based on comments received.
--Publish MTW First Cohort Selection Notice to invite the
initial cohort of MTW agencies to apply (likely 30 agencies).
Fall 2018:
--Publish final MTW Operations Notice.
--Publish MTW Second Cohort Request for Letters of Interest
Notice that outlines the parameters of the second cohort and
invites PHAs to submit letters indicating their intentions to
apply if selected.
Winter 2018:
--Designate the initial cohort of PHAs as MTW agencies.
--Invite the second cohort of agencies to apply.
Spring 2019:
--Designate the second cohort of PHAs as MTW agencies.
federal housing agency-housing finance agency multifamily risk-sharing
Question. Congress established the Federal Housing Agency (FHA)--
Housing Finance Agency (HFA) Multifamily Risk-Sharing program in 1992
to increase and speed up FHA's multifamily mortgage production. The
FHA-HFA Risk-Sharing program allows state HFAs that meet rigorous
financial standards to underwrite FHA multifamily loans in return for
sharing the risk of losses on those loans.
HUD has previously said that ``the Risk-Sharing program is an
increasingly important part of meeting HUD's strategic goal to support
affordable housing preservation and development.'' But HUD failed to
include an extension of this program in the Administration's fiscal
year 2019 budget request.
Why did HUD not request the inclusion of an extension of the risk-
sharing program in the Administration's budget request for fiscal year
2019?
Answer. The Risk-Sharing program remains an important part of
meeting HUD's affordable housing goals. The Department is not
terminating the Risk Sharing program and HUD fully supports the
continued use of Risk Sharing with HFA partners. The Risk Sharing
program will continue to be funded with FHA Insurance commitment
authority.
Question. What is your justification for why HUD's risk-sharing
program is no longer needed and what evidence do you have to support
this justification?
Answer. As noted in the response to the question above, HUD is not
terminating the Risk Sharing program.
proposed changes to hud's mission statement
Question. This year is the 50th anniversary of the enactment of the
Fair Housing Act (FHA), the purpose of which was to end discrimination
in the sale, rental, and financing of homes on the basis of race,
color, religion, sex, or national origin.
But recently HUD announced that it is considering a change to its
mission statement from one that promotes inclusion and discrimination-
free communities to one that does not strive to offer the same
protections.
Could you provide an update on where HUD is in the process on this
issue?
Answer. As in previous Administrations, HUD is considering modest
changes to the Department's mission statement to make it a more clear
and concise expression of the historic work this agency performs on
behalf of the American people. As part of this effort, HUD is currently
soliciting input from employees across the agency. You can be sure of
one thing--any mission statement for this Department will embody the
principle of fairness as a central element of everything that we do.
HUD is committed to ensuring inclusive housing, free from
discrimination, for all Americans.
transitional housing for survivors of domestic violence
Question. Access to safe and affordable housing is crucial to
domestic violence survivors' healing, and HUD's Transitional Housing
Program has a key role in providing short-term safe housing for
domestic violence survivors who need a few weeks or months to rebuild
their lives.
As you know, both in California and nationwide, domestic violence
shelters have either been shut down or they are perpetually overcrowded
due to a decrease in funding for Transitional Housing Programs. This
decrease in funding comes as a result of domestic violence shelters
being scored low in Continuum of Care (CoC) grant applications because
of the priority parameters that are set by HUD.
HUD has previously recognized the intersection between domestic
violence and homelessness.
Do you have a strategy in place to ensure that domestic violence
shelters receive the funding necessary to remain open and will you
commit to ensuring such shelters are appropriately scored in the CoC
grant applications so survivors of domestic violence and their families
do not end up homeless?
Answer. Because of the large number of people served by HUD's
homeless assistance programs that have experienced domestic violence,
it is important to HUD that our communities consider high quality
projects that serve survivors of domestic violence as a critical
component of their homeless services system. Therefore, HUD encourages
Continuums of Care (CoC) to continue funding high quality projects for
survivors of domestic violence regardless of component type. This means
transitional housing programs and emergency shelters for survivors
should have a place in a community's system so long as they meet a
community need, can show positive safety and housing related outcomes,
and provide choice to the people who want to use these types of
programs.
However, HUD expects that other types of projects that are
dedicated to survivors demonstrate these same qualities. Because rapid
re-housing assistance offers a great deal of flexibility in terms of
the length and depth of the rental assistance and the services
provided, it can often meet the immediate needs of survivors while
exiting them quickly from homelessness. Moreover, rapid re-housing can
often achieve this while serving more people, being more cost-
effective, and having better outcomes for the survivor than
transitional housing. Therefore, many communities have shifted their
transitional housing projects for survivors to rapid re-housing
projects for survivors.
HUD uses its CoC Program Competition to incentivize CoCs to adopt
best practices and most effectively serve those experiencing
homelessness in their communities. Included in the fiscal year 2017 CoC
Application, as in the past, HUD requires CoCs to report how they
address the unique needs of survivors of domestic violence, what
regular training is being offered to improve how coordinated entry
participants address the specific needs of survivors of domestic
violence, and how they measure the needs related to survivors of
domestic violence.
Additionally, in the fiscal year 2017 CoC Program Competition, HUD
introduced a new project type that combines transitional housing and
rapid rehousing. It allows communities to provide people experiencing
homelessness with a safe place to stay while they search for a
permanent unit and then provides the financial resources to help them
obtain and maintain that permanent unit. One of the populations HUD
recommended a CoC consider for this new type of project was survivors
of domestic violence and many victim service providers were funded in
the fiscal year 2017 Competition for this type of project.
HUD is moving quickly to make the additional $50 million of funding
from the fiscal year 2018 appropriation dedicated to assisting
survivors of domestic violence available to communities. This is a
great opportunity to continue to encourage communities to implement
effective programs and best practices for ending homelessness for
survivors of domestic violence.
Within HUD's CoC Program, HUD gives CoCs flexibility to determine
how projects are prioritized for funding. Projects that are ranked
highly by communities are awarded, including transitional housing
programs for survivors of domestic violence. In the fiscal year 2017
Competition, HUD allowed communities to rank up to 94 percent of their
funding in the high priority category. Projects that are ranked lower
compete against other lower priority project applications across the
country. To the extent that CoC's continue to rank projects for
survivors, including transitional housing projects, in this high
priority category, HUD anticipates respecting that decision and
continuing to fund them. Additionally, HUD expects that its ESG program
will continue to fund emergency shelters, rapid re-housing projects,
and homelessness prevention projects for survivors across the country.
Finally, HUD partners with DOJ's Office of Violence Against Women
and HHS' Family Violence Prevention & Services to find solutions to
better serve survivors of domestic violence. Together, HUD, DOJ, and
HHS created the Domestic Violence and Housing Technical Assistance
Consortium. The Consortium, launched in 2015, provides training,
technical assistance, and resource development at the critical
intersection of homelessness and domestic violence and sexual assault.
The Consortium works collaboratively to improve policies and practices
that strengthen efforts to build safe and supportive housing options
for domestic and sexual violence survivors.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Christopher A. Coons
home program
Question. Given the extraordinary demand for affordable housing and
the great benefits that the HOME program provides, why does the budget
once again eliminate the HOME program?
Answer. This Administration believes that state and local
governments are best positioned to address specific needs in their
communities. Therefore state and local governments are uniquely
situated to engage public, private, and philanthropic partners to
coordinate efforts to effectively address affordable housing needs
within their jurisdictions.
Question. Do you anticipate that these budget cuts will result in a
net decrease in the availability of affordable housing?
Answer. Units previously funded with HOME dollars have
affordability periods of up to 20 years. Consequently, in the short
term, there should be no decrease in the availability of affordable
housing units. However, maintaining or increasing affordable housing
stock over time will require a commitment from states and local
governments to carefully evaluate policies that may be contributing to
affordability issues and to commit to policy reforms and new funding
mechanisms to address affordability. In particular, to meet their
affordable housing needs, states and localities must reform local
policies such as zoning and permitting policies, and commit state and
local resources through state or local housing trust funds, property
tax exemptions, state-funded rental assistance programs, or state
investor tax credits.
impact of budget cuts
Question. The HUD budget request states that budget cuts are to
``recognize a greater role for State and local governments and the
private sector in addressing community development and affordable
housing needs''. In Delaware, few projects happen without significant
Federal support from programs like CDBG and HOME. Federal funding is
essential in order to attract other state and private financing.
Without this Federal gap financing, projects would not be funded. Can
you elaborate on your expectation about State and localities covering
an over $4 billion annual shortfall?
Answer. HUD believes states and local governments are uniquely
situated to engage public, private, and philanthropic partners and to
coordinate efforts to effectively address affordable housing needs
within their jurisdictions. To meet their affordable housing needs,
states and localities must reform local policies such as zoning and
permitting policies, commit state and local resources through state or
local housing trust funds, property tax exemptions, state-funded rental
assistance programs, or state investor tax credits.
public housing
Question. The Administration is proposing significant cuts to
Public Housing funds, particularly the Capital Fund, which is
eliminated under the fiscal year 2019 request.
What will the impact of these cuts be on the quality and condition
of the nation's public housing, and the families, people with
disabilities, and elderly people who live in these homes?
Answer. The current approach to supporting the Public Housing
program is unsustainable and has resulted in units lost due to poor
physical conditions, and more than $26 billion in unmet capital needs.
To address the problem, the President's Budget includes enhanced tools
and strategies to empower PHAs to make local decisions about how to
best use their properties to meet the needs of their communities. Among
the flexibilities and resources available to PHAs are:
--Demolition: If a project is physically distressed or obsolete, the
PHA may apply to HUD to demolish the property. In these cases,
residents may be eligible to receive tenant protection vouchers
as their form of subsidized housing, and PHAs also have the
option to move residents to other public housing properties
within their portfolio. The Budget requests $30 million to
facilitate the demolition of physically obsolete public housing
projects.
--Rental Assistance Demonstration (RAD) program: RAD allows public
housing properties to shift to the Section 8 Project-Based
Voucher and Project-Based Rental Assistance platforms. These
project-based Section 8 programs benefit from greater private
sector involvement and can leverage private financing for
modernization, generally resulting in higher quality housing
for the assisted low-income families. HUD requested $100
million in the Budget to facilitate RAD conversions.
--Disposition: HUD recently published PIH Notice 2018-4, which
streamlines the disposition process. The Notice also allows a
PHA to redevelop a non-distressed property and receive tenant
protection vouchers for up to 25 percent of the occupied units
in the property, which could then be used to provide project-
based assistance for residents.
Through these policies, HUD is seeking to shift public housing to a
more sustainable platform of support. PHAs may utilize these options to
address the needs of Public Housing.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Patrick J. Leahy
rescissions
Question. Despite the fact that the President signed the Bipartisan
Budget Agreement, press reports indicate that he is now considering
sending a package of rescissions to Congress that would undo spending
decisions based on that deal. I believe when you strike an agreement,
you should stick to it. It is clear that you and I have very different
visions of what the budget for the Department of Housing and Urban
Development should be, and what it should prioritize. Congress clearly
rejected in the fiscal year 2018 Omnibus the President's proposed cuts
to housing and community development programs. Not getting the message,
the President again proposes significant cuts to these important
programs in fiscal year 2019.
Given the stark difference between the vision Congress has for the
Department, and yours, have you or anyone on your staff recommended or
do you plan to recommend to the President or OMB that we rescind any of
the money we recently appropriated for housing and community
development proposals? Which programs specifically?
Answer. Awaiting clearance from OMB
rapid rehousing--domestic violence
Question. The proposed budget for HUD fails to include rapid
rehousing assistance for victims of domestic violence, dating violence,
sexual assault or stalking. This funding is imperative to ensure
victims of abuse don't have to decide between returning to their
abuser, or becoming homeless, often with their children. Transitional
housing programs administered by the Department of Justice alone cannot
solve this problem.
What should we tell victims in our communities in Vermont and
across the country since HUD has signaled it does not support these
programs?
Answer. Because of the large number of people served by HUD's
homeless assistance programs that have experienced domestic violence,
it is important to HUD that our communities consider high quality
projects that serve survivors of domestic violence as a critical
component of their homeless services system. Therefore, HUD encourages
Continuums of Care (CoC) to continue funding high quality projects for
survivors of domestic violence regardless of component type. This means
transitional housing programs and emergency shelters for survivors
should have a place in a community's system so long as those projects
meet a community need, can show positive safety and housing related
outcomes, and provide choice to the people who want to use these types
of programs.
However, HUD expects that other types of projects that are
dedicated to survivors demonstrate these same qualities. Because rapid
re-housing assistance offers a great deal of flexibility in terms of
the length and depth of the rental assistance and the services
provided, it can often meet the immediate needs of survivors while
exiting them quickly from homelessness. Rapid re-housing can often
serve more people, be more cost-effective, and have better outcomes for
the survivor than transitional housing. Therefore, many communities
have shifted their transitional housing projects for survivors to rapid
re-housing projects for survivors.
HUD uses its CoC Program Competition to incentivize CoCs to adopt
best practices and most effectively serve those experiencing
homelessness in their communities. Included in the fiscal year 2017 CoC
Application, as in the past, HUD requires CoCs to report how they
address the unique needs of survivors of domestic violence, what
regular training is being offered to improve how coordinated entry
participants address the specific needs of survivors of domestic
violence, and how they measure the needs related to survivors of
domestic violence.
Additionally, in the fiscal year 2017 CoC Program Competition, HUD
introduced a new project type that combines transitional housing and
rapid rehousing. It allows communities to provide people experiencing
homelessness with a safe place to stay while they search for a
permanent unit and then provides the financial resources to help them
obtain and maintain that permanent unit. One of the populations HUD
recommended CoC consider for this new type of project was survivors of
domestic violence and many victim service providers were funded in the
fiscal year 2017 Competition for this type of project.
HUD is moving quickly to make the additional $50 million of funding
from the fiscal year 2018 appropriation dedicated to assisting
survivors of domestic violence available to communities. This is a
great opportunity to continue to encourage communities to implement
effective programs and best practices for ending homelessness for
survivors of domestic violence.
Within HUD's CoC Program, HUD gives CoCs flexibility to determine
how projects are prioritized for funding. Projects that are ranked
highly by communities are awarded, including transitional housing
programs for survivors of domestic violence. In the fiscal year 2017
Competition, HUD allowed communities to rank up to 94 percent of their
funding in the high priority category. Projects that are ranked lower
compete against other lower priority project applications across the
country. To the extent that CoC's continue to rank projects for
survivors, including transitional housing projects, in this high
priority category, HUD anticipates respecting that decision and
continuing to fund them. Additionally, HUD expects that its Emergency
Solutions Grants (ESG) program will continue to fund emergency
shelters, rapid re-housing projects, and homelessness prevention
projects for survivors across the country.
Question. HUD partners with DOJ's Office of Violence Against Women
and HHS's Family Violence Prevention & Services to find solutions to
better serve survivors of domestic violence. They have worked together
to create a Domestic Violence and Housing Technical Assistance
Consortium. The Consortium, launched in 2015, provides training,
technical assistance, and resource development at the critical
intersection of homelessness and domestic violence and sexual assault.
The Consortium works collaboratively to improve policies and practices
that strengthen efforts to build safe and supportive housing options
for domestic and sexual violence survivors.
Do you think your department has a responsibility to assist victims
of domestic violence who would otherwise become homeless?
Answer. The Department continues to prioritize high quality
projects and communities that serve survivors of domestic violence as a
critical component of their homeless services system. Through the
Continuum of Care (CoC) Program Competition and the Emergency Solutions
Grants (ESG) program, HUD works to ensure that victims of domestic
violence have services and programs addressing their unique needs.
Finally, HUD is moving quickly to make the additional $50 million of
funding from the fiscal year 2018 appropriation dedicated to assisting
survivors of domestic violence available to communities.
Question. Will you commit to requesting rapid rehousing assistance
for victims of domestic violence in the fiscal year 2020 budget?
Answer. HUD will continue to support housing solutions that address
the needs and challenges for victims of domestic violence. Through the
CoC and ESG programs, HUD will support projects that benefit survivors
including transitional housing programs, rapid re-housing, and
emergency shelters.
deep cuts to hud funding
Question. The administration's budget proposes deep cuts to
administrative support and program offices like the chief financial
officer, general counsel, chief information officer, housing, fair
housing and lead hazard control, with only a few exceptions. Across
those offices, the budget proposes cutting 216 full time employees.
These may sound like faceless, nameless bureaucrats, but they are the
people that help ensure the department can serve the millions of
Americas that rely on HUD programs every day. At the same, you propose
an increase of $1.6 million to accommodate 9 full time staffers for the
Executive Office.
How can HUD continue to meet its obligations to the American people
with deep funding and staff cuts at its Administrative Support and
Program Offices?
Answer. The Department can continue to meet its obligations with
the proposed staffing level. The Department has a stable, experienced,
dedicated, hardworking workforce that will be able to meet its core
mission. HUD is also striving to make its programs more efficient and
effective and is focused on using technology wherever possible to do
so.
Question. How do you justify the need to increase staffing to
support your Executive Office, while proposing to eliminate staff for
programs that serve our lowest-income Americans and distressed
communities?
Answer. The cited increase was relative to a staffing level that
was temporarily reduced due to vacancies in Executive Offices
associated with the Presidential transition. The proposed staffing
level also reflects increased workload associated with managing the
Department's disaster response. Additionally, the Department has
notified Appropriations Committee staff that a staffing level of 78
full time equivalents will be sufficient for fiscal year 2019.
the american dream and homeownership
Question. For so many Americans the prospect of homeownership, long
viewed as part of the American Dream, is perceived to be out of reach.
A majority of younger Americans are graduating college with significant
student loan debt. In some markets more affordable homes are
underwater, which prevents existing homeowners from selling.
What steps will your Department take to support initiatives that
increase opportunities for homeownership, particularly for low income
Americans and those with significant student loan burdens?
Answer. FHA continuously monitors its policies to ensure it is
meeting the housing needs of the borrowers its programs were designed
to serve while simultaneously minimizing the risk undertaken relative
to the insurance of those mortgages. As part of this monitoring, FHA is
assessing how changes in the student loan debt market over the past
several years may impact FHA's requirements for analyzing student loan
debt in the underwriting process. FHA is simultaneously seeking to
update its technology to be able to capture and analyze additional data
about the mortgages it insures. This effort includes plans to capture
credit report data files that would enhance FHA's ability to assess
borrowers' debt types, including student loan debt.
Question. What is the Department's view on shared equity
homeownership models?
Answer. HUD supports investigating prudent and sustainable
homeownership models that would benefit low- and moderate-income and
first-time homebuyers. There are a variety of shared equity
homeownership models that have been tested over the years. The most
prevalent are those that entail the use of second liens and subsidies
from nonprofits or governmental entities both of which, if they were
attached to an FHA-insured first mortgage, have the potential to
increase risk to the Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund. Further, the most
common shared equity models reduce a borrower's ability to take
advantage of the full equity they've built up at the time of resale.
That being said, HUD would be interested in exploring any shared equity
models put forth that can reasonably balance risk with borrower
benefit.
Question. Would the Department support Federal investment in
studying the appropriate role of shared equity homeownership and a
potential role for HUD in scaling up shared equity homeownership in the
United States?
Answer. HUD would be happy to discuss the potential of a Federal
study with your office.
elimination of cdbg and home
Question. The administration has again proposed eliminating the
CDBG and HOME programs, which provide critical capital to organizations
in my state of Vermont that develop affordable housing. It is my
impression that by putting forward this proposal, the administration
really doesn't understand what it takes to create affordable housing in
rural America. In Vermont, developers pull together every possible
source of funding, often from multiple programs and Federal agencies to
create something that meets the needs of Vermonters. It is not
uncommon, even in rural Vermont, for a housing trust to receive
hundreds of applications for units when they have only a small handful
available. Too often, projects in the pipeline fall through for lack of
funding, illustrating the critical need for a combination of Federal,
state, private, and nonprofit investment. Absent Federal funding, these
project simply do not move forward. States, communities, nonprofit
organizations, and private entities are already stretching their
dollars as far as they can. That nongovernment entities cannot fill the
funding gaps if Federal investment were removed from the equation, what
would you and your Department say to the Vermonters and other Americans
is desperate need of affordable housing?
Answer. The Administration believes that state and local
governments are best positioned to address specific needs in their
communities. Therefore, the Administration continues to seek the
elimination of the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program,
shifting responsibility for community development to the state and
local level. Since 1980, and most recently in 2013, HUD studies have
found that CDBG is not well targeted to the poorest communities and it
has not demonstrated a measurable impact on communities. Similarly, the
Administration proposed the elimination of the HOME Investment
Partnerships program because state and local governments are better
positioned to address the unique local market challenges and
impediments that lead to housing affordability problems.
Question. What strategies would you recommend to those that are
unable to find affordable rental housing and would be further
disadvantaged by your department's budget proposal?
Answer. HUD believes that effectively addressing affordable housing
needs requires a multi-pronged effort that leverages the unique ability
of state and local governments to engage local institutions and
coordinate resources. This effort could include: reform of local
policies such as zoning and permitting that lengthen development
timelines and raise development or operating costs; greater commitment
of state and local resources to affordable housing, such as
establishment of local housing trust funds, property tax exemptions,
state-funded rental assistance programs, and state investor tax
credits; careful targeting of existing Federal resources such as Low-
Income Housing Tax Credits; and increased coordination between state
and local governments and the local business community (especially
large institutional employers), philanthropic organizations, and
nonprofit service providers.
affirmatively furthering fair housing
Question. On January 5, 2018, your department announced it would
delay the implementation of the Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing
Rule. Why did your department choose to delay the AFFH rule?
Answer. Based on the initial Assessments of Fair Housing (AFH)
reviews, HUD believes that program participants need additional time
and technical assistance to adjust to the new AFFH process and complete
AFH submissions that can be accepted by HUD. HUD's January 5, 2018
Federal Register notice announced the delay of the submission of
Assessments of Fair Housing (AFH). At that time, 49 local governments
had submitted AFHs to HUD using the new format established by the AFFH
Final Rule and the Assessment of Fair Housing Tool for Local
Governments. HUD's analysis of these AFHs shows that more than one
third (35 percent) of all local governments in the cohort of the first
49 AFHs submitted were not accepted by HUD on first submission. Another
third required intensive intervention and technical assistance during
HUD's review process before the AFH was accepted. HUD did not
anticipate mid-review technical assistance and addendums being
necessary until issues presented themselves during implementation. HUD
determined that program participants' frequent misunderstanding of how
to set clear goals, metrics, and milestones that addressed their
identified contributing factors and related fair housing issues too
often resulted in non-accepted AFHs.
Question. In advance of the decision to delay the rule, did HUD
consider providing, through existing funding or by requesting
additional funding, increased technical assistance to help
jurisdictions come into compliance more easily and efficiently?
Answer. HUD provided technical assistance to every jurisdiction
conducting an Assessment of Fair Housing.
Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity (FHEO) staff at the local level
provided the first line of technical assistance (TA) through ``pre-
submission support'' to HUD program participants as they were in the
process of preparing an AFH. The AFH pre-submission support included
the following activities and more depending upon the jurisdiction:
--sending a welcome letter to program participants outlining the AFH
process;
--providing direct outreach to program participants through email and
regularly scheduled conference calls;
--creating community profiles to familiarize themselves with local
conditions in communities prior to AFH submissions;
--facilitating monthly calls with program participants on AFH
requirements 6-9 months in advance of submission; and
--coordinating inter-office collaboration with other HUD program
offices who also engaged program participants during the pre-
submission phase, e.g. Community Planning and Development (CPD)
staff and Public and Indian Housing (PIH) staff.
In addition to technical assistance provided by staff, HUD TA
providers engaged in direct technical assistance with program
participants, on-call technical assistance, product development, and
regional training for program participants. Have you met with
jurisdictions, experts, or other stakeholders to strengthen or improve
the rule? Which ones?
Answer. HUD intends to conduct listening sessions with stakeholders
across the country in the coming months. The specific attendees are yet
to be determined.
Question. Did your department generate any reports, evaluations or
documentation in support of delaying the AFFH rule? If so, please share
that documentation with the Committee. What other steps has the
Department taken since January of this year and what is the
Department's timeline moving forward?
Answer. HUD's analysis (attached) of submitted AFHs indicate that
more than one third (35 percent) of all local governments submitted
AFHs that were not accepted by HUD on first submission. Another third
submitted AFHs required intensive intervention and technical assistance
during HUD's review process before the AFH was accepted. HUD determined
that program participants' frequent misunderstanding of how to set
clear goals, metrics, and milestones that addressed their identified
contributing factors and related fair housing issues too often resulted
in non-accepted AFHs.
HUD continues to provide direct technical assistance (TA) led by
third party subject matter experts to program participants that wish to
develop their Analysis of Impediments (AIs). Direct TA is currently
deployed to local and state governments as well as public housing
authorities that are participating with their local and state
governments in conducting joint or regional AIs.
HUD published three notices in the Federal Register on May 23,
2018. One withdraws the January 5, 2018, notice that extended the
deadline for submission of an Assessment of Fair Housing (AFH) by local
governments. The second notice withdraws the Assessment of Fair Housing
Tool for Local Governments. In addition, any local government that have
not yet submitted an AFH that has been accepted by HUD must conduct a
robust Analysis of Impediments (AI) to fair housing choice within its
jurisdiction. In its third notice, HUD is reminding these local
governments that the legal obligation to affirmatively further fair
housing remains in effect.
HUD leadership is reviewing next steps regarding the AFFH rule in
light of the new notices.
assessment of fair housing (afh) submissions (49) and initial hud
review decisions
October 2016-December 2017
HUD received, reviewed, and issued initial decisions on (49)
Assessments of Fair Housing (AFHs) between October 2016 and December
2017. As the Federal Register Notice stated, 35 percent of these (17/
49) were initially non-accepted.\1\ However, this figure is somewhat
misleading regarding the performance of HUD program participants on
initial AFH submissions. Many AFH submissions (28.5 percent or 14/49)
were only accepted after revisions and additional information was
submitted to HUD in the form of addendums that were added onto initial
submissions. Taken together, 63.2 percent of the (49) AFHs submitted
were either officially non-accepted or accepted after additional
information and revisions required by HUD. Of the (49) AFHs with
initial HUD review decisions completed, 18/49 or 36.7 percent were
acceptable on initial submission to HUD.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2018-01-05/pdf/2018-00106.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We have color-coded these decisions by green, orange, and red to
classify the types of initial HUD review decisions on the (49) AFHs
between October 2016 and December 2017. Pages 2-6 of this document
outline the results for each of the (49) AFHs with initial HUD review
decisions.
Accepted: AFHs that were accepted on initial submission without the
need for additional information. The first submission fulfilled all
regulatory requirements for acceptance by HUD.
Accepted with Revision and Addendum: Upon initial review, it was
determined that revisions and an addendum were needed for these AFH
submissions to be acceptable. Program participants provided these
revisions and submitted addendums to HUD for review during the 60-Day
HUD review period. Examples of information included in these addendums
were additional details regarding community participation,
prioritization of contributing factors, additional metrics and
milestones for assessing goals, etc.
Non-Accepted\2\: These AFHs were non-accepted on initial submission
because the AFH did not fulfill regulatory requirements and required
significant modifications to be acceptable by HUD. Program participants
were provided between 45-90+ days to revise their AFH and resubmit to
HUD for a second review.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Please note that of the (17) initially non-accepted AFH
submissions: (9/17 AFHs) were accepted by HUD after their second AFH
submission, (2/17 AFHs) were under review by HUD at the time of
publication of the FR Notice and reviews were suspended by HUD, and (6/
17 AFHs) were pending a second AFH submission to HUD at the time of
publication of the FR Notice.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# of Program
HUD Initial Review Decision
AFH Submissions
Participants
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Accepted......................................................
18 (36.7%)
31 (30.1%)
Accepted with Revision and Addendum...........................
14 (28.5%)
29 (28.1%)
Non-Accepted..................................................
17 (34.7%)
43 (41.7%)
Totals....................................................
49
103
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Results for (49) AFHs with Initial HUD Review Decisions
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second
Number of
AFH Lead Entity
Collaborating Partners
First Submission Outcome
Submission
Program
Outcome
Participants
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AFH Due Date: October 4, 2016 (15 AFHs)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1
Dauphin County, PA
Housing Authority of
Non-Accepted
Accepted on
2
Dauphin County
Second
Submission
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2
Harrisonburg, VA
Harrisonburg
Accepted
2
Redevelopment and
Housing Authority
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
3
Philadelphia, PA
Philadelphia Housing
Accepted
2
Authority
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4
Wilmington, NC
Housing Authority of the
Accepted with Revision
2
City of Wilmington
and Addendum
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5
Hamilton, OH
N/A
Accepted with Revision
1
and Addendum
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6
Hammond, IN
N/A
Accepted
1
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
7
Jonesboro, AR
Jonesboro Urban Renewal
Non-Accepted
Accepted on
2
& Housing Authority
Second
Submission
(Additional
Information
Requested)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
8
New Orleans, LA
Housing Authority of New
Accepted
2
Orleans
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
9
Kansas City, MO
Kansas City, KS; Blue
Accepted
5
Springs, MO;
Independence, MO;
Leavenworth, KS
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10
El Paso County, CO
N/A
Accepted
1
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
11
Cathedral City, CA
N/A
Accepted with Revision
1
and Addendum
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
12
Paramount, CA
N/A
Accepted
1
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
13
Temecula, CA
N/A
Non-Accepted
Accepted on
1
Second
Submission
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
14
Apple Valley/Victorville
N/A
Non-Accepted
Accepted on
1
HOME Consortium, CA
Second
Submission
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15
Clackamas County, OR
Housing Authority of
Accepted
2
Clackamas County
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additional information and addendums were requested on the second
AFH submission from Jonesboro, AR for HUD to accept the AFH.
Results for (49) AFHs with Initial HUD Review Decisions
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second
Number of
AFH Lead Entity
Collaborating Partners
First Submission Outcome
Submission
Program
Outcome
Participants
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AFH Due Date: January 4, 2017 (5 AFHs)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
16
Manatee County, FL
Manatee County Housing
Accepted with Revision
2
Authority
and Addendum
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
17
Richland County, SC
Housing Authority of the
Accepted with Revision
2
City of Columbia
and Addendum
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
18
Lake County, OH
Lake MetropoliNon-Accepted
Accepted on
2
Housing Authority
Second
Submission
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
19
Lewisville, TX
N/A
Non-Accepted
Accepted on
1
Second
Submission
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
20
Long Beach, CA
Long Beach HouNon-Accepted
Accepted on
2
Authority
Second
Submission
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AFH Due Date: April 6, 2017 (5 AFHs)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
21
New Rochelle, NY
New Rochelle Housing
Non-Accepted
Accepted on
2
Authority
Second
Submission
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
22
Chester County, PA
Housing Authority of the
Accepted with Revision
2
County of Chester
and Addendum
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
23
Savannah, GA
N/A
Accepted with Revision
1
and Addendum
24
Anchorage, AK
N/A
Non-Accepted
Review
1
Suspended due
to FR Notice
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
25
Seattle, WA
Seattle Housing
Accepted
2
Authority
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AFH Due Date: August 4, 2017 (1 AFHs)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
26
Mobile, AL
N/A
Accepted with Revision
1
and Addendum
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
27
Nashville, TN
Metropolitan Development
Non-Accepted
Review
2
and Housing Agency, TN
Suspended due
to FR Notice
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AFH Due Date: October 4, 2017 (19 AFHs)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
28
Burlington, VT
Burlington Housing
Accepted
3
Authority; Winooski
Housing Authority
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
29
Somerville, MA
N/A
Accepted
1
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
30
Delaware County, PA
Housing Authority of
Accepted with Revision
2
Delaware County
and Addendum
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
31
Sandy Springs, GA
N/A
Non-Accepted
Second
1
Submission
pending at time
of FR Notice
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
32
Clayton County, GA
N/A
Non-Accepted
Second
1
Submission
pending at time
of FR Notice
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
33
Greenville, NC
N/A
Non-Accepted
Second
1
Submission
pending at time
of FR Notice
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
34
Horry County, SC HOME
Housing Authority of
Accepted with Revision
3
Consortium
Conway; Housing
and Addendum
Authority of Myrtle
Beach
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
35
Winston-Salem HOME
Housing Authority of
Accepted with Revision
2
Consortium, NC
Winston-Salem
and Addendum
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
36
Washtenaw Urban County,
Ann Arbor Housing
Accepted
2
MI
Commission
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
37
Santa Fe, NM
N/A
Accepted
1
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
38
Springdale, AR
N/A
Accepted with Revision
1
and Addendum
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
39
Albuquerque, NM
Albuquerque Housing
Accepted with Revision
3
Authority; Rio Rancho
and Addendum
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
40
Jefferson County HOME
N/A
Accepted
1
Consortium, MO
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
41
Hidalgo County Regional
Non-Accepted
Second Submission
19
AFHDonna Housing
pending at time ofFR
Authority; Edcouch
Notice
Housing Authority;
Edinburg; Edinburg
Housing Authority; Elsa
Housing Authority;
Hidalgo County Housing
Authority; Hidalgo
Housing Authority; La
Joya Housing Authority;
McAllen; McAllen Housing
Authority; Mercedes
Housing Authority;
Mission; Mission Housing
Authority; Pharr; Pharr
Housing Authority; San
Juan Housing Authority;
Weslaco Housing
Authority
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
42
Pomona, CA
Housing Authority of the
Non-Accepted
Accepted on
2
City of Pomona
Second
Submission
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
43
San Mateo County HOME
Daly City; Redwood City;
Accepted with Revision
6
Consortium, CA
Housing Authority of the
and Addendum
County of San Mateo;
South San Francisco
Housing Authority
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
44
Los Angeles County, CA
Housing Authority of Los
Non-Accepted
Second
2
Angeles County
Submission
pending at time
ofFR Notice
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
45
Moreno Valley, CA
N/A
Non-Accepted
Second
1
Submission
pending at time
ofFR Notice
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
46
Bellingham, WA
N/A
Accepted
1
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AFH Due Date: November 4, 2017 (2 AFHs)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
47
Ithaca, NY
N/A
Accepted
1
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
48
Lawrence, KS
Lawrence-Douglas CAccepted
2
Housing Authority
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AFH Due Date: April 6, 2022 (1 AFH--Submitted Early)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
49
Rogers, AR
N/A
Accepted
1
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
manufactured housing
Question. The Department published in the Federal Register a
request for comments on regulatory review of Manufactured Housing
rules. I have heard concerns from stakeholders in Vermont that HUD's
regulations for the installation of manufactured homes and particularly
the foundation installation requirements are unduly onerous.
What did HUD learn from the comments submitted?
Answer. HUD has received 462 comments in response to the Federal
Register notice regarding regulatory review of Manufactured Housing
rules. Of this total, there were 156 unique comments, which HUD is
currently reviewing. The comments received have underscored the
critical and essential role that HUD plays in balancing the protections
for consumers with the burdens and impacts regulatory compliance and
enforcement has on the industry of this nationally preemptive building
oversight program. HUD will be working with the Manufactured Housing
Consensus Committee to further review all comments received and address
the comments through the consensus and recommendations process required
by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards
Act of 1974 as amended by the Manufactured Housing Improvement Act of
2000.
Question. What improvements, if any, could be made to HUD
regulations for the installation of manufactured homes and particularly
the foundation installation requirements?
Answer. Comments were received from the public after HUD's
publication of the proposed Interpretative Bulletin (for Model
Manufactured Home Installation Standards Foundation Requirements in
Freezing Temperature Areas) as well as in response to HUD's request for
comment on reducing regulatory burdens. HUD will work with the
Manufactured Housing Consensus Committee to assess all comments
received and address and balance the concerns of the public including
all segments of the industry through the consensus and recommendations
process required by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended by the Manufactured Housing
Improvement Act of 2000.
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
Senator Collins. I want to thank the staff for their hard
work as well. And this hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:50 p.m., Wednesday, April 18, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene subject to the call of
the chair.]