- DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
[Senate Hearing 115-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
----------
TUESDAY, APRIL 24, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 10:00 a.m. in room SD-192, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Richard Shelby (chairman)
presiding.
Present: Senators Shelby, Collins, Murkowski, Blunt,
Daines, Hoeven, Durbin, Murray, Reed, Tester, Schatz, and
Baldwin.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
Department of the Navy
Office of the Secretary
STATEMENT OF THE HON. RICHARD V. SPENCER, SECRETARY
opening statement of senator richard c. shelby
Senator Shelby. The committee will come to order. Today I'm
pleased to welcome Secretary Spencer, Admiral Richardson, and
General Neller to the committee for an update on U.S. naval
operations and to review the fiscal year 2019 budget request
for the Navy and Marine Corps.
For fiscal year 2019, the Navy and Marine Corps are
requesting $194.1 billion, which is an increase of about $4.5
billion over amounts appropriated in 2018, and it's consistent
with the 2-year budget deal passed earlier this year. The
funding level in this request is still below what the Navy had
projected for the upcoming year before the Budget Control was
passed in 2011.
Secretary Mattis has warned, and I'll quote, that ``failure
to modernize our military risks leaving us with a force that
could dominate the last war, but be irrelevant to tomorrow's
security.''
The increase is a necessary first step to reverse the harm
to our military by 5 years of sequestration budgets. Today,
there are over 100,000 sailors and Marines and more than 100
ships forward deployed, including three aircraft carriers and
three amphibious assault ships.
Our Nation has tasked our Navy and Marine Corps with
assuring access to the world's oceans and far-away regions
while defending our interests in those areas, protecting U.S.
citizens across the globe, and preventing the adversaries from
using the world's oceans against us.
Gentlemen, we look forward to your testimony and working
with you during this appropriation process to meet the needs of
the Department of the Navy in an increasingly complex strategic
environment.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Senator Richard C. Shelby
Good morning, the Subcommittee will come to order.
I am pleased to welcome Secretary Spencer, Admiral Richardson and
General Neller to the committee for an update of U.S. Naval operations,
and to review the fiscal year 2019 budget request for the Navy and
Marine Corps.
For fiscal year 2019, the Navy and Marine Corps are requesting
$194.1 billion, which is an increase of about $4.5 billion over amounts
appropriated for fiscal year 2018, and is consistent with the 2-year
budget deal passed earlier this year. However, the funding level in
this request is still below what the Navy had projected for the
upcoming year before the Budget Control Act was passed in 2011.
Secretary Mattis has warned that ``failure to modernize our
military risks leaving us with a force that could dominate the last
war, but be irrelevant to tomorrow's security.''
This increase is a necessary first step to reverse the harm to our
military by 5 years of sequestration budgets.
Today there are over 100,000 sailors and Marines and more than 100
ships forward deployed--including three aircraft carriers and three
Amphibious Assault Ships.
Our Nation has tasked our Navy and Marine Corps with assuring
access to the world's oceans and far-away regions, while defending our
interests in those areas, protecting U.S. citizens across the globe,
and preventing adversaries from using the worlds' oceans against the
United States.
Gentlemen, we look forward to your testimony and working with you
during the appropriations process to meet the needs of the Department
of the Navy in an increasingly complex strategic environment.
Now I turn to the Vice Chairman, Senator Durbin, for his opening
remarks.
Senator Shelby. Senator Durbin.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR RICHARD J. DURBIN
Senator Durbin. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks to the witnesses who are appearing today. I want
to thank Secretary Spencer, Admiral Richardson, and General
Neller.
Last year, the Navy lost the lives of 17 sailors in fatal
accidents involving the USS Fitzgerald and the USS John S.
McCain. Petty Officer Second Class Stephen Palmer, of
Harristown, Illinois, a 23-year-old interior communications
electrician, was among those lost on the McCain. The incident
investigations concluded both collisions happened because of
human error aboard the ships at unacceptable readiness levels.
This was an embarrassment for the Navy and for our Nation.
These incidents should never have happened, but they did. The
Navy and the Nation collectively took our eyes off the ball.
Admiral Richardson, you immediately accepted responsibility
for these tragedies. That's important. You undertook serious
efforts to get to the bottom of what happened with the
Comprehensive Review.
Secretary Spencer, you also completed a separate review of
the Navy's overall readiness.
Collectively, these reviews recommended over 80 corrective
actions for the Navy to implement to restore safety and
readiness. It's not going to be easy, it will take some time
and resources and leadership, and the recent omnibus provided
several funding increases to tackle these problems. We're ready
to do more if needed. During today's hearing, I look forward to
learning more about the progress that we've made to date and
what's in the Navy's fiscal year 2019 request to accomplish the
extensive list of reforms.
Looking forward, the Navy is seeking to grow its
capabilities. Last year, the NDAA (National Defense
Authorization Act) set the goal of a 355-ship Navy, adding
scores of ships to the Navy while working to fix these systemic
readiness problems. That's a significant challenge.
General Neller, the Marine Corps is called upon to do an
awful lot with limited financial resources and many aging
vehicles and weapons. I understand your priority is
modernization, but we also want to hear about your efforts to
recruit and retain the very best Marines that America has to
offer. This committee and today's panel needs to have a candid
discussion about Marine Corps readiness and additional
resources we need to provide.
Finally, let me say--I mentioned this to each of you on an
individual basis--it's a shame that you have to deal with
Congress sometimes--I know you think that privately-- and the
appropriations process, and the fits and starts and the ups and
downs. Compared to the fiscal year 2017, last fiscal year,
enacted budget of $174.1 billion, we have a virtual increase in
2018 of almost 10 percent in 1 year. We're projecting an
increase of 2 percent next year. And then the year 2020 we
can't even tell you what will be given by Congress or whether
it will be an increase or held steady or even a cut. It's very
difficult for anyone, a family, a company, certainly the United
States Navy and Marine Corps, to budget with that uncertainty
in the future and not to make serious mistakes, over-investing
in some areas, under-investing in others. I'd like to have a
little time during the course of this hearing to ask your
thoughts on that challenge that lies ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Shelby. We welcome again all of you to the
committee today.
Mr. Secretary, we will start with you. All of your written
testimony will be made part of the record in its totality. You
can proceed.
SUMMARY STATEMENT OF HON. RICHARD V. SPENCER
Secretary Spencer. Yes, sir.
Chairman Shelby, Vice Chairman Durbin, distinguished
members, I want to thank you for the opportunity to come here
today and present to you the posture of the Department of the
Navy. It truly is a pleasure for me to be sitting here with
Admiral Richardson and General Neller, who, over the past 9
months, truly have become my business partners as we address
the Title 10 issues facing the Department of the Navy.
I also want to say that on behalf of the Navy and the
Marine Corps, I want to thank you for the effort put forth by
Congress and your colleagues addressing the bipartisan
agreement to support the President's budget. We are completely
cognizant of the fact that it puts some people into the far
extent of their comfort zones, we're aware of that, and we are
greatly appreciative. Know that we will spend these resources
in the most responsible manner that we can. We look forward to
receiving those funds and those resources as soon as possible
to enhance the readiness and lethality of your team, all the
while expending them focused on the National Defense Strategy.
Today, 94,000 sailors and Marines are forward deployed,
stationed around the globe, using the maritime commons as their
medium of maneuver, ensuring the maritime lanes of commerce
remain free and open, assuring access to overseas regions,
defending key interests in those areas, protecting United
States citizens abroad, and preventing adversaries from
leveraging the world's oceans against us, and they're doing
this 24 hours a day, 365 days a year.
Our budget request enhances readiness and continues
increasing the capability and capacity of the Navy-Marine Corps
team. As directed in a 2018 National Defense Strategy, our
budget submission supports a more lethal, resilient, and agile
force, able to deter and defeat aggression by pure competitors
and other adversaries in all domains across the conflict
spectrum.
My priorities for the Department center on three
categories: people, capabilities, and process. The ability to
accomplish our mission relies on our people. 800,000 sailors
and Marines, active duty, reserve, civilian teammates and their
families comprise this team. We are building a more lethal,
agile, talented, and rapidly innovating workforce as we speak.
The ability to accomplish our mission relies on having
capabilities necessary to fight tonight, challenge competitors,
deter our rivals, and win. We are investing in the
modernization of key capabilities and new technologies to keep
that goal in sight.
Lastly, the ability to accomplish our mission relies on
having efficient processes in place that will speed value and
ability to support our warfighters in a more effective and
efficient manner. We're creating a continuous improvement
mindset in both our culture and our management systems to
deliver performance with ability and speed.
I deliver to you a plan today with a sense of urgency. We
cannot and will not allow our competitive advantage to erode.
With your guidance, these planned investments will--I beg your
pardon--provide combat-credible, maritime forces for the
future. We will ensure that we are good stewards, and we will
drive efficiency across the Department to maximize every
dollar, invest smartly, to leverage the return on our
investments. I look forward to your questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Richard V. Spencer
Chairman Shelby, Vice Chairman Durbin, distinguished members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to
testify regarding the Department of the Navy (DON) 2019 President's
Budget request (PB19).
First, on behalf of our Sailors and Marines, I would like to
express gratitude for the efforts put forth by Congress addressing the
President's Budget request. We are very aware that this process has
stretched members to their limits on many fronts. Please know that the
resources we receive will be expended in focused alignment with the
National Security Strategy (NSS) and National Defense Strategy (NDS)
building our combat credible force.
Our Nation supports maritime operations worldwide. Forward-deployed
and forward-stationed naval forces use the global maritime commons as a
medium of maneuver, ensuring the maritime levels of commerce remain
free and open, assuring access to overseas regions, defending key
interests in those areas, protecting U.S. citizens abroad, and
preventing adversaries from leveraging the world's oceans against the
United States. The ability to sustain operations in international
waters far from U.S. shores constitutes a distinct advantage for the
United States--a Western Hemisphere nation separated from many of its
strategic interests by vast oceans. Maintaining this advantage in an
interconnected global community that depends on the oceans remains an
imperative for the Sea Services and the Nation.
Our PB19 request enhances readiness and begins increasing the
capability and capacity of the Navy and Marine Corps team. As directed
within the 2018 National Defense Strategy (NDS), the PB19 budget
submission will support the building of a more lethal, resilient, and
agile force to deter and defeat aggression by peer competitors and
other adversaries in all domains and across the conflict spectrum.
Ultimately, our budget submission reflects the DON's efforts to protect
the homeland and preserve America's strategic influence around the
world. The Navy's overarching plan--the Navy the Nation Needs (NNN)--
consists of six dimensions: Readiness, Capability, Capacity, Manning,
Networks, and Agility. The Marine Corps' plan--Modernizing for the
Future Force--focuses on investments in Modernization, Readiness, and
Manpower; further increasing its competitive advantage and lethality
resulting in a Next Generation Marine Corps. The resourcing of both
services aligns with the NDS, ready to fight and win across the range
of military operations (ROMO).
The strategic environment is rapidly changing and the Navy and
Marine Corps is engaged in a competition that they have not faced in
over 20 years. To meet the objectives of the NDS, and as part of the
Joint Force, the Navy and Marine Corps' primary force contributors are
Carrier Strike Groups (CSG) and Amphibious Ready Groups/Marine
Expeditionary Units (ARG/MEU), and ballistic missile submarines--the
most survivable leg of the nuclear triad. These units remain forward at
all times, while additional CSGs and ARG/MEUs are ready to surge in
support of Operational Plans. Our PB19 budget continues to make strides
in achieving that requirement to once again re-establish the standard
that has ensured preeminence. This will be imperative to winning peer-
on-peer competition, as we move forward to deliver enhanced distributed
lethality.
The Department is committed to follow reform guidance and has
identified savings of over $1 billion in fiscal year 2019 and $5
billion over the Future Years Defense Program (FYDP) which will be
reinvested in force structure and readiness. Savings were achieved
through reform efforts focused on improving organizational
effectiveness; eliminating, restructuring, or merging activities; and
workforce management. One specific fiscal reform effort has been the
Department's focus on improving the expenditure of funds through an
emphasis on the quality of our obligations. Leadership is committed to
ensure that a dollar appropriated to the Department is expended by the
Department to achieve the direction laid out by the NDS. Additionally,
the Department has also reviewed duplicative programs or programs that
are no longer mission essential. This has resulted in the divestiture
of legacy F/A-18 Hornets, the transition of the HH-60H reserve squadron
from legacy aircraft to newer MH-60S aircraft, and a review of Marine
Corps training munitions. Representative investments resulting from the
reform initiative include an additional DDG-51, one additional F/A-18
E/F, increased procurement of Rolling Air Frame missiles and MK48
torpedoes, and funding afloat readiness to maximum executable levels.
Moreover, the Department is focused on improving business processes
heightened through the audit of our financial statements.
As we continue to look forward to the PB19 budget, our priorities
center on people, capabilities, and processes, and will be achieved by
our focus on speed, value, results, and partnerships. Readiness,
lethality, and modernization are the requirements driving these
priorities.
people
The ability to accomplish our mission successfully relies on the
Navy and Marine Corps team--800,000 Sailors and Marines, active duty
and reserve, our civilian teammates and families. We rely on their
superior talent, recruiting the most promising workforce for the
future, and making strategic investments in training and retention
initiatives.
Our forward-deployed forces suffered tragic mishaps in 2017, both
on the sea and in the air. We will never forget those we lost and we
stand by our fellow Sailors and Marines along with their families in
solidarity.
We do not take these losses lightly; both the Comprehensive and
Strategic Readiness Reviews have examined the factors that led to the
series of incidents on the sea and provided recommendations we are now
implementing. The Strategic Readiness Review found that institutional
deficiencies were the cumulative result of well-intended decisions
developed over decades. Accepting deviations from our standards
translated into the acceptance of higher risk, which then gradually
became normalized, thereby compounding the accumulating risks. The
entire Department of Navy leadership is committed to addressing these
issues across the Force. The action plan, well underway, commands my
full support and oversight and while we operate with a sense of
urgency, we are steadfast in ensuring this is addressed correctly the
first time.
Good order and discipline are key ingredients to unit cohesion and
lethality. Sexual assault is a cancer effecting the aforementioned. The
Department of the Navy has come a long way in addressing sexual
assault, but until we get to zero, there is still work to be done. As
with any cultural change in an organization, our challenge involves
sustaining positive momentum. We continue to resource and monitor our
progress and address preventing sexual assault along with prosecution.
My commitment is enduring and fundamental, and my position of
intolerance for sexual assault anywhere is unequivocal.
While the Navy and Marine Corps are achieving overall military
recruiting objectives, the Department faces ongoing challenges from an
increasingly competitive marketplace and a decline in the propensity
for military service among young people as our accession goals are
modestly increasing. The Department continues to explore systematic
improvements to support recruitment and retention, to include programs
which maintain the health and resilience of the force, and maximize
professional, personal, and family readiness. Our success in sustaining
maritime dominance relies on our ability to attract America's best. We
will continue to recruit superior talent and invest in long-term
measures to retain it, while fostering an environment where our
Sailors, Marines, and civilians are provided the opportunities and
resources they need to thrive and be successful. Aligned with our Core
Values of Honor, Courage, and Commitment, we continue to strengthen our
investment in the ethical development of our Sailors, Marines, and
civilian employees. While competition for talent with the private
sector continues to increase, I believe we are resourced and positioned
to overcome our manning and retention challenges.
capabilities
As we build our lethal capabilities to fight tonight and challenge
rivals, we must respond on all fronts, to include research and
development, rapid prototyping, accelerated learning, and partnership
with industry. These efforts and partnerships will be built on shared
risks and shared benefits. We are now working with industry in a true
partnership to achieve a sustainable acquisition process that will
provide us solutions to problems we face in order to remain ahead of
the competition.
The Department of the Navy has an overarching plan to meet
warfighting requirements in support of the NDS. For example, the long
range ship acquisition plan:
--Establishes acquisition profiles to grow the force at a steady,
sustainable rate. This includes sustainment of the industrial
base at a level that supports more affordable acquisition while
growing an experienced workforce to support more aggressive
growth if additional resources become available.
--Implements Service Life Extensions (SLE) based upon return on
investment--we will modernize rather than replace when
appropriate as good stewards of taxpayer dollars.
--Provides options for aggressive growth as resources and industrial
capacity permit. PB19 includes four additional DDG 51 Flight
IIIs over the FYDP, for a total of 14 Flight III ships and
three additional fleet oilers across the FYDP. New ship
construction totals have increased since last year's plan, with
three additional ships (1 DDG 51 Flight III, 1 Expeditionary
Sea Base, and 1 fleet oiler) added in this request for fiscal
year 2019. Throughout the FYDP, the Department added a net
total of 11 battle force ships.
With sustained funding and SLEs, PB19 puts the Navy on a path to
355 ships while we are simultaneously increasing our capabilities. By
setting the conditions for an enduring industrial base as one of our
priorities, the Navy is postured to take advantage of additional
funding that may be provided through reform initiatives in future
years. This can be achieved without threatening the long-term
competitive posture of a balanced warfighting investment plan while
retaining an option to accelerate a targeted portfolio of weapons
systems.
The Navy is aggressively pursuing cost reduction opportunities to
deliver fully capable assets at the most efficient possible cost. The
Ford Class Aircraft Carrier program refined the ship construction
process for CVN 79 by, capitalizing on technological improvements, and
enhancing shipbuilder facilities to drive towards the targeted 18
percent reduction in labor hours from CVN 78. The Navy is also
executing advance procurement and negotiating long-lead time material
for CVN 80, and full funding for CVN 81 begins in fiscal year 2023.
Naval Aviation continues to operate forward, fully prepared for
conflict across the ROMO while managing near-term service life
extensions, mid-term procurement and modernization, and long-term
investment in research and development. With the support of Congress,
the U.S. Navy and Marine Corps are implementing our ``Vision for Naval
Aviation 2020.'' The Department has initiated a Next Generation Air
Dominance Analysis of Alternatives (AoA) study that is investigating
technology and program investment requirements to recapitalize Navy F/
A-18E/F and EA-18G tactical aviation platforms. The future of DON
tactical aircraft relies on a combination of F-35B and F-35C 5th
generation aircraft. Continued investment in capability upgrades for
both platforms is required to improve the lethality of the CSG and ARG/
MEU. We will see our first operational deployment of F-35Bs later this
year with our ARG/MEUs in the Pacific.
The MV-22B Osprey's unique combination of vertical flight and
fixed-wing capabilities continues to enable effective execution of
missions that were previously unachievable. Marine Corps MV-22B's
continue to extend operational reach, revolutionizing our ability to
operate from the sea, austere locations, and previously damaged
airfields within a contested environment. The DON begins procurement of
the Navy CMV-22B variant in support of the Carrier On-Board Delivery
mission in fiscal year 2018.
Navy and Marine Corps Expeditionary Forces will soon receive the
next generation protected mobility. The Joint Light Tactical Vehicle
begins fielding in 2019. In fiscal year 2019, the Marine Corps is set
to receive the first Amphibious Combat Vehicle Low Rate Initial
Production units in preparation for Operational Test and Initial
Operational Capability in 2020. These capabilities are vital for our
continued efforts to adapt and modernize our expeditionary forces with
the requisite protected mobility. As we work through the programmatic
schedule with these vehicles, we are continually looking at ways to
improve their ability to counter ever changing threats from potential
engagement with peer adversaries.
The Department of the Navy is determined to lead the way in the
development and responsible integration of cyber metrics and artificial
intelligence, establishing aggressive goals for the acceleration of
integrating these unmanned systems. One of these future systems is the
Snakehead Large Displacement Unmanned Underwater Vehicle which is
designated as a Maritime Accelerated Capability Office program to fast-
track this capability. Surface operations will be augmented through an
integrated team of manned and unmanned enhancing capabilities and
capacity. Investments in autonomous platforms and mine countermeasure
technology will reduce the threat of mines in contested waters while
reducing risk to our Sailors conducting this dangerous mission.
Steady progress will continue in developing and fielding unmanned
aviation assets. Today the MQ-4C Triton Unmanned Aircraft System
enhances awareness of the operational environment and shortens the
sensor-to-shooter kill chain. The Navy is committed to future unmanned
carrier aviation with the MQ-25 Carrier Based Unmanned Aerial System
that will deliver an unmanned tanker. The Marine Corps continues
development of the unique Marine Unmanned Expeditionary (MUX) system to
further increase lethality and resilience of the fleet while also
enhancing aggregate ISR capability.
We are also investing in strike weapons as well as theater and high
value target multi-layer area defense weapons for the Fleet.
Investments are enhancing warfighting capability and increasing
magazine depth. Along these lines, the Marine Corps is pursuing ground
based fires to restrict freedom of movement along sea lanes while
requesting the integration of Vertical Launch Systems to amphibious
shipping.
Efficiently operating Navy and Marine Corps installations are
essential in generating naval forces. Over the last decade the DON has
taken risk by underfunding infrastructure capital investments and
installation operations to fund other warfighting, readiness, and
modernization requirements. Under-investment has created a backlog of
maintenance and repair requirements and reduced facility effectiveness.
The DON's fiscal year 2019 budget request acknowledges and begins to
address these installation investment challenges. The budget funds
infrastructure that supports new platforms and an increase in
infrastructure sustainment funding; begins to address the significant
requirement to recapitalize our naval shipyards; and recapitalizes
critical enabling infrastructure.
processes
The Department is actively reforming business processes and driving
efficiencies to increase speed, value, and support to the warfighter,
while concurrently enhancing lethality and increasing readiness. We are
identifying and clearing constraints caused by burdensome policies and
regulations, and are increasing adoption of agile business models and
technologies to support our need for urgency. Layers of overhead are
being removed and organizations are being flattened to return
decisionmaking authority further down the command structure. We are
also demonstrating progress in the area of data-driven decisionmaking
and problem solving. The Department of the Navy's fiscal year 2019
budget request reflects extensive use of modeled campaign and mission
level outcomes to evaluate capabilities and force structure and
maximize naval power. We stood up a Digital Warfare Office to harness
the power of data by executing digital pilot projects that informed
decisions on operational effectiveness and readiness. Moving forward,
the fiscal year 2020 Navy budget features additional force level
analytic tools, developed at our federally Funded Research and
Development Centers and in conjunction with industry that will further
assist us in integrating valuation and capability assessments to
optimize the Navy's budget for the highest warfighting return on
investment.
Growing the Fleet requires a strong and integrated relationship
with our private sector partners. We are working closely with our prime
contractors to ensure suppliers are prepared to support the increasing
demand of building a larger Fleet. We need industry to provide
solutions and capabilities at the speed of relevance and at an
affordable value. As the same time we also need to be a better
customer. Industry needs predictable and stable programs, which require
a stable budget. If we are effective at long-range planning, we can
increase our buying power by using all of our tools to provide stable
commitments to our industrial partners. We appreciate the much needed 2
year budget deal and look forward to working with you to produce stable
and flexible funding that will drive improved productivity, efficiency,
and competitiveness across the supplier base.
We continue to pursue acquisition reforms contained in recent
legislation, with emphasis on provisions that increase Service
acquisition oversight and the role of the Service Chiefs in the
process, along with those that provide opportunities to accelerate the
fielding of critical capabilities. We are employing new constructs, to
include the Maritime Accelerated Capabilities, the Marine Corps Rapid
Capability Office, and an Accelerated Acquisition Board of Directors.
These solutions will improve innovation, speed, and agility through
strategy-driven investments addressing our highest priorities.
The DON is undergoing its first full audit of all financial
statements, which will help us gain a clearer picture of the
effectiveness and an opportunity to improve our processes and internal
controls. The Marine Corps was the first from our Department to
complete the Full Financial Statement Audit for fiscal year 2017,
sharing lessons learned across the Department. As our data quality
improves, we will be able to harvest savings generated through process
reform and reinvest in lethality. We are committed to full
accountability for every dollar.
conclusion
I deliver you today a plan with a sense of urgency. The fiscal year
2019 President's Budget request seeks to provide sustained and
predictable investments to modernize and increase the readiness of our
Navy and Marine Corps team. We cannot and will not allow our
competitive advantage to erode.
These planned investments will provide combat-credible maritime
forces for the future. I commit to you that we will not just look
forward but will lean forward. I will focus the Departments support to
the NSS and NDS. We will gain efficiencies and effectiveness through
business reforms at my level while supporting both the Chief of Naval
Operations and the Commandant of the Marine Corps' programmatic efforts
to fulfil their needs to meet the challenges our Nation faces in the
evolving strategic environment and maritime domain. We are grateful to
Congress for their support and efforts. We will ensure we are good
stewards of the provided resources, drive efficiency across the
department to maximize every dollar, and invest smartly to leverage the
return on our investments.
I appreciate this opportunity to present our plan and will continue
to work with the Congress to provide our Nation the Navy and Marine
Corps team it requires.
STATEMENT OF ADMIRAL JOHN M. RICHARDSON, CHIEF OF NAVAL
OPERATIONS
Admiral Richardson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Vice Chairman
Durbin, and distinguished members of the committee for the
opportunity to testify today to discuss your Navy. And I'm also
honored to be here with Secretary Spencer and General Neller,
two great leaders with whom I'm working to increase the
warfighting lethality and readiness of your Navy-Marine Corps
team.
Mr. Chairman, you and the Secretary have described in vivid
terms our Navy deployed around the world today, and a strong
and responsive Navy matters to America now more than ever. As
our National Defense Strategy makes clear, more naval power is
essential in this new era of great power competition. With a
rising China and a resurgent Russia, America no longer enjoys a
monopoly on sea power or sea control. And meanwhile, regimes
like Iran and North Korea threaten global stability.
Given these challenges, we must increase naval power with a
sense of urgency. Every day we must earn our place as the
world's best Navy. To do that, we must take a balanced approach
to build the Navy that the Nation Needs.
The Navy the Nation Needs requires a bigger fleet, more
ships, submarines, aircraft, and special operations forces.
Congress agreed with the conclusions of several thoughtful
studies, and a 355-ship Navy is now the law of the land. This
will increase our Navy's ability to protect our homeland and
our allies, to expand our influence as America's global
maneuvering force, and to support American prosperity by
safeguarding access to critical waterways. And while there will
always be a debate about the eventual number of ships to build,
we can all agree on one thing now, the Navy must get bigger and
we must start building now.
The Navy the Nation Needs requires a better fleet, more
capability achieved through modernization, networking, and
agile operating concepts. The Navy the Nation Needs requires a
ready fleet, time at sea, more flying, better maintenance, and
more weapons of increased lethality that go faster and farther.
All of this demands a talented force of sailors and civilians
with officers of confidence and character to lead them.
Thanks to the efforts of this committee and the Congress,
the readiness funds in 2017, and the enactment of the fiscal
year 2018 budget has put us on a strong trajectory towards
increasing American naval power in a balanced way. And as we
discuss the 2019 budget request today that will help us achieve
a bigger, better, and ready fleet, I commit that your Navy will
be good stewards of every previous taxpayer dollar.
This budget request enables your Navy to continue down a
good course, and I look forward to the pleasure of navigating
that course with Congress to building the Navy the Nation
Needs, a Navy that's lethal to our enemies, committed to our
partners, and safe for our sailors.
Thank you. And I look forward to your questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Admiral John M. Richardson
Chairman Shelby, Vice Chairman Durbin, and distinguished members of
the committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the
Navy's fiscal year 2019 budget.
This hearing comes at a critical time in our Navy's and our
Nation's history as we confront a dynamic security environment. The
maritime domain--which I define as the sea floor to the stars--is
indisputably more complex than it was when I took my oath in 1978.
Within the past quarter century, global waterways have become more
congested, with maritime traffic increasing by a factor of four. On the
seabed, transoceanic cables carry 99 percent of all information, and
new technologies are making undersea resources more accessible. The
polar ice caps are receding, opening new trade routes, exposing new
resources, and redrawing continental maps. People are migrating to
megacities dotting the coastlines. Rapid technological advancements in
cyberspace, artificial intelligence, robotics, and directed energy are
changing the face of naval warfare. There can be no doubt that
stability and economic prosperity both here in the United States and
around the world are inherently linked to freedom of movement and
security on, below, and above the world's oceans.
But just as we have come to depend on this rules-based security
order, there are those who would seek to turn the tide and upend it.
For the first time since the fall of the Soviet Union, we are
experiencing a return to great power competition. With a rising China
and a resurgent Russia, the U.S. does not enjoy a monopoly on sea power
or sea control. Rogue regimes like North Korea and Iran persist in
taking actions that threaten regional and global stability. Given these
challenges, a balanced strategic approach is more important than ever.
Our priorities have been clearly defined by the President's
National Security Strategy, which directs our Navy to protect the
American homeland, promote American economic prosperity, and advance
American influence throughout the world. The National Defense Strategy
(NDS) operationalizes these imperatives and articulates our plan to
compete, deter and win in the new competitive security environment of
our time.
The maritime expression of the NDS--what we are calling Navy the
Nation Needs--articulates the Navy's role as part of the broader
military joint force across three lines of effort. First, we must
restore readiness while building a more lethal joint force--the prime
objective of the Navy's fiscal year 2019 budget submission. Next, we
must strengthen traditional alliances while building new partnerships
to expand American influence and fortify global resolve. And finally,
we must reform the Department to achieve greater performance through
agile acquisition processes, early engagement with industry, capability
iterations that ride the technological curve, and thoughtful
stewardship of America's tax dollars.
As the NDS makes clear, unstable funding over the past decade has
contributed to ``erosion of military advantage,'' and recent action by
Congress to restore stable and predictable funding demonstrates that
you share this viewpoint. The recent passage of the Bipartisan Budget
Act of 2018 (BBA-18) and the fiscal year 2018 defense appropriations
are major steps in the right direction, underscoring our shared
responsibility to provide, maintain, and operate a global Navy. The
importance of stable and predictable funding cannot be overstated. It
facilitates more planning time, productivity, and purchasing power;
restores readiness through planned and precise resource allocation;
sharpens perishable warfighting skills by steaming ships and flying
planes; stabilizes the industrial base--especially shipbuilding--so
that it is efficient, agile, postured to respond; enables us to mature
technologies on a thoughtful path; and allows us to maximize every
taxpayer dollar spent.
In fiscal year 2017 we arrested readiness decline with the Request
for Additional Appropriations, and the fiscal year 2018 enacted
appropriations and fiscal year 2019 budget request further restore
readiness while beginning to increase warfighting capacity and
capability. The fiscal year 2019 budget submission is strategy-based,
seeking a $2.4 billion increase for the Navy over fiscal year 2018
enacted levels. The single most effective way to maintain the strategic
momentum started in fiscal year 2017 and fiscal year 2018 is to enact
the fiscal year 2019 President's Budget by the start of the fiscal
year. This funding will help us fulfill our responsibilities in the NDS
by building the Navy the Nation Needs. Everything we do must contribute
to increasing America's naval power, which must be balanced in six
specific dimensions to achieve needed wholeness.
To increase America's naval power, we'll build a bigger fleet--more
platforms like ships, submarines, aircraft, and more special operations
forces. Congress made a 355-ship Navy the law of the land, and this
increased capacity will strengthen our ability to prevail in any
warfighting contingencies, meet demand signals from Combatant
Commanders, expand global influence, and support American prosperity by
safeguarding access to critical markets, waterways, and chokepoints. In
fiscal year 2019, this budget requests over $55 billion in procurement
accounts, funds a 299-ship deployable battle force, procures 10 new
ships and submarines, and buys 120 fixed and rotary wing, manned and
unmanned aircraft for the Navy and Marine Corps. Expanded across the
Future Years Defense Program (FYDP), PB-19 funds construction of 54
battle force ships--11 more than the PB-18 baseline--and extends the
service life of six guided missile cruisers, four mine countermeasure
ships, and one attack submarine to further increase the size of the
fleet. And just as they have every day since the early 1960s, our
ballistic missile submarines continue to patrol the deep as the only
survivable leg of our nuclear triad. PB-19 includes $3 billion in ship
construction (SCN) funds to ensure lead COLUMBIA-class ship
construction commences on time in fiscal year 2021, guaranteeing
defense of the homeland into the 2080s. Additionally, our Annual Long
Range Plan for Construction of Naval Vessels, which accompanies the
budget request, outlines a path to reach the Navy the Nation Needs.
While there will always be debate about the final number of ships for
our Navy, we can all agree on one thing. The Navy must get bigger, and
we must start building NOW.
To increase America's naval power, we'll build a better fleet--more
capability across all our naval platforms. This means fielding state-
of-the-art systems and continually modernizing legacy ones. Keeping
pace with advances in technology demands consistent, unwavering, and
aligned financial, programmatic, and operational commitments. To that
end, the fiscal year 2019 budget includes almost $18 billion for
research and development in addition to other modernization efforts.
For example, PB-19 includes $276 million for guided missile cruiser
modernization and $79 million to upgrade eight cruisers to AEGIS
Baseline 9, enabling them to perform critical Integrated Air and
Missile Defense (IAMD) and Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD) operations
simultaneously. By the end of fiscal year 2019, the Navy will have 41
ships modified for BMD missions to defend our ships and the homeland.
PB-19 also invests over $2 billion per year over the FYDP in land- and
carrier-based aviation modernization and training to include improved
radars, common avionics, structural enhancements, sensor upgrades, and
refreshed mission computers. The budget maintains fiscal year 2018
enacted funding levels for acoustic superiority modernization to
improve large vertical arrays, advanced hull coating, and ship
machinery quieting technology. The budget also requests $420 million
for Surface Electronic Warfare Improvement Program (SEWIP), which will
enhance shipboard electronic support capabilities and continue delivery
of Block 2 systems currently in full rate production. We are also
leveraging accelerated acquisition and rapid prototyping--for directed
energy, lasers, STANDARD Missile (SM)-2/6 weapons, MQ-25 Stingray, and
Unmanned Underwater Vehicle capabilities, just to name a few--to
deliver capability faster.
To increase America's naval power, we'll build a networked fleet--
allowing our fleet and the broader joint force to connect and combine
in rapidly adaptable ways. History is replete with examples where
networked forces that shared information executed more efficiently and
effectively. The fiscal year 2019 budget builds on the progress made in
fiscal year 2018 by requesting an additional almost $500 million
investment in command, control, communications, computers;
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance; and cyber resiliency.
By establishing and requesting $27 million to fund the Digital Warfare
Office under the Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Information
Dominance (N2/N6), we continue to centralize our efforts to identify
material and non-material solutions to mitigate warfighting gaps.
Finally, critical upgrades to our E-2D Hawkeyes, F/A-18 E/F Super
Hornets, and EA-18G Growlers will improve Naval Integrated Fire
Control-Counter Air (NIFC-CA) architecture and introduce sensor netting
and Cooperative Engagement Mode, allowing air- and seaborne units to
optimize sensing, tracking, shooting, and controlling functions.
To increase America's naval power, we'll build an agile fleet--more
innovative concepts of operating to increase our competitive advantage.
This past year alone, we leveraged the global maneuver power that is
inherent in our Navy through concepts like Distributed Maritime
Operations, in which fleet commanders are able to distribute but still
maneuver forces across an entire theater of operations as an integrated
weapon system, leveraging multi-domain capabilities and harnessing the
power of the fleet tactical grid; Third Fleet Forward, during which our
San Diego-based numbered fleet commander retained command and control
for forces operating west of the International Date Line; and
electromagnetic spectrum management, which safeguards our units and
preserves our capabilities. Over the past year, we also established the
Navy Analytic Office to better integrate the results of wargames, fleet
exercises, and experimentation and continually learn and improve our
technical and tactical operations at sea. And we are focusing four
global wargames--facilitated through the Naval War College but
sponsored by the Commanders of the Pacific Fleet and Naval Forces
Europe--on peer competitors and high-end warfare. Finally, we are
sharpening our focus on countering unmanned threats through programs
such as the Surface Navy Laser Weapons System, as well as targeted
experimentation, wargames, and innovation competitions to more rapidly
integrate capability against these continuously emerging threats. In
fiscal year 2019, we are investing over $300 million in research and
development to develop and field laser weapon systems which include
advanced capabilities to destroy unmanned threats. Additionally, our
fiscal year 2019 budget requests $60 million to improve existing
systems and other equipment to be able to identify and destroy unmanned
aerial systems.
To increase America's naval power we'll build a talented fleet--
more recruiting, training, education and retention. America's sons and
daughters have always been our greatest source of strength. But make no
mistake, we're in a competition for talent. So the fiscal year 2019
budget requests an additional $1.6 billion for military personnel,
which will increase the size of the active force by 7,500 billets, thus
providing more accessions and support personnel to meet projected
shipbuilding and special operations forces growth. Additionally, our
Sailor 2025 initiative seeks to maximize all authorities and non-
monetary incentives to attract and retain skilled teammates in all
warfare disciplines. We are transforming Manpower, Personnel, Training,
and Education by investing in user-friendly systems and by updating our
personnel detailing and assignment processes. Finally, while we remain
on track for mandatory headquarters reductions, the fiscal year 2019
budget adds about 1,400 critical civilian billets above current fiscal
year 2018 estimates for ship depot maintenance, base security,
intelligence, contracting, and training.
To increase America's naval power, we'll build a ready fleet--more
at-sea time, more flying, more ammunition and parts, more maintenance.
Readiness--both materiel and practice time --transforms our Navy from
potential power to actual power. The fiscal year 2019 budget continues
the readiness and wholeness commitments we made in fiscal year 2017 and
fiscal year 2018 by funding ship operations to 100 percent of the
requirement and ship depot maintenance to 100 percent of executable
capacity. It also funds flying hours to the maximum executable
requirement and increases aviation depot maintenance funding to 92
percent (the maximum executable capacity) as we grow capacity on our
flight lines. In addition, $1.9 billion requested in fiscal year 2019
for military construction will fund 33 Navy projects--the largest such
request in over a decade. Recognizing the inherent link between
readiness and lethality, the budget also increases procurement of high-
end ship-, sub-, and air-launched munitions over the FYDP, including
Long-Range Anti-Ship Missile (LRASM), SM-2/6, Rolling Airframe Missile
(RAM) Block II, Evolved Sea Sparrow Missile (ESSM) Block II, Advanced
Lightweight torpedo, and Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile
(AARGM). And because the element of time is unforgiving, still other
investments over the FYDP accelerate the delivery of critical
capabilities and capacities into our magazines and launchers, such as
multi-mission Maritime Strike Tomahawk ($239 million), Mark-48
Heavyweight torpedoes ($184 million), and Littoral Combat Ship Over-
the-Horizon (LCS OTH) missile system ($177 million). Finally, we
continue to work to stabilize and incentivize the industrial base. The
fiscal year 2019 budget also includes 12.7 percent capital investment
in public shipyard depot facilities, exceeding the 6 percent
legislative requirement, underscoring our commitment to increase our
capacity to maintain and modernize our fleet.
As part of building readiness, we are also making immediate
readiness improvements by funding the recommendations in our recent
Comprehensive Review (CR) and Strategic Readiness Review (SRR). Across
all appropriations categories, the budget requests $79 million in
fiscal year 2019 and continues to invest an average of $130 million
each year across the FYDP to address the individual and unit training,
navigation equipment, command and control, and manning issues
identified in the reports. We are also committed to improving the
quality and duration of our training--both at sea and in realistic,
shore-based simulators. The fiscal year 2019 requests $81.9 million
over the FYDP to upgrade and integrate navigation, seamanship, and
shiphandling trainers in Fleet Concentration Areas. We are already
seeing progress: as just one example, a U.S.-based guided missile
destroyer today has at least 30 more crew members onboard during the
training phase before they are scheduled to deploy than a similar ship
had in 2012 while on deployment. Additionally, we restored funded
billets for our US- and overseas-based destroyer squadrons across the
FYDP from 64 percent to 100 percent of the validated requirement, an
increase of 306 total billets. This will add more experience in
critical waterfront positions, improve the quality of our assessments,
and ensure our units sail over the horizon ready to meet any challenge
they may encounter. We are exploring ways to adjust assignment policies
and expand incentives because our commitment to prioritize manning for
our deploying units--particularly those ships, submarines, squadrons,
and platoons based in Guam, Japan, and Spain--remains steadfast.
A fundamental tenet of our budget request is that naval power is
about maintaining balance across all six dimensions of naval power.
Naval power is not a choice between increased capacity or better
capability--it is a combination of both. Naval power is not a choice
between readiness and modernization--it requires a balance of both.
Naval power is not a choice between more complex stand-alone
technologies or networked systems--it is achieved through both. The
talent to operate and sustain a larger and more lethal force is not a
choice between more people or better training--it must draw on
components from both. Optimizing this balance ensures the fleet can
maneuver as desired, respond when directed, and win in a short or
prolonged fight.
Of course, no number of ships, no new technologies, and no crews of
talented Sailors are, by themselves, sufficient to respond to today's
complex challenges without commanders of competence and character to
lead them--they are the glue that binds our Navy team together. Just as
we have done throughout our history, we will continue to develop and
empower leaders who are obsessed with building teams that win.
From the Black Sea to the Bab el Mandeb, from the North Atlantic to
the South China Sea, and from the Indian Ocean to the waters off the
Korean Peninsula, the stakes are high. And as we have learned from
history, war at sea--whether lasting a day or a decade--is unforgiving:
the winners sail away and the losers sink to the bottom of the ocean.
Let there be no doubt: America is a maritime nation and a maritime
power, and our way of life and our economic prosperity have always been
linked to the sea. For 242 years, in rough seas and calm, America's
Navy has operated around the world protecting our homeland from attack,
ensuring common domains remain open, and advancing our interests to
include defending our allies from military aggression.
In the competitive environment we face now and in the future, we
must increase naval power in a balanced approach to meet our national
strategic objectives. I am grateful to this committee and to your
colleagues in the Congress for starting this important work, and we
look forward to sailing alongside you to build the Navy the Nation
Needs--a lethal Navy for our enemies, a steadfast Navy for our allies
and partners, and a safe Navy for our Sailors.
STATEMENT OF GENERAL ROBERT B. NELLER, COMMANDANT,
U.S. MARINE CORPS
General Neller. Chairman Shelby, Vice Chairman Durbin,
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today. I know this committee,
the Congress, and the American people have high expectations of
their Marines. As our Nation's expeditionary force in
readiness, you expect your Marines to operate forward with our
Navy shipmates, reassure our partners, deter our rivals, and
respond to crisis. And when called to fight, you expect us to
win. You expect a lot of your Marines, and you should.
As we hold this hearing, approximately 34,000 Marines along
with their shipmates are forward deployed, some in harm's way,
all engaged doing just what you expect them to be doing. Your
Marines are an integral part of the new Defense Strategy, and
rest assured we're doing our best to increase our competitive
advantage against our strategic competitors.
That said, we continue to face challenges, some as a
consequence of rival adaptations, unpredictive funding, or our
adjustment to the new strategic environment. I support what our
Secretary and the CNO (Chief of Naval Operations) have said.
Since the fall of the Soviet Union, the sea services of the
United States have enjoyed well-earned, uncontested global
dominance. Those days are over. Your Marine Corps, however,
remains capable, along with our Navy shipmates, but that
competitive edge has eroded in almost every domain of warfare.
We must modernize and address great power competition or risk
falling further behind.
As we look ahead to the 2019 budget, developing your next-
generation Marine Corps requires the modernization of our
Corps, the continued recovery of current readiness, and further
investment in resourcing the next generation of Marines. These
priorities, coupled with adaptations to our global posture,
will provide our Nation's leaders the right capabilities at the
right places to create decisionmaking space necessary for the
Nation to compete, and if necessary, fight at the lowest cost
and resources possible.
Despite the challenges facing us today in today's strategic
environment, our Marine Corps remains the Nation's forward-
deployed, agile expeditionary force in readiness as part of
that Navy-Marine Corps team. To preserve that role and sustain
the readiness it entails, we continue to require sustained,
adequate, and predictable funding to develop the right mix of
advanced capabilities and ensure a ready and relevant force.
With the Congress' support and sustained commitment, we can
begin to restore our competitive naval advantage, enhance
global deterrence, and ensure that we send our sons and
daughters into the next fight with every advantage our Nation
can provide.
I look forward to your questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of General Robert B. Neller
marines--vital to our nation's defense
As set forth by the 82nd Congress and reaffirmed by the 114th, the
purpose of our Corps is to provide maritime expeditionary combined arms
air-ground task forces that are ``most ready, when the Nation is least
ready.'' We are a naval force whose mission requires us to be ready--a
fight-tonight, forward deployed, Next Generation force--able to respond
immediately to emergent crises around the globe either from the sea,
forward bases, or home station. While our organization, training, and
equipment must continually adapt to meet changes in the operational
environment, this fundamental purpose is unchanging. Our adaptation
requires consistent, predictable funding--a reality we haven't
witnessed in 9 years. Your Corps continues to be responsible stewards
of our Nation's resources, innovating to meet new challenges and
leverage new opportunities to further increase the lethality of our
Marines. As our annual requirement to meet before this body and report
our status, this statement aims to do three things: Broadly describe
how your Marine Corps is adapting to increase its competitive advantage
against pacing threats; explain our budget priorities for the
President's Budget fiscal year 2019 (PB19) submission; and describe how
continued support from Congress will result in a more lethal force,
postured to prevent conflict, yet ready to prevail in the next fight.
Our Contribution to National Defense
Combatant Commander (CCDR) demand for Marines and tailored Marine
Air-Ground Task Forces (MAGTFs) continues to drive an aggressive
operational tempo. We consistently maintain about 35,000, or one-third,
of our operating forces forward deployed across the globe. Of those
forward deployed forces, more than 11,000 served aboard Navy warships
last year. Furthermore, our current posture encompasses several global
tasks: Marines supporting multiple CCDRs with offensive air support and
strikes from our Amphibious Ready Groups/Marine Expeditionary Units
(ARG/MEU) afloat; building partner capacity in both Iraqi and Afghan
Armies confronting Islamic State and Taliban fighters; providing
critical fixed-wing and artillery fire support to coalition-enabled
Syrian Democratic Forces as they fought to clear the Islamic State from
Raqqa, Syria; providing tailored military combat-skills training and
advisor support to foreign forces as part of Marine Corps Forces
Special Operation Command (MARSOC); deterring aggressive behavior in
the East and South China Seas through the forward posturing of 5th
Generation aircraft within the Pacific; providing immediate disaster
response from our ARG/MEU and Special Purpose Marine Air-Ground Task
Force (SPMAGTF) to Americans in the wake of four hurricanes; supporting
continued efforts to ensure freedom of navigation through the Bab al-
Mandab strait; and enabling full spectrum cyberspace operations while
supporting Joint and Coalition Forces as part of Marine Forces Cyber
Command (MARFORCYBER).
Marines continue to foster and strengthen relationships with our
allies and partners, executing 62 joint, bilateral, and multinational
exercises last year. Exercises like Balikatan in the Philippines, Eager
Lion in Jordan, and Joint Viking in Norway, increase our effectiveness
and help us to gain an understanding of how to best complement one
another's strengths. The Marine Corps also maintains a vital
relationship with the State Department, providing security at our
Embassies and Consulates worldwide. Today, Marines routinely serve at
178 Embassies and Consulates in 148 countries around the globe. Marine
Security Guard Security Augmentation Unit teams deployed 36 times last
year at the request of the State Department, executing 17 Embassy/
Consulate and 18 VIP (POTUS/VPOTUS/SECSTATE) security missions. In
short, as the Nation's ``911 force,'' we are forward postured across
the Geographic Combatant Commands (GCCs), engaged daily in deterrence
and security cooperation efforts, all while remaining capable of
rapidly aggregating Marines from adjacent GCCs and the homeland to
effectively respond to national crises.
adapting to increase our competitive advantage
The strategic environment continues to be complex, uncertain,
technologically charged, and dangerous. The proliferation of modern
conventional and cyber weapons to a broader range of state and non-
state entities, along with the erosion of our competitive advantage in
areas where we have long enjoyed relative superiority, is likely to
continue as rival states and organizations attempt to contest our
influence. Competition for natural resources, violent extremism,
natural disasters, social unrest, cyber-attacks, regional conflict, and
the proliferation of advanced weaponry and weapons of mass destruction
create a wide range of challenges for a globally responsive force.
Further, complex terrain, technology proliferation, information as a
weapon, the battle of signatures, and contested domains are driving
change across the strategic environment. Through the lens of these
drivers, your Marines look for ways to adapt and modernize to increase
our competitive advantage against pacing threats.
The ascendant threats posed by revisionist powers and rogue states
require change--we must become more lethal, resilient and as a
consequence, a more capable deterrent. The Navy-Marine Corps team can
no longer rely on concepts and capabilities premised on uncontested sea
control. We have begun to re-evaluate our capabilities to operate in
all domains and conduct sea control, power projection, maritime
security, and deterrence knowing that we must consider the tactical and
operational details of a contingency--and how our contributions could
shape the strategic environment to prevent conflict. Modern sensors and
precision weapons with expanding ranges and lethality are redefining
how we assess our posture and relative combat power. Advanced defensive
networks are forcing us to re-consider the methods of power projection
required to compete against rising peers.
We have focused on preventing and deterring conflict by providing
combined-arms task forces to theaters either already in crisis or at
the risk of crisis to meet the Congress' mandate to be `` . . . ready
to suppress or contain international disturbances short of large-scale
war.'' We remain poised to quickly respond within the Contact Layer
should deterrence fail to keep local disturbances from cascading into
larger contingencies requiring the attention and resources of the
larger Joint Force. As stated within the recently released National
Defense Strategy (NDS), we must re-posture in a manner consistent with
being the Nation's sentinels--preventing large-scale war and managing
crises as an extension of the naval force. Steady-state requirements
have degraded our readiness to support naval campaigns and degraded our
combined-arms training necessary to create credible combat deterrent
forces. Two challenges must be addressed to remedy these problems--(1)
the resilience of our posture and (2) the pace of our naval force's
availability and modernization. We require Congress' assistance with
aspects of each.
First, our global posture must adapt. To best adapt we must
increase our strategic flexibility and freedom of action. The NDS
introduces a Global Operating Model consisting of four layers--Contact,
Blunt, Surge, and Homeland Defense--and apportions a combination of
U.S.-based forces and theater-based ready forces to provide a method to
mitigate the challenges outlined above. Your Marine Corps operates
regularly within three of the four layers--Contact, Blunt, and Surge.
ARG/MEUs, allocated forces, MARSOC, and MARFORCYBER are part of the
Nation's Contact Layer--that competitive space where the military
element of national power preserves the alignment of shared interests
with our partners and allies. When competition escalates to conflict,
these forces must be able to rapidly transition to combat operations.
They are more often than not operating within the maritime domain, an
area proving to be increasingly contested, compounding the challenges
presented by the strategic environment. We must do so while
simultaneously preparing to conduct challenging naval campaigns against
adaptive competitors such as China and Russia. Despite being
responsible and prudent with our Nation's resources, the cost of war
and war readiness today is higher than ever. We have been innovative in
meeting past challenges and leveraging emergent opportunities, yet we
face ever growing threats from rising peers and irregular foes that
require us to take a hard look at our global disposition.
The development and acquisition of long-range precision weapons by
our Nation's chief competitors and threats--China, Russia, North Korea,
Iran, and Violent Extremist Organizations (VEO)--have placed many of
our forward deployed forces within the effective range of their weapons
systems, or ``threat rings.'' Forward deployed and stationed Marines
are now vulnerable to attacks in ways we have not considered for
decades. To operate within the Contact and Blunt Layers, Marine forces
must be combat-credible and oriented on warfighting to provide credible
deterrence. Marines who are stationed at and rotate through III Marine
Expeditionary Force (MEF) in the Pacific are forward postured,
providing expeditionary forward presence. The Blunt Layer requires a
resilient, dispersed basing posture with sufficient forward stockpiles
of logistics items and a reliable command and control (C2) network to
delay, degrade, and deny aggression. Conversely, most of our forward
bases and stations lack sufficient resilience against long-range
kinetic and non-kinetic attacks; thus, jeopardizing our ability to
prepare, project, and sustain combat power. Efficiencies in the
construction and configuration of these bases made possible by relative
security now pose as risks; however, there are remedies to these
problems. We need additional hardening of our facilities to include
aircraft hangars and command posts, the capability to rapidly repair
damage to our air stations, and counter- precision guided munitions and
advanced air-defense capabilities.
From our current posture, rapidly aggregating Surge Forces will
prove challenging. Responding to global contingencies against peer
rivals in an expeditious manner may be contested every step of the
way--we are going to have to fight to get to the fight. Surge Forces
are those war- winning forces that deliver capable mass to the fight,
primarily from the Continental United States, but also from across
GCCs. They are highly ready and able to fight in all domains, degrading
and penetrating anti-access area denial (A2AD) networks, as well as
assuring access and projecting power with C2, fires, maneuver, and
logistics. The rapid aggregation of Surge Forces is a problem that is
not unique to the Marine Corps. Sea control has become more important
now than in past decades, and the Marine Corps must further develop and
integrate force capabilities in support of the Navy. This will require
measured shifts from a focus on a near symmetric land-based enemy to an
asymmetric view in which Marine forces ashore threaten enemy naval and
air forces from expeditionary advance bases. There are elements of
naval security cooperation concerning maritime security, all domain
access, and power projection that could be assumed by the Marine Corps
to alleviate pressure on our over-stressed fleets, particularly in the
Pacific.
Secondly, the operationally available inventory of amphibious
warships and connectors is well below the requirement to satisfy a
competitive global strategy. This is forcing CCDRs to rely on shore-
based MAGTFs that lack the advantages resident in shipborne formations.
38 L-Class Amphibious warships are required to meet a 2.0 MEB Joint
Forcible Entry requirement, and upwards of 50 would be needed to meet
CCDR demand. Maritime Prepositioning Force (MPF) and Expeditionary-
class ships offer cost effective alternative platform options to help
mitigate a lack of warship capacity and for low-end, low-risk missions
in an uncontested maritime domain; however, they do not supplant our L-
Class warship requirement.
Ships acting within a networked fleet must contribute to the
lethality of the fleet with the ability to protect themselves from air,
surface, and sub-surface attack, while also possessing organic ship-to-
ship and ship-to-shore strike weapons. Current amphibious ships lack
these capabilities and therefore must rely on support from other
combatants to perform sea control and power projection missions. This
could be remedied by upgrading command and control suites, introducing
vertical launch systems and organic air defense, decreasing ship
signatures to become less targetable, and installing the ability to
launch and capture the MAGTF's growing arrangements of unmanned aerial
systems (UAS). Incorporating these capabilities, with the help of
Congress, would increase the lethality of our ARG/MEUs and the entire
Joint Force while supporting operations throughout the Range of
Military Operations (ROMO).
Increasing the Lethality of Our Corps
Your Marines continue to innovate and build a Next Generation
Marine Corps--a lethal, adaptive, and resilient Corps that implements
combined arms as a means to conduct maneuver warfare across all
domains, no matter the challenge--directly supporting the NDS, ready to
fight and win across the ROMO. This transformation began in 2016 with
the implementation of the Marine Corps Operating Concept (MOC). The MOC
represents our institutional vision for how the Marine Corps will
operate, fight, and win despite the challenges described above. As
mentioned at the outset of this statement, while the Corps' fundamental
purpose does not change, our concepts--and the organization, training,
and equipment changes they drive--must adapt to effectively accomplish
it. The MOC provides the foundation and context for subordinate
operating and functional concepts--like Littoral Operations in a
Contested Environment and Expeditionary Advanced Base Operations
(EABO)--and it guides our analysis, wargaming, and experimentation.
Further, the MOC drives the evolution of our Service doctrine,
organization, training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel,
and facilities (DOTMLPF) through a detailed and thorough Capabilities
Based Requirements System.
Whereas the MOC provides the concept for how Marines will fight and
win, it is through extensive experimentation and wargaming that we
validate our capability development choices and inform our investment
strategies. Our experimentation and wargaming focuses on designing a
balanced MAGTF, optimized for the future that incorporates Marines
capable of leveraging cyber, information, and artificial intelligence
capabilities. As a driver of innovation to identify these future
capabilities, our Marine Corps Warfighting Lab (MCWL) completed the
first phase of our long-range experimentation plan called Sea Dragon
2025, which focused on augmenting an infantry battalion with
experimental equipment, developing an analytically-based wargaming
process, and leveraging commercial technological advances through our
Advanced Naval Technical Experiment series. Phase two of Sea Dragon
2025 is underway, initiating our Experiment Campaign Plan. This plan
spans 3 years, focusing on MAGTF hybrid logistics, operations in the
information environment, and EABO. Through these efforts, the Marine
Corps will continue to adapt and refine our capability development,
force structure, and investment strategy that modernizes the force.
our 2019 budget
Our overall theme for PB19, Modernizing for the Future Force,
focuses on three key budget priorities--modernization, readiness, and
manpower--directly aligning with the Secretary of Defense's guidance to
improve warfighting readiness, achieve program balance, and increase
lethality. Driven by Marine Corps Force 2025 (MCF 2025), the capability
investment strategy which modernizes the force toward implementing the
MOC, we plan to rebuild a more lethal, maneuverable, and resilient
force able to operate in the emerging strategic environment. To
accomplish this goal, we require a budget that is delivered on-time,
with consistency--adequate, sustained, and predictable funding is
needed to properly plan for and resource a ready, capable force. That
said, your Marine Corps remains committed to building the most ready
force our Nation can afford, allocating $40.4 billion to our ground and
aviation baseline budget, and an additional $3.1 billion in Overseas
Contingency Operations funding as part of the PB19 submission--a 7
percent increase over last year's submission. We plan to use the
resources to increase our lethality to maintain our military advantage
in a fiscally prudent and executable manner, addressing critical
modernization requirements and investing in key warfighting
capabilities without sacrificing near term readiness. Additionally, we
plan to resource our infrastructure reset, Indo-Pacific strategy, new
structure, materiel, munitions, maintenance and training requirements
that together generate the right capability and capacity required.
Allocating money across our budget priorities supports Department of
Defense (DoD) guidance to restore military readiness and provide
solutions that proactively shape the strategic environment.
The Marine Corps is committed to audit readiness and business
reform, viewing both as critical enablers to Warfighter readiness. The
Marine Corps recently completed the Full Financial Statement Audit for
Fiscal Year 2017, the first within the DoD. Although a disclaimer was
issued for this first-year effort, the Marine Corps continues to push
forward as the lead military service for a full audit of its financial
statements. The Marine Corps has a commitment to achieve and sustain
favorable audit opinions regarding the presentation of its annual
financial statements. The transparency afforded with auditable
financial statements demonstrates our commitment to the prudent
management of taxpayer provided resources. Efficiencies gained through
audit efforts enhance the overall support to the Warfighter and ensure
the effective use of funds received. Progress will be measured not by
the auditor's opinion in 2017, but by the velocity of corrective action
as we continue to improve financial processes, systems, internal
controls and accountability of equipment to achieve a clean financial
opinion in the years to come. As the rest of the military services
commence their full financial statement audits in fiscal year 2018, the
Marine Corps continues to share our lessons learned across the
Department.
As part of ongoing business reform initiatives, the Marine Corps
has identified more than $3.6 billion in savings and cost avoidance,
$567 million in fiscal year 2019 alone, to provide for reinvestment in
warfighting readiness. We continue to make strategic choices in the
divestiture of certain programs to reallocate funds toward building a
more lethal, modern, multi-domain, expeditionary force. This has
included reducing depot level maintenance for the legacy Light Armored
Vehicle (LAV) and Assault Amphibious Vehicle (AAV) as we look to
accelerate the replacement of each vehicle. Similarly, the Marine
Corps' Infrastructure Reset Strategy seeks to improve infrastructure
lifecycle management and ensure infrastructure investments are aligned
with Marine Corps installations that are capable, adaptive, and
economically sustainable platforms from which to generate readiness and
project combat power in a fiscally constrained environment.
Implementation of this strategy consolidates and appropriately resets
the infrastructure footprint within existing installations to improve
operational readiness and generate resources for reinvestment.
Marine Corps business reform initiatives have also included the
more effective use of operating resources and force restructuring
throughout our military and civilian manpower. An in-depth
organizational structure and design review of Marine Corps Systems
Command, for instance, led to a reorganization to enhance MAGTF
alignment across product lines, maximizing economy of force by reducing
overall program office structure, achieving better rank and
responsibility alignment, and optimizing alignment with key
stakeholders. In another example, a review of our ground conventional
ammunition portfolio led to training requirements refinement; the use
of new, less-expensive training munitions; and the elimination of
duplicative munition requirements. We are focused on continuing
business reforms in fiscal year 2019 that foster effective resource
management and streamline the requirements and acquisition process.
Modernization--The Foundation of Our Future Readiness
Our Marine Corps must be modernized to meet the demands of the
strategic environment. Given this urgency, we appreciate the
Congressional action to improve acquisition through the National
Defense Authorization Acts of fiscal year 2016 and fiscal year 2017,
and we continue to leverage the opportunities provided by this
legislation. While we are leveraging technology to advance promising
capabilities in a range of information related areas, funding stability
and flexibility must be increased to enable us to keep up with the
rapid pace at which technology evolves. What we desire to achieve is a
Corps capable of exploiting, penetrating, and destroying advanced
adversary defenses in all domains in support of naval or Joint Force
operations. That modernized force would deter adversaries, prevent
conflict, and provide capabilities required to `` . . . suppress or
contain international disturbances short of large-scale war;'' thus,
preventing the consumption of readiness from the larger Joint Force. To
do that, we must be afforded the flexibility to experiment with new
technologies available on the market, determining what will work best
in the future operating environment, and then delivering those
capabilities to the force quickly to mitigate the rapid rate of
technological change. Our newly chartered Marine Corps Rapid
Capabilities Office (MCRCO) accomplishes that end, seeking emergent and
disruptive technologies to increase our lethality and resiliency. The
MCRCO leverages fiscal year 2016 and fiscal year 2017 NDAA provisions
and partnerships to accelerate the acquisition process--with the
consistent and steadfast support of Congress--we will continue to fund
this office. Accelerated modernization is the most effective remedy to
our long-term readiness problems and we must abstain from burying our
modernization efforts under cumbersome acquisition processes--we have
to get this right.
PB19 provides $13.8 billion towards our investment accounts, nearly
32 percent of our total request to modernize the force. This represents
a 19 percent increase in investment funding over our fiscal year 2018
budget submission. The PB19 investment approach is synched with the
implementation of MCF 2025, specifically investing in areas such as:
Information Warfare (IW), long range precision fires, air defense, C2
in a degraded environment, and protected mobility/enhanced maneuver.
These capability areas support building a Next Generation Marine Corps
across the Active and Reserve components of the force. This approach
includes changes to the structure of our Tables of Equipment into
equipment sets that balance affordability with the need for a
networked, mobile, and expeditionary force. Over the past decade and a
half, fiscal instability, funding decreases, and operational demand
increases have forced us to take risk in modernization to preserve
readiness, deferring critical future aviation and ground programs. PB19
continues the efforts started by the fiscal year 2017 Request for
Additional Appropriations and PB18 to reverse this trend by investing
in, and in some cases accelerating, our modernization programs that
directly correlate to improved readiness by reducing unit costs,
increasing efficiencies, and providing needed operational capabilities
sooner.
PB19 invests in our C2 capabilities needed to build a Next
Generation Marine Corps that will dominate the information domain. This
requires transforming MAGTF C2 through a unified network environment
that is ready, responsive, and resilient, with initiatives that
integrate Navy and Marine Corps systems. Enhanced C2 and digitally
interoperable protected networks are modern capabilities that will
facilitate improved battlefield awareness to and from small, dispersed
tactical units--achieving this end is my top acquisition priority. Such
programs as Tactical Communication Modernization (TCM), Common Aviation
Command and Control Systems (CAC2S), and Networking On-the-Move (NOTM)
provide significantly increased capabilities associated with maneuver
and fires across the battlespace. As warfare evolves into a battle of
signatures and detection, these information capabilities are vital to
maximize the lethality, maneuverability, resilience, and effectiveness
of our multi-domain, naval expeditionary forces.
We continue to prioritize the integration of information
capabilities throughout the MAGTF. Within the Command Element,
investments in the Marine Intelligence Program allowed the formation of
the MEF Information Group (MIG) to establish IW coordination centers
for MAGTF Commanders, filling the IW gap at the operational level.
Additionally, we have increased funding to MARFORCYBER to man, train,
and equip cyber forces and conduct full-spectrum cyberspace operations.
The coordination, integration, and employment of information and cyber
capabilities will enable the MAGTF Commander to facilitate friendly
forces maneuver and deny the enemy freedom of action in the information
environment.
The Ground Combat Element (GCE) is likewise being adapted to
operate and fight more effectively in the strategic environment through
the incorporation of information-related capabilities and the overall
modernization of its ground formations. PB19 continues to invest in key
ground systems like the ACV 1.1, Ground/Air Task Oriented Radar (G/
ATOR), High Mobility Artillery Rocket System (HIMARS), and Increment 1
of the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle (JLTV). Furthermore, investments
are being made to ensure more technological advances are being
incorporated into our infantry units. We continue to increase the
maneuverability, lethality, and resiliency of our infantry by
decreasing loads, enhancing Company Level Operations and Intelligence
Centers, increasing small UAS capacity and unmanned teaming with
robots, adding engineering capacity to provide direct support to every
infantry battalion, and increasing long range fires capacity. It is in
areas like these that we need to garner flexibility within our
acquisition process to assist in the streamlining of our modernization
efforts. We must be able to outfit the individual Marine with the most
modern technology and gear as soon as it becomes available. The
investments being made across the GCE will result in a more lethal
fighting force able to better support the Joint Force across the ROMO.
PB19 invests in our aviation systems to modernize the Aviation
Combat Element (ACE) by funding increases in the procurement of 5th
Generation aircraft. The Marine Corps is challenged to replace aging
aviation platforms that have reached the end of their service lives or
suffered accelerated wear in ongoing combat operations. Our aviation
modernization plan is a phased multi-year approach to modernization
that encompasses aircraft transitions, aircraft inventory shortfalls,
manpower challenges, safety and fiscal requirements. Our modern
expeditionary force requires fixed-wing aircraft capable of flexible
basing ashore or at sea in support of our Marine units. A top priority
is the F-35B/C and its future sustainment. This aircraft is not just a
replacement for three aging platforms; it provides transformational
electronic and information warfighting capabilities for the future
naval and Joint Force. Maximizing the potential of this aircraft
requires further analysis of our joint training ranges to ensure our
aircrews are able to train to its full capability. Other priorities for
aviation include investing in lethal, persistent, multi-role
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) Vertical Take-Off
and Landing (VTOL) UAS like our MAGTF Unmanned Expeditionary (MUX)
program; supporting capabilities such as electronic attack;
implementing robust strike weapons programs; creating manned-unmanned
teaming capabilities; and pursuing other sustainable modern aviation
platforms ultimately increasing our competitive advantage against
current rivals. Additionally, the CH-53K (Heavy Lift Replacement)
remains a critical replacement to the CH-53E, as it has triple the lift
capacity and is the only maritime, heavy-lift helicopter capable of
supporting current and future warfighting concepts. Much like the MV-22
Osprey, this helicopter will change the scope of our amphibious
operations through its increased lift and load capacity.
The Next Generation Logistics Combat Element will optimize tactical
distribution with unmanned platforms, flatten the supply chain through
additive manufacturing (AM), and enhance preventive and predictive
supply/maintenance with sense and respond logistics. Further, state-of-
the- art logistics C2/Information Technology, enabled by artificial
intelligence, will extend the operational reach of the MAGTF. Our MCWL
and Next Generation Logistics (NexLog) organizations continue to stay
at the cutting edge of military innovation. Marines are at the
forefront of this effort, optimizing the potential of AM in garrison
and overseas in austere environments. Our Marines are the world's
military leaders in the realm of 3D printed tactical level unmanned
aerial vehicles and using AM to produce time and mission critical
components. We have more than 70 3D printers throughout the Marine
Corps, and are fostering innovation through the establishment of
``makerspaces'' (areas where 3D printers are made available for use by
Marines) in the operating forces and supporting establishment. Once
fully integrated, this capability will enable our Marines to create
custom solutions to tactical problems, enhancing flexibility and speed,
while fundamentally altering the supply chain and wartime logistics. We
are experimenting with various unmanned aerial and surface platforms to
increase our ISR and logistical capacity and capability on the modern
battlefield. Lastly, we are conducting a series of innovation
symposiums and challenges to harness the creative energy of all Marines
in the development of Next Generation warfare capabilities for this
century's five domain warfighting environment. This is the future and
your Marines are working to change the way we conduct logistics in
combat.
Readiness--The Core of Our Ethos
The Marine Corps is unique among the Armed Services because your
expectations require Marines to be a fight-tonight, forward deployed
force, ready and capable of acting with minimal preparatory time--we
should therefore be resourced accordingly. Our ability to rapidly
deploy Marines to support missions across the spectrum of conflict is
incompatible with tiered readiness. Marines do not get ready when a
crisis occurs; we must be forward deployed and ready to respond
immediately from within our rival's threat rings. PB19 provides $13.1
billion towards our operation and maintenance accounts, over 30 percent
of our total request, enabling us to meet all of our steady state and
contingency requirements within established timelines, while balancing
efforts across the force to meet operational demands.
The Marine Corps is committed to building the most ready force ``to
suppress and contain international disturbances short of large-scale
war,'' and one capable of gaining and maintaining sea control as
required by the larger naval force. Readiness, however, is the product
of two metrics. The first is the ability of the force to execute its
mission with ready people, ready equipment, and the right training. The
second metric compares the force against potential adversaries in
various circumstances. Within the context of global competition against
rising peers, the scope of the second metric grows dramatically. For
instance, if our units are ready (near-term readiness levels), then by
the first metric we are ready. If, however, the force is outranged or
outpaced by potential adversary capabilities (long- term capability
modernization), then by the second metric we are not ready. We either
assume risk to mission or modernize our capabilities to mitigate
against the second metric.
The Marine Corps is ready to execute missions assigned with
deployed and next-to-deploy forces, but maintaining this readiness has
come at the expense of the readiness of non-deployed forces,
modernization, and infrastructure sustainment. This shortfall in
readiness of our non-deployed forces limits our ability to respond to
unexpected crises or major contingencies. In the event of a major
contingency, degraded units could either be called upon to deploy
immediately at increased risk to the force and the mission or require
additional time to prepare, thus incurring increased risk to mission by
surrendering the initiative to our adversaries. The fiscal year 2017
RAA provided the investment needed to arrest this decline, and the PB18
and PB19 budget submissions provide the resources needed to accelerate
our readiness recovery.
Another aspect of our readiness for major combat operations
involves the capacity of our War Reserve Materiel to enable and sustain
large-scale force mobilizations for major contingencies against rising
peers. Historically, readiness of deployed and next-to-deploy forces
also takes precedence over War Reserve Materiel, increasing risk and
cost in the event of a major contingency. PB19 invests in our War
Reserves in such areas as munitions and emerging starter stocks,
maintenance modernization, and our MPF fleet; all vital parts of our
Surge Forces. It also invests in our prepositioning programs in Norway,
which includes the maintenance of our prepositioned equipment. The
security threats to our Nation, as articulated by the Secretary of
Defense and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, demand that America
has a globally responsive, truly expeditionary, consistently ready,
forward-postured naval force. This is beyond dispute. To deliver on
that requirement, there are four primary challenge areas within
readiness that the fiscal year 2019 budget addresses: aviation;
amphibious, maritime, and expeditionary ships; deployment-to-dwell; and
infrastructure.
Aviation
Our most acute readiness issues are in aviation units. A
combination of aging aircraft, a lack of ready basic aircraft, an
unresponsive supply of parts and spares, and maintenance backlogs at
the depots contribute to high over-utilization rates of available
aircraft needed for training and certifications. This in turn hastens
the induction of these aircraft into maintenance cycles. Lack of
predictable and stable funding affects industry. Often when funding
becomes available late in the year through Continuing Resolutions, the
industrial base is not energized to meet demand. This negatively
influences training and certification opportunities for our maintainers
and aircrew.
Our priority remains building aviation readiness for combat by
balancing modernization with readiness recovery. PB19 works to assist
with this by providing support to our comprehensive aviation recovery
plan that, if sufficiently resourced and supported by our industrial
base, recovers the force to an acceptable readiness level by fiscal
year 2020 with a ready bench by fiscal year 2022. Further, PB19 plans
to fund aviation readiness accounts at maximum levels and spares at 93
percent of the requirement across both legacy and Next Generation
platforms. We are also continuing to fund and support readiness
initiatives to the F/A-18, CH-53E, and MV-22B. Budget challenges,
production delays, and increasing sustainment costs for aging aircraft
place the recovery plan in a fragile state--this readiness goal has
already been delayed once. While aviation readiness recovery remains a
priority--the introduction of the F-35B/C and accelerated modernization
of our Next Generation ACE is just as important. Furthermore, the
continued funding of legacy aircraft is a necessary bridge to the
future as we continue to increase the size of our Next Generation fleet
of aircraft.
Amphibious, Maritime, and Expeditionary Ships
The Joint Force must maintain access to and the ability to maneuver
through the global commons, project power, and defeat a competitor
attempting to deny freedom of action via the employment of A2AD
capabilities. To meet these challenges, the naval force must be
distributable, resilient, and tailorable, as well as employed in
sufficient scale and for ample duration. Due to existing shortfalls
within our amphibious, maritime, and expeditionary ship capacity, the
naval force currently struggles to satisfy these basic requirements--an
issue that will only grow worse over time if we cannot remedy our
current budgetary issues. PB19 puts us on a path to address these
issues, but we need Congress to act on this in a timely manner,
consistent with a return to the regular order of business.
The naval services must have optimally trained and equipped
amphibious forces tailored to each theater and threat and ready to
deploy with a suitable quantity of forces, on the designated timeline,
and with the reservoir of non-deployed yet ready forces that can surge
to meet the demands of large-scale operations or unplanned
contingencies. The operational availability of the existing amphibious
fleet is insufficient to meet global demands, negatively impacts the
unit training necessary to recover full spectrum readiness, and does
not support CCDR requirements for power projection. Consequently, the
strategic risk to the larger Joint Force and mission is increased. The
Navy possessed 62 amphibious ships in 1990, yet possesses only 32
today. Of the 32 amphibious ships, 18 are available to support current
or contingency operations. The stated requirement of 38 amphibious
warships is the minimum number to fulfill our Title 10 obligation.
Resourcing to a lower number puts CCDRs requirements and contingency
response timelines at risk. The Navy and Marine Corps are currently
operating below the minimum acceptable level and will continue to do so
until fiscal year 2033 when we reach the minimum amphibious ship
requirement of 38 per the fiscal year 2017 30-year shipbuilding plan.
That said, we recommend exploring the acceleration of LHA-9--a project
that can begin within the out years of the FYDP, bringing continuity to
our industrial base and directly increasing the lethality of our Navy
and Marine Corps team.
While some ships in the amphibious inventory have undergone
upgrades to support the F-35B and are fundamentally more capable
platforms than those they replaced, the naval force lacks the capacity
necessary to conduct requisite training to build total force amphibious
readiness and simultaneously prevent conflict. The Marine Corps, in
coordination with the Navy, is exploring innovative ways to employ
alternative platforms for amphibious operations in more permissive
environments in order to provide more global coverage in the most
resource-appropriate manner. These alternatives are by no means
replacements for amphibious warships, but instead provide cheaper,
additive alternatives in certain environments. Tailored MAGTFs afloat
on these vessels would replace those on shore due to limited shipping.
Regardless of the ship, whether an LHD equipped with F-35Bs and MV-22s
or an Expeditionary Sea Base with embarked crisis response forces,
Marines require additional maritime expeditionary shipping to satisfy
current requirements and the NDS. Congress could help remedy this by
supporting the PB19 request.
Ship-to-shore connectors move personnel, equipment and supplies,
maneuvering from a sea base to the shoreline. These are critical
enablers for any naval force. Modern aerial connectors, such as the MV-
22 Osprey and CH-53K, extend operational reach and lift capacity,
revolutionizing our ability to operate from the sea, austere locations,
and previously damaged airfields within a contested environment. Aerial
connectors alone do not suffice; the Navy is in the process of
modernizing the surface connector fleet by replacing the aging Landing
Craft Air Cushion (LCAC) and the 50-year-old fleet of Landing Craft
Utility (LCU). This system of surface and aerial connectors would
enable the Joint Force to establish a web of sensor, strike, decoy, and
sustainment locations based on land and sea that would complicate the
strategic and operational decisionmaking of our most advanced rivals,
thus attacking their A2AD strategies. Continued funding of the
modernization, maintenance, and service life extension programs of our
existing fleet of connectors is critical to enabling our success in
future security environments.
Mine Countermeasure (MCM) capabilities are consistently
underfunded, affecting the Joint Force's ability to operate in the
littorals. The assault element of an amphibious task force, as well as
any amphibious force maneuvering to establish expeditionary advanced
bases, requires assured maneuver through very shallow water, surf
zones, and beach zones to inland objectives. The Naval force has a
deficiency in MCM capability and capacity in these areas, which has a
direct effect on options available to fleet commanders within contested
seas. Naval MCM is in a transitional period where legacy systems are
reaching the end of service life. Although PB19 extends the service
life of four MCM systems, we must accelerate future capability to
ensure continuous MCM coverage during the shift from legacy to future
MCM systems. Future MCM systems could provide solutions to identified
gaps in detection and neutralization in very shallow water, the surf
and beach zones. Sufficient, sustained, and focused resourcing for this
transition is needed to provide required capabilities and capacities--a
critical capability to support amphibious operations. If the naval
force possessed the capability to easily overcome layered mine defense
in contested near-seas, such as the South and East China Seas, through
a more robust MCM capability, then we would in effect be attacking the
adversary's A2AD strategy. This would demonstrate our ability to
penetrate their defenses at a time and place of our choosing, and force
them to revalidate assumptions, change decisions, and invest in other
more costly capabilities. Assured naval surface access and assured sea
control cannot be achieved without an acceleration of our MCM
capabilities.
Deployment to Dwell
The rate by which Marines deploy largely depends upon what unit
they are assigned to and the operational demand for those units.
Currently, that rate is favorable for Marines assigned to many of our
headquarters elements; however, a majority of the Active Force is
experiencing a deployment to dwell (D2D) ratio that is unsustainable.
We confront this challenge daily. While these demands are clear and
unmistakable evidence of the continued relevance of Marines, this tempo
is not sustainable as it limits time to train to our full naval mission
sets. We must return to a 1:3 D2D force to have the time required to
train for the high-end fight and achieve balance with our Marines and
their families at home. Continued high operational tempo is affecting
our ability to retain Marines and we need to ensure we are doing what
we can to sustain our career force.
There are three types of Marines in our Corps: those who are
deployed, those getting ready to deploy, and those who just returned.
PB19 supports an 186,100 Active and 38,500 Reserve component end-
strength force while maintaining an approximate 1:2 D2D ratio in the
aggregate. Funding at a 1:2 D2D ratio, although not sustainable, is a
conscious, short-term decision we must make to balance modernization
while meeting current demand and simultaneously recovering our
readiness.We owe our Marines and their families the necessary time to
reset and train for the next deployment or contingency. Historically,
Marines have benefited from being a 1:3 D2D force. The Marines that
were not deployed, had adequate time to prepare across the full
spectrum of conflict and could be counted on to be ready when called
upon to reinforce their teammates if a major contingency happened. This
would require a substantive increase in supply or decrease in demand--
we are not asking for the former in this year's budget. Consequently, a
temporary reduction of our operational tasking is required to improve
our D2D ratio. Although accepted in the short-term for the reasons
outlined above, we must not accept a 1:2 D2D as the new normal. We
routinely talk about our readiness--fixing these dwell challenges will
help to better our readiness.
Infrastructure
We must prioritize Infrastructure Reset--we must improve
infrastructure lifecycle management and ensure infrastructure
investments are aligned with Marine Corps capability-based requirements
to support the warfighting mission and contribute directly to current
and future Force readiness. PB19 funds the Infrastructure Reset
Strategy with realized long-term cost savings through a reduction of
1056 failing structures (14 million square feet) during the Future
Years Defense Program (FYDP) and yield savings in Facilities
Sustainment, Restoration and Modernization (FSRM) accounts. Our
installations provide three critical force enabling functions. First,
they are deployment platforms from which our expeditionary forces fight
and win our Nation's battles; second, they are where our MAGTFs train
and hone their combat readiness; and third, they house our Marines and
families.
The Marine Corps has historically taken risk in facilities funding
to protect near-term readiness and service-level training. While
proposed investments in FSRM will allow our facilities to maintain an
average condition, if long term underfunding of FSRM requirements
continue, the progressive degradation of our infrastructure will
result, potentially creating a bow wave of long-term costs and in a
manner inconsistent with the National Security Strategy (NSS), NDS, or
National Military Strategy (NMS). PB19 begins the work to ensure our
infrastructure is resilient against not only long-range precision
strike, but also cyber-attacks. The greatest need of enhanced
resilience exists on our strategically significant overseas bases in
the Pacific on Okinawa and Guam. These locations are vital to
reassuring partners and allies in the region.
Manpower--Growing and Sustaining Our High Quality People
Our people--Marines, civilians, and their families--are the
foundation of all that we do; they are our center of gravity. PB19
provides $15.7 billion towards our manpower accounts, over 36 percent
of our total request as it begins to implement MCF 2025. It also
supports building a more experienced, better trained, and more capable
force by increasing the number of Marines we have with special skills
like MARSOC; those required for intelligence operations; and
electronic, information, and cyber warfare. Our manning requires
leaders with the grade, experience, and technical and tactical
qualifications associated with their billets, which is essential to the
Marine Corps as a ``fight tonight'' force. The resources we dedicate to
recruiting, retaining, and developing our people directly contribute to
the success of our institution. Our commitment to our Marines, their
families--and the civilians who support them at bases, stations, and
depots across the globe--must never waiver.
Marine recruiters consistently meet our recruiting goals by finding
motivated and qualified men and women within our Nation who are willing
to raise their hands and volunteer to wear the Eagle, Globe, and
Anchor. These men and women are smarter and more capable than past
generations and we continue to effectively lead them, both at home and
in combat. Devoted to upholding our values of honor, courage, and
commitment, we are dedicated to holding ourselves to the highest
standard of personal conduct. To this end, we have taken an
introspective look at our culture in light of social media
controversies and have created a task force and permanent office to
examine and correct conditions that enable disrespect or misconduct to
exist. We are committed to ensuring Marines treat each other with
dignity and respect. As issues arise, our commanders take necessary
action to ensure we maintain an organization that values the
contributions of all Marines based on their individual merit and
commitment to warfighting excellence.
Increasing the effectiveness of our Marines requires constant
reflection on how we conduct training; training to prepare for combat
and training that sustains the transformation of Marines into resilient
leaders who are mentally, morally, and physically fit. That
transformation begins with entry- level training, whether it be recruit
training or Officer Candidate School, and continues throughout a
Marine's service--whether it be a single enlistment or 40 years. We
believe in returning quality citizens to society when they leave the
Marine Corps--entry-level training is where that begins.
Over the last year, we have examined how we conduct recruit
training and made adjustments, while strictly maintaining the standards
necessary to ensure all Marines are proficient in the skills required
of our Nation's premier warfighting force. We have integrated a
majority of the recruit training phases at Marine Corps Recruit Depot
Parris Island. Additionally, the Recruit Depots have redesigned the
last 11 days of entry-level training--as a new, fourth phase--to
enhance a recruit's new identity as a Marine. The training focuses on
mentorship and leader-led instruction aiming to better prepare the new
Marines for the transition to follow-on training and the operating
forces. The newly created Transformation Enhancement Program (TEP)
improves our existing curriculum at our Formal Schools--reinforcing the
values and principles emphasized during the Fourth Phase of recruit
training. The TEP has been implemented at our combat training
battalions and Schools of Infantry with plans to continue
implementation into all formal schools over the next year.
Our Marines want to deploy, serve our Nation, and protect our
country from threats overseas. As Marines, we pride ourselves on being
ready and on training for combat in conditions that are as close to
reality as possible to enable success when called to fight. To ensure
their success in future conflicts, we continue to build upon our
lethality as we adapt our training, driving changes in our programs.
Conducting combined arms in multiple domains, counter-unmanned aerial
systems, managing signatures, and increasing integration of simulation
technologies are all part of the new training regimen. Innovation
remains a critical aspect of our Corps as Marines continue learning
through the testing and evaluation of new methodologies and
technologies to gain advantage over our rivals. Cyber operations,
information and electronic warfare, more capable command and control,
intelligence, engineering, civil-military operations, manned-unmanned
teaming, robotics, AM, and the leveraging of artificial intelligence
are critical skills we need for the future fight. Accordingly, we are
updating course materials and developing new programs of instruction to
ensure the Marine Corps remains a step ahead of our rivals.
Taking care of our Marines, civilians, and their families is a key
element of overall readiness, combat effectiveness, and warfighting.
Today's requirements mandate that we not only provide equipment, but
also focus on other important aspects of readiness, such as family
stability, housing, spousal support, behavioral health, education,
professional development, transition assistance, financial literacy,
and wounded warrior support. Deployment Readiness Coordinators help
ensure our families get the support needed before, during, and after
their Marines deploy. Additionally, our comprehensive packages of
services (Sexual Assault Prevention and Response; Suicide Prevention
and Response; Behavioral Health; Wounded Warrior Regiment; Personal and
Professional Development; and Transition Assistance) support the
complete fitness and readiness of our Marines and their families. The
Marine Corps remains focused on solutions to reduce destructive
behaviors, particularly sexual assault, suicide, hazing, and excessive
alcohol consumption. The abuse of alcohol is a known factor and
contributor across the spectrum of force preservation issues and
negatively impacts the readiness of our force. We are keenly focused on
dramatically reducing these destructive behaviors.
conclusion
Today, the Marine Corps faces many challenges; some as a
consequence of rival adaptations, and some as a result of unpredictable
funding. Years of sustained operations ashore in Iraq and Afghanistan
have increased the divide between the Marine Corps and the Navy. For
years, the Marine Corps and Navy have taken presumptive sea control for
granted, despite warnings. We have focused on power projection and
assured access, assuming sea control would remain uncontested. Since
the fall of the Soviet Union, the Sea Services have enjoyed well-
earned, uncontested global dominance. Those days are over. We need to
modernize and address peer competition or risk falling further behind.
Our budget priorities, coupled with the evolution of our global
posture, will provide our Nation's leaders the right instruments of
power and the right places to create the decisionmaking space necessary
for competition and contingency at the lowest cost in resources
possible.
The Marine Corps will adapt its global posture. As a naval force,
deployed Marines predominately reside aboard ship, fully integrated
with the Navy and expanding the competitive space and advantage of the
Joint Force. The ocean provides flexibility, freedom of maneuver,
survivability, and agility. Despite being the subject of competitor
tracking, hitting a moving target is much more difficult than one that
has been in the same position year after year, and thus affords much
greater unpredictability--imposing a cost on any competitor. In recent
history, we have found our forces tied to fixed locations in special
arrangements to support necessary requirements during times of
increased instability throughout specific regions of the globe. We must
put these forces back on ship, whether on upgraded amphibious warships
postured to respond to conflict or on alternative platforms. This
postures us to assure partners and allies, compete with rivals, and
defeat VEOs. We recognize the continued issues with our amphibious,
maritime, and expeditionary ship inventory; however, we must focus on
increasing the capabilities of the ships we do have, while developing
cheaper alternatives for more permissive environments.
We will continue to foster and strengthen our partnerships and
alliances as today's strategic environment requires strong global
partners. When our adversaries choose to test our will or capabilities,
we must be ready with our allies to act with the appropriate force to
overcome those hostile acts with such speed and decisiveness as to
prevent further acts of aggression. We will prioritize those joint,
multinational and bilateral exercises that offer the greatest return on
investment as measured in readiness gains with select partners. These
exercises increase our lethality as we gain an understanding of where
we can strengthen each other's weaknesses.
Despite the challenges facing us in today's strategic environment,
our Marine Corps remains the Nation's forward deployed, agile,
Expeditionary Force in Readiness. As the service with unique readiness
requirements, we require sustained, adequate, and predictable funding
to develop the correct mix of advanced capabilities and ensure a ready
force. As we look ahead to the 2019 budget, we have prioritized the
modernization of our Corps, the recovery of our current readiness, and
investments to resource the next generation of Marines. The continued
investment in these priorities will ensure Marines are capable as a
high-end, conventional combat deterrent, able to respond to immediate
contingencies and conduct crisis response across the continuum of
conflict. With the Congress' support and sustained commitment, we can
begin to restore our competitive naval advantage, enhance global
deterrence, and ensure that we send our sons and daughters into the
next fight with every advantage our Nation can provide.
FISCAL RESPONSIBILITIES AND READINESS
Senator Shelby. Secretary Spencer, the 2-year budget deal
for the fiscal years 2018 and 2019 provides additional
appropriations for the Department of Defense and of course, the
Navy. With the steep increase in funding that we've alluded to
already compared to previous years, can you explain to the
committee here today how the Navy is maximizing your
opportunity here to use every dollar to make sure that
taxpayers' dollars don't go to waste but go to national
security?
Secretary Spencer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We do have a
plan front and center that we started actually at the turn of
the calendar year in hope that we might get the great gift that
you have given us. As an example, for the budgeting offices, we
have had the practice out in place to start monitoring
obligations as they go forward. Those offices that find
themselves challenged to actually deploy funds that they've
been allocated are to put the hand up early and say, one, ``Can
we use BTR relief that you have given us to reapply the funds
to different areas within their purview and/or hand it up into
the Department level so we can make sure that they can be
reallocated by notifying you all?'' The whole goal here is to
spend those funds--one, to allocate those funds where needed in
a maximum effort and a responsible effort.
Senator Shelby. Mr. Secretary, because we all know that the
2-year budget deal ends after 2019, and the budget caps created
by sequestration remain in effect for the years 2020 and 2021.
What impact would return to sequestration have on the Navy?
Secretary Spencer. Massively detrimental, Mr. Chairman. We
would hope, and I know hope is not a strategy, we would pray
that it does not happen, and that you all can rectify the
situation. Sequestration, as you've heard me say before, and
continuing resolutions have cost the Navy about $4 billion in
wasted dollars.
Senator Shelby. Also could cost you readiness, too, could
it not?
Secretary Spencer. Exactly.
Senator Shelby. Thank you.
GREAT POWER COMPETITION
Admiral Richardson, great power competition, which we have.
In your submitted testimony, you say that the U.S. does not
enjoy a monopoly on sea power or sea control, and that we're
experiencing a return to great power competition with a rising
China and a resurgent Russia. Could you describe what you can
here in open hearing today what the Navy is doing to improve
its defensive and offensive capabilities to address these
challenges?
Admiral Richardson. Sir, that is exactly the Navy the
Nation Needs, and so we're----
Senator Shelby. It's what you're about, isn't it?
Admiral Richardson. Pardon me, sir?
Senator Shelby. I said that's what you're about.
Admiral Richardson. That--that is--you described my job,
sir.
Senator Shelby. Yes.
Admiral Richardson. That's what I do. And so not only a
bigger fleet, more ships, this budget request has a request
for, you know, 10 ships, dozens of aircraft. This is lethal
power. But not only the capacity of the Navy, the number of
ships, but also, what is the capability of each of those ships?
And so we've got an aggressive approach to take a look at
modernization with leaning into the future with directed energy
weapons and those sorts of capabilities that will really
maintain our superior edge over those emerging navies.
Finally, as competitive as anywhere else is the competition
for talent. And none of this works without our talented sailors
and civilians. And so we've got competition in that area as
well.
Senator Shelby. Do you believe that a lot of the great
power competition that is China and perhaps Russia is occurring
or will occur in the Pacific?
Admiral Richardson. Sir, the Pacific is the central
priority there.
Senator Shelby. It is.
Admiral Richardson. Absolutely.
Senator Shelby. It's our biggest lake, isn't it?
Admiral Richardson. Yes, sir.
Senator Shelby. Thank you.
Admiral Richardson, and I'll also direct this to General
Neller, too, rogue regimes like North Korea and Iran are acting
to threaten regional and global stability. Do the Navy and
Marine Corps have the ability to respond if called upon in a
real crisis there?
Admiral Richardson. Mr. Chairman, we do.
Senator Shelby. General?
General Neller. Yes, sir, we do.
Senator Shelby. Admiral Richardson, in December of 2016,
you completed a force structure assessment to determine the
correct balance and mix of platforms needed to address the
Navy's responsibilities to the Nation. You concluded that you
need 355 ships. Can you explain how this budget request
supports the Navy's requirement to get to that goal?
Admiral Richardson. Sir, this budget request is very
supportive of our requirement to get to that goal. The
combination of new acquisitions, service life extensions, you
know, the combination of those will allow us to reach that 355
goal as quickly as we can, right now projected in the 2030s. So
we see a quickly building ramp in terms of growing the Navy.
COMPETITION AND THE MARITIME DOMAIN
Senator Shelby. Could you speak to how important that a
healthy and robust industrial base is to the shipyards and
vendors and everything that goes with it? In other words, you
just can't create a Navy overnight, can you?
Admiral Richardson. You cannot. And our shipbuilding and
really Navy industrial base is an absolute strategic jewel in
the Nation's crown. It's something that must be preserved at
every cost.
Senator Shelby. About 90 percent of the world's trade is
carried by sea. New trade routes are opening up, and there is
competition, as we all know, for undersea resources. In other
words, the maritime security environment is becoming ever more
complex.
I'll address this to you, General Neller, and also to the
Admiral. What does this mean for how we train and equip our
sailors and Marines because this is more competition, more
risk? General?
General Neller. Chairman, the United States is a maritime
nation. We rely upon the sea lines of communication for
commerce and to move trade. We are traders; that's what we do.
And your Navy, your naval force, your Navy-Marine Corps team,
has to make sure those sea lines of communication are open and
unrestricted. So for us, for our training, it's not ops normal
because the capabilities of our potential adversaries are much
more capable. They're getting longer range, their submarines
are getting better, their aircraft, and their missiles. So
we've got to up our game, not just in the capabilities we have,
but in the training that we do. We've been at war in our
counterinsurgency stability operations, at least for your
Marine Corps, for the last 17 years, and we're in the process
of changing our training regimen to focus, as we did back in
the '80s, against the Soviet Union, against a peer adversary.
So we've got to change how we train our force. There are
certain capabilities in the force that we need that we didn't
need to the degree in the past, such as information operations,
cyber, electronic warfare, and other capabilities, more long-
range precision strike. So all of that is in this budget, and
we're looking forward to getting after it. But those are the
things that we're doing to adjust to the new environment.
Senator Shelby. To both of you, my last question here, we
all hope that there are going to be some diplomatic
breakthroughs dealing with Korea, North Korea, and so forth,
but if there's not, does the Navy and the Marines stand in
readiness to do whatever we have to do to protect our national
security?
Admiral Richardson. Mr. Chairman, I'll start. As you know,
it's a diplomatic and economic campaign at this point with the
military and support.
Senator Shelby. Number one.
Admiral Richardson. Right, yes, sir. And we are providing
firm and credible military options to back that up.
Senator Shelby. General.
General Neller. Our job is to provide for the decision-
makers and the leaders of this country, decisions base--based
on the capabilities that we have as a military. So we're
continuing to look at all possible contingencies and what may
be required to support those diplomatic options.
Senator Shelby. Senator Durbin.
SURFACE FORCE READINESS
Senator Durbin. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks again to the panel that's gathered today for
your service to our country.
The incidents involving the Antietam, Champlain,
Fitzgerald, and McCain were wakeup calls. As a result of those
incidents, we initiated a Comprehensive Review and a Strategic
Readiness Review. The finding in those two--the findings in
those two reviews are sobering. Among the observations that
were made, the Fitzgerald, not operating at a safe speed, the
crew did not use radar properly, they failed to use the GPS
(Global Positioning System) system, poorly communicated
situational awareness, and the crew was fatigued. The command
leadership failed to foster a culture of critical self-
assessment and was not aware that daily performance standards
had degraded to an unacceptable level. Crewmembers did not
attend the navigation brief and lacked basic knowledge and
proficiency in steering and propulsion.
The Strategic Readiness Review found that within the Navy
a, quote, normalization of deviation took root in the culture
of the fleet. The review concluded that the Navy came to accept
a lower standard performance until that lowered standard became
the new norm. As an example, the GAO (Government Accountability
Office) report found that the number of expired certifications
among forward-deployed naval forces in Japan skyrocketed from 6
percent in 2015 to nearly 40 percent in 2017. I note that most
of the testimony from the Secretary and the Admiral have noted
the need for increasing the size of the fleet, a bigger fleet.
I have a question for you. Were the Antietam, Champlain,
Fitzgerald, and McCain experiences outliers or are they tragic
revelations of an unacceptable safety culture in our Navy?
Admiral Richardson. Sir, there were definitely some
problems, as you noted, on those ships. And I think that my
culture and the culture of the Navy is that we don't take
anything for granted when we see those sorts of indications.
And so we did thorough investigations into the individual
circumstances surrounding each of those individual events.
That's--you know, we did four separate investigations, and you
quoted from those for the Fitzgerald.
When you see incidents like that, multiple incidents, it, I
think, is incumbent upon leadership to back up and at least
explore the question as to whether we've got a systemic issue.
And that's what the Comprehensive Review and the Strategic
Readiness Review were about. Anytime you dive in and take a
look at something like that, you're going to find something. We
did, and we put a comprehensive recovery plan in----
Senator Durbin. That goes to the heart of it, Admiral. Was
this isolated? Were these outliers? Or was the Strategic
Readiness Review finding that the Navy has accepted a
normalization of deviation as the culture of the fleet?
Admiral Richardson. Not the entire Navy, sir. And as a
counterexample, we can point to the strikes just last--recently
in Syria. The continued strikes executed safely and effectively
in the fight against ISIS (Islamic State of Iraq and al-Sham),
the strikes into Syria last year, the vast majority of your
Navy is performing its mission effectively and safely. However,
every chance we get to improve, every chance we get to correct
deficiencies, we're going to leap on those with an aggressive
stance and fix them.
Senator Durbin. I guess--I pray you're right, and I hope
you're right, and I have no reason to believe you're not
correct in what you've just said, but the point I was trying to
make in this question was I would think before you give us
testimony about building a larger fleet, we talk about the men
and women who serve the United States Navy and our Nation and
making certain that they're doing their job effectively, that
they're not fatigued, that they are prepared, and when called
on, will perform their responsibilities safely and come home
safely.
Admiral Richardson. Senator, we talked about a balanced
approach, which included not only capacity, but also readiness,
increased time at sea to get--you know, practice those skills
and to strike that balance. And so that's what I hope to convey
with our budget request.
WOMEN IN COMBAT
Senator Durbin. General Neller, recent articles have been
written about the training of women in the Marine Corps for
combat. Has there been any change under your watch with the
Marines in terms of training women for combat service?
General Neller. Senator, women have been in combat in the
Marine Corps since we've had women Marines, so what's changed
is the assignment of women to ground combat units and to
specific MOSs. So----
Senator Durbin. Is it not true that the assignment of women
for combat training has been diversified now, that they're now
being trained on the West Coast, too?
General Neller. Women--women Marines are all trained at
Parris Island right now. And they had previously all--all
Marines, when they graduate from boot camp, regardless of their
MOS, go to what we call Marine Combat Training, which is basic
infantry training, for 28 days. Up until a few months ago, all
the women from Parris Island went to our training School of
Infantry on the East Coast. But you are correct, we have
decided, particularly based on where those Marines might have
their follow-on training or where they were recruited from,
that it was more cost effective and efficient to send them to
School of Infantry on the West Coast. So, yes, sir.
Senator Durbin. Are you familiar with the article written
by Kate Germano, who served for 20 years in the Marine Corps
and retired as a lieutenant colonel, about the training of
women in the Marine Corps for combat?
General Neller. I have read some of Colonel Germano's
writing; yes, sir.
Senator Durbin. And what do you make of it?
General Neller. I think Colonel Germano was trying to up
the requirement for female recruits and the training for them
to become Marines, and I would say based on my observation and
what we've implemented, a great number of the things that she
expressed concern with have been implemented and are currently
taking place today at Parris Island, South Carolina.
Senator Durbin. Thank you very much.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Shelby. Senator Collins.
SHIPBUILDING
Senator Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Spencer, let me begin by thanking you for coming
to Maine and visiting Bath Iron Works. I can't tell you how
well received your visit was by the hardworking shipbuilders at
BIW (Bath Iron Works). And I very much appreciate your coming
to visit.
In the fiscal year omnibus bill, Congress decided to
authorize the DDG-51 multiyear despite some reservations that
GAO and others had brought up. It is, therefore, critical that
the Navy carefully manage this multiyear procurement so that
both large surface-combatant shipyards have stable and a
balanced program workload to sustain the industrial base. In
fact, we included some report language as we authorized the
multiyear that included a requirement that the Navy report on
how the multiyear Acquisition Strategy addresses workload
balance, stability, and viability for both DDG-51 shipbuilders.
Is the Navy, in fact, taking steps to ensure that the DDG-51
multiyear will sustain both yards?
Secretary Spencer. Senator, in February of 2018, we put the
RFP (request for proposal) out for the Flight 3, as you know.
It is a continual concern of mine and something that I monitor
regularly, which is the health of the industrial base across my
portfolio, but know that when it comes to the large
shipbuilders for DDG in particular, we are specifically
looking--constantly looking at workload balance in that regard.
But I want to--I want to punctuate that because my
fiduciary responsibility--while we're partners in this with our
suppliers, my fiduciary responsibility is to get the best value
for the taxpayer. We have to work as a team, whether it be the
DDG program, whether it be the submarine program, across the
board, the workers are out there doing their best, management
of their workers has to lean in, too, to make sure that they
are providing the best for the team to produce at their optimum
capacity, and that's another thing that we will ensure going
forward, Senator.
Senator Collins. Thank you.
Admiral Richardson, nice to see you again. I always want to
remind you of your graduating from Kittery High School and your
strong ties to the State of Maine.
You recently outlined your vision for the next generation
surface combatant acquisition to replace the Navy's aging
cruisers, which included looking at existing hull forms as a
base for a future combatant. How might the Zumwalt's unique
capabilities, such as excess power capacity, inform the Navy's
thinking about the next class of large surface combatant ships?
Admiral Richardson. Ma'am, thank you very much. And it's--
it's great to see you again as well. You've hit exactly on a
centerpiece of the strategy going forward, which is to garner
as many of the lessons learned and roll those into the new ship
as quickly as possible. I will tell you, we are learning more
lessons from Zumwalt every single day about the capability that
ship brings, whether it be power generation, the role of
stealth, the volume that the ship brings, the capability of the
ship to bring down, you know, very sensitive communications, et
cetera. And so that's exactly the types of lessons that I would
look forward to rolling into the next ship.
Senator Collins. As the Navy begins planning for this next
generation of large surface combatants, how can the Navy ensure
a smooth transition? As you know, there were some disruptions
in workload and difficulties in going from the DDG-51s to the
DDG-1000s and then back with the restart of the DDG-51s. What
lessons have we learned from that?
Admiral Richardson. If there is one word I think that
describes the major takeaway, it's ``stability.'' And so we
would ask and hope for stability in terms of funding and a
return to normal order so that that part is there. On my part,
it's stability of requirements and stability of design that
allows us to put together a program that meets the Nation's
needs, that is stable and predictable, and then can be executed
in a way that is smooth and sails right through.
Senator Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for your service.
Senator Shelby. Senator from Hawaii.
Senator Schatz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here.
Secretary Spencer, I wanted to follow up on Senator
Durbin's line of questioning around the Comprehensive and
Strategic Readiness Reviews. My question is quite
straightforward. A lot of the recommendations have to do with
changes within the organization. And I'm wondering where we
find the resourcing and the sort of budget ``money where your
mouth is'' behind the Readiness Review in the coming budget
request.
Secretary Spencer. Senator, you hit the nail on the head.
If you divide out the recommendations from the Strategic
Readiness Review and the Comprehensive Review, the Strategic
Readiness Review is primarily more management oriented and
don't really have that many dollars attached to it. The
Comprehensive Review, addressing everything from common bridge
components to training to bricks and mortars. If I'm not
mistaken, we're somewhere around the $600 million range for
that needed for funding to address the Comprehensive Review
issues.
OPERATIONS IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC REGION
Senator Schatz. Thank you.
Admiral Richardson, I want to talk to you a little bit
about freedom of navigation operations. Obviously, the Navy
plays an essential role in challenging unlawful claims around
the world, and I won't ask you to talk about current or future
FONOPS (Freedom of navigation operation), but I just have a
basic question about how we approach these, and I don't mean to
be pejorative, but the only way I can frame it is whether or
not you have a sort of a comprehensive strategy as it relates
to FONOPS or if your strategy--and this may be the right way to
do it--is to be somewhat more reactive to incursions, to
unlawful claims, to inappropriate actions from some of our peer
adversaries.
So the question is, Do we sort of monitor the situation and
respond as necessary, or do you have a schedule or a theory of
the case that you implement regardless of circumstances, or is
it a blend?
Admiral Richardson. I would say your last comment hits it
on the head, sir. It's a blend. And so strategically we're out
there to advocate for the normal rules and norms that govern
commerce and free flow of trade in the global commons. And so
that's why we are there. We are present wherever international
law allows us to sail and fly, and we'll continue to do so to
advocate not only for us, but for everybody else. Having said
that, there are--we've got to be like foxes, we've got to be
responsive to opportunities as they present themselves inside
that strategic framework. And so that's how we approach it.
Senator Schatz. What new partnerships with other countries
give you the most optimism? And who do you want to kind of move
from neutral to leaning away to our side of the ledger?
Admiral Richardson. Sir, there are all sorts of dynamism in
that regard in the Pacific theater, and so we've got our
staunch allies: Japan, South Korea, Australia, those sort of
folks. But we're seeing great opportunities with partners like
India, partners like Vietnam even. And so there is an emerging
dynamic----
Senator Schatz. Indonesia?
Admiral Richardson. Indonesia.
Senator Schatz. Malaysia?
Admiral Richardson. Malaysia. That entire region is----
Senator Schatz. Where do you see the Philippines in that?
Admiral Richardson. The Philippines is a traditional strong
ally of the United States.
Senator Schatz. Still?
Admiral Richardson. Still.
Senator Schatz. Good.
General Neller, Guam, I'd like to talk to you about Guam,
as usual. What is the status of building training ranges at
CNMI (Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands)?
General Neller. Senator, there are still some environmental
impact issues with those training ranges, specifically on
Tinian, and there are some other legal issues with ancestral
homeland on Pagan. The training on Guam proper, those ranges I
think are not going to be an issue. So there is construction
going. We're still committed to the entire DPRI IP plan, reduce
the number of Marines on Okinawa, moving out of Futenma to the
Futenma Replacement Facility, and Marines are going to go to
Guam. So--but we need to be able to train and we need to be
able to move off that island.
Senator Schatz. So I'm hearing that you think you're on
track, but if you fall off track, I assume that impacts unit-
level readiness?
General Neller. We've always stated, the Marine Corps has
always stated, that for us to go to Guam, those units that go
there have got to be able to maintain their readiness.
Senator Schatz. And what's your level of confidence right
now about staying on track with respect to construction?
General Neller. I'm not going to speculate. We're operating
on the assumption that these things are going to get resolved
and we're going to be able to train there.
Senator Schatz. Okay.
And, Secretary Spencer, I'll take this one for the record.
There is strong support from PACOM and PACFLT for the
University of Hawaii's application to establish a Navy ROTC
program. And can you please follow up for the record with a
definitive answer about what the Navy would need in order to
support the University of Hawaii's Navy ROTC application?
Secretary Spencer. Senator, just to--duly noted, and to let
you know that--you might have seen it in the press--that we are
doing a benchmark review of all our educational institutions,
and we're going to actually address the ROTC issue there. So
duly noted, and I will respond.
Senator Schatz. Thank you.
Senator Shelby. Senator Blunt.
NAVAL AVIATION
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Chairman.
Thank all of you for being here.
Admiral Richardson, Senator Durbin and I and members of
this committee generally always are very engaged in the
discussion about the F/A-18 Super Hornet production. I think
we've--generally that's been sort of at the top of the unfunded
list. I believe this budget has fully funded the line for the
coming year. And mostly I just didn't want to fail to mention
this once again, that this is an item we care about a lot. The
question I have for you, though, is the competition for the new
aerial unmanned refueling asset and how that's going and how
you see that unmanned refueling as an important part of the
future of the Navy.
Admiral Richardson. Senator, thanks. And I just want to
double down on the importance of the F/A-18 Super Hornet as a
current and continuing part of our future naval air wing, and
so we're completely behind you on that.
With respect to the MQ-25, the unmanned aerial tanker, this
is a signature program for the Navy that is not only going to
fulfill a critical readiness and capability gap, the ability to
fuel strike fighters, which will liberate additional strike
fighters to go do a strike-and-fighter mission, which are
currently tanking. And so this will not only extend the range
of the air wing, but also reap benefits in terms of increasing
the striking power of the air wing as well.
We brought in industry very, very quickly on that. Early on
in the problem, we leveraged the technology that had been
developed to date so that we could move quickly to production
on this. Competition is going very well. We are currently in
the evaluation of that, and we expect award of contract later
this year.
Senator Blunt. Later this year?
Admiral Richardson. Yes, sir.
Senator Blunt. Okay, thank you, Admiral.
FORT LEONARD WOOD
General Neller, as you know, I think there are more Marines
at Fort Leonard Wood because of the schoolhouse that is run
there than there are at any other non-Marine base in the
country. We're certainly glad to have those Marines. I know
you're looking at the feasibility of moving the civilian law
enforcement training to Fort Leonard Wood, where other military
police training goes on. And I'm wondering if you could discuss
the benefits of potentially unifying that training at one
location.
General Neller. Well, Senator, you're correct. I visited
Fort Leonard Wood about 6 months ago, and I--you would think
after being in the Marine Corps this long, I would know where
all the Marines were. I was--there are a lot of Marines there.
We've got our Motor Transport School and we've got our
Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear Defense School
there. And we also train our military police Marines. And I
believe there's a study ongoing now to take a look at whether
civilian law enforcement go there. Obviously, if you can
consolidate any training and achieve economies of scale,
particularly where you have a school for military police, that
there's going to be advantage to that. So we're still waiting
for the final results of that. And I would ask that I can give
you the results of that when we get the final readout on that
report.
Senator Blunt. That would be great. I hope you continue to
look at the feasibility of that. And I know you're encouraging
them to get to a final conclusion soon and hope to be updated
on that.
READINESS
And Secretary Spencer, my question for you is, As we talk
about continuing to add to the equipment, add ships to the
Navy, how does that compete with the readiness concerns that
we've seen, and I know you have? You're adding more ships in an
environment where we've had a hard time keeping all the ships
we currently have ready. And just your thoughts on how we do a
better job of balancing those things.
Secretary Spencer. Senator, to frame an answer for you, to
grow the fleet is one bar in the chart. And there are two other
bars that need to be acknowledged, and that's the manpower
needed to support the ships and the actual maintenance needed
to keep them going. That is the full life-cycle cost of the
platform. We are analyzing that as we go forward.
When it comes down to the actual tactical measures we're
doing, we are actually starting to see the needle move when it
comes to ship maintenance. There are some efforts underway that
we're reaching out to the private sector to take some best
practices from them. We're learning some lessons already that
we're indoctrinating into both depot-level aircraft maintenance
and ship availabilities. We're taking this all into effect
because as we grow the fleet, we have the responsibility in
spending the resources to make sure they're put forward to make
it a more efficient and effective team.
Senator Blunt. Well, I think we all know we've been asking
too few people to do too many things with equipment that wasn't
where we'd want it to be, and I know that's an important
priority for you, and I'd suggest it is for the committee as
well. So hopefully we can work together to make it a priority.
Secretary Spencer. I look forward to it.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Chairman.
Senator Shelby. Senator Reed.
SUBMARINE INDUSTRIAL BASE
Senator Reed. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And also let me
thank you and the Vice Chairman, Senator Durbin, for your
support of $225 million to expand funding for the submarine
industrial base supply chain. It's deeply appreciated. Thank
you, sir.
And with that, Mr. Secretary and Admiral Richardson, the
supply chain for submarine construction is absolutely critical
as we try to continue to build the Virginia-class and put the
first Columbia-class in the water. Can you comment on where we
are in the supply chain? And do you need additional resources
this budget cycle to continue to make improvements?
Secretary Spencer. Senator, the supply chain is--it's
coming forward over the last 5 years. It is an absolutely
critical topic that we discussed, and it was not readily
apparent to many people going forward as to the importance of
it. We are looking at this with a fine-toothed comb, both the
Navy in partnership with our suppliers, because that is what
puts the whole ship together. And when it comes to the
Virginia-class and the Columbia, and I will also put in there
also our carrier efforts, it is a combined, in many cases, an
overlapping, supply chain.
Our integrated plan working with both our suppliers and the
Navy are combing through the supply base. We've done it. We
have joint efforts going on. How can we make a supplier a
better supplier? What do they need? The questions are being
asked now when we approach contracting is, Fine, what are
benefits that you can provide us? And they might come back and
say a 10 percent savings. Our immediate response is, ``What can
we do for you to get to 20 percent savings?'' as an example.
That is how we're working with the supply base because it's
going to be critical to get both the Columbia on-station,
Virginia payload mod, and the carriers.
Senator Reed. Admiral?
Admiral Richardson. Senator, let me just pile onto that.
Senator Reed. Yes, sir.
Admiral Richardson. One, I concur with everything that the
Secretary said. And as you know, some of the second- and third-
tier suppliers have really been hanging on by the skin of their
teeth here as we've worked through some of the continuing
resolutions and Budget Control Act sequestration levels of
discussions. And so they are breathing a cautious sigh of
relief with these new funding levels. So we're taking a very
integrated approach to this problem, making sure that we
continue to ensure the viability of the second- and third-tier
suppliers as well.
Senator Reed. Let me raise another issue related to the
supply chain. Reports that we've heard periodically, in fact, I
think when Secretary Kendall was here, he indicated that a
great number of unclassified components were basically in the
hands, either physically or virtually, of our adversaries,
which goes to the whole issue of the security of the supply
chain as well as their ability to produce material. So any
comments about that? Is that part of your focus, too?
Secretary Spencer. Senator, it is. In my previous
testimony, as you might have me heard, that we were about to
let a contract to a company that provided digital modeling for
the Navy and were going to put some MSC (Military Sealift
Command) ships in there so we could do predictive maintenance,
et cetera. We found out that the division of the prime that was
providing the company was--actually had a joint venture with
Huawei. We raised our hand and said, ``Let's get the company on
the phone, find out what this is all about.'' We were told,
``No problem, we're not using Huawei software or hardware.'' We
asked, ``Fine, can we see the governance documents for the
joint venture?'' and all of a sudden the phone line got kind of
quiet, to be very frank with you. We have responded by putting
prophylactic language in there that will protect us. We've yet
to see the response from the prime yet. We await that.
This is a continuing issue. We have an office inside the
Department of Defense called OCEA, the Office of Commercial and
Economic Activity, that the Navy and the Air Force have been
funding on a pilot basis, that is specifically rooting this
out, because what we're finding when we drill down is if you go
two and three layers of holding companies, all of a sudden
China, Inc., is the owner, and we have to start paying
attention to this, and we are.
Senator Reed. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Thank you very
much.
Just let me raise an issue that we've talked about before,
Mr. Secretary, and this is one that is not exclusive to the
Navy, but important, and that is in Newport. The Navy base is a
key asset of not just the Navy, but national security with the
War College and everything else. But it's also been a way in
which we've been able to support Coast Guard activities, and
it's been a collaborative effort. And again, with the help of
the chairman, we've been supporting NOAA's (National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration) activities in terms of planning
to provide a basically new pier operation there that could be
used by the Navy in times of need, but also something that
would add again quality and capacity to the base. And again I
would like your help and support as we go forward, if we could.
Secretary Spencer. Most definitely, Senator. We talked
about this. The logistics of incorporating a whole-of-
government solution, shall we say, we're totally open to that.
It goes to speak to, if I could use this as a moment to keeping
our infrastructure in place, that infrastructure really is a
key component of readiness.
Senator Reed. Thank you. Now, my real concern is about
investment in certain athletic fields in the State of Maryland,
but I will not push that issue. Thank you.
HYPERSONIC WEAPONS
Senator Shelby. I'll direct this question to the admiral
and to you, too, Mr. Secretary. I don't know what you can get
into here in this committee, but in the area of super
development and deployment of hypersonic weapons, our
adversaries or would-be adversaries, maybe our competitors in
the world, are certainly developing a strong weapons system in
the area of hypersonic.
Admiral Richardson, are we still on the cutting edge? Are
we trying to catch up? Or do you feel fairly good about that?
Because they could be a huge threat to our fleets, could they
not?
Admiral Richardson. Mr. Chairman, you've got that exactly
right, and I don't get paid to feel good about anything, and so
I approach it all with a sense of urgency. We're moving out
urgently in the area of hypersonics. The Navy is going to be
appointed the lead--has been appointed the lead service to lead
the Department's effort in hypersonics. We look forward to
following through, laying in the investment of the program to--
--
Senator Shelby. Should we get into that program a little
bit in a classified area?
Admiral Richardson. I look forward to giving you a brief on
that; yes, sir.
Senator Shelby. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Spencer. If I could put a punctuation on that,
Mr. Chairman, as Secretary Mattis says, too, the service
secretaries were not paid to be patient. Hypersonics is one of
the 10 bins that Mike Griffin and RD&A (Research, Development
and Acquisition) are totally focused on. As the admiral just
said, we are the lead in this thing, but the three--Dr. Esper
and Dr. Wilson and I speak about this with some regularity on
how we can combine our dollars and do the fastest, best based
research going forward, and then take each weapon to each
service.
Senator Shelby. Was that what Mr. Putin was referring to
when he was talking about all the advanced weapons and what
they could do to our shield and so forth? Was he alluding maybe
or maybe not to hypersonic weapons or what? What do you think?
I know it's speculation.
Secretary Spencer. Speculation is yes, sir.
Senator Shelby. Okay. Admiral Richardson, do you agree?
Admiral Richardson. It's difficult. With cartoon drawings
and everything else, it was difficult to figure out----
Senator Shelby. Thank you.
Admiral Richardson [continuing]. But I think we've got that
situation covered; yes, sir.
Senator Shelby. Thank you very much.
Senator Murkowski.
ARCTIC ISSUES
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I
want to thank you for the hearing today.
Gentlemen, thank you for your leadership.
I want to talk about Arctic and Arctic issues. It might
have a little bit to do with the Chairman's favorite subject
when we discuss appropriations, and that's icebreakers and the
need for them.
Let me start with you, Admiral. Just the importance of
working with our partners and our allies as we project power in
the Arctic. In November, NATO (North Atlantic Treaty
Organization) Secretary-General Stoltenberg announced plans to
create an Atlantic Command, which will cover the Arctic. Do you
think that this counterbalances Russia's Joint Artic Command?
Admiral Richardson. Ma'am, there is no question that with
the dynamism in the Arctic, the receding ice cap, the opening
of strategic waterways, the uncovering of continental shelves
with their attendant resources, that there is an increasing
strategic urgency in the Arctic. That effort plus the efforts
that we're working with the Coast Guard, including their
effort, the Coast Guard's effort, to get started again building
icebreakers are all part of us addressing this emergent
strategic opening.
Senator Murkowski. Well, I appreciate your focus on it and
recognizing that as we deal with an area that has really for
some kind of been off the map, off of people's radar screen,
that we recognize that in order to play, we've got to have the
requisite infrastructure, and infrastructure includes, most
specifically, the icebreakers. It's my understanding that NATO
inventories on icebreakers include one for the U.S., eight in
Canada, with six Navy icebreakers planned, Norway has one. And
by 2022, NATO is going to be looking at a total of 16
icebreakers while Russia has close to 50. Canada is obviously
moving ahead with procurement on a much larger scale. But you
mentioned the connect, with working with the Coast Guard in
producing dedicated icebreakers. But I'm looking at this and
saying one icebreaker does not a fleet make. And we recognize
that the Strategy calls for six. But do you think that we
should be more aggressive in this area, perhaps following
Canada's lead in procuring icebreakers, not only for the Coast
Guard, but also dedicated icebreakers for the naval fleet?
Admiral Richardson. Ma'am, it's a timely question regarding
activity in the Arctic because we just rolled out this year's
ICEX (Ice Exercise).
Senator Murkowski. Right.
Admiral Richardson. We've been dedicated to going up there
with our submarine force every other year for decades now. This
time we went up with two U.S. submarines and a British
submarine. And so we--it has not been off our radar I guess is
my bottom line.
With respect to the icebreakers, that is a historic and
very well-defined Coast Guard mission. The Navy looks forward
to supporting the Coast Guard in every way to build the number
of icebreakers that we need.
Senator Murkowski. Well, know that I'm going to continue to
be aggressive in my push for not just one, but for meeting the
needs that we have as an Arctic nation.
EXERCISE NORTHERN EDGE
Secretary Spencer, I want to talk about Northern Edge, the
exercise in Alaska. It's obviously a very important exercise
for the military and for the communities, the coastal
communities that support it. Thank you for the outreach that
the Navy played last year around the gulf after the 2017
exercise to communicate with the affected communities to give a
little bit of a debrief and to really have that public
engagement.
As you know, I've been kind of outspoken on behalf of these
communities in urging a greater openness. One of my big
concerns about the exercises in the past has been the potential
for impact on our fisheries. This is our number private
employer. Making sure that we have good, strong, sustainable
fisheries is key.
The decision to do the 2017 exercise in May caused a lot of
consternation among the fishing fleet concerned about impact to
the salmon migration, given the timing. We've got 2019 that is
in the planning. And what I would ask of you is that you engage
with communities around the Gulf of Alaska to collaboratively
determine a time for the exercises to take place that will have
the least possible risk for negative effect and conflict with
the fisheries. So I would ask for your commitment to work with
my office, to work with the impacted communities, to ensure
that the concerns that the fishing communities have are
addressed before we finalize a date for the next Northern Edge.
Secretary Spencer. Senator, you have my commitment, and as
you know, the last cycle, we did have good communications. We
are acutely aware of our responsibility as a Navy, doing our
training both environmentally and community-wise. You will see
that we had the conversations that no more SINKEX (Sink
Exercise) and minimal use, especially in certain grounds of
explosives. We are talking, but this is a fine example. We look
forward to going forward and making sure that all communities
have input and we balance out the outcome.
Senator Murkowski. Good. Well, I appreciate that. I look
forward to working with you. Know that Alaskans are very proud
of the fact that we have superlative training areas in the air,
on the land, and in the sea, but making sure that we have good
strong relationships with our military as you move forward in
these is I think key to the ongoing goodwill that is created on
both sides.
Secretary Spencer. Sustainability is our key.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Shelby. Senator Hoeven.
Senator Hoeven. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'd like to thank all three of our witnesses for being here
today and for your service to our country.
NUCLEAR POSTURE
And Mr. Secretary, to you or to the Chief of Naval
Operations, how long will it take for the Navy to integrate a
low-yield warhead into the Trident ballistic missile, as
envisioned in the most recent Nuclear Posture Review?
Secretary Spencer. Senator, if you look at how we're going
to get to a low-yield path, you have the W76-1 is our prime. We
believe there is an ability to--a path off of that with a -2
model that would be an immediate path to a low-yield. And then
we also have to put money in PB18--I beg your pardon, 19--to
look forward to an outward-looking weapon to do the exact same
thing. So we have a near-term fix and long-term research.
Senator Hoeven. Are you on your schedule?
Secretary Spencer. That I'll get back to you, sir.
Admiral Richardson. We're just getting started, sir.
Secretary Spencer. Yes.
Admiral Richardson. The Nuclear Posture Review just came
out. So by definition, yes, starting line, and we'll look
forward to staying----
Senator Hoeven. So when you look at the 2018 and 2019
budgets, you realistically feel that you're--you'll be on the
schedule you've at least charted at this point?
Admiral Richardson. We'll deliver this thing on the
schedule the Nation needs; yes, sir.
Senator Hoeven. And how does that timing sync with the
Columbia-class going from the Ohio boomers to the Columbia-
class? Or will this update beyond the Ohio's or will it await
the Columbia-class?
Admiral Richardson. We anticipate that this will be used on
the current Trident-class, Ohio-class submarine, and they will
also transition to Columbia-class.
Senator Hoeven. How about are there synergies? Because the
Air Force is doing the same thing, it's upgrading its ballistic
missile fleet long-range standoff, as you're aware, as well as
upgrades to the Minuteman III. Are there synergies in the
programs both in terms of, for example, the LRSO (Long Range
Stand Off) in the Air Force case, and ICBM (intercontinental
ballistic missile) versus the SLBM (submarine-launched
ballistic missile) and the upgrades to the missile----
Admiral Richardson. Yes, sir. Senator, as you know, we've
sort of time-phased the upgrade to the D5 missile program so
that we don't create a gigantic funding mountain trying to
upgrade everything at once. And so following the Columbia-class
introduction into the fleet, that's when we'll address the
upgrades to the D5. I think there are tremendous opportunities
for commonality between the two services as we do that.
Senator Hoeven. Well, that's what I'm wondering. In terms
of the nuclear triad, the bombers, ICBMs, you know, part of
that's working together to maintain that triad. As we do these
upgrades, which are expensive and take time, but which we need
to do, and we need to bring in on the timelines we talk about
so we stay ahead of any defensive systems, you know, is there
an active effort to synchronize and share research, share
costs, and so forth, and make sure we hit these timelines that
we've laid out both in terms of funding and getting the
programs done?
Secretary Spencer. Senator, most definitely. If you look at
the arrival of Mike Griffin at DOD (Department of Defense), one
of his charges is to align the services to make sure that R&D
and S&T dollars are being spent to the priorities of the
National Defense Strategy. We're binning those already. The
dollars for this are aligned.
What you're seeing also is the services now communicating
quite rapidly amongst themselves when it comes to S&T and R&D
dollars to ensure that we are aligning the dollars in the most
effective, responsible manner.
Senator Hoeven. Yes, again, doing that with programs like
the F-35 and so forth, it seems to me we need to be looking to
do the same thing.
Secretary Spencer. Most definitely.
Senator Hoeven. And again I want to commend you both on the
operation in Syria. Unbelievable professionalism and I just
can't say enough how much we appreciate it and commend you, and
the men and women obviously in uniform carrying it out.
Unbelievable.
Admiral Richardson. It's really them that did it, sir. It's
the--those men and women deployed around the world.
Senator Hoeven. Absolutely.
Admiral Richardson. That's what they do.
Senator Hoeven. Absolutely. And so we need to continue to
make sure they have the technology to stay ahead of our
adversaries.
MILITARY MANPOWER
General Neller, manpower levels. Talk about where you
feel--talk about, do we have enough manpower in the Marine
Corps and are we able to recruit to it? Just give me your sense
of that.
General Neller. The answer, Senator, is yes and yes. I'll
take recruiting. We've been--our recruiters work really, really
hard, and we're running 99.9 percent high school grads. We're
in the highest categories. We start each month, even in the--
the hardest time to recruit is in the winter. Now as we get
into June, we'll start, you know, looking if people are going
to be prospective high school seniors, and we're shipping
people that have been in the delayed entry program. So we never
take that for granted, just like we never take making Marines
for granted at the recruit depots.
As far as the size of the Marine Corps, a couple of years
ago, we were looking at going to 182 or possibly lower. This
budget that we've been afforded allows us to go to 186.1. I
would like to get our dep-to-dwell down, but I'm more concerned
now that we have the right capabilities within the 186. The
Marine Corps we're going to see in the future is going to be a
little bit older. We've always been the youngest force, running
about 62 percent of the Marine Corps 25 years old or less, but
the capabilities we need in the future are going to be
individuals that have gone to school for a while, have had more
extensive training in the areas of electronic warfare, cyber,
information ops. So advising, there are a number of things that
we have ongoing that are going to make the Marine Corps a
little bit older and make us a little bit more expensive.
So we don't need right now more infantry battalions, we
need these other capabilities. So I am focused right now on
modernizing the force that we have and getting ready for the
future fight and making sure that we have people trained to
operate the capabilities we're going to need, not just
tomorrow, but 5, 10 years from now. So I think we're in a good
place.
Senator Hoeven. Thank you.
And again thank you to the men and women in uniform. Just
amazing what they do for us around the globe.
Thank you very much.
Senator Shelby. Senator Baldwin.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
LITTORAL COMBAT SHIP
Secretary Spencer, I'd like to discuss the littoral combat
ship, both in the terms of the fiscal year 2019 budget request
of only one ship and in terms of the fiscal year 2018 and 2019
Acquisition Strategy.
First I'd like to say that I really appreciate your taking
the time to have a couple of recent conversations about these
issues and our shared belief in the importance of our
shipbuilding industrial base. It's the industrial base,
specifically the LCS shipyard in my home State of Wisconsin,
that I'm concerned will be hurt by this budget request and the
Acquisition Strategy, neither of which meet the standards set
by President Trump to support U.S. manufacturing and the
American workers and build a 355-ship Navy.
Navy officials have consistently noted the importance of
avoided--avoiding a production gap and layoffs at the LCS
shipyards as the Navy transitions to the frigate. Admiral
Neagley testified last year that three LCS ships per year is
the optimal number of ships to maintain the workforce and
maximize efficiency at the shipyards. And last month, Assistant
Secretary Geurts said that, ``obviously not operating at
optimal production rates will cause some concerns to workers
and we'll have to spin that workforce back up as soon as we
make that transition.''
Put simply, one LCS in fiscal year 2019 will result in
shipyard layoffs, and that's a highly skilled workforce that
can't simply be spun back up. On the contrary, two LCSs in
fiscal year 2019, one shipped to each yard, will result in the
minimum sustaining rate needed to maintain the workforce and
effectively compete for the frigate, competition which is
needed to ensure the best value to the Navy and to our
taxpayers.
Similarly, I am concerned that the Navy's fiscal year 2018
and 2019 Acquisition Strategy, which is based on a lowest price
competition, and which we talked extensively about, would harm
the Wisconsin shipyard because it fails to consider the unique
capabilities, cost structures, and workforces of each LCS
variant. Indeed, for complex defense programs like LCS where
innovation and capability are prized, lowest priced contracting
methods are inappropriate because they fail to provide the best
value to the Navy.
So, Mr. Secretary, will you ensure that the Navy's LCS
acquisition strategy, number one, follows an equitable and best
value approach; number two, takes into account the differences
between the LCS variants regarding capabilities, service life,
and total life-cycle cost; and three, considers the negative
impacts of potential workforce layoffs to the Navy and
industry?
And as I noted in my recent letter to you, allow me to
preface your response with my belief that the Saudi ships that
we discussed, which cannot be accelerated without injecting
unacceptable risk into the program, are not, in my opinion, a
substitute for LCS, and that the previous ship backlog at
Marinette yard is now clear and therefore, will also not
provide the sufficient work for the shipyard.
LITTORAL COMBAT SHIP
Secretary Spencer. Senator, I appreciate your comments.
Your first three requirements of me I can agree to because we
do that across contracts no matter what.
When it comes to price and value, I do want to address
that. We have an amazing working force out there at all our
shipyards, and they are owned by companies. And I believe that
when I talk about the partnership of our suppliers, everybody
has to get on board. I would say there is probably room at the
owner of--of the LCS operation up there to be competitive, and
they should sit down with us and address those abilities to
become competitive.
We will watch everything we can do to make sure that the
workers--that the skilled workers we have do have work. While I
say that, we are not in it for corporate welfare, to be very
frank with you, and everybody has to get on board with the
program, both the suppliers and the Department of Defense, and
we will work forward in earnest to attain that goal.
Senator Baldwin. Well, just as a quick follow-up to that,
obviously, we want the greatest efficiencies we can extract and
build in, but I hope you acknowledge that there are differences
between the variants in terms of their capabilities, their
service life, and total life-cycle costs, and I hope----
Secretary Spencer. I totally agree with that.
Senator Baldwin. Okay.
Secretary Spencer. I totally agree with that. My addressing
is not the operation of the ship at all. I'm addressing our
suppliers' management.
Senator Shelby. Senator Daines.
Senator Daines. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, gentlemen, for appearing before this committee
today.
Montana is proud to claim one of the highest per capita
rates in military service in the Nation. As the son of a Marine
myself, I'm not a Marine, General, but I was raised by one. I'm
mindful of those serving abroad on the seven seas and around
the world.
In particular, I want to recognize the sailors and the
Marines who train at Montana's two Navy Operational Reserve
Centers in Billings as well as Helena, supporting worldwide
missions while also pursuing careers, raising families, and
being leaders in their communities. Thank you for your
continued service to them as well as to our Nation.
CHINESE TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCES
I recently returned from a trip to China. I take a trip
there every year. I brought along four other Senators with me
here 3 weeks ago. We met with industry leaders across China. We
were in Shenzhen, Hangzhou, Beijing, and Shenyang, in fact,
went down to Dandong, and had a shot across the Yalu River
there. And my father--after we left China, I was able to text
my dad in South Korea. My dad just reminded me about the
tremendous price that was paid there and about some great
Marines as well as other members that lost their lives.
But we were really in an innovation deep dive while we were
there in China. As we can see, the Chinese are leaning forward
in advanced technology to gain momentum ahead of others. Their
decision cycle between development and production is faster,
frankly, than what the DOD is able to do. They are now rivals
in artificial intelligence, in quantum computing, in
biotechnology. Having spent 28 years in business, 12 years in
the cloud computing industry, the innovation ecosystem that
they are building right now as we speak is something that I
hope we open our eyes to. I know you all see that, but I
believe complacency is one of our greatest challenges right now
in our Nation regarding the potential, not only where they're
at today, but where they will be here in the not too distant
future.
So this is a question for the panel. How is the Department
of the Navy keeping pace to stay ahead in these technological
advances that we see? And what can we in Congress do to help
you in that endeavor?
Secretary Spencer. Senator, those are great observations.
Let me preface it by saying besides the comments I made about
OCEA, the Office of Commercial and Economic Activity, that the
DOD has underway to look at China's impact on the Department of
Defense and Navy when it comes to production, I can tell you
that complacency starts at our country level. The education
being derived by Chinese from our own educational institutions
and then retreating back to China, their wanton disregard for
appreciation of intellectual property, all has to be taken into
account because we are at competition with them, hand and foot
competition.
That being said, what are we doing? If you look at what
we're doing as far as rapid prototyping, our abilities to sit
down and focus and align our research and development and S&T
dollars that coordinate to the support of the National Defense
Strategy, it's becoming much more focused. The dollars are
being aligned for a greater output and a more efficient output
and a speedier output. That is how I would like to frame the
answer. And I turn it over to the CNO and the General.
Admiral Richardson. Senator, thanks. I'll just pick up
where the Secretary left off. Our budget request includes a
request for what we call accelerated acquisition programs, and
these are programs and unmanned programs in directed energy, a
number of programs, where we have put them on a fast lane. And
I would really advocate the money is moving faster, obligations
are faster than traditionally done because we are speeding this
up. We are--you know, we are trying to fight that sense of
complacency. We are moving out with a sense of urgency. We're
looking at more mature products and prototyping than we have
historically done. So I would--I would really ask for the
committee's support for these programs as we move forward. This
is what's going to allow us to compete at speed.
BUDGET STABILITY
Senator Daines. Yes, and I'll let the General have the next
comment, but I remember when we were in the race in our
startup, and we grew to a large business around the world, but
our competitive differential was we could run faster than
anybody else. It was about speed in the innovation cycle no
doubt.
Admiral Richardson. That's the key.
Senator Daines. Yes.
Admiral Richardson. That's the key.
Senator Daines. General.
General Neller. Senator, I, like you, we've been watching
this for years.
I assure you that there is no complacency within your
Marine Corps or your Navy on what's going on. They're--they're
the pacing threat. The National Defense Strategy tells the
naval force that, not at the exception of the other potential
threats out there, but that's the pacing threat.
So I think to go faster, we all want to go faster, the one
thing, I hate to say that funding not just the quantity, but
consistent, sustainable, plannable funding is going to allow us
to go faster because if someone is going to do business with
us, we know that the commercial world is now the source of
innovation as opposed to the government, but they've got to be
able to work with us, and we've got to be able to say that we
can provide resources to them. And just like we need our--our
suppliers out there to know that there's going to be a
business, and if we start and stop, CR (continuing resolution),
no CR, they've got to feed their families, they've got to pay
their payroll.
The other thing I would say is that we're in competition
not just technologically, but we're in competition politically
and policy and for influence around the world. We should always
be aware of human rights and the actions of other nations, but
we need to make it easy--easier for others to be our friend. We
need to be the country of choice for partnership in not just
the Pacific region, the Indo-Pacific region, but around the
world. And yes, we should hold those countries accountable, but
we can't--on a mil-to-mil basis, we can't have generations of
military officers like we've had in places like Pakistan and
Indonesia, for good and valid reasons, not be able to come to
our schools, not to be able to engage with us, not to come to
this country and become our partners and develop those
relationships and see what--the way it's supposed to work.
Senator Daines. Thank you for the comments.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your new leadership in the
Appropriations Committee. As we can hear from our distinguished
panelists, we can play a significant role here through your
leadership and trying to get away from the CR nonsense and
getting back to regular work, which I know you are trying
desperately to move us in that direction.
Voice. Hear, hear.
Senator Shelby. Senator Murray.
MILITARY SPOUSE EMPLOYMENT
Senator Murray. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. And let
me just start by saying employment and opportunities for
spouses of our military is incredibly important. A sailor or a
Marine's readiness depends on their family being well situated
as much as it does to their own training. We know that military
spouses are unemployed or underemployed at rates that are much
higher than their civilian counterparts and face the additional
obstacles of having to relocate frequently, transferring
licenses and credentials, and it's very difficult. I believe we
can't afford to lose good people who want to serve, but get out
because their spouse can't find work, and staying in doesn't
make financial sense to them.
Perhaps most concerning, I heard recently from military
spouses in my home State of Washington about challenges they
look for in facing employment, and they told me that they
stopped putting on-base addresses or that they are military
spouses actually on their resume, they just stopped doing it,
because employers wouldn't call them back if they knew the
spouse was military affiliated.
So my question to you today, Admiral Richardson, General
Neller, are you working with the private sector to overcome
that type of bias and ensure that they see military spouses as
an asset?
And Admiral Richardson, I'll start with you.
Admiral Richardson. Ma'am, I'll be happy to address that. I
signed out just recently a framework to get after increasing
the strength and support to our families. And the bottom line
of that framework is that a stronger family equals a stronger
fleet, just as you said. And so we're looking at ways that the
Navy can support the families directly, which includes going
out to the private sector, the communities in which we reside,
our neighbors, and look for employment opportunities. And there
are a number of also good news stories out there of those
employers that are opening their doors to the amazing talent
that we have in our families and our spouses.
Senator Murray. Okay. Well, I think we have to take
specific direction on this.
And General, let me ask you what you're doing.
General Neller. Last week, Senator, Senator Tillis and
Senator Kaine had a meeting with some of our senior spouses to
talk about this very issue. And I think there's some
legislation being considered to at least emphasize to the
civilian sector the talent and capability that are there with
the servicemembers' spouses.
So it's a difficult problem. And you're right, we recruit
the individual, we retain the family. So--and the demographics
are different than they were when I joined 40 years ago. So we
are looking at a number of things, to include keeping people
someplace longer. I'm concerned we have a lot of families that
don't move because the spouse has a job and they've got a
house, and then we end up with a lot of geographical bachelors
or bachelorettes around the service, which is not good because
you want families to stay together.
So it's a complicated problem. We are looking forward to
this legislation. A lot of our bases and stations are overseas,
and their credentials and the things that they bring with them
are not recognized by the foreign government. A lot of the
places are in more or less populated areas, so the job
opportunities just aren't there. But we do everything we can on
bases and stations to try to afford spouses employment
opportunities, at least on the base. If they're a government
employee, they can transfer that. If they come overseas or they
move, they get certain exceptions to hiring. But it is a
problem and we're aware of it, and we appreciate the Senate,
Senator Tillis and Senator Kaine, stepping up to try to help us
find a solution.
Senator Murray. Okay, good. I'm happy to work with them,
and----
Secretary Spencer. Senator, if I could just weigh in
because I'm living this. This is an issue my wife has taken on
while taking her role as wife of the Secretary of the Navy. But
a month--I believe it was last month, you might be aware that
the three service secretaries signed out a letter to all the
Governors in the country when they were here for their retreat
addressing this exact issue. And therein lies some of the
issues because they are State and local issues, not so much
Federal issues.
That being said, I would actually like to give a shout-out
to the State of New Mexico, where the Governor there has taken
this issue by the horns and is addressing it spot on with
action and goals.
Senator Murray. With the private sector.
Secretary Spencer. With the private sector, exactly.
Senator Murray. Right. I appreciate the on-base jobs, but
in many of our communities, it's the off-base jobs that count.
And if they don't want to write that they're a military spouse
on their resume that is pretty telling. So, all right, we look
forward to working with all of you on that.
GROUND WATER CONTAMINATION
I also wanted to ask, Secretary Spencer, in my home State
of Washington, there was a significant amount of groundwater
contamination as a result of military use of firefighting foam.
I know you know the issue well. Recently, the Navy agreed to
install a filtration system for the town of Coupeville to make
sure they have safe drinking water, but I hear a lot from my
constituents who are very concerned about their health. This
committee provided more than 42 million to the Navy for cleanup
of those chemicals and to make sure there is safe drinking
water, which is in addition to tens of millions to others, the
other services, and to OSD (Office of the Secretary of Defense)
for cleanup and research.
I just want to really impress on you it is imperative the
Navy acts quickly and decisively. And can you just tell us what
your next steps are in addressing this contamination?
Secretary Spencer. Senator, we've made the statement, and
we mean it, that the Navy takes its responsibilities, both for
protection of this country and our responsibilities for the
environment, very, very seriously. It has to be sustainable for
us to be impactful going forward.
I'm aware of the issue that you're talking about. We are a
neighbor, we remain to be a neighbor, and we're a responsible
neighbor. We are putting forth the best that we can do with the
sciences that we know are available now. And I can commit to
you that that is how we're going to go going forward.
Senator Murray. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I have other questions. I will submit them
for the record. And I appreciate it very much.
Senator Shelby. Without objection.
TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER
Mr. Secretary, you alluded to our competition with China,
and I think you're spot on, but it seems to me that there has
been, say, in the last 30, 35 years, a huge transfer of
technology, that is, engineering and science, and the ability
to--and manufacturing and everything that goes with that, from
the west, especially us, but Europe, too, to China, that in
modern history no one has ever seen. So they've not only taken
a few steps, as you've mentioned, big steps, to educate some of
their best and brightest, having been doing it nearly 40 years,
100- and maybe 200,000 a year in U.S., and they're going back.
That's going to--it's already posing a threat to us
economically. It could pose a threat to us down the road
militarily, could it not?
Secretary Spencer. Yes, sir.
Senator Shelby. And is that one of your concerns, and it
better be a wakeup call for all of us?
Secretary Spencer. It is a tremendous concern, Senator, and
it's not just within the DOD, I think it's in the corporate
boardrooms around America.
Senator Shelby. Yes. Well, you referenced buying companies
and so forth. And of course, we have the CFIUS (Committee on
Foreign Investment in the United States) issue we're familiar
with on another life in the Banking Committee, I've worked on
that.
I think it's very important for us not to sell things or
help other companies, foreign companies, control things that we
deem are important to our national security. Do you agree with
that?
Secretary Spencer. I could not agree more, Senator.
Senator Shelby. Do you agree with that, Admiral?
Admiral Richardson. I do; yes, sir.
Senator Shelby. General.
General Neller. Yes, Senator.
Senator Shelby. Thank you.
Senator Baldwin, do you have any other questions?
JOINT LIGHT TACTICAL VEHICLE
Senator Baldwin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Neller, you've previously commented that you want
to field the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle as quickly as
possible. Bless you. I've also seen reports that the Marine
Corps may be looking to increase the JLTV acquisition objective
from 5,500 vehicles to more than 9,000. Given this posture,
which I support, I'm concerned that the President's last two
budget requests don't seem to support that same goal. For
example, the fiscal year 2019 budget request seeks to buy 214
fewer JLTVs than was anticipated in the fiscal year 2018
request.
Similarly, the fiscal year 2018 budget requested only 527
vehicles when the prior year budget had planned for more than
1,150. If JLTV procurement gets pushed to the right, the
program will have to compete for resources with future larger
scale modernization programs, which would probably put
increasing--incredible pressure actually on the Marine Corps
budget.
General Neller, could you comment and do you think
restoring 214 JLTVs to your fiscal year 2019 acquisition plans
would help the Marine Corps fielding schedule stay on track?
General Neller. Senator, as we discussed before, we want to
field this vehicle as quick as we can. And the acquisition
objective originally was 5,500, and somewhere now it's around
9,000. And so it's a good vehicle. We want to get it. Our
Humvees are old and need to be replaced. The drawdown or the
reduction of 214 vehicles in the budgets was based on other
trades where we just simply put other things at a higher
priority. The total price of those vehicles is about $60, $65
million.
So if that money were restored, obviously, we would want to
do that. But we had to make some trades on things that we
thought were of higher priority, like long-range artillery,
rockets, and things like that, and so that's--that's where we
ended up. It has nothing to do with us not wanting to field
that vehicle faster.
Senator Baldwin. All right. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
Senator Shelby. This hearing and subcommittee will
reconvene on April the 26th at 10:00 a.m. to receive testimony
on the Defense Health Program. Senators that were not here and
some that were here may submit additional questions for the
record, and we would hope you would answer within 30 days of
receiving them.
[The following questions were not asked at the hearing, but
were submitted to the Department for response subsequent to the
hearing:]
Questions Submitted to Hon. Richard V. Spencer
Questions Submitted by Senator Susan M. Collins
navy unfunded priorities list--shipyard investment acceleration
Question. The Navy's Unfunded Priorities List includes an
additional $176 million for ``Shipyard Investment Acceleration'' to
speed procurement of industrial plant equipment at the public
shipyards, which is badly needed. How would this additional funding aid
in the Navy's shipyard modernization efforts and increase productivity
at the yards even further?
Answer. The Navy estimates that additional fiscal year 2019 funding
of $176 million will shorten the capital equipment modernization period
by 1 year. Attached is a list of Capital Investment Program Other
Procurement Navy requirements that can be accelerated into fiscal year
2019. This list reflects priorities documented in Appendix H of the
Navy's February 2018 Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization Plan and only
includes out-year projects that are mature enough to accelerate into
fiscal year 2019. Priorities are based on the formalized evaluation of
each project including return on investment and improvement to depot
maintenance throughput.
[The list follows:]
Question Submitted by Senator Susan M. Collins
shipyard apprenticeship programs
Question. Apprenticeship programs are crucial in helping our
workforce develop the highly technical skills, including nuclear, to
sustain our fleet. Portsmouth Naval Shipyard uses the Trades
Apprenticeship Program and the Worker Skills Progression Program (WSPP)
to train applicants in various skilled trades. The Shipyard has a
Memorandum of Understanding with York County Community College and
Great Bay Community College, providing employees the opportunity to
earn credits towards associate's degrees at both institutions. I
understand that these apprenticeship programs are very important to the
other three public shipyards as well. How can the Navy and Congress
better support these programs to ensure that we are fully developing
and supporting our skilled workforce?
Answer. Development of our workforce is crucial to ensuring we have
the highly technical skills required to sustain our fleet. Challenges
and recommendations for addressing the them include:
--Current hiring process for apprentices takes an average of 6-8
months and results in considerable attrition of high quality
candidates. Examples for causes of delays include the Advanced
Fingerprint Report requirement (Federal Bureau of
Investigation), security clearance processing (Office of
Personnel Management), under staffing of Naval Health Clinics
delaying physical examinations and base access requirements.
Recommendation: The Navy will work to streamline processes that are
under our control. Request congressional support for
streamlining hiring processes to allow for expedited
recruitment, selection and onboarding of highly qualified
candidates while meeting all administrative requirements.
--Trade jobs and apprenticeships are not widely recognized as a
viable post-secondary pathway to meaningful and lucrative
careers. Additionally, current efforts at expanding
apprenticeships are geared towards the private sector.
Recommendation: Request congressional support to revitalize skilled
trades training in secondary schools (through shop classes and
vocational training) so students and parents see trades and
apprenticeships as a viable alternative to pursuing college
degrees. Request congressional support for funding the
expansion of apprenticeship programs in the public sector as
well as the private sector.
--Difficulty in hiring qualified instructors with technical
experience to teach trades and other technical topics.
Recommendation: Request congressional support for modifications to
hiring laws to allow direct transition of military journey man
level workers and other qualified candidates into shipyard
instructor programs to create pathways for military technicians
to transition to GS-11 instructor positions.
--Many of our apprentices are young parents with child care issues.
Recommendation: Request congressional support to provide funding so
that communities have better child care options, including
earlier start times, infant care and later closing times.
--Increase outreach and education promoting science, technology,
engineering and math (STEM).
Recommendation: Request congressional support for Federal grants
for STEM programs.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Brian Schatz
Question. There is strong support from PACOM and PACFLT for UH's
application to establish a Navy ROTC program. It makes good sense and
would let the Navy harness Hawaii's diversity, including the unique
cultural and language skills these cadets would bring to the fleet. But
we have heard mixed reasons for why the Navy cannot do this--from a
lack of funding, to a cap on the number of ROTC units that the Navy is
allotted at one time.
Can you please provide me a definitive answer about what the Navy
would need to support UH's Navy ROTC application?
Answer. We agree that University of Hawaii has high potential as a
NROTC unit, and we look forward to working with you on making it a
reality. Given our program's current excess capacity, it would be
essential to disestablish some under-performing units to better align
capacity with the true officer commissioning requirement, and to serve
as a funding offset for consideration of any new units. Toward that
end, we would request your assistance with gaining statutory relief
from the prohibition in recent Department of Defense Appropriations
Acts against planning for and executing Senior ROTC unit
disestablishments as a path for establishing a new unit at the
University of Hawaii.
Question. Can you explain the role of Navy civilians in achieving
your readiness recovery goals?
Answer. Civilians are vital in all areas of readiness recovery. To
improve the readiness of our ships and align the workforce to the
projected workload, we are adding nearly 1900 civilian Full-Time
Equivalents (FTEs) to our Naval Shipyards over fiscal years 2018 and
2019, continuing our ramp to 36,100 FTEs in the shipyards by fiscal
year 2020. This increase in the workforce, possessing the right talent,
will help us to meet scheduled ship maintenance, support additional
ships, and reduce the backlog that has accumulated from over a decade
of increased operational tempo. To support naval aviation readiness,
our 2019 budget request provides funding for an additional 258
civilians including artisans, engineers and logisticians at our Fleet
Readiness Centers (FRCs). This growth in the FRC workforce, building
off past budgets that added funding for civilians will increase the
throughput of aircraft and components, helping to restore aviation
readiness by getting more mission capable aircraft back to the
flightline and fleet sooner where they are needed to support both
training and operational demands. Training and retaining the new
workforce is critical to sustaining readiness improvements. It will
take time--historically 2 to 4 years--for the newly hired personnel to
develop the skill level necessary to drive the improvement in
productivity we need to achieve our goals. The Navy is exploring ways
to train and educate new workers to make them productive more quickly.
Question. Is there a link between years of directed reductions to
the Navy civilian workforce and the current state of readiness in the
Navy?
Answer. The link between directed reductions and readiness is less
about the overall numbers of civilian personnel and more about the loss
of talent and capability. The Department of the Navy maintains an
integrated workforce comprised of civilians, contractors, Sailors and
Marines with a mission to protect the American way of life. Skilled
civilians which include welders, engineers, scientists, information
technology and acquisition specialists--many with critical
certifications and advanced degrees--man our shipyards, monitor
situations across the globe, develop tomorrow's technological
advancements, and provide cyber support. Congressionally-mandated
reductions have resulted in highly trained personnel in these critical
occupations leaving the Department. On top of mandated reductions,
Government shutdowns and furloughs have discouraged potential employees
from seeking jobs in the Navy, creating holes in workforce continuity.
Knowledge and capability gaps increase the time required to get vital
assets repaired and operational.
Question. How can the Navy generate readiness for the force while
facing reductions to its civilian workforce?
Answer. The Navy continues implementing the 25 percent headquarters
reduction required by Congress and is committed to achieving a more
efficient and effective Department. More important than the overall
size of the workforce however, is the capability and talent that the
civilian workforce brings to the Navy and to the generation of force
readiness. The Navy continually reviews its requirements and carefully
manages its civilian workforce in order to support readiness and
efficiently and effectively achieve the Navy mission. The Navy will
continue to recruit superior talent and invest in long-term measures to
retain it. The fiscal year 2019 budget request funds the civilian work
force required to support the programmed force structure, meet
strategic guidance, and build the Navy the Nation Needs. It sustains
efforts in critical areas such as cyber defense, equipment maintenance,
logistical services at home and abroad, engineering services and
research and development at our labs and warfare centers to generate
technology that results in more capable and lethal equipment and weapon
systems. Where the Navy civilian workforce is growing amidst
Congressionally mandated reductions, increases are focused on those
areas that restore and improve readiness and increase the lethality,
capability, and capacity of our military force. To accomplish this, the
budget reflects civilian workforce growth in ship and aircraft
maintenance to address backlogs, meet scheduled maintenance and
increase throughput, growth in the warfare centers focused on
increasing our air, surface and undersea capabilities, and growth in
base operating support, fleet support, intelligence and cyber.
In order to recover readiness fully, the Navy must have the ability
to retain the best while recruiting new talent in an increasingly
competitive marketplace. The Navy's 2019 budget adds funding for
civilians in several key areas. To improve the readiness of our ships
and align the workforce to the workload, we are adding nearly 1900
civilians (2017-2019) to our public shipyards. To support naval
aviation readiness, we are adding over 250 artisans, engineers and
logisticians at our Fleet Readiness Centers to increase aircraft
throughput and numbers of mission-capable aircraft on the flightline.
At our warfare centers and labs, we are adding additional personnel to
support increased air, surface and undersea capabilities, and at our
installations, we are adding personnel to address security and incident
response at installations. This additional workforce, armed with the
right skills and training, is necessary to sustain readiness.
Question. Would the Navy's capability and lethality be improved if
you were able to grow the civilian workforce?
Answer. More important than the overall size of the civilian
workforce is the talent and capability that the workforce brings to the
Navy and to the execution of our mission. The Department of the Navy's
(DON) civilian workforce is essential to DON's mission and is directly
linked to the success of the Navy and Marine Corps team and the ability
to operate and fight decisively around the globe. DON civilians operate
across a broad spectrum of occupations from world-class researchers and
scientists that develop cutting-edge equipment and weapons, to those
that provide day-to-day technical, operational and management
capability to the Department. We are committed to preserving this
exceptionally capable and vital workforce, while carefully managing it
in order to ensure a more efficient and effective Department. The 2019
budget funds the civilian workforce required to support the programmed
Navy force structure, meet strategic guidance and build the Navy the
Nation Needs. Modest growth in the civilian workforce in the 2019
budget is focused on building a more capable and lethal force. At the
Navy's warfare centers, we are adding nearly 1300 civilian personnel to
support increased air, surface and undersea capabilities. Much of the
warfare center growth is focused on engineering and support of expanded
platforms including; the payload module added to all future VIRGINIA-
Class submarines; communication and weapons systems; enhanced
electronic warfare capabilities; and nuclear deterrence capabilities.
We are also adding 58 civilian personnel to accelerate and enhance
offensive and defensive cyberspace operations. At our installations, we
are adding 365 civilians to address security and incident response. We
are adding 190 fleet support personnel in order to expand operations in
the Pacific including standing up a Littoral Combat Ship squadron,
growth at the Naval Expeditionary Combat Enterprise and the Fleet
Maritime Operations Center. And finally, we are adding nearly 1900
civilians (2017-2019) to our public shipyard workforce and over 250
artisans, engineers and logisticians at our Fleet Readiness Centers in
order to reduce backlogs and increasing throughput to get our ships
back to the fleet on time and mission capable aircraft back to the
flightline.
______
Questions Submitted to Admiral John M. Richardson
Questions Submitted by Senator Jon Tester
sealift capabilities
Question. Are we exploring all options to re-capitalize our sealift
capability and get newer, younger, ships into the Ready Reserve Force?
Answer. Yes. The Report to Congress, Sealift That The Nation Needs,
submitted by the Secretary of the Navy on 2 March 2018, reflects a
three phased approach to the recapitalization of the sealift capacity
provided by the Ready Reserve Force (RRF). The plan is to extend the
service life of selected vessels, acquire used vessels from the
commercial market, and resource and implement a new construction
program.
Question. What can be done to get more U.S. built, and U.S. flag
vessels sailing and into the Maritime Security Program?
Answer. In coordination with the Maritime Administration,
considerations have been identified as ways to expand the numbers of
vessels in the Maritime Security Program (MSP). These considerations
include: increasing cargo preference requirements to improve the
competitiveness of U.S.-flag shipping, expand the U.S.-flag share of
trade through bi-lateral trade agreements, and reduce the costs of
operating ships under U.S. flag through other tax and regulatory
initiatives. Navy will continue to support MARAD initiatives to
strengthen MSP as these ships provide a major source of merchant
mariners that are utilized to crew surge sealift capability.
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
Senator Shelby. This committee is adjourned, recessed.
[Whereupon, at 11:30 a.m., Tuesday, April 24, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene at 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday, April 26.]