- REDUCING EMISSIONS WHILE DRIVING ECONOMIC GROWTH: INDUSTRY-LED INITIATIVES
[Senate Hearing 116-107]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-107
REDUCING EMISSIONS WHILE DRIVING ECONOMIC GROWTH: INDUSTRY-LED
INITIATIVES
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CLEAN AIR
AND NUCLEAR SAFETY
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
OCTOBER 17, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
___________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
38-868 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
[[Page (ii)]]
COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming, Chairman
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware,
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
Ranking Member
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE BRAUN, Indiana
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
RICHARD SHELBY, Alabama
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JONI ERNST, Iowa
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
Richard M. Russell, Majority Staff Director
Mary Frances Repko, Minority Staff Director
----------
Subcommittee on Clean Air and Nuclear Safety
MIKE BRAUN, Indiana, Chairman
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island,
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
Ranking Member
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
JONI ERNST, Iowa
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming (ex officio)
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware (ex
officio)
[[Page (iii)]]
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
OCTOBER 17, 2019
OPENING STATEMENTS
Braun, Hon. Mike, U.S. Senator from the State of Indiana.........
1
Whitehouse, Hon. Sheldon, U.S. Senator from the State of Rhode
Island.........................................................
3
Carper, Hon. Thomas R., U.S. Senator from the State of Delaware,
prepared statement.............................................
134
Inhofe, Hon. James M., U.S. Senator from the State of Oklahoma,
prepared statement.............................................
155
WITNESSES
Wilkinson, Todd, Policy Division Vice Chairman, National
Cattlemen's Beef Association...................................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
8
Responses to additional questions from Senator Braun.........
14
Macchiarola, Frank, Vice President of Downstream and Industry
Operations, American Petroleum Institute.......................
16
Prepared statement...........................................
18
Responses to additional questions from:
Senator Braun............................................
75
Senator Whitehouse.......................................
78
Durbin, Martin, President, Global Energy Institute, U.S. Chamber
of Commerce....................................................
82
Prepared statement...........................................
84
Responses to additional questions from:
Senator Braun............................................
91
Senator Whitehouse.......................................
91
Dutton, Andrea, Visiting Associate Professor, Department of
Geoscience, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Gainesville,
Florida........................................................
95
Prepared statement...........................................
97
Wilson, John, Vice President and Director of Corporate
Engagement, Calvert Research and Management....................
104
Prepared statement...........................................
106
Responses to additional questions from Senator Braun.........
110
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL
From Senator Braun:
Letters:
To Senators Braun and Whitehouse from the American Forest
& Paper Association, October 9, 2019...................
156
To Senators Braun and Whitehouse from the City of
Farmington, New Mexico, October 15, 2019...............
160
To Senators Braun and Whitehouse from the National
Audubon Society, October 16, 2019......................
162
To Senators Braun and Whitehouse from the Portland Cement
Association, October 17, 2019..........................
164
Enchant Energy San Juan Generating Station--Units 1 & 4,
CO2 Capture Pre-Feasibility Study. Final,
prepared by Sargent & Lundy, July 8, 2019..................
167
Pursuing Policies to Drive Economic Growth and Reduce
Emissions, The Heritage Foundation, October 16, 2019.......
207
From Senator Carper:
The Kigali Amendment is a Win for the Environment and the
U.S. Economy, U.S. Chamber of Commerce, May 8, 2018........
224
Testimony of Ross Eisenberg, Vice President of Energy and
Resources Policy, National Association of Manufacturers,
before the House Committee on Energy and Commerce
Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change, September
18, 2019...................................................
227
REDUCING EMISSIONS WHILE DRIVING ECONOMIC GROWTH: INDUSTRY-LED
INITIATIVES
----------
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 17, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Environment and Public Works,
Subcommittee on Clean Air and Nuclear Safety,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m. in
room 406, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Mike Braun
(Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Senators Braun, Whitehouse, Barrasso, Capito,
Ernst, and Carper.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE BRAUN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF INDIANA
Senator Braun. Good morning. I call this hearing to order.
Thanks to everyone for being here today.
We are meeting today to begin the important work of
examining our changing climate and its effects on producers of
American goods, services, and agriculture. Today, we will hear
testimony from experts on the innovative private sector led
initiatives in the U.S. that reduce air emissions while
promoting economic growth. We will begin with opening
statements and then hear from our panel of witnesses.
I will start here. During the month of August, I traveled
around the Hoosier State on my Summer Solutions tour. In the
first little over 9 weeks, I did visit all 92 counties and got
a real good reading of where Hoosiers are on issues related to
climate. Nearly every stop, we discussed the importance of
sustainability and the need to protect our environment.
As I have learned through visiting with Hoosiers over the
past 2 years, I have concluded the American people are paying
attention to these important conversations. You wouldn't know
it by watching the news, but we have all been thinking about
and investing in this problem for a long time. Everyone, that
is maybe except Washington, who has been too polarized for too
long to deal with much of anything, particularly our changing
climate.
Instead, American innovators and capital have been leading
the way, our manufacturing, agriculture, and generation sectors
have seen significant improvements from the voluntary adoption
of new, lower carbon corporate practices.
[[Page 2]]
According to the Energy Information Administration, U.S.
energy related CO2 emissions decreased nine-tenths
of a percent in 2017 alone. The American economy has been so
impressive at reducing emissions that, in 2018, BP noted in its
statistical review of world energy that the U.S. was the world
leader for reducing carbon emissions, prompting the American
Enterprise Institute to note that for the ninth time in this
century, the U.S. has had the largest decline in emissions in
the world. And we still need to do better.
In fact, in 2017, the U.S. Energy Information
Administration found U.S. emissions from energy sources hit
their lowest level in 25 years, while during those same 25
years, U.S. GDP more than doubled, and real median household
income rose by nearly 20 percent.
And yet, innovation continues. In September, Duke Energy, a
company which serves 7.2 million customers, announced an
ambitious new initiative, which would bring its carbon
emissions to net zero by 2050.
The world's largest retailer, Amazon, has announced its
plan to achieve net zero by 2040.
Last year, in an Indiana subsidiary of Nicor, a natural gas
utility that serves almost 4 million customers, announced a
Your Energy, Your Future plan. Under this initiative, Nicor
plans to cut 90 percent of its greenhouse gas emissions.
What is perhaps most impressive about changes made by
industry is that we have been able to accomplish significant
emissions reduction while not sacrificing the country's overall
economic competitiveness. But we must constantly remain
vigilant of the balance.
There is a real risk that in attempting to curb emissions,
American families, workers, and businesses will be hit with
rising prices, fees, and utility bills. It is our duty to
balance these two interests. Rather than dictate choices, we
should allow for the market to drive new ways to produce and
consume energy and goods more efficiently.
However, our national debate is deviated from this balance,
instead focusing on policies which would, without question,
severely limit consumer choice in many areas, from the type of
energy you should use to the kind of car or appliance you
should buy, to how much meat you should eat. In the case of the
Green New Deal, a complete central planning reorganization of
our economy, I believe the effect would be significant, and not
in the right direction.
It is one thing when you make these decisions for yourself.
It is another one when Washington forces its decisions upon
you.
Economic competitiveness would be the real cost of these
proposals, when ironically, if we really are going to solve our
environmental problems, we will need innovators to produce the
technologies to get us there, the hallmark of what has built
this country. This is why today's focus on private sector
investment has been so critical, what has been driving these
decisions and what the results have been.
I look forward to each of your testimonies as we continue
to consider these questions. And I draw the parallel of being
on the HELP Committee, where we are taking on the health care
industry, who I have solely blamed for the pickle we are in
with high
[[Page 3]]
health care costs, and have asked them to get with it, start
fixing yourselves. When 80 Senators weigh in, you should be
getting the message.
I have been impressed, in the energy sector, in what we are
going to talk about today, the interest within the industry of
being responsible in trying to help protect the environment.
Now I would like to recognize Ranking Member Senator
Whitehouse for his opening statement.
Senator.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF RHODE ISLAND
Senator Whitehouse. Let me start by thanking Senator Braun
for holding this. He is a terrific colleague to work with on
these issues. I think there is a real chance for progress in
the weeks and months ahead.
I will start my remarks by looking backward to 1986, when a
similar subcommittee of this Committee had 3 days of hearings
on climate change. After these hearings, six members of this
Committee, three Republicans and three Democrats, wrote to the
executive director of the now defunct Office of Technology
Assessment, and asked for a study of policy options to reduce
carbon pollution. They all wrote together that they were deeply
troubled by climate change and its implications for the human
and natural worlds. Deeply troubled, and implications for the
human and natural worlds being quotes from their letter, 33
years ago.
In the intervening decades, carbon pollution and global
temperature increase and warming and acidification of the
oceans and the experience of climate related events like
wildfires have all accelerated. The disastrous effects of
climate change are now plain for anyone who is looking to see.
Yet Congress has undertaken no serious legislation to address
our climate crisis.
Why is that? Because hundreds of millions of dollars are
spent by the fossil fuel industry to block climate action. Much
of this is spent through trade associations and front groups
that are controlled by the fossil fuel industry.
Two of these trade associations are present here today. The
watchdog group, Influence Map, identified the U.S. Chamber as
one of the two most obstructionist groups on climate policy.
API is not far behind.
There are signs of change at the Chamber, and at the
National Association of Manufacturers, the two tied for worst
climate obstructers in America. And even at API. I want to
express my appreciation to the Chamber for inviting me, of all
people, to speak to a Chamber gathering in New York City during
Climate Week, which I hope is a sign of good progress to be
made in the future.
I appreciate very much also that the Chairman and my
colleague from West Virginia are working with me to provide
Federal dollars for developing new technologies to reduce
industrial emissions. Our industrial emissions bill is a good
one. The Chamber and NAM are supporting it.
But what companies are doing voluntarily to reduce their
emissions won't come close to the reductions that we need. A
2018 study by America's Pledge totaled up the voluntary pledges
from compa
[[Page 4]]
nies and State and local government emissions reduction
commitments and found that they would only result in a 17
percent decline in carbon emissions by 2025, which is well
short of even the rather weak kneed Paris Agreement pledge of
28 percent. We actually need far larger reductions if we are to
hold warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius and avoid the very worst of
consequences.
Innovation is a beautiful thing. America specializes in it,
but it doesn't happen in a vacuum. Without Federal policies
such as a price on carbon, there is little incentive for
businesses to innovate. We have seen this principle proven out
over and over, whether for criteria air pollutants under the
Clean Air Act, or CFCs under the Montreal Protocol. Federal and
international policies provided the framework for businesses to
rely on and develop new technologies that reduced those
emissions.
Investors also recognize this. More than 200 major
investors with $6.5 trillion in assets under management
recently wrote to almost 50 blue chip companies that,
``Corporate commitments to embrace energy efficiency and set
greenhouse gas reduction goals are necessary and welcomed, but
to facilitate the deployment of capital at a necessary pace and
scale, a strong public policy framework is needed.''
More than 500 investors with over $35 trillion in assets
under management recently called on policymakers to put a
meaningful price on carbon emissions. The reason for this is,
of course, the well documented warnings which I have forwarded
to every single one of my Senate colleagues of a carbon asset
bubble crash and a coastal property values crash. Progress on
climate is increasingly seen as essential to successful
business models in the banking, investment, and agricultural
sectors.
To get that progress done, corporate America must ensure
that the trade associations to which they belong are not major
climate obstructionists. And I hope the Chamber and API are
getting the message.
If one message can come out of this hearing, it is that it
is well past time for corporate America to break the fossil
fuel industry's stranglehold on these trade associations, and
instead, demand the climate action that is needed to protect
our economy and their own business models.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Braun. Thank you, Senator.
I am pleased that we have a great panel here today. Our
witnesses come from a wide variety of backgrounds, and I am
looking forward to the different perspectives that will
facilitate our discussion today.
Our first witness today is Todd Wilkinson, who is co-owner
and operator of a commercial cow-calf operation in South
Dakota. He is also co-owner of Redstone Feeders, a family owned
cattle feeding and finishing operation, and a founding member
and current vice president of the South Dakota Cattlemen's
Foundation.
Mr. Wilkinson is here today in his capacity as policy
division vice chairman of the National Cattlemen's Beef
Association. Mr. Wilkinson has practiced law for more than 35
years, specializing in estate planning and agricultural law. He
is a graduate of
[[Page 5]]
Augustana College and the University of South Dakota Law
School.
Our next witness is Frank Macchiarola, the vice president
of downstream and industry operations at the American Petroleum
Institute, API. He joined API in January 2016, where he leads
association efforts on fuels, refining, marketing, and
downstream safety, security, and technology. Prior to joining
API, Mr. Macchiarola served as executive VP of government
affairs at America's Natural Gas Alliance. From 2004 to 2013,
he worked here in several senior staff positions in the U.S.
Senate, including staff director and counsel to the U.S. Senate
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources, and minority staff
director of the U.S. Senate Committee on HELP.
Mr. Macchiarola earned his BA from the College of Holy
Cross, and his J.D. from New York University School of Law.
Next in line will be Marty Durbin. Mr. Durbin is the
president of the Global Energy Institute at the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce. Previously, Mr. Durbin was the executive VP and chief
strategy officer at the American Petroleum Institute, and the
VP of Federal relations at the American Chemistry Council.
Earlier in his career, he served as a staffer for Senator
Alan Dixon, and for Congressman Rick Boucher. Mr. Durbin
received his bachelor's in government and politics from the
University of Maryland-College Park.
Fourth will be Dr. Andrea Dutton. She is an associate
professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison where her
research focuses on various impacts of climate change, in
particular its impact on sea levels. Previously, she spent 8
years as an assistant professor in the University of Florida's
Department of Geological Sciences.
Prior to her professorship at the University of Florida,
Dr. Dutton was a research fellow at the Australian National
University, where she worked to understand historical warming
periods. Dr. Dutton holds a bachelor's degree in music from
Amherst College, in addition to a master's and Ph.D. both in
geology from the University of Michigan. She completed her
post-doctoral work at the Australian National University.
Final witness today is John Wilson, the VP and director of
corporate engagement for Calvert Research and Management. His
firm specializes in responsible and sustainable investing
across global capital markets. Mr. Wilson leads the design and
execution of Calvert's corporate engagement and shareholder
activism strategy.
He began his career in the investment management industry
in 1997. Before joining Calvert Research, he was the head of
governance and research at Cornerstone Capital Group. He also
served as the director of corporate governance at TIAA-CREF and
was the director of socially responsible investing at Christian
Brothers Investment Services.
John earned a B.A. in English from Georgetown University,
an MBA in finance from Columbia University, and an MIA in
economic and political development from Columbia University
School of International and Public Affairs.
I want to remind the witnesses that your full written
testimony will be made part of the official hearing record.
Please keep your
[[Page 6]]
statements to 5 minutes, so that we may have plenty of time for
questions.
We look forward to hearing your testimony, beginning with
Mr. Wilkinson.
Please proceed.
STATEMENT OF TODD WILKINSON, POLICY DIVISION VICE CHAIRMAN,
NATIONAL CATTLEMEN'S BEEF ASSOCIATION
Mr. Wilkinson. Good morning, and thank you, Chairman Braun
and Ranking Member Whitehouse.
My name is Todd Wilkinson. I am an owner of a cow-calf
operation with my son and a part owner of a commercial feed
yard with my brothers near to Smith, South Dakota. I am proud
today to testify on behalf of the American cattle producers.
The United States has one of the lowest beef greenhouse gas
emission intensities, 10 to 50 times lower than other countries
around the world. That statistic is not accidental. American
cattle producers work hard to implement new technologies and
practices that reduce our environmental impact while
simultaneously increasing our efficiency.
Farmers and ranchers face increasing pressure from
consumers to be socially responsible while managing existing
environmental responsibility and attempting to remain
economically viable. According to the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, direct emissions from cattle represent just
2 percent of all greenhouse gas emissions in this country.
Climate change policies that unfairly target cattle
producers fail to recognize the positive role of cattle. Rather
than waiting for Congress to adopt misguided policies that
threaten the viability of this key industry in the climate
fight, we hope to shift the conversation to continue to be the
innovators.
Cattle graze on over 660 million acres in the United
States. That is nearly a third of our Nation's continental land
mass. This acreage not only feeds cattle, but also sequester
carbon. The ruminant grazing enhances sequestration. Emissions
from cattle are a part of the natural cycle of the methane.
Cattle consume grasses and then emit methane through
belches as a part of the ruminant digestive process. In just 10
years, more than 90 percent of that methane oxidizes in the
atmosphere and converts to CO2. The CO2
is then absorbed by grasses. Those grasses are eaten by cattle,
and the process goes on and on.
Methane has no long term impact on the climate when the
emissions and the oxidation are in balance. While cattle are a
nominal contributor to America's overall greenhouse gas
emissions, our industry works to further increase our
efficiency every day by implementing grazing management
systems.
Our operation developed a grazing management system through
USDA's Natural Resource and Conservation Service, which guides
our implementation of a rotational grazing system. Rotational
grazing creates an opportunity for cattle to intensely graze
pastures, thereby compounding carbon sequestration while
naturally decreasing weed and invasive species growth.
If producers have learned anything, it is that there is no
one size fits all, no silver bullet solution. Cattle producers
across the Nation
[[Page 7]]
effectively implement voluntary conservation practices with
technical assistance from USDA and land grant universities. The
benefit of technical assistance is its personalized approach.
Local NRCS employees work with agricultural producers to
implement a suite of conservation practices best suited to fit
each individual need.
Voluntary conservation practices supported by research and
implemented by producers with technical assistance are the keys
to increasing efficiency and resilience. The American cattle
herd provides an incredible environmental benefit through
unmatched ability to upcycle byproducts. Upcycling being
defined as a concept of using discarded materials to create a
higher value product.
In addition to the cattle's ability to turn grass into a
nutrient dense protein, cattle also upcycle other byproducts
when they move from pasture to the feed yard. Ninety percent of
the cattle feed yard diet is human inedible. At Redstone
Feeders, we feed a byproduct of an ethanol called distiller's
grain. By feeding distiller's grain to cattle, not only do we
provide the animals with an essential set of nutrients, but
simultaneously reduce the greenhouse gas emissions.
Distiller's grain is just one example. There are many
byproducts that are fed to cattle to enhance their diet in a
safe and efficient manner, including potato peelings, bakery
trimmings, even byproducts of chocolate.
NCBA was a founding member of the U.S. Roundtable for
Sustainable Beef. The roundtable is a multi-stakeholder
organization which aims to demonstrate and improve beef
sustainability. The roundtable began with a discussion on how
we, as members of the beef value chain, can directly and
measurably impact sustainability. This approach is unique from
previous sustainability efforts, because it is anchored by the
institutional knowledge of America's cattle producers.
Farmers and ranchers are America's original
conservationists. We provide a safe and affordable beef supply,
and we work hard every day to ensure that we can pass our
operations on to the next generation.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilkinson follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Braun. Thank you.
Mr. Macchiarola.
STATEMENT OF FRANK MACCHIAROLA, VICE PRESIDENT OF DOWNSTREAM
AND INDUSTRY OPERATIONS, AMERICAN PETROLEUM INSTITUTE
Mr. Macchiarola. Thank you, Chairman Braun, Ranking Member
Whitehouse, and Senator Capito. Thank you for the opportunity
to testify this morning.
The subject of today's hearing raises important policy
questions affecting our Nation's economic strength, energy
security, and environmental stewardship. How we address these
topics will have meaningful implications for our Nation's
future and our standing globally.
[[Page 8]]
Over the past decade, the United States has experienced a
dramatic transformation in our energy landscape. Ten years ago,
energy analysts and policymakers spoke in terms of energy
scarcity with the expectation that we would predominantly be
importing natural gas from the Middle East, Russia, and West
Africa to meet our growing energy demand. On the petroleum
side, a similar picture was emerging, with projections of flat
domestic production and growing dependence on foreign sources
of oil.
As a result of oil and natural gas industry innovation, and
the advancement of engineering technologies, such as hydraulic
fracturing and horizontal drilling, we speak today in terms of
energy abundance, and our Nation's energy future is bright.
Domestic oil production has risen from 5 million barrels per
day in 2009 to now more than 12 million barrels per day today.
On the natural gas side, U.S. production of natural gas has
increased by more than 50 percent over the last decade, with
natural gas deliveries to electric power consumers doubling
since 2004.
American oil and gas development and production from
unconventional shale resources has fundamentally changed the
energy landscape while creating economic growth and significant
employment opportunities across the country. And congressional
leadership to end the crude oil export ban has favorably
reshaped our Nation's energy security posture.
The U.S. is poised to remain the world's leading producer
of oil and natural gas, which will continue to help strengthen
our economy and national security for years to come. Challenges
remain, however. And the oil and natural gas industry is
committed to meeting these head on. One such challenge includes
addressing the risks associated with global climate change
through collaborative efforts of private industry, Government,
and the public.
The oil and natural gas industry is focused on solutions to
help reduce greenhouse gas emissions, while ensuring access to
affordable and reliable energy that helps enhance our standard
of living around the world. At the same time, the U.S. has
become the leading producer of natural gas, CO2
emissions here at home have declined to their lowest levels in
a generation. From 2005 to 2017, the U.S. economy grew by 20
percent, while CO2 emissions fell by 14 percent
overall.
In addition to reductions in emissions of CO2,
the growth of natural gas in power generation over the last
several years has led to significant reductions in nitrogen
oxide, sulfur dioxide, and particulate matter emissions,
contributing to cleaner air for all Americans.
Importantly, while we have experienced a dramatic increase
in U.S. production of natural gas, emissions of methane from
our industry have decreased over the past 20 years. The story
here is the same. We have accomplished positive environmental
outcomes by advancing technologies that ensure we are capturing
both VOCs and methane.
Our industry has been at the forefront of innovation,
developing technologies to reduce emissions from hydraulic
fracturing completions, storage tanks, pneumatic controllers,
and leaks. We have worked directly with the EPA since the early
days of the Obama administration in 2010 to ensure that EPA's
regulations incor
[[Page 9]]
porate these and other effective emissions reductions
requirements. And we continue to support these regulatory
requirements.
Our industry has also established the Environmental
Partnership, a program for continuous improvement in
environmental performance with an initial focus on VOC and
methane emission reductions. There are currently 67 companies
participating in the program, including 18 of the 20 top
natural gas producers. Companies in the partnership agree to
implement emission reduction programs for leaks, pneumatic
controllers, and for liquids unloading operations.
On the downstream side of our industry, more than 98
percent of vehicles on the road use our fuels to conduct
commerce, commute to work, go on vacation, and visit loved
ones. Today this is done with cleaner fuels that allow
automobile manufacturers to build engines that reduce
emissions. This progress has helped drive significant
reductions of major air pollutants, even as vehicle miles
traveled have tripled.
A strong natural gas sector and a strong oil sector is
essential to our Nation. Our industry supports 10.3 million
jobs in nearly 8 percent of the U.S. economy. More importantly,
the men and women who work in our industry are committed to
providing reliable and affordable energy, and to protecting the
environment. After all, they live in the communities in which
they work. Through a balanced approach that promotes innovation
and smart regulation, we can provide affordable, abundant
energy that Americans rely upon. And we can do it with an
emphasis on environmental protection and stewardship.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Macchiarola follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Braun. Thank you.
Mr. Durbin.
STATEMENT OF MARTIN DURBIN, PRESIDENT, GLOBAL ENERGY INSTITUTE,
U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Mr. Durbin. Chairman Braun, Senator Whitehouse, thank you.
Thanks for the opportunity to testify today.
Let me start by saying the Chamber believes the climate is
changing, and that humans are contributing to these changes.
Inaction on climate is not an option, and there is much common
ground on which all sides of this discussion should come
together to address climate change with policies that are
practical, flexible, and durable. We also believe in a policy
approach that considers costs, benefits, and the
competitiveness of the U.S. economy.
In order to tackle the global climate challenge, we must
commercialize and deploy clean energy technologies. It will be
largely up to the business communities to develop, finance,
build, and operate the solutions needed to power economic
growth worldwide, mitigate greenhouse gas emissions, and build
resilient, lower carbon infrastructure. In short, we will need
more energy with fewer emissions. The good news is, we are up
to the challenge.
Thousands of companies have already taken voluntary steps
to reduce emissions and have pledged further reductions.
Sustain
[[Page 10]]
ability plans are now the norm for major corporations. Our
Global Energy Institute has launched an Energy Innovates
initiative to showcase the innovators, projects, and
technologies that are shaping America's future energy
landscape.
The specific examples are included in my written testimony,
but we have highlighted technologies such as battery storage,
advanced nuclear, power plants that utilize CO2
itself as an energy source, and energy efficient, smart
neighborhoods. All of these technologies will be needed.
Such technologies are being developed and deployed first in
the United States, but ultimately, are an opportunity for the
U.S. to become the world's leading exporter of clean energy
technology. This will not only be a business opportunity and an
economic boon, but also a way for the U.S. to take a leadership
role in reducing global emissions and to improve the quality of
life in developing countries that lack access to the basics,
like electricity and refrigeration.
These global realities illustrate the paramount importance
of technological breakthroughs that will enable financially
constrained developing countries to adopt the technologies
necessary to slow and ultimately reverse emissions growth. The
good news is that numerous technologies hold great promise to
do just that, and that is why the Chamber has made the
development and acceleration of these alternatives a top
priority.
All told, the private sector was responsible for more than
$45 billion of energy related research and development in 2017.
But we can't do it alone. There remains an important role for
the Federal Government to play in technology development,
including through the Department of Energy's National
Laboratory System.
However, statistics show that U.S. investment in R&D is
only average compared to other developed nations. The Chamber
has long supported increasing R&D budgets with programs like
ARPA-E, a great example of what can be accomplished.
We agree more must be done to meet the challenge of climate
change. The Chamber has established a task force on climate
actions, which will help us gain a better understanding of the
range of mechanisms, innovations, and internal processes that
our members are employing to address climate change. This
dialogue will make us smarter about how existing policies and
future proposals affect our broad membership. What we learn
will help inform our approach to legislation and other policy
proposals to address this important issue for our members, the
Nation, and the world.
That said, we believe there are concrete actions Congress
can take now which would help accelerate the innovation agenda
necessary to address this challenge. We recently led a letter
with 27 organizations from across the political spectrum,
calling on Senate leadership to schedule floor time for a
series of legislative proposals which would reduce emissions.
My written testimony highlights the specific bipartisan
legislation the Chamber supports, many of which were introduced
or are co-sponsored by members of this Committee.
As we said in that letter, more needs to be done. But there
is no reason to delay passage of initiatives we know would help
us re
[[Page 11]]
duce emissions right now. Doing so would send a signal that
Congress is serious about this issue.
American businesses have a long history of rising to the
world's challenges. Companies and entrepreneurs are bringing
innovation, technology, and ingenuity to the climate change
challenge. We believe combating climate change and growing the
economy can and should go hand in hand. Our members are already
hard at work in bringing solutions to the table.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Durbin follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Braun. Thank you.
Dr. Dutton.
STATEMENT OF ANDREA DUTTON, VISITING ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR,
DEPARTMENT OF GEOSCIENCE, UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN-MADISON,
GAINESVILLE, FLORIDA
Ms. Dutton. Thank you, Chairman Braun, and Ranking Member
Whitehouse, for inviting me to speak today.
I am a geochemist and field geologist who conducts research
on past climate and sea level change. The main focus of my
research is the behavior of sea level and polar ice sheets
during past warm periods to better inform us about future sea
level rise.
My research accomplishments have been widely recognized,
for example, as a Fellow of the Geological Society of America,
as a Fulbright Scholar, and as a newly minted MacArthur Fellow.
I am here today to offer my expert opinion as a geologist
and climate scientist on the scale of the challenge that we
face from industrial greenhouse gas emissions and resulting
human caused global warming.
The devastating impacts of climate change will vary by
region. Some will contend with worsened wildfires, while others
will grapple with intensified inland flooding or rainfall,
inundation from sea level rise, or more intense and slower
moving hurricanes.
This list may evoke personal memories of extreme weather
events from the past few years. That is because climate change
is already here, and it is going to get worse before it can get
better.
All regions of the U.S. will experience higher
temperatures. Consider Florida, where I have lived for the past
9 years. In 2000, Miami had 24 days with a heat index at or
above 105 degrees Fahrenheit, the official danger level
according to the National Weather Service. By 2030, Miami is
projected to experience 126 danger days a year, that is about 1
in 3 days, where crippling heat will make it dangerous for
people to be outdoors.
Are voluntary reductions in industrial emissions enough to
avoid such futures? The answer is no. They don't even come
close. Voluntary reductions are but proverbial drops in the
bucket.
Because of decades of relative inaction, the scale of the
problem has grown, and the time to act is rapidly shrinking.
Policy solutions must therefore be bold, moving us rapidly
toward net zero emissions, with the aid of stringent and
integrated policy interventions, including putting a price on
carbon.
[[Page 12]]
Reductions do not happen in a vacuum, though. They are
driven by policy, which in turn drives innovation to meet new
targets.
As a geologist, with the perspective that deep time brings
to this issue, I offer these four critical insights. No. 1, we
are conducting an uncontrolled and unprecedented experiment
here on planet Earth. Our extensive knowledge of past climate
change reveals that there is no other event in Earth history
that approaches the combined rate and magnitude of change that
we are causing, aside from cataclysmic events such as the
massive asteroid impact that marked the end of the Cretaceous.
While Earth survived that impact, the dinosaurs did not, nor
did about 75 percent of all marine species. Climate change is
not so much about saving our planet, then, as it is about
maintaining thriving ecosystems that support human
civilization.
No. 2, while there are natural, stabilizing processes that
draw down carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere, they are too
slow, by several orders of magnitude, to keep up with the rate
at which we are pumping them into the atmosphere. It would take
many thousands of years to draw down the carbon dioxide that we
have already emitted.
No. 3, our actions today will impact the climate for
millennia to come, a lesson drawn from studies of geological
changes. The U.S. leads the world in cumulative carbon
emissions. The faster we slash these emissions, the less
dangerous the outcomes. Committing to additional fossil fuel
infrastructure, conversely, locks in more dangerous impacts.
No. 4, finally, the geologic record tells us that we can
expect big impacts from what sound like small perturbations. We
are already witnessing the effects of climate change at just
over 1 degree Celsius, and every fraction of a degree matters.
For comparison, Earth was no more than 4 degrees Celsius colder
at the peak of the last ice age, when ice sheets more than a
mile thick covered parts of North America and mammoths and
mastodons roamed through present day Florida.
My own research tells us that increasing Earth's
temperature by as little as 1 degree Celsius could commit us to
at least 6 meters--that is 20 feet or more--of sea level rise.
If we don't enact policies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
as the best available science dictates, we are committing to a
very expensive and dangerous future.
Talking to Floridians on the front lines of sea level rise,
I know that they are deeply concerned about climate change and
want to know what is being done. During the recent global
climate strike led by our youth, millions took to the streets
telling us in no uncertain terms that it is up to us to act now
or we take their future from them. As a mother, as a scientist,
and as a citizen of the United States, I hear their call. And I
hope that you will too.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Dutton follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Braun. Thank you.
Mr. Wilson.
[[Page 13]]
STATEMENT OF JOHN WILSON, VICE PRESIDENT AND DIRECTOR OF
CORPORATE ENGAGEMENT, CALVERT RESEARCH AND MANAGEMENT
Mr. Wilson. Chairman Braun, Ranking Member Whitehouse,
thank you for your invitation to speak before you today.
My name is John Wilson, and I am Vice President and
Director of Corporate Engagement for Calvert Research and
Management. Our firm sponsors one of the largest and most
diversified families of responsibly invested mutual funds. We
seek to generate favorable investment returns by allocating
capital consistent with financially material environmental,
social, and governance issues and through structured engagement
with our portfolio companies.
Climate change is an urgent issue for us as fiduciaries
because investment returns depend on a robust and growing
economy. The U.S. Government's Fourth National Climate
Assessment makes clear that unchecked climate change could
reduce economic activity in several U.S. sectors by hundreds of
billions of dollars by the end of the century. We believe our
investment portfolios will be exposed to these risks within the
coming decades, well within a typical investment time horizon.
As one element of our overall investment analysis, we
evaluate the exposure of companies we invest in to the risk of
climate change. This assessment is consistent with well
grounded empirical evidence. A recent meta-analysis of 32
studies found a negative correlation between corporate carbon
emissions and financial performance.
Many mainstream investors and companies now support action
on climate change. Three hundred and sixty investors with $36
trillion under management have committed to engage the top
greenhouse gas emitting companies in dialogue about how they
can drive a transformation toward a clean energy economy and
achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement.
On the corporate side, nearly 7,000 companies worldwide now
report on greenhouse gas emissions and mitigation strategies to
the Carbon Disclosure Project, the most comprehensive database
of this information in the world. According to CDP, the 215
largest global companies alone report over $1 trillion of
capital at risk from climate impacts, many of which may be felt
in the next 5 years.
Among the many industries making commitments to transform
their business models, at least 17 U.S. utilities have pledged
to cut emissions by at least 80 percent by 2050, to the
Chairman's earlier point. And all major automotive companies
are investing heavily in low or no carbon transportation
alternatives, and committing to expand their line up of
electric powered vehicles.
Despite the efforts being made on all sides, consensus is
emerging among both investment professionals and corporate
executives that voluntary efforts will not be enough. Business
incentives are misaligned because those responsible for the
emission of greenhouse gases do not bear the costs of climate
related harms such as extreme weather events, drought, or sea
level rise. Instead, those costs are borne by the entire
market.
For this reason, a coalition of 515 institutional investors
with $35 trillion under management urged world governments to
enact enabling policy to meet the goals of the Paris Agreement,
in part by
[[Page 14]]
helping to accelerate sound business investments in climate
mitigation. A clear policy signal, such as a carbon price,
would allow investors to better quantify the economic
implications of climate change on investment decisions.
For companies, it would help to overcome the pressures of
short-termism, which sometimes hampers long term innovation. We
observe, for example, that a mix of subsidies and requirements
has helped to incentivize research and development that has
rapidly reduced the cost of wind and solar energy over the last
several years.
Both corporations and investors can and should make
important contributions to the public dialogue about climate
change policy. We are concerned, however, that some companies
have failed to align their public policy engagements with their
long term business strategies to invest in climate solutions.
In response, 200 investors with $6.5 trillion under management
forwarded a letter to company CEOs calling on them to harmonize
their lobbying activities with the goals of the Paris
Agreement.
This letter asks companies to develop governance procedures
to ensure consistency between long term business strategy and
public policy engagement, including both direct engagement as
well as lobbying by intermediaries, such as trade associations
and social welfare organizations.
We are pleased that some of these third parties have
recently expressed support for action on climate change, and
encourage them to back up their words with substantive action
consistent with the scale of the economic challenge that we
face.
Most concerning to us as investors is the lack of U.S.
leadership in climate policy. Rather than supporting investors'
and companies' efforts to make economically rational long term
investment decisions, the Federal Government is moving in the
opposite direction, first by initiating steps to withdraw from
the Paris Agreement, and most recently by seeking to block
States' efforts to address the issue.
A failure of the U.S. to address climate change could
impact U.S. competitiveness relative to countries that are
supporting the next generation of technology and solutions.
Investors and companies across the globe are collaborating with
the public sector to address the risks that greenhouse gases
pose to portfolios and long term business investment. The
absence of U.S. Government leadership from this partnership
ensures that these technologies and solutions will arise
elsewhere.
We urge the Committee to support legislation that will
allow us to rapidly scale investments in climate change
mitigation, and I would like to thank the Committee for
allowing me the opportunity to share my perspectives on these
important topics.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilson follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Braun. Thank you.
I am going to start with the questions, and I would like to
address the first one to Dr. Dutton.
I really do believe that the dynamic we are facing is
significant. I think--Senator Whitehouse and I have talked
about modeling that is out there, that is going to give
believability to where you
[[Page 15]]
don't--it is going to be hard for any of us to react to
something where the world is going to end in 12 to 15 years. We
are already beyond the point of redemption, I am going to
guess, if that happens.
I think to make this sellable to the American public--we
all know that sea levels will rise over time. I think you
referred to 6 meters, over what period of time? When do you
expect that?
Ms. Dutton. Great question. So my research, a lot of it has
focused on looking at past warm periods, trying to understand
how much the ice sheets melted and then how quickly that
happened, which is what you are asking there.
Senator Braun. Yes.
Ms. Dutton. So that 6 meters, or 20 feet, will not happen
in your lifetime or mine. But the problem is, we don't know the
full answer to that question yet. And that is in part because
we have never been around to witness dynamic retreat of
Greenland and Antarctica of the type that is starting to happen
now. So we don't know all of the physics involved in that ice
sheet retreat. And that is the largest uncertainty when we look
at sea level projections into the future.
However, having said that, we are certain that sea level is
rising. So that uncertainty about exactly how quick shouldn't
really be the focus of the issue. Yesterday in the Miami
Herald, they reported that the northern part of Key Largo has
now been underwater, a neighborhood, for more than 40 days in a
row. And they are in about a foot of water.
Right now, tides up and down the U.S. east coast from New
York to Miami are running about a foot to a foot and a half
higher than predicted. It is not just because of sea level
rise, but additional impacts of swell, and when you get intense
rainfall, there is no place for it to go.
So these effects will in fact happen sooner than most
people think they will.
Senator Braun. What would be the next two or three biggest
general impacts? We all know sea level, because we hear that
all the time. Can you graphically give us what you think the
next two or three biggest differences would be in terms of how
it is going to impact everyday life?
Ms. Dutton. Right. Well, there are a myriad of ways. As you
know, there is a domino effect as well.
But one thing I have been focusing on recently when I give
public talks is just the heat, which came up in my testimony
today. So if you have experienced heat of 105 degrees, it is
crippling. Even though I work most of the day indoors, and I go
outside just to walk to my car, it feels miserable, right? You
can't do much outside then.
So heat, there is a limit of the heat that we can tolerate
as humans and still perform as we expect to. So heat is a big
one.
Another one is the wildfires that we are now seeing play
out across the western U.S. The area of those wildfires is
growing, and a lot of it is attributable to climate change.
And hurricanes are more intense; slower moving hurricanes
are going to be big contenders.
[[Page 16]]
Part of the reasons I highlight these wildfires and
hurricanes, they require huge responses in terms of Federal
disaster management. And the rapid intensification that we have
seen in some of these hurricanes, which is a trend that should
increase with increasing temperatures, makes it very difficult
from an emergency response perspective.
Senator Braun. One final question on the subject of what
might happen. Does climate change in any fashion have an effect
that would not be catastrophic? In other words, in places
where, just to get it out there, I would like to hear, or is it
just universally going to be destructive and bad?
Ms. Dutton. So you may argue that some people, it might
benefit them. So maybe you can grow apples farther north or
something like that. The problem is, the rate at which the
temperatures are changing and these zones are migrating
northward are too fast for us to keep up in terms of
infrastructure.
We have developed and built things based on the climate of
that region. To expect farmers to say, oh, well, instead of
planting this, now I am just going to completely change and do
something different, we just can't adapt that quickly. And that
rate of change is really the biggest challenge.
Senator Braun. Thank you.
I am going to go to Senator Whitehouse here in a moment.
But I think the thing I grapple with mostly is how we
marshal the resources, especially in the context of a place
that is not functioning here well currently, with trillion-
dollar deficits, when you look at what the cost would be. So
there is going to be a lot of practicality that is going to
have to be applied, in how you start the correction.
That is why I think that the more accurately we can have
models that we can trust would be kind of the selling tool to
take this in a broader way, not only here, but to convince
industry and emitters across the board that it is happening,
and to make it realistic on the other side of how we marshal
the resources to combat it.
Senator Whitehouse.
Senator Whitehouse. Thank you very much, Chairman, and
thank you again for this hearing.
Let me start by asking Mr. Durbin and Mr. Macchiarola
whether your trade associations ordinarily develop policy
positions based on the consensus position of your member
companies.
Mr. Durbin. Yes, we strive for consensus with the members
to reach a policy position.
Senator Whitehouse. Mr. Macchiarola.
Mr. Macchiarola. Yes, Senator, policy establishment at API
is largely based on the consensus based approach, as well as
principle based approach, reflecting the views of the broad
membership of the association.
Senator Whitehouse. So, Mr. Durbin, let me follow up a
little bit more in detail about the Chamber.
As I understand it, the Chamber has several dozen policy
committees. And your member companies can pay extra to sit on
those policy committees, is that correct?
Mr. Durbin. Well, the policy committees, there are various
affiliates, including the Global Energy Institute that I lead,
where mem
[[Page 17]]
bers can pay to be a part of that group. But the broad policies
of the U.S. Chamber are set by the board of directors of the
broad U.S. Chamber.
Senator Whitehouse. Is there a policy committee on
environment and energy?
Mr. Durbin. There are two separate committees that are open
to the broad membership; again, every member, one on energy and
agriculture, the other on environment and air. Just had a call
with them yesterday. Yes, those committees do exist.
Senator Whitehouse. If there is a call that goes out to the
members of those committees, do you contact every single member
of the Chamber? Or is there some way in which companies have
identified their interest in that committee, and you have a
list?
Mr. Durbin. Exactly. They opt in.
Senator Whitehouse. And do they compensate the Chamber in
any way for the right to opt in?
Mr. Durbin. Not beyond their membership.
Senator Whitehouse. It is a function of their regular dues?
Mr. Durbin. Indeed.
Senator Whitehouse. Can you tell me which companies--this
probably should be a question for the record--the two
committees that you mentioned, can you tell me which companies
sit on them?
Mr. Durbin. Certainly, I will take that as a question for
the record.
Senator Whitehouse. Great. I don't expect you to have that
off the top of your head.
Do you know how much the companies on those two policy
committees contributed to the Chamber, let's say, in 2018, to
the Chamber and its affiliates?
Mr. Durbin. I don't. I can look into that, and not every
company pays the same amount.
Senator Whitehouse. We will make that a question for the
record then, also.
Do you know how much in total fossil fuel industry
companies and allied organizations contributed to the Chamber
in 2018?
Mr. Durbin. Again, I will get back to you on that.
Senator Whitehouse. OK, we will make that a question for
the record, too.
Do you know if the Chamber and its affiliates take money
from non-corporate sources of funding, such as political
advocacy groups?
Mr. Durbin. Not to my knowledge. And I promise I won't play
this line too frequently today, but yesterday was--now there
are 6 weeks. So I would be happy to get back to you, like so
many of those, I would be happy to get back to you on a
question for the record.
Senator Whitehouse. OK, we will follow up.
Do you know if Marathon Petroleum is a member of either of
the two policy committees that you mentioned?
Mr. Durbin. I believe they participate.
Senator Whitehouse. In both?
Mr. Durbin. I don't know.
Senator Whitehouse. OK. So a lot of this is going to end up
as questions for the record, and I appreciate that you are
newer there, and that some of these are specific questions that
you shouldn't be
[[Page 18]]
expected to know the answer to off the top of your head. So
turning them into questions for the record is fine with me.
Do you know much ExxonMobil contributed to the Chamber and
its affiliates in 2018?
Mr. Durbin. I do not. I will get that.
Senator Whitehouse. Ok. Can you tell me what Chamber member
companies were consulted by the Chamber about the Chamber's
decision to sue EPA to block the Clean Power Plan?
Mr. Durbin. Again, I can get back to you on the process
that was used to determine that.
Senator Whitehouse. I have the question with respect to the
Chamber's decision to sue EPA to block the Clean Power Plan,
the same question regarding the Chamber's decision to intervene
in litigation to support the Trump so called ACE rule, the
replacement for the Clean Power Plan. And third, the Chamber's
decision to fund a study critical of the Paris Agreement that
has since been widely debunked. So that is a QFR, I guess,
times three.
Mr. Durbin. OK.
Senator Whitehouse. So my time has expired for this round
of questioning, and I will yield back. My apologies for going
over a few seconds.
Senator Braun. Thank you. It looks like we are going to
have plenty of time to ask questions, aren't we? Good.
[Laughter.]
Senator Braun. One of the vexing issues of what we are
dealing with is that there has been great progress made here in
our own country. I do remember vividly when the Cuyahoga River
caught on fire. I couldn't believe that could even happen. I
know that in even a local river, the White River, borders the
northern edge of our county. Never, 20, 25 years ago, would we
have fished in it, let alone eat the fish. Now I routinely see
eagles along it. And we do fish, and eat the fish.
So in places, we have made great strides. I really think it
is important that I think we are leading the way, but we were
the largest emitters. I guess the only good news is
internationally, we have been eclipsed by China.
So I don't want to get, and I am really worried about how
we get the rest of the world to see the light when coal
facilities are still being built, and it doesn't seem like that
same trajectory is necessarily occurring.
Mr. Wilkinson, I want to ask you, because I heard when it
comes to something like beef production, did I hear correctly
that the methods used elsewhere would emit--what was the
quantity more in terms of greenhouse gases?
Mr. Wilkinson. Ten to 50 percent, or 50 times more than us.
Senator Braun. That is what I thought I heard you say. That
is unbelievable in terms of how the methodologies could be that
different. I think where beef production in the U.S., you said,
was 2 percent of emissions, is that within the country, or is
that across the world?
Mr. Wilkinson. No, that is within the country.
Senator Braun. OK. And then, what is it in terms of beef
production across the world? Assuming if we are much better,
where
[[Page 19]]
would it stack up in terms of what that particularity would be
generating across the world? Do you know that?
Mr. Wilkinson. Depending upon the metrics that you use to
measure that, it is anywhere from 3 to 5 percent across the
world. We are statistically lower than that because, frankly,
we are more efficient. The example I can give you with that is
back in the 1970s, we had a third more cows. And yet we produce
the same amount of beef today with a third less cows.
Senator Braun. Better feed conversion.
Mr. Wilkinson. Better feed conversion, better genetics. Our
producers are--that is their life blood. They want to improve
all of those traits.
Senator Braun. And could you cite a couple of the methods?
I was a turkey farmer for 32 years. I know all the advances
that were made, better feed conversion. Of course, that lowers
your footprint.
What has happened in the cattle industry? I think that is
one of the things that has been thrown out there in kind of a
figurative way as being a part of the problem. I am glad you
pointed out what that is percentage wise here and across the
globe.
Talk about a couple or three things that have really made a
difference over the last decade.
Mr. Wilkinson. Well, in my lifetime, the biggest one I can
point to right off the top is rotational grazing, intensive
grazing. When I started out in the industry, when my brother
started out in the beef business, we didn't do rotational
grazing. It seemed counter-intuitive, the fact that we would
put our cow herd on a confined area and let them graze that
area more intensely. We just let them generally run over the
tract of land.
Now we specifically have those areas fenced off, and we
rotate them in and out of those various paddocks. As a result
of that--and again, it is logic, I guess, when you examine it
after this many years--as a result of that, the cattle eat down
the grass, the root system goes down deeper into the soil, and
more carbon is sequestered.
Another one is distiller's grain. That is a great example
of--it causes us to use less corn, and it is a byproduct. But
it has improved the efficiency of the animals.
And I have to end up saying for the seed stock producers
that we represent that the genetics of the animals, that the
seed stock, if you looked at what was a champion bull in 1950
in the Angus breed, it is going to be about this high. I mean,
that animal is now bigger in stature; it can put more pounds on
more efficiently. So our seed stock producers are doing a
wonderful job.
Senator Braun. It begs the question--and give me a quick
answer here--why has not the rest of the world copied what we
have done here, if you are assuming that we still need beef
production? Why haven't those techniques been used across that
other 3 percent that maybe totals 5? It seems like we could get
emissions from beef production almost down to 3 percent in
total if others would copy the methodology.
Mr. Wilkinson. Well, Senator, the first one I am going to
have to point out is India. They have an affinity to not want
to eat beef. So there is a bit of a problem there.
[[Page 20]]
But if you look at Australia, Brazil, two of our biggest
competitors, our geography gives us a competitive advantage
over those areas. We are not having to deforest, cut down
forests, to increase our grazing capabilities. We have natural
prairies and forests where we can graze at. We can take out the
fire load out of our forests rather than cut them down.
Senator Braun. So it gives us a comparative advantage.
Mr. Wilkinson. Yes, it does give us some advantage.
Senator Braun. Thank you.
Senator Whitehouse.
Senator Whitehouse. Thank you again, Chairman.
Mr. Durbin, I will follow up with two questions on our
previous line of questioning. Am I correct that there are
different membership levels in the U.S. Chamber of Commerce,
Signature, Advantage, Elite, and C100?
Mr. Durbin. There are different levels.
Senator Whitehouse. And am I correct that your Web site
shows that the option to serve on these policy committees is
for those who subscribe to the Elite and C100 higher membership
levels?
Mr. Durbin. Again, let me get back to you on that question.
Senator Whitehouse. OK. Let me put the Web page into the
record as an exhibit so it is clear what I have been talking
about.
[The referenced information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Whitehouse. Just today, the Chamber scorecarded the
Senate resolution to disapprove the Trump ACE rule. My
information is that the so called ACE rule requires zero
emissions from natural gas. And further, that from coal, while
it encourages certain efficiency improvements, it offsets those
with opportunities for increased generation and could actually
increase emissions.
So again, you guys just put this out today, neither you nor
I have had a chance to review it. But I would like to ask you,
the Chamber, for the record, to respond to how it is that the
Chamber is willing to support a rule designed to reduce carbon
emissions that actually doesn't reduce carbon emissions, and
appears to have been a product of the fossil fuel industry's
work.
I don't want to sandbag you with that, because I didn't get
it until just now myself. So we will leave that as a question
for the record.
Mr. Macchiarola, let me ask you a little bit about API. In
my experience, ordinarily, trade associations set their
membership dues with some correlation to the member
corporations' revenues or profits. Is that the way API
operates?
Mr. Macchiarola. Thank you for your question, Senator. API
generally sets its dues structure on the basis of production on
the upstream side, throughput on the downstream side.
Senator Whitehouse. So bigger companies should be expected
to pay more.
Mr. Macchiarola. Larger producing companies within the
United States would be expected to pay more, that is correct.
Senator Whitehouse. OK. You--API, I mean--supported the
Trump proposal to scrap the rules regarding methane emissions
at oil and gas facilities. Is that correct?
[[Page 21]]
Mr. Macchiarola. API supports the current methane rule in
place in 2011 and 2016. We support the----
Senator Whitehouse. The August proposal by EPA, you
publicly support it, correct?
Mr. Macchiarola. Correct.
Senator Whitehouse. At the same time, ExxonMobil and BP and
Shell publicly criticized that proposal. Based on the way in
which you have said you calculate your dues, I would expect
that ExxonMobil and BP and Shell would be three of API's
biggest contributors, correct?
Mr. Macchiarola. That is correct, Senator.
Senator Whitehouse. I am interested in how API took this
position, just to use this as one example, contrary to the
public positions of three of its largest members. Can I ask you
just to frame this out, how much money ExxonMobil, BP, and
Shell gave to API for 2018?
Mr. Macchiarola. Senator, with respect to the specific
question regarding membership dues, I don't know the answer to
that. So I will have to get back to you for the record.
Senator Whitehouse. Not a problem. That is not a problem at
all.
Mr. Macchiarola. With respect to the consideration of
support or opposition to a specific rulemaking, as you referred
in your previous question, Senator, we are a consensus based
organization that takes into account the views of the broad
spectrum of the membership, and work very hard to represent the
industry and not one individual member, regardless of the size
of the member.
Senator Whitehouse. Let me add to the QFR question you are
taking back also Marathon Petroleum, in addition to the three
companies I named, in terms of what their contributions were to
API during or for 2018.
The reason I am asking these questions--may I extend it
another minute? The reason I am asking these questions is
because Exxon and BP and Shell have taken a number of public
positions that are contrary to positions that API then comes
and pushes in Congress. The most significant of them is that
Exxon, BP, and Shell all publicly say they support a price on
carbon.
So my question to you is, can you share with us any sincere
effort by ExxonMobil, BP, and Shell to support carbon pricing
within your organization or to have you reflect their views in
opposing the methane rule? What I am trying to get at is the
extent to which Exxon, BP, and Shell are just basically
greenwashing themselves with public statements while leaving
you to do the dirty work of opposing things they claim to
support.
So I don't know what information you can give me along
those lines, but that is where this line of questioning is
trying to get. I see very big companies that presumably
contribute very significantly to your organization that seem to
be economic winners from things you do that they claim not to
support. And that is the discrepancy that concerns me here.
Mr. Macchiarola. Senator, it doesn't--so that is not
unusual for trade associations, first off. And second, it
doesn't fall on that side of the ledger every time. For
example, I look at the issue of CAFE standards, we had member
companies who have positions that
[[Page 22]]
would be more against your position on CAFE closer to the
position of the Trump administration. And our association
actually did not take that position.
So again, to your earlier point, sir, we are a consensus
based, principle based organization. We are not an organization
that is dictated by one member view. We wouldn't last as a
trade association that long, because we don't represent one
member, we represent the broad spectrum of the industry.
I appreciate the point, Senator.
Senator Whitehouse. I've gone well over my time, and I will
just make a question for the record to see whatever documents
you have that document that Exxon, BP, or Shell actually
pursued their concerns within your organization as opposed to
saying one thing to the public and using your organization to
do the opposite. I will follow that up with the question for
the record.
Mr. Macchiarola. Senator, to the extent those materials are
not proprietary, I am happy to share anything I can to shed
some light on a pretty robust policy discussion that again,
wants to end up with an outcome that reflects the broad view of
the industry, not the view of a specific member. But thank you.
Senator Whitehouse. Thank you, I appreciate it.
Thank you, Chairman Braun. I apologize for going 3 minutes
over.
Senator Braun. Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. I was happy to yield my 3 minutes.
Welcome, one and all, to this hearing. Ironically, this
kind of hearing is a timely hearing, it comes on the heels of a
weekend, a weekend that I spent in Aspen, at the Aspen
Institute Seminar where we had Democrats and Republican House
members and a couple of Senators. And we had folks from a
couple auto companies and people from all different walks of
life and businesses who have an interest in these issues.
In fact, the intersection, if you will, of how do we get
cleaner air, cleaner water, address climate change, and create
economic opportunity. I am one of those people who believe it
is possible to do both. In fact, it is necessary for us to do
both.
I am a retired Navy captain, a P-3 aircraft mission
commander, Vietnam veteran. Tomorrow morning, in fact, I will
be at the Naval Air Station in Jacksonville, Florida, with my
flight suit on, and go out and fly with a P-8, a new P-8 air
crew, and go out and drop some torpedoes out in the ocean.
Hopefully not too close to Russian submarines, but we will see.
[Laughter.]
Senator Carper. Last weekend, there was a lot of news in
Florida, because Miami is flooded again. Again. Not the first
time. It won't be the last time. And it is just getting worse.
We are not that far away from a place you heard about a lot
last year, Ellicott City, Maryland. My wife was just there,
went there with some of her friends, just to go on the heels of
all the bad weather they had, just to demonstrate some
solidarity and help do something for their economy and stay
there for a couple of nights and eat in their restaurants.
As you know, they have had two 1,000 year floods in like 18
months. People say, what is a 1,000 year flood? It is something
that
[[Page 23]]
happens every 1,000 years. They have had two of them in 18
months. So something is happening. I live in the lowest lying
State in America, Delaware; we are sinking, and the seas around
us are rising. So this is real for us. And we want to make sure
that we address it.
And as it turns out, it is not just enough to do rules and
regulations. It is not just enough to rely on innovation. We
need to do both. And I say probably once a day, we have to be
able to walk and chew gum at the same time. It has probably
been said here already. There is an opportunity to do both, and
we need to do both.
My sister and I were just barely teenagers and we were
driving back from Beckley, West Virginia, where we were born,
back to Danville, Virginia, where we were growing up, and my
mom was driving in our 1955 Chrysler Plymouth, which was like a
tank of a car. We were up mountain roads, and it started
raining, bad thunderstorms. She lost control of the car,
bounced off a rock cliff on the right side, over to the left
side, down the mountainside, over and over and over and over
again. Kind of came to a rest, and we were all thrown out of
the car, we had no seatbelts. They didn't make seatbelts in
most cars, and the auto industry did not receive them warmly
when they were pressed to do that.
I love the auto industry. I have worked for years to be
supportive of the auto industry. I still go to the Detroit Auto
Show just about every year. We had auto people with us at this
last weekend.
And I have been working and talking over the last week with
Michal Freedhoff, who is a chemist, a Ph.D. chemist, and a
member of our EPW staff. Smart as a whip. And we have been
talking to representatives from all the major auto industries,
auto companies, and asking what we can do to be helpful for
them.
They are looking for a certain predictability, I think most
businesses look for a certain predictability, that is what they
are looking for with respect to fuel efficiency standards. The
Obama administration left in place a rule, regulation that
provided very rigorous standards between 2021 and 2025, I think
about 5 percent increases a year. What the auto industry is
asking--they are not asking to get rid of fuel efficiency
standards, they are asking for some near term flexibility.
Maybe 3 percent instead of 5.
And they all wrote a letter to the President about a month
or two ago and said, Mr. President, you think you are helping
us out by saying we are basically going to flat line
everything, like we did in the 1970s, when we raised fuel
efficiency standards; remember CAFE? And we hit the target, 27
and a half miles and then just, we went to nothing more, and we
stayed there for like 20 years. Maybe more than 20 years.
And the auto companies said, we don't want to do that, that
is not what we are asking for. They are going to build a lot of
electric powered vehicles; they are going to build hydrogen
powered vehicles. And what we are going to do in this Committee
and in the legislation that we have reported out to Surface
Transportation, is help facilitate, enable them to be
successful when they build those vehicles, by providing money
for charging stations, electric vehicle fueling stations,
hydrogen powered vehicles. That is part of what we are going to
be doing.
[[Page 24]]
And seat belts, catalytic converters, air bags; as much as
I love the auto industry, they weren't anxious to do any of
those things. And now they advertise their products, how safe
they are and all this stuff they used to oppose.
So I just want to--that will be an opening statement, I
have an opening statement for the record, Mr. Chairman. But I
had to just, that was an audible, as they say in football, that
was an audible.
So I do have a question or two, if I could, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Braun. Yes.
Senator Carper. Thanks so much. I apologize for being here
so late. We had a prayer breakfast in Wilmington, Delaware,
this morning, and James Lankford from Oklahoma was our guest
speaker. It was great.
This would be for Frank, who I think is somebody who's
known Mary Frances Repko for a year or two. I am reminded that
every now and then I will hear somebody say in the meeting
room, they will say, someone who is my opponent doesn't have to
be my enemy.
Mr. Macchiarola. That is absolutely true, Senator.
[Laughter.]
Senator Carper. Might be true with you and MF; I hope so.
In your testimony, you described the investments in
innovative air pollution reduction technologies that have been
made by your industry. The question goes on to talk about lead,
which everyone agrees harms children's brains. One of the six
criteria air pollutants referenced in your testimony.
The thing is though, getting the lead out of gasoline was
not a voluntary measure, as you recall. It was a mandatory EPA
rule that was, I think, initially opposed by, I think, by the
organization that you represent here today.
I think somebody probably already mentioned this to you
before I got here, but I would like to ask, Mr. Chairman, for
unanimous consent to insert a copy of the API's testimony
opposing EPA's rules to remove lead from gasoline into the
record.
[The referenced information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Carper. And my question would be, do you agree that
this phase out never would have happened if EPA had just left
it, or may--I will say this, it is a better way to ask this
question. Would you agree that this phase out might never have
happened, or it would have taken a whole lot longer if EPA had
just left it up to the industry to get the lead out
voluntarily? That is not a trick question, it is just a
question from my heart.
Mr. Macchiarola. Yes, thank you for your question, Senator.
It is hard to predict what might have happened, but I
certainly take your point that sometimes Government action is
required to make progress on the environment. We at API support
that, we support a wide measure of rulemakings where the
Government steps in and takes action.
But we also have worked very hard as an industry to commit
ourselves to reducing emissions through our own technological
advancements and either not waiting for regulation or doing it
on top of regulation. I think a perfect example of that is what
I spoke of earlier, the environmental partnership, which is a
program of large
[[Page 25]]
member companies and small companies who join together to share
practices and to take action on reducing methane emissions. And
the progress in just a short period of time, less than 2 years,
has been remarkable.
The industry, while producing--increasing production since
2006 by more than 50 percent of natural gas, methane emissions
have remained flat. That is a recent NOAA study on the
industry.
So I do certainly agree with your point that oftentimes,
Government action is required to make this progress. But we as
an industry are committed to reducing emissions through our own
activities.
Thank you.
Senator Carper. Thank you very, very much, Frank.
Could I just have a minute to ask something of----
Senator Braun. One quick one.
Senator Carper. Thank you--of Dick Durbin's nephew. Nephew,
right? I think.
Cagoule, I could barely spell cagoule a couple of years
ago, now I use it a lot. But there used to be a time when we
had this hole in the ozone, as you recall. And people tried to
figure out what was causing that. It turns out it was
chlorofluorinated carbons, and it was coolants out of
refrigerators and stuff. So we stopped using those and phased
those out and replaced them with HFCs. We find that that is
good for the hole in the ozone but not so good for climate
change.
So now a number of companies, Honeywell is one of them,
Kumars is one of them, these others, American companies, have
developed a follow on to the HFCs. They are good for the hole
in the ozone and good for climate. And we need the Senate to be
able to vote to ratify a treaty, it flows out of the Montreal
Protocol.
There are a bunch of us who want to do it, a bunch of
Democrats and Republicans, led largely by our colleagues from
Louisiana. Any quick comments on that? And I appreciate your
support and the support of the Chamber on this.
Mr. Durbin. Thank you for the question, Senator. Again, I
agree with your premise, too, that there are times that the
regulation does help move things forward for us in the
environmental arena. I do think that the example you presented
there on the stratosphere for ozone is an opportunity for us to
work together to continue that and make that progress.
Senator Carper. That would be great.
Mr. Chairman, that is a great opportunity for us to work on
this stuff together. I hope that we will. We can do both. We
need to do both.
Thank you all.
[The prepared statement of Senator Carper follows:]
Statement of Hon. Thomas R. Carper,
U.S. Senator from the State of Delaware
Thank you, Chairman Braun and Ranking Member Whitehouse,
for holding this hearing. I also appreciate the willingness of
our witnesses to share their expertise with us.
Mr. Chairman, I am a big fan of innovation, and I am proud
to live in a country with such a rich tradition of industry-led
innovation and economic success. And I can truly say--as some
of our witnesses will today--that that innovation has re
[[Page 26]]
sulted in extraordinary improvements in air and water quality,
as well as public health and safety.
But I'd be remiss if I did not point out that in so many of
those cases, innovation alone was insufficient to protect the
public health and safety. In fact, at times, industry has
fought tooth and nail to oppose any efforts to protect the
public health from dangerous products.
Beginning in the 1950s, the automobile industry fiercely
opposed requirements aimed at improving passenger safety,
including innovations like seat belts and air bags that we all
take for granted today. Thankfully, the Federal Government
rejected those arguments and over time required seat belts and
air bags, including passenger-side air bags, in all new cars.
The result was not economic devastation to the auto industry,
but rather saving hundreds of thousands of lives.
In the mid-1970s--at a time when 88 percent of children
under the age of 5 had elevated levels of lead in their blood--
the oil industry vociferously opposed the EPA phase-out of lead
from gasoline. Before the predecessor to this committee, the
American Petroleum Institute testified, ``[i]n our judgment,
further control of lead is not necessary.'' Thankfully, the EPA
phase-out continued uninterrupted, and by the time it
concluded, the reductions meant that less than 2 percent of
young children had elevated blood lead levels.
In the 1980s, the world recognized that concerted,
international action was necessary to halt and reverse the
growing hole in the ozone layer. President Reagan's EPA
Administrator at the time, Lee Thomas, later recounted that
industry lobbied his Administration, claiming that they could
not phase-out the chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) causing the ozone
hole--that it would be too costly, and that the science was
uncertain.
President Reagan, however, recognized the risk of
chlorofluorocarbons, heeded the science, and helped to lead the
development and implementation of the Montreal Protocol. The
U.S. Senate ratified the resulting treaty unanimously, by a
vote of
83-0. Today, 99 percent of ozone depleting substances have been
phased out. EPA projects there will be a near complete recovery
of the ozone layer by the middle of the 21st century. And the
hairspray industry--which predicted economic calamity--survived
just fine.
In the early 1990s, while I was serving as Delaware's only
Congressman in the House of Representatives, I had the
privilege of working alongside the late John Dingell, when he
chaired the House Committee on Energy and Commerce. Under
Chairman Dingell's leadership, we passed the landmark Clean Air
Act Amendments of 1990 with the support of President George
H.W. Bush. Operators of coal-fired power plants argued that the
law's acid rain provisions would cause rolling blackouts, and
cost ratepayers billions of dollars. Instead, the law's cap-
and-trade program successfully leveraged the power of market
forces to reduce pollution, with costs only one-seventh of what
industry projected.
Similarly, for toxic air pollution, the 1990 Clean Air Act
Amendments looked to successful ways that industry was already
controlling emissions. The law required the largest polluters
to install ``maximum achievable control technology,'' based on
what each industry's most effective innovators were already
doing to reducing pollution. Some might derisively call this a
Federal mandate. I call it ensuring fair competition--a level
playing field so that polluters don't get an unfair advantage
over their cleaner competitors, at the expense of public
health.
Unfortunately, when it came to toxic pollution from power
plants, EPA dragged its feet. In the 2000s, when Senator Lamar
Alexander and I first introduced a bill to require power plants
to install already available technology to reduce mercury
pollution by 90 percent, the utilities said it couldn't be
done. It would cost too much and take too much time, they told
us. Thankfully, in 2012, the Obama-Biden EPA finally
promulgated the Mercury and Air Toxics Standards, which reduced
mercury pollution by 90 percent, and did so faster than the
utilities predicted and at one-third of the cost. Today, every
power plant in our country complies with those standards.
American industry is great at innovating. But the fact is,
companies are motivated chiefly by near term shareholder
pressures, not by the longer term goals of protecting the
broader public health and welfare. And too many times in our
history, industries have been resistant to the Government
actions and responsible regulations necessary to address
serious health and environmental problems. Yes, lead and
mercury levels are way down, our ozone layer is much restored,
and Americans are much less at risk as a result, and we can
thank smart laws and policies that resulted in unleaded
gasoline, innovative scrubbers, and CFC substitutes for these
successes.
Sometimes, changing the law or writing a new rule is, in
fact, the only way to resolve critical challenges to our
environmental quality and public health.
[[Page 27]]
As we look ahead to our continuing challenges--the climate
crisis, mercury and other air toxics, emerging contaminants,
vastly increasing extinction rates, and others--we will need to
deploy all of the tools at our disposal to ensure we leave
behind a healthy planet for our children and grandchildren to
call home.
So, I hope to learn more about how voluntary actions and
industry-led initiatives are going to help. I surely hope that
in some cases, voluntary industry efforts will help solve the
problem. That said, it is critical we see and accept that there
will be many cases in which those efforts are not enough, and
the Government needs to step in and act.
Once again, I thank our witnesses for sharing their time
and knowledge with us. I hope we will work together as we
continue to seek the right marriage of industry and Government
leadership to improve the quality of the environment.
Senator Braun. Thank you. It is amazing when time flies
when you are on an interesting subject. So to respect
everyone's time, I am going to ask a question here of Mr.
Wilson and then let the Ranking Member finish up, then I will
give a little concluding statement.
When it comes to the whole issue of how--first of all, I
believe industry, corporations, are generally footdraggers when
it comes to health care, which I am involved with. I see this
sector being a lot more ahead in the game, which, depending on
what you think its speed is, might be disappointing. You ought
to see how difficult it has been to get the health care
industry, which is the largest sector of our economy, to get
with it. Very disappointing.
I know that when it comes to the cost of capital and the
return on capital, I am a finance guy, I understand how that
works, without a pricing mechanism, how much progress do we
have to where people are just extrapolating the returns on
investment? And if they are not conscious of the climate, and
they are not green in nature, is that a mechanism in and of
itself that will have impact, hopefully geometrically better
than what we have had up to this point?
Mr. Wilson. I want to make sure I understand your question.
Are you asking whether it is possible to achieve sufficient
reductions without a policy statement?
Senator Braun. I think your answer to that would be no. I
am just asking what speed we might see, just for businesses
making that calculation, that I am not going to invest here
because it is not addressing the major climate issues, and
therefore, it would be a return, a poor ROI.
Mr. Wilson. Right.
Senator Braun. Which is basically what you have been
pushing and interested in, since you have been trying to direct
capital into a better return, because it is conscious of the
issues out there.
Mr. Wilson. That is correct. There are a lot of business
reasons why companies may take on climate change as an issue.
Right.
No. 1, obviously, is efficiency. A lot of companies--there
was a lot of low hanging fruit on the table, companies did not
have the systems in place to count energy efficiency savings,
for example, as a return on investment for a long time. So when
we engaged with companies, there was a lot of low hanging fruit
like that that they could take advantage of.
Another benefit of this is, companies are in a competition
for talent. And talent these days, especially young people, are
very engaged in this issue, I can tell you. I have two
children, and they are not of working age yet, but already very
engaged on this issue.
[[Page 28]]
The example you referenced earlier about Amazon, that began
with a movement within the employee base of Amazon to push the
company to take greater steps on climate change. So that would
be another benefit.
The third, of course, is more consumer interest in these
kinds of issues. So for everything from automotive, where
there's a much more avid interest in fuel efficiency, to the
food industry, that we engage with a lot, and there is a lot of
interest in not only healthier diets, but more sustainable
diets as well, which includes, obviously, better meat
production, but also moving away from meat to plant based
sources of food.
So there are different reasons why companies may take this
as an issue that they have to really think about. However, what
we find is that the low hanging fruit is rapidly diminishing,
and companies have gone a long way toward what they can do
without a price signal. However, obviously, a better signal
would accelerate all of the kinds of business cases that we
already see and have already raised with companies.
Senator Braun. Thank you.
Senator Whitehouse.
Senator Whitehouse. Thanks very much. I will just offer a
concluding thought.
First of all, let me thank Dr. Dutton for being here.
Science has been warning us for a considerable period of time
that this is coming at us. Science kind of provides the
headlights for society, giving us a preview of what is coming
down the road. For a long time; science has been predicting
that the road was going to get pretty damned rough.
But a scientific prediction is a different thing than an
actual human experience. And the fossil fuel industry's attacks
on science and on its conclusions have kind of fought that
science to a standstill, at least during the period when it was
just warnings.
Now we have entered the phase where the road is actually
really getting rough. And we are seeing this in previously
unknown wildfire intensities, and expanding wildfire seasons.
We are seeing it in the farming community with very atypical
flooding experiences and very atypical changes in how seasons
work, so that crops don't grow the same way.
In my world, the oceans, Ocean State, Rhode Island, we are
seeing it with fisheries moving about dramatically. Connecticut
and Rhode Island have essentially lost their lobster fisheries,
which used to be a pretty big deal. We are seeing it with
incredibly obviously measurements of sea level rise, of ocean
temperature. Really hard to argue with a thermometer.
And of ocean acidification. Any middle school with an
aquarium knows how to do a pH test. And pH tests are pretty
hard to argue with, too.
So all of this experience is now piling up. In addition,
from the economic side, we are starting to see warnings that
weren't apparent just a few years ago. So the warnings out of
the Bank of England and out of so many other sovereign banks
about a carbon asset bubble crash have the full attention of
banks, have the full attention of investors, have the full
attention of a community that did not take this terribly
seriously until recently.
[[Page 29]]
The warnings about a coastal property values crash coming
from not particularly green places like Freddie Mac have the
attention of all of the business community members whose
livelihoods depend on vibrant coastal communities--insurance,
real estate, builders, all of that.
So I think what we are at now is a point where for the
first time, there are very serious business interests for whom
climate change is no longer just a matter of humoring
shareholders and customers, but really goes to a potential
dramatic hit to their business model. And if you read what Mark
Carney at the Bank of England is warning about in terms of a
carbon asset bubble crash, even API's corporate members have a
lot to fear from a disorderly transition.
Companies that want to put their hands over their ears and
say la, la, la, la, la, and not pay any attention through this
stand a very good chance of hitting a wall and having a very
hard landing. Whereas with some preparation and care, that
could be something you could work your way through with some
attentive and thoughtful policy changes.
There is a big difference between jumping out of a plane
and jumping out of a plane with a parachute. And the outcome is
very different when you hit the ground.
So even API's members, I think, have an enormous stake in
getting this right. And certainly, the chambers do, across a
much broader array of industries that the Chamber represents.
So I look forward to continuing this discussion. I look
forward to the answers to the questions for the record.
In addition to asking to have the Chamber's page about
these different levels of membership put into the record, I
would also like to have the Chamber's letter of today
scorecarding the Senate resolution put into the record.
Then I have three articles, since I raised this issue about
the methane, three articles about the fossil fuel industry's
performance with respect to methane leakage and flooring. One
is a technical presentation, a scientific report called
Assessment of Methane Emissions from the U.S. Oil and Gas
Supply Chain.
The next is yesterday's New York Times story entitled
Despite Their Promises, Giant Energy Companies Burn Away Vast
Amounts of Natural Gas. And a final one is today's article from
Unearthed, whose title is not readily apparent, here we go,
Exxon and BP Among Worst for Flaring in U.S. Oil Fields,
Despite Green Pledges.
With your permission, Mr. Chairman, I would ask those to be
added to the record.
[The referenced information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Whitehouse. And I thank all the members of the
panel for being here today.
Senator Braun. By the way, those will be added to the
record, and the record will be open for 2 weeks for any other
submissions.
Very briefly, we are going to use this platform often. I
think the other news you may or may not know, but we are going
to introduce a climate caucus. I was the first Republican asked
to be on
[[Page 30]]
it, and was proud to be the first one to say yes. There will be
others.
I think this is the defining issue going forward. We just
need to figure out how we do it in a way that we can pay for
it, that everyone is engaged. And also, how we get the rest of
the world involved in doing it.
I think with the conscientious effort and speed you are
going to see from this country, and I am sure that we both
share that interest. This hopefully will be the first of many
conversations.
I want to thank all of you for coming in today to share
your thoughts.
With that being said, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:34 a.m., the hearing was concluded.]
[An additional statement submitted for the record follows:]
Statement of Hon. James M. Inhofe,
U.S. Senator from the State of Oklahoma
Mr. Chairman, thank you for hosting this hearing on the
important ways industry has both voluntarily and effectively
reduced its impact on the environment. This is a necessary
discussion as, unfortunately, we rarely hear of the many ways
industry is already taking initiative to reduce its
environmental footprint without overly burdensome and
ineffective Government mandates. I am taking this opportunity
to highlight an instance when regulators went too far with an
emission reduction proposal that harmed American innovation and
economic growth.
As a former chairman of this full committee, I distinctly
recall the many spirited policy disagreements I had with the
Obama administration on environmental regulations. While there
were many heavy-handed and harmful proposals during that
administration, one of the most ill-conceived was in regard to
changes to corporate average fuel economy (CAFE) standards. As
many know, days before President Trump's inauguration, the
Obama administration's Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
acted unilaterally to lock in its portion of the 2012 CAFE
standards through 2025. These standards would have
unquestionably hampered production of trucks and SUVs as these
types of vehicles do not help automakers meet the arbitrary
CAFE standards of 50 miles per gallon fuel economy average by
2025. Government bureaucrats intended to force their radical
environmental agenda on Americans despite the reality that SUVs
and trucks make up over two-thirds of vehicles sold in America.
The standards have also encouraged car companies like Jeep to
sacrifice passenger safety by forgoing a spare tire in an
effort to reduce vehicle weight to increase average fuel
economy. Fortunately, the Trump administration is putting a
stop to President Obama's harmful fuel economy standards and
has proposed replacing them with standards that will reduce
vehicle price tags for consumers while maintaining an ambitious
national fuel economy standard.
The Obama-era CAFE standards are one of many instances in
which bureaucrats have forced their radical environmental
agenda on the American people. These policies are misguided and
unfairly limit consumer choice. Oklahomans want affordable
vehicles and do not need Washington elites telling them what
kind of cars they can own. I continue to be proud of the Trump
administration and its efforts to cut red tape and improve CAFE
standards. Thankfully we finally have a president willing to
stand up for Oklahoma's farmers, ranchers and small business
owners.
[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]