- TO THE CLOUD! THE CLOUDY ROLE OF FEDRAMP IN IT MODERNIZATION
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
TO THE CLOUD! THE CLOUDY ROLE OF FEDRAMP IN IT MODERNIZATION
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
JULY 17, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-48
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available on: http://www.govinfo.gov
http://www.oversight.house.gov or
http://www.docs.house.gov
___________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
37-585 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM
ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland, Chairman
Carolyn B. Maloney, New York
Jim Jordan, Ohio, Ranking Minority
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Member
Columbia
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Thomas Massie, Kentucky
Jim Cooper, Tennessee
Mark Meadows, North Carolina
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Jamie Raskin, Maryland
James Comer, Kentucky
Harley Rouda, California
Michael Cloud, Texas
Katie Hill, California
Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida
Ralph Norman, South Carolina
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Peter Welch, Vermont
Chip Roy, Texas
Jackie Speier, California
Carol D. Miller, West Virginia
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Mark E. Green, Tennessee
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Kelly Armstrong, North Dakota
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
W. Gregory Steube, Florida
Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Ro Khanna, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
David Rapallo, Staff Director
Wendy Ginsberg, Subcommittee Staff Director
Joshua Zucker, Clerk
Christopher Hixon, Minority Staff Director
Contact Number: 202-225-5051
------
Subcommittee on Government Operations
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia, Chairman
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Mark Meadows, North Carolina,
Columbia,
Ranking Minority Member
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland
Thomas Massie, Kentucky
Jackie Speier, California
Jody Hice, Georgia
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
James Comer, Kentucky
Ro Khanna, California
Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachsetts
W. Gregory Steube, Florida
Jamie Raskin, Maryland
C
O
N
T
E
N
T
S
----------
Page
Hearing held on July 17, 2019....................................
1
Witnesses
Panel I
Anil Cheriyan, Director, Technology Transformation Services
General Services Administration
Oral Statement...................................................
4
Jack Wilmer, Deputy Chief Information Officer, Cybersecurity,
U.S. Department of Defense
Oral Statement...................................................
6
Joseph Klimavicz, Deputy Assistant Attorney General and Chief
Information Officer, U.S. Department of Justice
Oral Statement...................................................
7
Jose Arrieta, Chief Information Officer, U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services
Oral Statement...................................................
9
Panel II
Douglas Barbin, Principal, Schellman & Company, LLC
Oral Statement...................................................
22
Jonathan Berroya, Senior Vice President and General Counsel,
Internet Association
Oral Statement...................................................
24
Will Ackerly, Chief Technology Officer, Virtru
Oral Statement...................................................
25
Lynn Martin, Vice President of Government, Education, and
Healthcare, VMware
Oral Statement...................................................
27
The written openning statement and the witnesses' written
statements are available on the U.S. House of Representatives
Repository at: https://docs.house.gov.
Index of Documents
----------
The documents listed below are available at: https://
docs.house.gov.
* QFR's: from Chairman Connolly.
* QFR's: from Rep. Meadows.
* QFR Responses from: Will Ackerly, Chief Technology Officer,
Virtu; Douglas Barbin, Princeipal, Schellman & Company, LLC;
Jack Wilmer, Deputy Chief Information Officer, U.S. Department
of Defense; Lynn Martin, Vice President of Government,
Education, and Healthcare.
TO THE CLOUD! THE CLOUDY ROLE OF FEDRAMP IN IT MODERNIZATION
----------
Wednesday, July 17, 2019
House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Government Operations,
Committee on Oversight and Reform
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:11 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Gerald E.
Connolly (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Connolly, Norton, Lawrence,
Khanna, Meadows, Massie, Grothman, and Steube.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
The subcommittee will come to order. And without objection,
the chair is authorized to declare a recess of the committee at
any time.
The subcommittee is convening regarding the role of FedRAMP
in IT modernization, with the intention to introduce
legislation to codify the program. This hearing will inform
that legislation.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
I want to welcome everyone here to the hearing on the topic
of cloud computing, specifically Federal acquisition of secure
cloud computing services. Cloud computing has the potential to
help agencies modernize their information technology, while
saving taxpayers money, by eliminating the cost to the
government of building, operating, and maintaining those IT
products themselves.
The Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program,
known as FedRAMP, was established in 2011 to provide a
standardized governmentwide approach to security assessment
authorization and continuous monitoring of cloud computing
services. In short, FedRAMP is supposed to reduce the
redundancies of Federal cloud migration.
Recognizing the potential of cloud computing, the previous
administration established FedRAMP with the goals of reducing
duplicative efforts, inconsistencies, and cost inefficiencies
with the security authorization process; establishing a
private-public partnership to promote innovation and the
advancement of more secure information technologies; using an
agile and flexible framework that will enable the Federal
Government to accelerate the adoption of cloud computing;
creating transparent standards and processes for security
authorizations; and allowing agencies to leverage security
authorizations on a governmentwide scale.
Unfortunately, since the program began, cloud service
providers, some of whom are our constituents, have expressed
concerns regarding FedRAMP's efficiency, effectiveness, and
transparency. These stakeholders have noted that the process to
become FedRAMP certified can be expensive and time consuming.
What was supposed to be an expedited process, six months, may
be costing a quarter of a million dollars, instead, in many
cases, took years and takes years and can cost companies
millions of dollars, the very opposite of what FedRAMP was
designed to achieve.
In an audit of the FedRAMP program management office's
goals and objectives, the General Services Administration
Inspector General found that, while FedRAMP PMO has taken
action to address some of these concerns, additional action is
needed to strengthen the PMO to better meet the needs and
requirements of the program.
Last month, the Trump administration issued its Federal
Cloud Computing Strategy called Cloud Smart, which reaffirmed
the administration's support for FedRAMP. While acknowledging
that the FedRAMP program management office has made
improvements to the program and has reduced the amount of time
it takes to authorize a cloud service provider in most cases,
the policy also notes there's still a lack of reciprocity
across agencies in adopting FedRAMP authorizations, which has
led to significant duplication of effort when assessing the
security of a cloud service offering.
The policy also notes that a large number of agency-
specific processes has made it complicated for agencies to
issue an authorization to operate for cloud services, even when
a cloud service provider has already been authorized at other
agencies. And that is a concern the ranking member and I have
shared for the last two Congresses.
The Federal Government must do better when it comes to
acquiring cloud computing technologies. We cannot afford to
repeat the siloed processes of past IT acquisitions that's led
to spending $90 billion annually, a large chunk of which is on
maintaining legacy systems. However, we can't leverage the
potential of cloud computing if the processes are slower than
the speed at which the technology itself advances.
In a report published in April of this year, the GAO
analyzed IT dashboard data of 16 agencies to evaluate those
agencies' use of cloud services for fiscal years 2016 through
2018 and projected use in 2019. In Fiscal Year 2016, those 16
agencies reported 8 percent of their IT investments, on
average, used cloud services, with that average projected to
increase by 11 percent in fiscal 2019. Some agencies, such as
Social Security and GSA, projected nearly 40 percent of their
total IT investments would be for cloud computing services, a
100 percent increase.
As more of the Federal Government continues to increase its
investment in cloud computing, I believe we can achieve the
original goals laid out for FedRAMP. Last year, the ranking
member, Mr. Meadows, and I introduced legislation to codify the
program and to enable wider agency reuse of existing
authorizations to operate. We're working on legislation
together this year that would maintain those two objectives
while also helping to improve the program by increasing the use
of automation and providing for more transparency, all while
continuing to ensure that cloud computing services are secure
for use by Federal agencies.
The bill establishes a presumption of adequacy for those
security assessments that have been FedRAMP-certified to
increase agency reuse of authorizations. It requires FedRAMP to
establish and make public metrics on the length and quality of
assessments and to report progress toward meeting those metrics
to Congress. It calls on FedRAMP to find ways to automate the
process to increase the efficiency of security assessments.
I hope those are all needed improvements we can agree on,
and that includes the Trump administration. I don't often say
it, but I think we're on the same page.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for coming to today's
hearing. I look forward to hearing from them about the current
state of FedRAMP and how the process could be improved and
about the future of cloud computing in the Federal Government.
And with that, I call upon my good friend, the
distinguished ranking member from North Carolina, Mr. Meadows,
for his opening statement.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank all of you for being here.
Mr. Chairman, I just want to highlight your leadership in
this area and truly how you've worked, not only in a bipartisan
way, but you have been very inclusive on this issue that is
critical, and I just want to say I thank you for that.
Obviously, as we look at FedRAMP and what it is and what it
is not, it's all about providing agencies state-of-the-art
transformative power, and yet what we've--as the chairman has
highlighted, going back all the way to 2011 when the first
cloud, Cloud First initiative was first introduced, and as he
mentioned, the Cloud Smart announcement earlier this year, it
is critical that we are all on the same sheet of music and that
we are rowing in the right direction.
And I think probably the frustration for me many times is
that the Federal Government that spends over a hundred billion
dollars a year on IT is so lagging behind the private sector. I
can get--I can have cloud computing in a secure environment
much quicker than it seems like some of our Federal agencies.
And that's not to be condemning of anyone here or any of you,
because I think from your nodding you share my concern. And yet
what we have to do, as the chairman highlighted, is make sure
that we take these same efficiencies that are available to both
the private and public sector and make sure that it's not
laborious in its implementation.
We've had great successes with the pilots and where we are
now, and as the chairman mentioned, we're working on
legislation again this Congress to try to make sure that, not
only is it codified, but that we take some of the stumbling
blocks, as the chairman mentioned, some of the implementation,
it just needs to go faster.
I was at OPM the other day, and we were looking at some of
their systems and what they had to go through to actually just
do basic functions that I could probably do on an iPhone now,
and yet we've got these legacy systems that--and they have to
go in and log in and out of so many different systems to get
something that, honestly, if it was in the clouds, we would
have access to all of that where we would be able to ping it
from multiple locations.
But this is all about making sure that we have great
cybersecurity as well. And so I don't want us to be fast and
yet run into some of the same cybersecurity concerns that we
have been plagued with under the legacy systems that we have
already.
You know, the FedRAMP has worked with over 150 agencies,
220 cloud providers, and saved over $250 million. That's a
great story to tell. And we've seen the growth of this growing
at some 33 percent each year, and yet some of those benefits
still need room for improvement. And so what we want to hear as
a committee in a bipartisan way is how can we improve it, how
can we codify it, and how can we make it so that agencies, when
they make this decision, it gets done quickly. And so anything
we can do to streamline that process is great.
I look forward to working with all of you and the chairman
on this topic. You know, he said he wants to, you know, reach
for the clouds, and I think it's time we ramp it up. How about
that? All right.
I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my good friend. And I want to thank
him for being a great partner for a number of years on the
whole information technology management challenge in the
Federal Government. We've worked together in a bipartisan basis
on FITARA, on MGT, on the sunset provisions of FITARA and now
on FedRAMP, and we're going to continue that bipartisan
tradition on this subcommittee, on this subject for sure.
We now have a panel of four members. We have Anil Cheriyan,
the director of Technology Information Services at GSA, the
General Services Administration; Jack Wilmer, the deputy chief
information officer for Cybersecurity at the Department of
Defense; Joseph Klimavicz--is that right?
Mr. Klimavicz. Klimavicz.
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. Klimavicz, deputy assistant
attorney general and chief information officer at the U.S.
Department of Justice; and Jose Arrieta, chief information
officer at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
If you all four would stand and raise your right hand to be
sworn in. It is our custom to hear sworn testimony in this
committee.
Do you swear or affirm that the testimony you're about to
give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you God?
Let the record show that all four witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
The microphones are sensitive. So if you'll speak directly
into them like I'm doing, you can be heard.
And we'll begin with you, Mr. Cheriyan.
STATEMENT OF ANIL CHERIYAN, DIRECTOR, TECHNOLOGY TRANSFORMATION
SERVICES, GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
Mr. Cheriyan. Thank you.
Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Meadows, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, good morning, and
thank you for the opportunity to testify here.
I am Anil Cheriyan, deputy commissioner of the Federal
Acquisition Services and director of Technology and
Transformation Services within the GSA. Prior to joining the
GSA in January of this year, I served as a CIO at SunTrust
Banks, where as part of the executive leadership team, I led
digital, data, and operational transformation for various parts
of the bank. Also in my SunTrust role, I led a sectorwide
committee on cybersecurity standards, and so I understand the
criticality of this program for government.
I joined TTS because I was attracted to its mission of
making the lives of the American public better by leveraging
technology. FedRAMP, I believe, is an integral part of this
mission. At its core, the value proposition of FedRAMP is
threefold. One, it's about creating a single--leveraging a
single consistent standard for authorizing cloud products to
improve the security posture of Federal Government. Two, it's
to allow cloud service providers and agencies to have an
authorization in a streamlined, cost-effective manner. Three,
it's to encourage the reuse of these authorizations across the
Federal Government, thereby saving effort and cost on the part
of agencies and the industry.
I've been at the GSA for a little over six months now, and
I'd like to share with you some of my initial observations and
thoughts on the future.
I believe FedRAMP is turning a corner and is on the path to
success. FedRAMP provides tremendous value to both government
and industry. While the process has evolved over time and some
of the improvements have shown great results, there's still
opportunities to further improve FedRAMP's performance.
Prior to its inception in 2012, agencies issued their own
authorizations to operate, using their own standards, and the
FedRAMP process was established to create a common
authorization process that can be used across Federal
Government.
The program has made several improvements based on industry
feedback, frankly, with program additions such as FedRAMP
Connect, FedRAMP Ready, FedRAMP Tailored, FedRAMP Accelerated.
In addition, we have increased outreach to agencies and cloud
providers. Let me highlight some of the outcomes of these
process improvements.
So after a relatively slow start where it took three years
to authorize 50--40 products, we authorized 40 products in 2018
alone. As of today, there's 143 products authorized, with
nearly 70 in the pipeline. We've decreased timelines by almost
50 percent, with authorizations taking, on average, 5-1/2 to
eight months. In the last two years, the number of agencies
have grown by roughly 40 percent to 156 agencies. And reuse has
grown as well, with the average reuse of eight times. On some
cases, in some instances, some products are reused over 150
times. We believe this has saved agencies and industry over
$285 million in cost avoidance.
So while--as I mentioned before, while these improvements
are great, there are still real opportunities to show
improvements. So looking ahead, I plan to leverage my prior
industry expertise and continue to drive improvements, working
in close partnership with industry and agencies.
And here are some immediate short-term improvement
opportunities that we've already embarked on. In order to
better channel the feedback from industry and agencies, we will
participate in the recently established ACT-IAC FedRAMP working
group. Second, we will further streamline processes and
automate processes and workloads, as well as evaluate a threat-
based approach to authorization. In addition, we will expand
our industry and agency training to further clarify any process
concerns.
I'm sure we'll come up with additional opportunities, but
this is by no means the sum total of all opportunities. There's
significant opportunities as the process improves and evolves
further.
So I'd like to summarize by saying I believe FedRAMP is
turning the corner and it's on the path to success. And I'm
committed to work in close partnership with industry and
agencies to continue to make improvements.
Again, thank you, and I look forward to the opportunity to
obtain your feedback and answer any questions.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Cheriyan.
And by the way, in drafting our bill, we had very useful
input from your colleagues at GSA and they were productive and
helpful, and we appreciate that.
Mr. Wilmer.
STATEMENT OF JACK WILMER, DEPUTY CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER FOR
CYBERSECURITY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
Mr. Wilmer. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Meadows, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. Thank
you for this opportunity to testify today on the effectiveness
of the Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program,
FedRAMP.
I am Jack Wilmer, the deputy CIO for Cybersecurity and the
chief information security officer for the Department of
Defense. I also serve by delegation from the DOD CIO as one of
the three chairs of the FedRAMP Joint Authorization Board.
Today, I will provide background on DOD's participation in
FedRAMP, the effectiveness of FedRAMP, and the synergy between
DOD and the FedRAMP Program Management Office to provide
authorization for cloud services for the Federal Government.
DOD has been a partner in the FedRAMP program from its
inception, and our involvement has been a major benefit to the
Department. We have leveraged FedRAMP to make about 140 cloud
service offerings available for use in DOD thus far.
DOD supports the FedRAMP program by providing technical
assessments and continuous monitoring support and by providing
strategic programmatic support and oversight through the Joint
Authorization Board.
The FedRAMP JAB is a critical collaboration venue for
improving cloud cybersecurity practices across the Federal
Government, and provides efficiency through the issuance of JAB
Provisional Authorizations to Operate, or P-ATOs, to cloud
service providers.
A JAB P-ATO allows the Federal Government to evaluate cloud
service offerings once and reuse many times. Federal mission
owners leverage the risk information enumerated by the JAB in
the P-ATO, and as of June 1, 2019, there have been over 722
reuses of JAB-authorized services, resulting in over $180
million in cost avoidance.
DOD provides full reciprocity for cloud service providers
who have been granted a FedRAMP moderate authorization for use
with DOD public data. However, as a result of the threats which
routinely target DOD systems, we require cloud providers to
meet cybersecurity requirements specified by the Committee for
National Security Systems to be able to process any DOD-
controlled unclassified information. These additional
requirements only add 38 controls to the 325 required for the
FedRAMP moderate baseline.
We issue a DOD provisional authorization to systems that
have met our requirements, and this process adds one to six
weeks to the FedRAMP certification process, depending on the
sensitivity and complexity of the system. We have issued 120
provisional authorizations through reciprocity with the
moderate baseline and have only had to require additional DOD
assessments for 20 cloud services.
As the Department continues its transition to the cloud, it
is becoming more important to increase the speed of
authorizations for new cloud capabilities. One upcoming change
for DOD is that we will now issue a general provisional
authorization which will cover any cloud service offering which
has been assessed at the FedRAMP moderate baseline. This means
that cloud service providers will not have to wait for a
separate DOD authorization to have their services used for DOD
public data. This use case covers the vast majority of DOD
provisional authorizations that have been issued to date, and
we expect to make this change within a month.
We continue to review opportunities to improve
authorization timelines through communication with vendors and
the interagency stakeholders, and we strive to achieve as much
consistency as possible between the FedRAMP and DOD security
control baselines.
I would like to emphasize the importance of FedRAMP and the
standardized approach the program provides for cloud products
and services. This approach saves money, time, and staff
required to conduct the Department's security assessments.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify this morning, and
I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Wilmer.
Mr. Klimavicz.
STATEMENT OF JOSEPH KLIMAVICZ, DEPUTY ASSISTANT ATTORNEY
GENERAL AND CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
JUSTICE
Mr. Klimavicz. Good morning, Chairman Connolly, Ranking
Member Meadows, and distinguished members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for your continued commitment to improving
information technology across the Federal Government, and thank
you for the opportunity to appear today before you as the chief
information officer at the Department of Justice.
This testimony provides an overview of the Department's use
of FedRAMP, some possible areas of improvement, and some
considerations for the Federal Government as we begin shaping
the next iteration of FedRAMP.
FedRAMP provides a standardized approach to security
assessment, authorization, and continuous monitoring for cloud-
based products and services. The FedRAMP process allows the
Department to efficiently implement cloud solutions in a
secure, cost-effective manner.
To date, the Department of Justice takes advantage of 18
JAB-authorized Provisional-ATOs and 9 ATOs sponsored by other
agencies. The Department has also sponsored nine ATOs which can
be used by other agencies. Additionally, the Department
incorporates FedRAMP requirements into our acquisition policy
and contract language. Awarding contracts with this language
holds vendors accountable for implementation of security
controls.
But like any government program, there are opportunities to
improve. So one of the stated goals of FedRAMP is to promote
the reuse of Provisional-ATOs and to reduce administrative and
cost burdens for both cloud service providers and Federal
agencies. But many cloud service providers, especially those
unfamiliar with Federal cyber requirements, do not know which
security controls to prioritize and implement. Also, the
predominantly manual 3PAO assessment process results in less
than standardized outputs and lengthened review times.
The cloud has opened up many new methods for small
companies to develop disruptive technologies at lower cost.
Opportunities exist to support their understanding and
implementation of security requirements in a more automated and
cost-effective manner. In addition, agency-level ATOs can be
difficult to share because of residual risks from tailored or
risk-accepted controls that are inherently different between
entities. Furthermore, the residual risks are not consistently
documented.
FedRAMP also fails to address all Federal security
mandates.
Finally, the Federal FedRAMP authorizations do not
eliminate all agency assessment, authorization, and monitoring
activities. Agencies must still assess controls not implemented
by the cloud service provider, as well as provide for FISMA-
required continuous monitoring of those same cloud-based
services for the entirety of their operational life cycle.
As the Federal Government and its partners shape the next
iteration of FedRAMP, I'm glad to offer a few observations for
improvement. First, an automated security assessment
methodology could be developed to allow third parties to assess
cloud service providers in real time. This would produce a
cyber risk--security risk score for Provisional-ATOs, reducing
the cost and time investment of services--service providers.
Second, replacing the manual 3PAO review with real-time
assessment platforms based on technical measures, machine
output only, and issuing Provisional-ATOs based upon risk
scores will eliminate the long wait times for manual review by
the FedRAMP PMO.
Third, require the cloud service providers to use and
conform to DHS' CDM standards for continuous monitoring to
increase threat awareness, enable consistent cyber reporting.
Fourth, require an independent Federal entity, for example,
the Federal CIO Council, Federal Chief Information Security
Officers Council, to review JAB Provisional-ATOs to ensure
standards are consistent with Federal policy updates.
Fifth, establish standardized acquisition clauses through
the Federal Acquisition Regulatory Council to capture Federal
Government policies and mandates.
As you can see, FedRAMP is a critical part of implementing
the Department's IT modernization efforts, and the Department
looks forward to working with the subcommittee, the FedRAMP
PMO, the Office of Management and Budget on the next iteration
of FedRAMP.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you
today. I welcome your questions. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Mr. Arrieta.
STATEMENT OF JOSE ARRIETA, CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
Mr. Arrieta. Good morning, Chairman Connolly and Ranking
Member Meadows and members of the committee. Thank you for
providing me the opportunity to discuss the Department of
Health and Human Services' FedRAMP program with you today. I
appreciate the opportunity to speak with the subcommittee today
to share our perspectives on a program that we believe is a
strategic enabler for modernization.
I joined HHS 18 months ago, and I was appointed as the
permanent chief information officer about 50 days ago. And
although I've had a brief tenure as CIO, I'm keenly aware of
the value and importance of leveraging cloud technology to
drive greater data sharing, greater data security, and greater
financial savings.
Why do we look at FedRAMP as a strategic enabler? HHS deals
with the most critical information regarding one in three
Americans. FedRAMP is the fulcrum for modernization efforts,
and we've committed to it.
In 2013, HHS was the first agency to sponsor a cloud
service provider through the FedRAMP process. To date, HHS has
authorized a total of 14 cloud service technologies and
leverages over 60 FedRAMP-authorized cloud products across the
enterprise.
We support the standardization and reuse model. It has
saved HHS, its customers, and industry countless hours.
At HHS, FedRAMP's success is built on partnership between
industry and government. At HHS, FedRAMP is more than a point
in time authorization of a specific technology. We actually
meet with our industry partners on a monthly basis and share
security concerns. This allows us to have ongoing monitoring
and maintenance of our FedRAMP-approved cloud service
providers.
I thought for a second I would talk to you about the legal
framework that y'all have put in place that is actually driving
change within Federal agencies and how it's impacting behavior
specifically within HHS. To us, FedRAMP is a secure cloud.
FITARA is empowering the CIO and giving him the visibility to
actually drive change to that secure cloud environment, and the
MGT Act is the incentives that actually drives those actions.
An example of this behavior in HHS that we believe will be
transformative for the acquisition function is called HHS
Accelerate. We thought to ourselves at HHS, wouldn't it be
amazing if we could give the cancer researcher that comes to
HHS insight on all of the expenditures associated with cancer
researchers that came before him so that he had the benefit of
that information in real time available to him at his
fingertips so that he could do a business plan or an
acquisition plan to spend the money that he has to solve a
large problem of cancer? We thought, wouldn't it be amazing at
HHS if we could give contracting professionals the terms and
conditions and prices paid associated with different products
and services from the $24.2 billion we spend every year in the
hundred thousand contracts?
It's kind of like going to Target. If you walk in Target
and you show them a price that you found on Amazon, the cashier
will immediately give you the discount.
Well, because of the legal framework that you've put in
place, we've actually been able to build a program which we
call HHS Accelerate that we think will facilitate those
behaviors. We built that program from April 17 to December 10,
and we're testing it now. And we would not believe--we do not
believe it could have happened that quickly without this legal
framework. So thank you for your visionary work.
All of the work to actually develop HHS Accelerate was
performed by small businesses. I've been committed to the small
business community as an employee at the Treasury, as an
employee at the Department of Homeland Security, and now as an
employee at HHS. And I just got an invite to participate in the
congressional meet and match procurement workshop conference in
September and, if Ethics approves, I'm delighted to attend.
As with anything, there are future opportunities, and I
just want to highlight a couple. At HHS, our Secretary and
Deputy Secretary have set a goal to make data available to
private sector healthcare companies to improve health outcomes
for the American people. We call it liberating data. FedRAMP is
the mechanism that will ensure that we can securely share data
with industry partners that specifically operate in the private
sector healthcare marketplace to improve health outcomes for
the American people.
We have to educate those companies on what FedRAMP is.
They've never done business with the U.S. Federal Government
before, but in order to access our data, they need to be a
FedRAMP-approved provider. That is extremely important to us,
and that is an opportunity to directly impact the American
citizens in this Nation. So we believe that education and
engagement with the industry base is the single most important
criteria for making FedRAMP successful.
I'll close by saying this: At HHS, we believe technology
modernization is iterative and evolutionary. As we build, we
learn. As we learn, we mature. As we mature, we implement. And
as we succeed, we scale. And we've taken that approach. As you
guys have built the legal framework to drive change in this
marketplace, I think you've taken the same approach, and we
certainly appreciate that at HHS.
Happy to answer any questions that you may have.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Arrieta, for your refreshing
testimony. And your comments about our legal framework and
praising FITARA and our visionary leadership I think merit you
a promotion and a big raise on a bipartisan basis. We agree.
The chair now recognizes the distinguished Congresswoman
from the District of Columbia, Ms. Norton.
Ms. Norton. I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And could
I congratulate you both as well. I love this spirit of self-
congratulation.
Mr. Meadows. We're very good at it.
Mr. Connolly. Yes, don't spoil it, Eleanor. Come on.
Ms. Norton. I'm trying not to, but the whole point of this
hearing is to see how we can improve FedRAMP.
So I'm going to try to break the spirit just a little bit,
because I am interested in the issue of reciprocity. It's a
great big Federal Government.
The whole point, I thought, of FedRAMP is to be able to
deal across agency lines and that that would be a big incentive
for agencies, and yet the reports to this committee is
duplication of efforts continue in assessing cloud products.
Many agencies have their unique processes and apparently are
not lured by reciprocity.
I've really got to--I don't know what--the chairman said 18
percent use FedRAMP. Is that the figure, Mr. Cheriyan, 18
percent of agencies?
Mr. Cheriyan. Yes. We have about 156 agencies engaged in
FedRAMP.
Ms. Norton. So I'm trying to see what percentage of
agencies that is now. You have any idea?
Mr. Cheriyan. I could get you that number.
Ms. Norton. I can't do the math because I don't know how
many agencies there are, and that might include all kinds of
small and large agencies.
And I congratulate you on what you've done. And you
listened to what needs to be done and you take action, and it
appears to produce some response. So I'm trying to find out the
reluctance of the chief information officers to use FedRAMP,
even certified products, particularly granted by other
agencies.
I guess I should speak with you, Mr. Cheriyan, because you
oversee the whole FedRAMP office. Is there more that could be
done to get reciprocal trust so that you could--we could speed
up the use of FedRAMP? And what--is it just doing things the
way they've always done it? I'm trying to get to the root of
the problem to find out what the solution is.
Mr. Cheriyan.
Mr. Cheriyan. Thank you for that question. And as you
mentioned, reuse is very important to us. That's one of the
core principles of FedRAMP, and that's why it was created in
the first place. So it's a significant issue for us that we're
working on.
As I mentioned earlier, about 156 agencies are currently
engaged in FedRAMP. It's close to a 40 percent increase over
the last couple of years. And a lot of that has been due to the
outreach efforts that have been going on by the FedRAMP teams,
as well as the JAB teams, in terms of getting the word out, in
terms of educating, in terms of training.
We've held over 12--you know, we've trained over 12,500
individuals in Federal Government, as well as industry, on the
process. We have agency-specific training efforts that are
underway. We have CISOs, or information security officers, also
going through the training. So training is a big part of it in
terms of really educating all of the agencies in terms of what
FedRAMP is, deal with any misperceptions, et cetera.
We're also actively participating in forums. I mentioned
the ACT-IAC forum that is about to get started, which is the
FedRAMP working group. That is a significant group that we
believe we can have a lot of sharing, not only between
agencies, but also cloud service providers. We really----
Ms. Norton. Before my time runs out, it seems to me that
the kind of outreach you're doing is appropriate, and that
you're listening and responding. So here is my question. It
seems to me with these agencies--and, again, I ask the chairman
to find out what percentage. I don't know where I got the 18
percent. It may have been from your opening remarks. I know the
figure sticks in my head.
But this is a question for everybody. It looks like there
need to be incentives given for FedRAMP to encourage agencies
to serve as sponsors for cloud providers, and I wish you'd
think about that. The outreach seems to be good. The response
seems to be good. So this is a question for the entire panel.
If you had to say, now, what could disengage people from
what they do already, what incentives could we offer that would
make it so attractive that they'd want to, in fact, engage the
FedRAMP program? What would each of you say?
Mr. Connolly. The gentlelady's time has expired.
But, Mr. Wilmer, you are authorized to respond.
Mr. Wilmer. Yes, sir. Thank you.
Ma'am, what I would offer in response to that, from a
Department of Defense perspective, is that we are fully
committed to reciprocity, and there's a massive incentive for
us in having that reciprocal arrangement with FedRAMP. Going
through those 325 controls with the moderate baseline as an
example, which is something that the FedRAMP program takes on
for us, is work that we no longer have to do in order to
leverage those cloud services.
I talked a little bit before about the increased security
environment, increased threat environment that our DOD services
face. And so we do require additional information, but that's
all built on top of the good work that FedRAMP has done.
So in terms of your specific question about incentives, I
believe that there's already a major built-in incentive from
the FedRAMP program in terms of doing that assessment once and
allowing for reuse across the government.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the gentlelady.
Thank you, Mr. Wilmer.
Although, just to followup, it's our information that 57
percent of Federal agencies use FedRAMP. And if that's
accurate, that still means 43 percent don't. So, yes, what you
say may be true, but it hasn't seeped through to the entire
Federal family.
The distinguished ranking member is now recognized for his
five minutes of questioning.
Mr. Meadows. Mr. Chairman, in the interest of time and
seeing that you've got a number of members on your side, here's
what I would ask all three of--or all four of you to do.
If you will let this committee know the three major
obstacles for creating delays for implementation, how we can
either help that administratively or help that legislatively. I
think the time is critical, and if you will do that and get
that to committee, I think that will be well-served.
I just want to say thank you to all of you. If we can
implement it at your levels, the rest of--all the other
agencies. There are none that are more critical than the four
that are represented at the table. And we'll be able to take it
everywhere. And so, you know, they're learning by your both
mistakes but also your frontier, pioneer kind of way of getting
this done. So I just want to say thank you.
And I'll yield back in the interest of time.
Mr. Connolly. Very well said, Mr. Meadows. And would that
all Federal agencies have the enthusiasm for change Mr. Arrieta
expressed in his testimony. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Khanna.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I will be brief as well.
In the spirit of congratulations, I will note two unique
parts of this hearing because of your leadership, Mr. Chairman,
and Ranking Member Meadows.
First, it's Congress displaying a proficiency in competency
in technology. What a refreshing change. And, second, it is
bipartisanship to that end. In the legislation that you and
Representative Meadows have offered last Congress, and I expect
that you would offer it this Congress, I think will be a
tremendous contribution to continuing to improve FedRAMP.
So my question--let me just ask two questions and then have
the panel address it so we can get to the other members.
One, what can we do to better allow small businesses access
to participate in FedRAMP? And, two, are there areas based on--
I imagine you've read the Meadows--the Connolly Meadows,
Meadows-Connolly bill. And are there things that you think are
important this time to include in that bill?
Mr. Cheriyan. So, yes, let me start. Thank you for that
question. You know, regarding small business, just a high-level
overview of where we are, we've got about 33 percent of the
authorized products right now are from small businesses. And if
you look at the pipeline, it's around 33 percent. So it's a
growing percentage over the last couple of years. It's really
increased.
However, there's still more opportunity, I believe, to,
one, educate small business. A lot of small businesses are
unaware of the process itself, the security requirements that
we have, and a lot of time is, frankly, wasted when the small
business is really trying to figure that out. So, really, the
education piece of creating that and that awareness in small
business is something that we take very seriously.
Mr. Connolly. Would my friend yield just for a second?
Mr. Khanna. Sure.
Mr. Connolly. That's true, Mr. Cheriyan, but that doesn't
let us off the hook. No small business can afford to risk
millions of dollars and the uncertainty of no guarantee of when
they'll be certified.
Mr. Cheriyan. Right.
Mr. Connolly. And that's a huge problem for small and
minority businesses, women, minority, veterans-owned businesses
to enter the field. The big players can afford it. The smaller,
medium-sized businesses, frankly, have to really look at it.
And that's one of the things our legislation is designed to try
to alleviate so that there's more possibility for entry.
Without prejudice to the gentleman's time, thank you for
yielding.
Mr. Cheriyan. Yes. Clearly need to add that the speed at
which we are authorizing these products for small businesses
needs to improve. And we talked a lot about the automation
approaches, the level of risk associated with it. And a lot of
small businesses run on existing infrastructure that has
already been authorized. So there's a significant amount of
inherited risk that has been certified already. So there's lots
of opportunities, I believe, to improve that.
Mr. Wilmer. Sure. I would add only the--I think the most
important thing that we can do is driving additional automation
into the assessment process. So there's a lengthy set of
controls that small businesses and all cloud providers have to
be able to implement, and the more that we can enable in terms
of automation of going through that set of controls should
reduce the burden of actually going through the process and
creating the artifacts that are then required for us to assess.
Mr. Klimavicz. I would just say with respect to small
businesses, when I've talked to small businesses, one of the
things I hear up front is they need more information to help
them make a better business decision, a cost benefit. Which
controls do I implement? What's important in terms of future
business? Do I go after low-, moderate-, or high-impact
tradeoffs, the encryption? Everything, all those decisions,
they've asked for more information up front so they can make an
investment decision, and also how much is it going to cost to
implement these controls and are they going to get that paid
back down the road. So understanding tradeoffs, getting more
information up front.
And with the second part of your question, I agree with Mr.
Wilmer here that I think the automation. As I mentioned in my
testimony, everything needs to be real time, everything needs
to be automated, and that will help the small businesses.
Thank you.
Mr. Arrieta. And I'll just say about the automation, as the
automation is built, if it is built, there should be direct
engagement with the small business community as to what you're
building. That will actually help them plan to take advantage
of the automation that you're building. That shouldn't be
here's what we're thinking of building and then asking further
feedback. There should be a dialog there that shapes what is
built. And I think if you want to include the small business
community, as a former small business executive at the
Treasury, you have to engage them as you build the solution.
And I agree with the other panelists' comments.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much, Mr. Khanna.
The chair now recognizes the very distinguished lady and
accomplished Congresswoman from Michigan, our dear friend, Mrs.
Lawrence.
Mrs. Lawrence. Thank you, Chairman, for holding this, and
to the ranking members here.
Mr. Arrieta?
Mr. Arrieta. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Lawrence. I want you to know that, I want to be on the
record, I agree. We in government, as we embrace technology, as
we try to keep pace with this industry, we must sit down at the
table and talk and work together. Because so often, our
regulation and our pace that--for our approval lags so far
behind innovation and advances in technology. So I really
agree.
I wanted to ask this question of you, sir. I would like to
ask you how the implementation of cloud services has affected
the Department of Health and Human Services. Specifically, how
did the implementation enable the Department of HHS to
accelerate its mission?
Mr. Arrieta. Well, thank you for the question. I appreciate
that. At HHS, we, as I said in the opening testimony, we award
about a hundred thousand contracts $24.2 billion in spend flow
through those contracts every year.
What we were able to do in a very short time because we had
FedRAMP-approved cloud service capabilities is we were actually
able to move all of that contracting data to a commercial cloud
environment, and then we were able to use an incremental
approach to actually rebuilding our business process and
partnership with small business to automate many of the
functions of the acquisition life cycle.
If we didn't have FedRAMP-approved products to actually
build on, the process would have taken a lot longer. So the
ability to actually separate data from business process
actually gave us the flexibility to modernize our IT systems,
while allowing our legacy IT systems to still function and
serve the mission but also directly engaging over 3,000 members
of the acquisition community over a nine-month period across
HHS and allowing them to design the functionality that would
drive the best outcome for them.
We had a really strong and robust business plan around
that. If you--you know, privately if you wanted to hear that,
I'd be happy to come back and share that with you. But we had
very specific ROI measures on the basis of process improvement,
on the basis of savings at the point of purchase, and on the
basis of infrastructure savings that we thought we were able to
generate, and we were able to track those investments along the
way because we were able to take this incremental approach,
separate data from business process, and modernize.
So I think FedRAMP is a key component to that. And like I
said, the legal framework that this committee has put in place
actually gave us the tools to make the argument that this was a
good idea, and we thank you very much for that.
Mrs. Lawrence. Thank you so much.
Cybersecurity threats constantly evolve, and while the
FedRAMP controls serve as a baseline, we must ensure that these
assessments are flexible enough to incorporate changing
security threats.
So, Mr. Wilmer and Mr. Cheriyan, how does FedRAMP stand up
to the speed with the evolving cybersecurity threats?
Mr. Cheriyan. At the core of the FedRAMP process, we use a
NIST standard for cybersecurity in terms of the level of risk,
whether it's low, moderate, or high. And there's a fairly
detailed set of controls that NIST has provided that form the
basis of the risk assessment of FedRAMP.
As you mentioned, cybersecurity is really fast-moving.
Mrs. Lawrence. Yes.
Mr. Cheriyan. It moves at a pretty fast pace, and that
control and that standard is constantly updated. So we work
with NIST to give them feedback, and they get the feedback from
a lot of the different agencies, and that's how the whole
standard has changed. And can it be done faster? Definitely we
should be looking at that, but that's----
Mrs. Lawrence. But does FedRAMP emphasize the most
important security vulnerabilities that our government faces?
Mr. Wilmer?
Mr. Wilmer. So, ma'am, what I would offer is that a lot of
the controls are really a framework for how you would deal with
cybersecurity incidents. So you're exactly right, ma'am, that
the threat evolves over time. Many of the controls that we
require cloud service providers meet ensure that they are
prepared to deal with the evolution of threats, as opposed to
ensuring that they are protected against specific ones.
And so that combination of making sure that you have basic
security practices in place to protect yourself from the
threats and then also ensure that you have the right processes
and procedures in place to deal with threats or, you know,
worst case, if they are actually negatively impacted by a cyber
incident, is a critical piece of that.
And then as Mr. Cheriyan mentioned, as NIST evolves the
framework itself, the Joint Authorization Board will actually
go through and determine if any additional controls need to be
added or removed from the FedRAMP baseline.
Mrs. Lawrence. Thank you.
Just in closing, I want to be on the record that it's been
amazing and just such an honor to share this time in history
with an amazing leader like my colleague, Congressman Connolly.
I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. I wish we could give you a promotion and a
raise. Thank you so much, Congresswoman Lawrence.
I now recognize myself for questioning.
Let me just say, my interest in FedRAMP was stoked by a
friend and colleague, Steve O'Keefe, at MeriTalk. They had a
conference up here a few years ago. And I don't know, there
were 125, maybe 150 people in the room. And at one point--and
there were all kinds of complaints about FedRAMP.
And at one point, Mr. O'Keefe asked everyone to raise their
hands on a simple question. How many of you think FedRAMP is
working the way it was designed to work? The only hands that
went up were Federal officials in the room, like nine of them.
And then he said, well, how many think it's not working the
way it was designed? And the other 120 or whatever hands wept
up.
I'm looking at this, thinking, are we that disconnected
from, in a sense, our client base, right? FedRAMP has clients,
and the Federal Government ultimately is the client, but so are
the service providers, right, whom we certify. And it just
etched in my mind that we've got a problem, and we were
reluctant to address it legislatively. We were hoping it would
be addressed administratively. And there have been
administrative improvements. And certainly, not least under
your leadership, Mr. Cheriyan. But problems continue. And we're
going to hear from a second panel, and we're going to hear some
problems from the private sector in terms of what they
experience.
Let me begin, Mr. Cheriyan, with the budget. My
understanding is FedRAMP gets roughly $10 million within your
agency from the Federal Citizen Services Fund. Is that correct?
Mr. Cheriyan. Yes, that's correct.
Mr. Connolly. And 25 percent goes to the JAB, and 75
percent goes to your office at GSA.
Mr. Cheriyan. Let me just clarify a little bit of that. The
$10 million is the amount spent by GSA. And DOD and DHS each
spend an additional $2.5 million.
Mr. Connolly. Okay.
Mr. Cheriyan. So it's roughly $2.5 million for JAB and $7.5
million----
Mr. Connolly. All right. And we'll be certainly talking to
all of you about this, but Mr. Meadows and I, in the draft
bill, are looking at do we need additional resources. A lot of
people in the private sector say yes. We're both pecunious
gentlemen; but on the other hand, if FedRAMP isn't working the
way we want it to work and it needs some adjustment in resource
availability, we're certainly willing to look at that in the
draft legislation.
It's my understanding, Mr. Cheriyan, that we're doing about
12 certifications, 12 approvals a year. Is that correct?
Mr. Cheriyan. Yes. There are 12 JAB certifications per year
and another 38 or so agency--30-plus agency authorizations. So
perhaps maybe two or three years ago, the majority of the
certifications were JAB. And, frankly, the whole approach has
pivoted a little bit as agencies have got more engaged, and
about 75 percent of the authorizations are now agency
authorizations, and only 25 percent are JAB authorizations.
Mr. Connolly. But what are--going back to Ms. Norton's
question, I mean, I think from, certainly speaking for myself,
and most commonsense perspectives maybe, if you get certified
at window X, certainly if you get--let's start with JAB. If I'm
certified at JAB, I view that as the gold standard, and that
ought to be good for me to punch my dance ticket at all the
other windows, except for compartmentalized, highly specialized
needs. The idea that, no, that's fascinating, that's our
referendum but you've got to start all over again is
unacceptable and leads to absolutely needless expense.
And, again, going back to the small minority--small and
medium-sized businesses, minority and otherwise, it de facto
discriminates against them. They cannot incur that kind of
expense. And we have many, many Federal contractors who serve
many different Federal agencies.
And so if we're sort of diffusing the approval process, is
that forcing businesses to get 24 stamps or 12 stamps, or can
they get one with the presumption that's going to be pretty
much good, with a few exceptions, at the other windows as well?
Mr. Cheriyan. Yes, let me take a shot at it and then have
some of my colleagues answer.
So just a couple of things. The JAB authorization or an
agency authorization, for the FedRAMP PMO standpoint, we view
it as the same. It's following the same processes, the same
standards, et cetera. The JAB is really using the DOD, DHS, and
GSA security leaders to do the authorization. In addition, we
provide continuous monitoring, et cetera.
Mr. Connolly. I want to give you a chance to be very clear.
You're not arguing JAB is just no different than any other
Federal agency. JAB is a different--I mean, it--we created it
as a multiagency entity for a reason.
Mr. Cheriyan. No. I do believe that the JAB authorization
enables a cloud service provider to go to more agencies. So----
Mr. Connolly. That's right. I just wanted to clarify what
you were not saying.
Thank you.
Mr. Cheriyan. The second point I'd make is that when an
agency takes a P-ATO from JAB, they don't have to start from
scratch. What they're doing is they're looking at whatever the
number of the controls are, whether it's low, moderate, or
high, and it's a hundred to 300 to 400, depending on the
severity or the risk. They will then evaluate on their own risk
profiles as to which areas they need to spend more effort in.
And so it's not a start from scratch. It's purely a, what has
the JAB provided? Do we accept it or do we now need to do more?
And that's fundamentally the reuse process that----
Mr. Connolly. Well, let me just say, yes, that's how it
should work. But I'm aware of, for example, right now, one
entity, a private sector entity that is using a software
application that's been approved, that's certified; but because
it's for a different application, same software, they have to
go through the process, and they have no idea when it will be
approved.
Mr. Cheriyan. Okay. So we should----
Mr. Connolly. And that's millions of dollars and multiple
years for a medium-sized, maybe small-to medium-sized business,
and that's maddening to people. Like, well, if Mr. Wilmer
thought it was okay to use the software, the fact that I'm
applying it to HHS, it's the same software, shouldn't the
presumption be that, of course, I'm certified, just a different
application?
Mr. Cheriyan. We believe it should.
Mr. Connolly. Okay.
Mr. Cheriyan. And if there's misperception and----
Mr. Connolly. All right. Expect a phone call.
Mr. Cheriyan. We're happy to take the phone call.
Mr. Connolly. No, I--thank you.
Mr. Cheriyan. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. There are going to be hiccups, but what I'm
trying to establish is we agree on some principles here that,
moving forward, especially once we have a bill, will, in fact,
streamline the process and make it more, you know, user-
friendly for people who apply.
Now, let me just ask one more question about the 12 JAB.
And maybe, Mr. Wilmer, you want to get in on this. Does that
create a backlog? I mean, if we're doing 12, how many are we
not getting to every year?
Mr. Wilmer. Sir, as you are well aware, there are tons of
cloud service offerings, especially when you look at the
software as a service space. And that's where, to your point,
there is absolutely a backlog of those that would like to go
through the JAB process. We do have a published prioritization
process through which we determine which order we will actually
work through cloud service providers, but that's where I'd also
like to give the FedRAMP PMO a lot of credit for coming up with
the agency authorization process.
And, really, what this particular capability does is it
allows a cloud service provider that has a customer that wants
to use it. So any Federal agency can go through and perform an
assessment on that cloud service offering. They can then
package up all of the work that they did, provide it to the
FedRAMP PMO. The FedRAMP PMO can review it, ensure that it
meets the standards, and then put that out on the FedRAMP
marketplace so that they can still benefit from the same
reciprocity that is otherwise offered.
Mr. Connolly. One of the concerns we have is entry into the
market. And we've heard people say, through the grapevine, that
certain officials of the Federal Government actually want to de
facto limit the number, because it's easier to manage how many
people are certified and qualified to provide cloud services.
And I understand that but, on the other hand, it's a big
Federal market, huge.
Mr. Arrieta just talked about how many contracts and how
much cumulatively they add up to, and we want to give Americans
who are entrepreneurs an opportunity to compete in that market.
And sometimes the smaller entities are more nimble and more
innovative, depending on the need, and we don't want to find
that there are artificial barriers to entry by virtue of a
fixed number in our minds or in our willingness or ability to
approve. So that's our concern about 12. It seems like a small
number.
Mr. Wilmer. Yes, sir. So the number 12, part of the impact
of going through a JAB authorization is that we are also
responsible for the continuous monitoring of the cloud services
that we authorize. So as we approve more services, there are
more that we have responsibility for ensuring that they
continue to meet the standards through which we assess them.
I agree completely with your point in terms of reciprocity,
and also your comment about the number of services that we are
able to process, but that's effectively part of the limiting
reagent that we have in terms of the bandwidth we can support.
Mr. Connolly. Two more questions, and then I'll be
finished, and we will thank you so much, and I know we will be
in touch again.
One is to you, Mr. Wilmer. You serve on the JAB,
representing the Pentagon.
Mr. Wilmer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. In the past, we've had stories told about a
private-sector entity that went to the JAB, got approved, and
then went to one of the windows at the Pentagon, only to be
told, ``That's fascinating; you have to apply all over again,''
as if the JAB thing was advisory or fascinating but irrelevant.
Can you assure us that this no longer occurs, if it did?
Mr. Wilmer. Frankly, yes, sir. So I can't speak to the past
incident, but what I can tell you is that we have contracting
clauses, as an example, that requires a DOD authorization. The
process that we use for granting a DOD authorization builds on
FedRAMP. So FedRAMP is core to our process for authorizing use
of cloud services----
Mr. Connolly. But you work at the Pentagon, and you know
that stovepiping is built into the culture.
Mr. Wilmer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. So ``How fascinating that the Navy thinks
you're certified, but here at the Army we have a very different
point of view, and you'll start all over again and meet our
criteria,'' that defeats the purpose of having a JAB and
defeats the whole purpose of FedRAMP, frankly.
Mr. Wilmer. Yes, sir. And what I will offer is, I've been
in this job now for several months. Interestingly, most of the
comments from the services mirror that of your constituents, of
the companies, and the other cloud providers, in terms of
wanting access to cloud capability faster.
I've seen very little resistance to accepting FedRAMP or
JAB authorizations and much more interest, in terms of the
folks that have come to our office, in trying to figure out how
can we get this process more streamlined, faster, so that they
can get capable to the warfighter at greater pace.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Meadows.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wilmer, I want to followup on this, because, obviously,
DOD is very good at checking the boxes and dotting i's, but
sometimes what happens is--in your answer to the chairman, you
said it's a core component. What we need to do is make sure it
is the component. And there's a very different answer to that.
And I guess, if you will monitor that and make sure that
we're not running into the future problem where they say,
``Well, thank you, you've done everything that Mr. Wilmer
suggests that you do, but here's this stack of other
applications that you've got to fill out that are laborious.''
You get our point?
Mr. Wilmer. Yes, sir. I understand completely. And one of
the things I'd like to emphasize in responding to that is that,
of the 140 or so authorizations that we've provided, 120 of
those required zero additional DOD work.
Mr. Meadows. Very good.
Mr. Wilmer. So there are still--for, as you mentioned, sir,
sensitive applications, capabilities like that, we do require
some additional work to be done to address the increased threat
posture for those applications. But the vast majority require
no additional work.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much. Thank you, Mr. Meadows.
A final concern I've got, and I'm just going to throw it
out there, but one of the things we've heard in the past as an
excuse for why we have to sort of almost reinvent the wheel in
application--we don't admit that, but that's what we're doing--
is, well, wait a minute, I've got a separate requirement in
terms of FISMA compliance, and I'm not going to put my agency
at jeopardy to be FedRAMP-certified and risk FISMA compliance.
And maybe that's a legitimate concern, but sometimes we've
been struck with the fact that maybe that's also an excuse to
minimize risk and slow down this process.
And I'd just like any of you to comment on: Where are we on
that issue, and how serious do you think it is as an impediment
moving forward?
Mr. Klimavicz. I'll take a shot at it.
In my five years in this job, I've not heard that as an
impediment or anything like that. I mean, it's consistent with
FISMA. And certainly within Department of Justice, we use all
JAB ATOs. It's fantastic. I mean, the benefits are tremendous,
in terms of speed and cost savings.
Mr. Connolly. You're going to be the poster child for our
bill. Thank you, Mr. Klimavicz.
Mr. Arrieta, did you want to comment?
Mr. Arrieta. Yes. In the 50 days I've been on the job, I
have not run into that issue.
And the FedRAMP folks from HHS that sit behind me, who do a
fantastic job, are 100-percent focused on the use case and the
need at HHS, and that is the first and most important question
that we ask. We accept the JAB's authorization, and we look at
the use case within HHS, and if there is a use care there, we
accept it and move forward.
So we'll go back and talk with the cyber team and see if
that's an issue.
Mr. Connolly. Yes. Well, just keep us posted if you think
it does crop up. If there's something we can do legislatively
to provide that relief or clarify, we're happy to do it. If
it's, in fact, no longer a problem, great. But we're going to
count on you to give us some feedback.
And Mr. Cheriyan and Mr. Arrieta, being relatively new to
your positions, I think bring a certain fresh perspective that
we can all benefit from.
I want to thank this panel so much for your thoughtful
legislation. I do want to say that there is going to be
legislation in your future. We are determined to make sure that
we address this by statute and that we codify it so it has a
statutory anchor, which it does not have now.
We think FedRAMP is another one of the pieces of the IT
legislation that we've championed over the years, always on a
bipartisan basis. And we've been working with many of your
agencies. We'd be glad to hear any concerns you've got.
We've be working extensively, for months, with the private
sector as well, and we're going to hear now from four of them.
So thank you all for your willingness to share with us
today. There may be additional questions submitted for the
record through the chair. We'll get them to you as
expeditiously as possible and ask you to get back to us with
answers as expeditiously as possible.
I thank you all. We look forward to working with you.
The first panel is now dismissed, and I would ask the
second panel, as quickly as possible, to take their seats.
We're not going to take a break.
Joining us for the second panel--while we're getting ready,
I'll introduce them--are: Jonathan Berroya, who is the senior
vice president and general counsel of the Internet Association;
Douglas Barbin, who's the principal of Schellman & Company,
LLC; Will Ackerly, who's the chief technology officer for
Virtru; and Lynn Martin, who's the vice president of
government, education, and healthcare at VMWare.
I would ask all four of you if you would be willing stand
to be sworn in, and raise your right hand.
Do you swear or affirm that the testimony that you're about
to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth, so help you God?
Thank you. You may be seated.
Let the record show that our four witnesses answered that
question in the affirmative.
And, again, I'd ask you to limit your testimony to a five-
minute-or-less summation. And if you'll turn on that button
that says ``Talk'' when you're ready and speak into the
microphone, so we can all hear you and pick you up on the
record.
Mr. Barbin, why don't you go first.
STATEMENT OF DOUGLAS BARBIN, PRINCIPAL, SCHELLMAN & COMPANY,
LLC
Mr. Barbin. Yes. Good afternoon, and thank you, Mr.
Chairman and respective members of this subcommittee, for the
opportunity to share my testimony today.
My name is Doug Barbin. I'm a principal at Schellman &
Company, where I'm responsible for leading the firm's FedRAMP
practice, along with other cybersecurity assessment offerings.
Schellman & Company, or Schellman, is a top 100 CPA firm in
the United States and distinguished from other large firms as
we are solely and exclusively focused on cybersecurity
compliance and certification services. Our clients range from
startup firms to many publicly traded companies.
In 2012, Schellman became the first CPA firm to become a
FedRAMP third-party assessment organization. Since that time,
Schellman has grown to become the second-largest provider of
FedRAMP assessments. And, in fact, FedRAMP has performed three
times as many FedRAMP assessments as all other CPA firms on
that list combined, including the Big Four.
I offer you my insights today as someone who has conducted
more than 4,000 security assessments spanning virtually ever
widely accepted technology compliance framework or program in
the United States and many of those internationally.
The views I express in this testimony are on my own and
should not be construed as reflecting any official position of
Schellman.
So as a brief few opening remarks, as you know, the FedRAMP
program was designed with the ``audit once, leverage many''
principle, with the goal of reducing the redundancies of
Federal agencies each conducting their own assessments of
vendors. It is my belief that this program has largely achieved
those goals.
This leverage model is not new, and significant credit
should be given to program leadership for their ability to
launch and adapt the program in a timeframe that's
significantly shorter than other similar compliance frameworks.
To add in perspective, the credit card industry has been
doing this formally for 15 years. With the previous five years,
when the credit card industry or the payment card industry was
doing this, Visa and Mastercard were doing it themselves.
Based on my personal experience, I have just a few
recommendations for the FedRAMP program as it moves forward.
First and foremost, protect the role of the assessor. We
are the independent finder of fact, and we facilitate the
conversation between the cloud provider and the authorizing
body.
Some of the commercial compliance programs have blurred the
lines between assessor, consultant, and decisionmaker. These
roles are well-defined within the FedRAMP program and should
continue to be strictly enforced. Independence between the
parties should always be maintained in both fact and
appearance.
Second, remember that the ``R'' in ``FedRAMP'' stands for
``Risk.'' Some commercial compliance frameworks adopt a
checklist approach to all-or-nothing compliance. Under these
frameworks, achieving security is often secondary to achieving
compliance with the letter of the written standard. This
concern is even more critical due to the rapidly changing
nature of the cloud technologies.
And I will say, as an aside, not in the written prepared
testimony, I was very enthusiastic about the mention of a
threat-based model, risk-based model for this program moving
forward.
And then last but not least, community engagement. New
guidance for requirements should be put out for feedback with
reasonable timeframes for implementation. A more streamlined
process for cloud providers to implement new products and
services was mentioned as well.
And, in addition, from the last panel, I couldn't be more
excited about the opportunity for automation. There are 300,
400, sometimes more controls that we have to manually comb
through. There are vulnerability scans. Lots and lots of
technical data. And the deliverables we're required to produce
now were in Microsoft, Word, and Excel. So the opportunity for
automation and to comb through that data is significant.
So I hope this feedback, along with the engaging dialog
today, will assist the subcommittee in further moving the
FedRAMP program forward in a positive manner. I thank you once
again for the opportunity to share my views.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Barbin.
Mr. Berroya?
STATEMENT OF JONATHAN BERROYA, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT AND
GENERAL COUNSEL, INTERNET ASSOCIATION
Mr. Berroya. Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Meadows, and
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the Federal
Risk and Authorization Management Program.
My name is Jonathan Berroya, and I am the senior vice
president and general counsel at Internet Association. Internet
Association, or IA, represents over 40 of the world's leading
internet companies. Our companies are global leaders in the
drive to offer lower-cost, more secure, scalable, and
innovative cloud services to customers in both the private and
public sectors.
Cloud computing enables on-demand access to shared
computing resources, providing critical services more quickly
and at a lower cost than having agencies manage such services
themselves, allowing those agencies to focus more of their
resources on their missions and less on maintaining
infrastructure.
To begin with, I would like to thank Chairman Connolly,
Ranking Member Meadows, the subcommittee leadership, and your
staff members for your continued commitment to government IT
modernization. Ensuring that FedRAMP continues to meet the
needs of all entities involved in the government's procurement
of cloud services is an important priority.
IA cloud vendors are committed to the highest levels of
information security and, collectively, invest hundreds of
millions of dollars in compliance and certifications across
both U.S.-based and international assessment frameworks.
Furthermore, our member companies have been engaged in
working with the public sector for much of the past decade,
many well before the creation of the FedRAMP Program Management
Office or even the Cloud First Policy.
IA members support FedRAMP and efforts to facilitate the
program's continued evolution. To that end, I would like to
highlight four priorities that we believe will help ensure that
FedRAMP continues to deliver value to all stakeholders, leading
to greater adoption of commercial cloud services
governmentwide.
First, we would like to see more reuse of authority-to-
operate packages once a vendor has received FedRAMP Joint
Authorization Board approval.
A core goal of FedRAMP's authorization process is to make
the assessment of cloud offerings more efficient for vendors
and agencies. The slogan ``Do once, reuse many times,''
featured on the FedRAMP website, is a reference to the idea
that once a service offering has been authorized for use,
multiple agencies should be able to rely on that authorization
to deploy that same service offering in their organizations.
In practice, however, there is a lack of reciprocity across
Federal agencies that is due, at least in part, to the fact
that each agency CIO must issue individual authorizations,
which creates inefficiencies that undermine the central goal of
the FedRAMP program.
Second, we'd like to ask that Congress establish the
program in a way that will allow it to evolve over time. IA and
its members support a FedRAMP process that is flexible and
keeps pace with innovation without imposing unnecessary
bureaucratic requirements.
For example, it would be helpful to ensure that GSA and the
FedRAMP Program Management Office have sufficient flexibility
to fully automate the process of auditing the controls and
missed baselines in the future, as this may result in a
compliance workflow that requires fewer intermediaries, less
paperwork, and faster processing.
Third, we ask that industry have a seat at the table to
provide feedback on regular basis regarding the FedRAMP
program.
IA members have noticed and appreciated GSA's demonstrated
commitment to soliciting and acting on feedback offered thus
far, including its creation of both the FedRAMP Ready
designation and the low-impact SAAS baseline as a direct result
of feedback from cloud service providers and agency cloud
customers.
We feel that the creation of a formal industry advisory
board or similar body would help foster ongoing FedRAMP
engagement with industry, ensuring that this successful public-
private partnership continues and that future policies are not
created in a vacuum.
Fourth, we believe that this program needs more resources
in order to assess and accredit the coming wave of cloud
products. According to the GAO, the Federal Government invests
approximately $90 billion in IT each year, with about 75
percent spent on operating and maintaining existing systems.
Many of these systems will be modernized using cloud services,
which means that dedicating adequate resources to fund the
FedRAMP program will become even more essential to the cloud
business ecosystem than ever before.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Internet
Association's gratitude for being included in any legislative
discussions regarding FedRAMP and for the opportunity to appear
before you today.
We know that FedRAMP plays a critical role in the ongoing
on adoption of innovative cloud services across the public
sector, and Internet Association and its members stand ready to
help the subcommittee succeed in its efforts to strengthen this
important program.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Connolly. Well done. Five seconds to go.
Mr. Ackerly?
STATEMENT OF WILL ACKERLY, CHIEF TECHNOLOGY OFFICER, VIRTRU
Mr. Ackerly. Thank you very much, Chairman Connolly,
Ranking Member Meadows, and distinguished members of the
committee. Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you
today about FedRAMP and our experience with the program as a
tech startup.
My name is Will Ackerly. I'm the co-founder and CTO of
Virtru, a small, D.C.-based software company that helps
organizations and individuals protect their data wherever it
travels.
Virtru successfully completed the FedRAMP process earlier
this year. Security is core to our mission, so achieving
FedRAMP approval was an important milestone for us. Based on
our experience, I believe that the FedRAMP program makes an
important contribution not only to the security of our
government but also benefits all other customers as well.
While deeply valuable, the process is long, time-consuming,
and expensive. It is a process that can and should be improved.
For large corporations, the effort required may not be a major
obstacle, but for startups and companies like Virtru, the
current process is daunting. Many startups may be not able to
afford to secure FedRAMP authorization as it exists today.
Because the Federal Government can benefit from many of the
innovations that young companies can provide, it is worth the
effort to make FedRAMP authorization processes more accessible
to smaller businesses.
In our case, the FCC wanted to use Virtru's data
protection, and they were willing to sponsor us through an
agency FedRAMP authorization. We officially entered the process
in June 2017. We did not receive our final authorization until
this past March, 20 months later. For startups like us, this is
a very long timeline. More importantly, perhaps, it was unclear
to us how long this was likely to take.
A related challenge was also the cost. Cost is a major
consideration for startups, and at roughly $1.6 million in
total costs, was a significant percentage of our annual revenue
that had to be balanced against other priorities like hiring
and further product development. As a privacy and security
company, we were able to justify this decision, but when
combined with unknown timelines, it can be a high-risk decision
for most small companies.
Our challenge did not end with the authorization. The
FedRAMP process also requires significant resources to maintain
the authorization. This was not well-understood by us upfront.
Many organizations may think that FedRAMP is a one-time effort,
but, in our experience, the continuous monitoring requirements
do entail a significant ongoing effort and cost.
We also found that the level of support and expertise
available to help successfully complete the FedRAMP process
varied significantly between different government agencies.
This required us to adjust our engagement strategies for each
specific agency.
In short, there were a few instances where the difficulties
we encountered could be addressed by changes to the FedRAMP
process.
Mr. Chairman, based on our recent experience with the
FedRAMP process, I ask that the committee consider a number of
specific recommendations, which I have described in my written
testimony. I would like to provide you two quick examples.
First, streamline the process and costs by further
empowering the PMO; to assist the PMO, the formal creation of
FedRAMP leads at each agency as a force multiplier. This could
help educate and shepherd companies and their agencies through
the authorization and continuous monitoring process. This could
improve the experience and the effectiveness and the cost for
companies and agency personnel navigating this process.
Second, continue to empower agency sponsorship into the
FedRAMP as an alternative to the JAB. Agencies best understand
their own missions and are in the best position to identify and
vet applicable solutions. While the JAB plays an important
role, it would've been harder to justify the expense without
interest from a sponsoring agency giving us a roadmap to
potential return on investment.
I appreciate the opportunity to address the committee
today. I will gladly answer any questions you have. And I'm
happy to make anyone at Virtru available for followup.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you very much, Mr. Ackerly, and thank
you for sharing your experience.
Ms. Martin?
STATEMENT OF LYNN MARTIN, VICE PRESIDENT OF government,
EDUCATION, AND HEALTHCARE, VMWARE
Ms. Martin. Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Meadows, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you so much for the
opportunity to speak to you this afternoon.
My name is Lynn Martin, and I am the vice president of our
government, education, and healthcare verticals in the Americas
at VMWare. I appreciate the opportunity to share our
perspective on this important legislation and to relate our
experience in taking our solutions through the FedRAMP process,
as well as discuss some recommendations.
My experience dates back to the formation of the FedRAMP
office back when I worked at HP. Since joining VMWare, I have
also taken two products through the process, and I'm in the
process of our third service through the FedRAMP. In addition,
I'm working with our teams around other opportunities to funnel
through there in joint partnership with both the JAB and the
FedRAMP PMO.
Based on my experiences, I can personally say the FedRAMP
process has taken great strides to achieve higher capacity and
a more streamlined process since 2011. I would like to commend
their efforts in making improvements.
Our collaboration and partnership with GSA has improved
through each of the different authorizations I've been involved
in. For example, in the last one over the past 18 months, the
PMO has gone to great lengths to ensure that we understand and
have more transparency than previously. There also has been
engagement at our corporate site to ensure that we understand
the process.
I commend Chairman Connolly on his efforts to support GSA
on its ongoing efforts to improve FedRAMP.
VMWare believes that one of the most elements of the bill
is that it formally provides a funding mechanism for the GSA
FedRAMP Program Office. Dedicated funding will be a starting
point to ensure that more FedRAMP authority-to-operate packages
are completed in a faster manner.
The bill introduces much-needed clarity around the roles
and responsibilities for each organization that has a hand in
executing vendors through the process. Speaking from VMWare's
firsthand experience in our recent interactions, we had to
determine on our own which organization had ownership of what
and interact with the office through organic understanding.
The clarity introduced in the bill would allow all vendors,
not just VMWare, to build a repeatable plan, assessing our
business case and returns, targeting the proper stakeholders on
how best to navigate with the PMO. I believe this one step
would cut down the time that vendors go through because of the
learning process on our end.
As we heard earlier, GSA has put some prioritization around
the authorization. I think through the discussion earlier, one
of the areas that I think there is an opportunity for
improvement would be around looking at the agency ATOs,
assessing the commonality of the security protocols, finding
which ones are more commonly being used, and assessing whether
there's a way to start with a baseline against those
authorizations, and then resolve across the different agencies
the percentage that maybe are outliers. So basically, if you
look at the large number of protocols required for a JAB,
there's a subset in the agency ATOs.
VMWare also agrees with the adoption for consistent metrics
surrounding cost, quality, and time. The ability to drive
measurements of the PMO will allow for not just accountability
through the OMB but also transparency into the capacity of the
PMO's ability to ATO public cloud services for the government
to embrace quicker.
The final area that we would like to call attention to is
the creation of Federal Secure Cloud Advisory Committee. We
believe that the industry collaboration and coordination with
the FedRAMP office is a key component of success. This will
allow industry to interject best practices and allow GSA to
stay ahead of the coming technology trends.
FedRAMP has become synonymous with Federal cloud security.
However, in order for supply to keep up with demand, the
Federal PMO must be given adequate resources so that the
government can move further and faster in its modernization
efforts.
VMWare is proud to partner with the government on its
journey, and we look forward to further collaboration as the
Federal Government refines and improves the FedRAMP process and
we continue to bring to market innovation solutions.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify this afternoon,
and I'm happy to answer any questions the subcommittee may
have.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much. And your praise of our
draft bill, you also should be promoted and given a big, fat
raise.
The chair recognizes the distinguished ranking member.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank all of you for your testimony. Obviously, it's a
second panel on really establishing the foundation for
legislation to move forward. The chairman, in his leadership,
takes not just your testimony here but your written testimony,
as well as some of the input, to make sure that the bill that
we work on is perfected.
And under new House majority rules, these hearings are a
prerequisite for moving any legislation. So you're playing a
valuable part of making sure that not only your expertise gets
folded into the bill that Chairman Connolly and I are working
on but, more importantly, that your concerns get addressed.
You know, Ms. Martin, when you were talking about your
testimony, the chairman is leaning over and he says, well,
that's why we put this in and that's why we put that in. And so
I want to let you know that you're being heard.
Mr. Ackerly, you talked about some of the obstacles for a
small business--the uncertain nature of getting the approval
and how long and then how do you keep the certification up. How
can we improve that?
I mean, because now you've gone through it, but unless
somebody sees this hearing and they happen to call you and say,
``By the way, I'm a small business; how long will it take
me?'', it's problematic. So how do we address those
expectations and maybe draw down on how long it takes?
Mr. Ackerly. Yes. Thank you for the question.
One of the biggest benefits we had were a few internal
advocates within agencies that understood the value of our
product, who were willing to engage with us and educate us----
Mr. Meadows. So had you not had that, you may still be
waiting.
Mr. Ackerly. Yes, we may not have been able to make the
business decision to move forward.
Mr. Meadows. So you had to find somebody within the agency
to basically say they see the merits of your product and
they're willing to be an advocate for you.
Mr. Ackerly. That's right. And I think, like, Department of
the Interior was engaging with us early on, and we were
immature in our understanding of FedRAMP at that point. They
had been through some sponsorships, and they were willing to
make that investment. They saw the broader value, which was
fantastic. And same with FCC.
But I think, you know, being able to grow on that per-
agency representation and have those folks educated and having
consistency across agencies I think would be really valuable.
Mr. Meadows. So Mr. Berroya, you represent, for a large
part, those that would dwarf the size of Mr. Ackerly's company.
Is that correct?
Mr. Berroya. Ranking Member, we have large and small
members, but some would, yes.
Mr. Meadows. And so here is the concern I have. And it's
proper that the two of you sit next to each other, in that you
have behemoths that are--you know, they can work through it.
And Mr. Barbin talked about, you know, being able to process
and look at security things for thousands of stakeholders.
To put it in a different term, it's kind of like working
through the FDA for a drug approval. Big Pharma, they
understand how to do that. A small, little, startup generic
company has a tougher spot with that. And it really is a
chilling effect on new innovation.
So how do we work to make sure that some of your clients
that are big and understand the process and some of the new
folks that may come on the front, like Mr. Ackerly--how do we
make sure that both of them understand what is required and how
to navigate the bureaucracy?
Mr. Berroya. Is that a question to me?
Mr. Meadows. Yes. It's a hard one, so I'm going to let you
take it.
Mr. Berroya. I appreciate that. I'll do my best to give you
a helpful answer.
So for our small members--and, obviously, every company is
going to be in a different position, and their experience is
going to be somewhat different.
I've been advised that, for many of our small members,
there's an argument that there's a market advantage. If you can
make it through the process once, you're in, and you have that
badge of having been certified, having been authorized, and
that's something that you can use as a competitive advantage in
other contexts when you're trying to woo additional customers.
But to get more directly to the question that you asked, I
think the creation of a formal industry body to provide regular
feedback about the FedRAMP process and how things are working
that includes a mix of different types of companies, which is
something that was alluded to on the first panel as well, would
be something that would go a long way to ensuring that
throughout the process the voices of both large and small
companies are taken into consideration.
Mr. Meadows. All right. Well, thank you.
And I'll close with this, with your indulgence, Mr.
Chairman.
Here is what I would like to see. In that body that
actually is really the difference--one of the differences in
the bill that we worked on last Congress is that stakeholder
involvement and that advisory panel. Would it be helpful if--at
the IRS, we have what we call a taxpayer advocate, or an
advocacy. So if they run into a problem with the IRS, they have
a group that they can go to and say, okay, here's where you go
to, here's where you go to. Would something like that on
FedRAMP be helpful to the process?
Ms. Martin?
Ms. Martin. Absolutely. I mean, like I said, even going
through it four times, it changes. And they've made
improvements, and we still took a long time. We started last
July. We're not through yet.
Mr. Meadows. Yes.
Mr. Ackerly?
Mr. Ackerly. Yes, I would support that. I think that would
be fantastic.
I think, you know, per previous mention as well, you know,
metrics for transparency and understanding, that is valuable as
well.
Mr. Meadows. Mr. Berroya, does that help with some of what
you were addressing?
Mr. Berroya. I would have to get back to you because I
represent a lot of members and I would want to make sure I had
a clear feedback from all of them, but my----
Mr. Meadows. You want to make sure we don't mess up.
Mr. Berroya. Exactly.
Mr. Meadows. Yes.
Mr. Berroya [continuing]. my instinct on this one is it is
likely helpful, yes.
Mr. Meadows. All right. Speaking for yourself, your
instinct is right.
Mr. Barbin?
Mr. Barbin. Yes. In short, yes. I mean, in many cases,
especially some of the smaller companies that we've worked
with, their biggest challenge has been the right person within
an agency, what that agency needs to do to provide an
authorization, and on an ongoing basis the continuous
monitoring as well. So I think that advocacy group would be
great.
Mr. Meadows. I think the chair's indulgence.
Mr. Connolly. Absolutely. Thank you. Very helpful
questioning.
So we're hearing--I mean, let us remember, FedRAMP
originally, back in 2010, 2011, was intended to be an
expeditious way of allowing entry into cloud services for the
Federal Government, and it was supposed to cost maybe about a
quarter of a million dollars and take about six months.
Now, Mr. Ackerly, you represent a startup--you're not even
a small or medium-size; you're a startup--with apparently some
expertise recognized or some capability recognized that was
desirable, and it took you 20 months. And, by the way, at the
beginning, no one could tell you, ``Here is the timeline.''
So you're betting that there will be light at the end of
the day, or the tunnel, but it took 20 months and $1.6 million
to be certified. Is that correct?
Mr. Ackerly. Yes, that's right, sir.
Mr. Connolly. And the other thing you did not anticipate
was a recurring cost to maintain that certification. Is that
correct?
Mr. Ackerly. That's right.
Mr. Connolly. Do you want to put a dollar figure on what
that might cost annually in your budget?
Mr. Ackerly. I'd have to double-check, but I think it might
be $150,000 to $200,000 in annual costs.
Mr. Connolly. All right.
And let me just explore that with all of you for a minute.
But, I mean, at one point, you can see why the government wants
maintenance, right? Maybe you're a startup particularly, you
know, and it goes to hell in a handbasket. Or maybe your
startup gets purchased or acquired, or maybe you expand by
acquiring others, and all of a sudden the company we contracted
with is different. Maybe it has foreign ownership. I mean,
there may be lots of concerns that lead us to want to monitor
the vendors to the Federal Government. That's not unreasonable.
But, on the other hand, what does it entail, from your point of
view?
I didn't see you, Mr. Grothman. We'll come to you right
away.
Mr. Ackerly. Yes, it comes from a few different sources. I
will say that I think, as you say, there are aspects of this
which are hugely valuable and important. I think through
automation and also transparency--I think the metrics reporting
and being able to track over time to understand what those are
and what they entail will really help rationalize a business
decision.
Mr. Connolly. One of your recommendations to us was a power
agency authorization instead of the JAB.
Mr. Ackerly. Correct.
Mr. Connolly. Let me just say, I understand why you might
say that, but we kind of also look at it from the other point
of view, that too many companies have been subjected to dual
certification. So ``Yes, you're certified with JAB, but sorry,
our window is different, and you're going to have to start the
process all over again.'' Imagine doubling your costs.
And remember that many companies have multiple Federal
agencies, right? So they may move from national security to IRS
or Social Security on the domestic side. And going to multiple
windows to be multiply certified could be very expensive and
time-consuming and unpredictable--everything you experienced,
only multiplied by a dozen.
So while we understand a power agency to do it without
having to have JAB certification, on the other hand, we don't
want unwittingly to create difficult circumstances for
companies from getting certified.
Mr. Ackerly. From my standpoint, I think some of the most
valuable things I think worth preserving and amplifying are the
agency advocacies, the people who are at the agencies that
understand the value, and making sure that they're in a
position at least to nominate or try to fast-track through some
sort of standardized process.
So if there's risk that there's going to be a dual track,
you know, finding an opportunity for there to be agency
advocacy and shepherding and common level of understanding
across the agencies and representatives at each.
Mr. Connolly. Just remember that what you're advocating for
in some ways is already occurring, right?
Mr. Ackerly. Correct. And so----
Mr. Connolly. So if the JAB processes 12 a year, the other
agencies are processing, I think he said 130, 80, or something
like that, a large number.
Mr. Ackerly. Yes. And what I'm recommending is formalizing
that.
Mr. Connolly. Uh-huh.
I've got two more questions, and then I'm going to call on
Mr. Grothman, who has joined us, from Wisconsin.
Ms. Martin, I brought up an example in the earlier panel
about a software approval for a same software, different
application, but the process required a parallel or different
or separate certification. Does that ring a bell with you at
all?
Ms. Martin. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Do you want to just expand real quickly?
Ms. Martin. So when you take a software platform to a
different company, like, a partnership with one company--so
VMWare's strategy is we provide a hybrid cloud architecture,
work with IBM, Microsoft, Amazon, more to come--that software
layer is the same software layer with each of those different
cloud services. Each one takes a parallel path on its own.
So part of the FedRAMP process--and I think it gets into
the agency and the JAB's as well--is any new services have to
go through the process again.
Mr. Connolly. Even though it's the same software.
Ms. Martin. It could be the same but a little bit
different----
Mr. Connolly. Applied differently, yes.
Ms. Martin [continuing]. and you start over. They don't
take the baseline assessment and say, ``Okay, since you added
this.'' It should, in theory, speed it up, in theory, once you
get one.
Mr. Connolly. But that was not your experience.
Ms. Martin. It is not our experience.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. And you heard that Mr. Cheriyan said he
would be look at that----
Ms. Martin. Right.
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. at GSA.
Mr. Connolly. Okay.
Final question. Mr. Berroya, I think you've heard both Mr.
Meadows and I assent to the wisdom of industry input in some
fashion so that industry's voice is heard in providing guidance
of the process. But you talked about lack of reciprocity. And
maybe you were here when Ms. Norton actually asked about the
problem of reciprocity.
And I want to give you the final word and--and, Mr. Barbin,
if you want to as well--comment on, what do you mean? What is
the problem still, from your point of view, in terms of lack of
reciprocity?
Mr. Berroya. Thank you for the question, Mr. Chairman, and
for the opportunity to be the last word. I'll try to keep it
short, given the time.
Essentially, the perspective of our members is that, while
CIOs play a very important role and they need to be able to
make the risk assessments that they need to make, the ideal
would be for FedRAMP to establish a ceiling rather than a floor
for authorization, such that, if an agency, for example, wanted
to engage in a pilot program and operate in a way that goes
below what the standard authorization would require for that
limited period of time so they can assess a new service
offering, that they would be able to do so. But for, perhaps, a
fully fledged new service offering that they're going to
implement on a longer-term basis, that if FedRAMP established a
ceiling, that might be a helpful way to inject a little bit
more efficiency into the process and encourage more reuse.
Mr. Connolly. I invite you to work with our staff and take
a look at the draft legislation to make sure that we are
adequately addressing that issue.
Mr. Berroya. We gratefully appreciate that. We will.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Grothman.
Mr. Grothman. Sure.
This is for any one of the four of you.
FedRAMP's current reporting and documentation structures
are often redundant and excessively time-consuming. Has this
inefficiency adversely impacted your industry's ability to work
with the program?
Any one of you.
Mr. Barbin. I'll take that, sir, as the 3PAO auditor.
I would agree. In my opening statement, I commented on
deliverables being Excel spreadsheets and Word documents, a lot
of manual analysis of a significant amount of data. I believe
there's a significant opportunity there. Automation was brought
up, you know, in the previous panel as well. So I would agree
with you and concur that that is definitely the case.
Mr. Grothman. Okay.
Is there sufficient communication between the FedRAMP
office and agencies to you regarding the authorization process?
Mr. Barbin. There is certainly--so I'd say there's
sufficient dialog and communication between ourselves, the
independent assessors, and the PMO. Certainly there's open
and--very open and ongoing dialog with respect to that manner.
We've been, you know, privileged to provide additional guidance
over the years and help make improvements in certain key areas.
You know, with the agencies, that's typically been more on
the PMO side; it's been less us, as an assessor. Our primary
interfaces are going to be the PMO and the cloud providers that
we perform the audits for.
Mr. Grothman. Okay.
Any of the others?
Do you have a comment?
Ms. Martin. I have one.
So when we've been going through a recent agency
authorization, our dialog's been more with the PMO and the
agency directly, U.S. Marshals. But in the case of the 3PAO,
they haven't been involved in those. But we have had better
collaboration and communication around the process than
previous experiences there.
I do think the transparency and the documentation and the
automation recommendations would improve things significantly
as well.
Mr. Grothman. Okay.
Mr. Ackerly. Yes, I would say our communication with the
3PAO and the PMO office have been fantastic, and when it comes
to agency, it's been a little less consistent. Sometimes it's
been great, and sometimes we've been learning together. And so
I think there might be areas for improvement there.
Mr. Grothman. If the FedRAMP program were codified, do you
feel that would provide more security to you guys as investors?
Mr. Ackerly. I think there are aspects of the bill that
would absolutely create much more certainty and would make the
business decision a lot easier.
Mr. Grothman. Okay.
I'll yield the remainder of my time.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the gentleman.
And I would just add a final word to his question, which
was a good one. I happen to believe, and I think Mr. Meadows
does as well--I don't want to speak for him, but--right now,
the problem is FedRAMP is potentially an orphan. It was created
administratively. It can be, you know, eviscerated tomorrow
morning.
And so codifying it gives you some predictability, gives
Federal employees who work on the program, you know, an anchor
to guide them, and allows us to have regular guidance as we do
through FITARA.
And so lacking a statutory framework sometimes can be a
boon, but it sometimes also, frankly, can have unintended
negative consequences. And I think we can restore some
predictability and oversight just by codification. The bill, of
course, does more than that. And so that's certainly our goal.
I want to thank all of you for sharing your stories today.
Very helpful. As the ranking member indicated, this is creating
the record that will allow us to go back to our colleagues and
talk about potential draft legislation.
Thank you so much for sharing your story.
All members, without objection, will have five legislative
days to submit additional written questions, if any, for the
witnesses, and I would ask that you would get back to us with
your answers as quickly as you possibly can.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:57 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[all]