- HEARING ON 2017 TAX LAW: IMPACT ON THE BUDGET AND AMERICAN FAMILIES
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
HEARING ON 2017 TAX LAW: IMPACT ON
THE BUDGET AND AMERICAN FAMILIES
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, D.C., FEBRUARY 27, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-3
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on the Budget
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available on the Internet:
www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-567
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET
JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky, Chairman
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts,
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas,
Vice Chairman
Ranking Member
HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York
ROB WOODALL, Georgia
BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio,
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Ranking Member
RO KHANNA, California
JASON SMITH, Missouri
ROSA L. DELAURO, Connecticut
BILL FLORES, Texas
LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina
DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
CHRIS STEWART, Utah
JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
CHIP ROY, Texas
JIMMY PANETTA, California
DANIEL MEUSER, Pennsylvania
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York
WILLIAM R. TIMMONS IV, South
STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
Carolina
ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT, Virginia
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
KEVIN HERN, Oklahoma
BARBARA LEE, California
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JIM COOPER, Tennessee
Professional Staff
Ellen Balis, Staff Director
Dan Keniry, Minority Staff Director
CONTENTS
Page
Hearing held in Washington D.C., February 27, 2019...............
1
Hon. John A. Yarmuth, Chairman, Committee on the Budget......
1
Prepared statement of....................................
4
Hon. Steve Womack, Ranking Member, Committee on the Budget...
8
Prepared statement of....................................
10
Hon. Sheila Jackson Lee, Member, Committee on the Budget,
statement submitted for the record.........................
13
Hon. Chip Roy, Member, Committee on the Budget, statement
submitted for the record...................................
19
William G. Gale, Ph.D., Arjay and Frances Fearing Miller
Chair in Federal Economic Policy, Brookings Institution and
Co-Director of Tax Policy Center...........................
20
Prepared statement of....................................
22
Chye-Ching Huang, Director of Federal Fiscal Policy, Center
on Budget and Policy Priorities............................
27
Prepared statement of....................................
29
Caroline Bruckner, Executive-in-Residence, Accounting and
Taxation Managing Director, Kogod Tax Policy Center Kogod
School of Business, American University....................
42
Prepared statement of....................................
44
Lana K. Pol, President/Owner, Geetings, Inc..................
55
Prepared statement of....................................
57
Hon. Janice D. Schakowsky, Member, Committee on the Budget,
article submitted for the record...........................
83
Additional Materials:............................................
William G. Gale, Brookings Institution, Tax Policy Center,
article submitted for the record...........................
99
Caroline Bruckner, Executive-in-Residence, Accounting and
Taxation Managing Director, Kogod Tax Policy Center Kogod
School of Business, American University, exhibit submitted
for the record.............................................
122
Hon. Janice D. Schakowsky, Member, Committee on the Budget,
CBO report submitted for the record........................
126
HEARING ON 2017 TAX LAW: IMPACT ON
THE BUDGET AND AMERICAN FAMILIES
----------
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 27, 2019
House of Representatives,
Committee on the Budget,
Washington, D.C.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:06 a.m., in
Room 210 Cannon House Office Building, Hon. John A. Yarmuth
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Yarmuth, Scott, Doggett, Jackson
Lee, Schakowsky, Higgins, Peters, Sires, Panetta, Horsford,
Omar; Womack, Flores, Johnson, Woodall, Smith, Hern, Burchett,
Crenshaw, and Meuser.
Chairman Yarmuth. The hearing will come to order. I would
like to begin with an announcement. I am pleased to announce
that Mr. Seth Moulton is designated as the new vice chair of
the committee. I look forward to working with Vice Chair
Moulton and welcome his leadership.
And now I want to welcome everyone to the Budget Committee
hearing. This hearing will focus on the impact of the 2017 tax
law on the budget and on American families. I especially want
to thank our great panel for being with us this morning.
Today, we will be hearing from Dr. William Gale, Arjay and
Francis Miller Chair in Federal Economic Policy at the
Brookings Institution and co-director of the Tax Policy Center.
We will hear from Chye-Ching Huang, director of federal fiscal
policy at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. We
welcome Caroline Bruckner, professor at American University and
the managing director of the Kogod Tax Policy Center. And Lana
Pol, president of Geetings, Inc., headquartered in Pella, Iowa.
Now, I yield myself five minutes for my opening statement.
Once again, welcome to our witnesses. I want to apologize
this morning to everyone here. We tried to find a tax expert,
named Michael Cohen, thinking it would generate more attention.
We were unable to do so. But again, we have an esteemed panel.
We are here today to talk about the impact of the 2017 tax
law on the federal budget and American families. It is a
conversation my Democratic colleagues and I tried to have with
our Republican counterparts more than a year ago. But instead
of collaborating on bipartisan, middle class-focused tax
reform, and instead of heeding the warnings of economists, the
Congressional Budget Office and even our own constituents,
congressional Republicans chose to enact massive tax cuts for
the wealthy and large corporations, which we will discuss
today. They did this on their own, behind closed doors, in the
dead of night and without time for debate or any public
scrutiny. And I exclude all my Republican colleagues here. I
don't think anyone here was involved in that, in that process.
Though most who are here did vote for it.
That bill was enacted in such a hurry that senators were
forced to read handwritten changes in the margins of the bill
text, if they had time to read it at all. It is one of the
reasons why there have been requests for more than 70
corrections to the tax bill coming from Senate Republicans, at
least.
This tax law was based on the flawed notion of trickle-down
economics, which has totally been discredited. The idea that
tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans and for corporations will
trickle down and raise the standard of living and incomes for
everyone else. We know that has not happened.
Under the Republican tax law, nearly all the tax cuts are
going to the top 1 percent and corporations. The richest 1
percent alone are receiving more than 80 percent of the total
benefits. Our long-term economic growth trajectory has not
improved, the federal deficit is soaring as corporate tax
receipts plummet. There is no sign of an investment boom. Wage
growth for workers remains weak and woefully inadequate. Most
small business owners have seen few, if any benefits.
Because of changes in this law, factories and jobs are more
likely to go overseas. There are even more special interest tax
loopholes for the wealthy than before. And that promise of
being able to do your taxes on a postcard--well, we are still
waiting for that one.
Since the President signed this bill into law, we have seen
a record-setting $1 trillion in stock buybacks, buybacks that
make rich investors richer and fuel rising CEO pay. And, by the
way, about a third of the benefits of those stock buybacks go
to foreign investors. They do almost nothing to improve
business operations or help the average worker. They have not
improved our economic outlook and, as our witnesses believe,
will ultimately worsen income and wealth inequality. And due to
perverse international tax incentives in the law, it is
possible for companies to actually reduce their taxes
significantly more or avoid paying tax altogether--by
generating income overseas and moving investments abroad. This
endangers more than 15 million American workers whose jobs are
vulnerable to being offshored.
For American families, this law is a huge and predictable
failure. For the federal budget, it is a huge and predictable
drain. And that is because the premise on which this tax
legislation was built, that it would magically pay for itself,
is fundamentally flawed. As we will hear today, the GOP tax law
has significantly weakened our budgetary health. It has caused
more than a 30 percent drop in corporate receipts in 2018, with
total receipts as a share of GDP falling to the lowest level
since the end of the great recession. This is despite healthy
economic growth and a tight labor market.
As we engage in our oversight function, today we will not
only discuss what the impact of the tax cuts have had on the
budget but how they will impact the economy and American
families going forward. Our budgetary challenges, and we have
many, require smart, fiscally responsible policies, and the
American people are demanding it.
Today, we are going to find out just how deep the damage
goes. We will look at the facts about the tax law's impact on
American families. And we will set the stage for taking
necessary action to move our nation's fiscal policies in the
right direction. I thank our witnesses for helping us with this
discussion and I look forward to hearing from you.
I now yield five minutes to the ranking member, Mr. Womack.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Yarmuth follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Womack. I thank the chairman for holding this important
hearing and thank you to our witnesses for being here today. By
the way, in case you didn't pick up on it, Chairman Yarmuth is
not a big fan of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. I kind of just
wanted to state that for the record.
I would like to extend a warm welcome to Lana Pol, a
second-generation business owner from Pella, Iowa. Thank you,
Ms. Pol, for traveling to Washington, D.C., to share your story
with us. I look forward to your testimony.
As we will hear from the gentlelady from Iowa, the Tax Cuts
and Jobs Act is working. It is delivering meaningful relief to
workers, families, job creators, and communities across the
country after years of sky-high taxes and a sluggish economy.
A little more than a year after President Trump signed the
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act into law, our economy is strong again,
with more than double the GDP growth seen during the Obama
administration, and Americans are feeling the difference every
day. Americans are seeing bigger paychecks, getting to keep
more of their hard-earned money to save, spend and invest the
way they see fit. Wages and salaries increased by more than 3
percent in 2018, the largest percent increase in more than a
decade. According to the nonpartisan Tax Foundation, 80 percent
of wage earners have seen an increase in their take-home pay.
Americans are seeing more jobs. There are 7.3 million job
openings, the most job openings since 2000 when the Department
of Labor first started recording this data. Unemployment fell
to the lowest level since the 1960s in 2018 at 3.9 percent, and
CBO projects unemployment will continue to decline to 3.5
percent in 2019.
Americans are feeling more optimistic about the future.
Consumer confidence is at an 18-year high. And, according to a
new Gallup Poll released earlier this month, nearly 70 percent
believe their personal finances will continue to improve next
year.
Job creators in my district are seizing on this
opportunity. One of my constituents, Rick Barrows, runs
Multicraft Contractors, a construction and industrial services
business with roughly 700 employees. In talking with Rick, it
is clear how the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act has made a meaningful
difference, not only for him and his family, but for all of his
employees. With lower taxes, Rick was able to double the
employer contribution to his employees' 401(k)s. He was able to
invest in leadership and workforce development. And, with the
ability to immediately write off the cost of capital
investments, Rick was able to dramatically expand his
operation, acquiring and renovating an adjacent property,
ensuring his business can continue to grow. Now, these are the
real-world benefits that I am hearing from back home.
Despite these successes, some of my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle are looking for ways to reverse this progress
and increase taxes on hardworking Americans, all so they can
pay for more expensive government-run programs. As we recently
heard from the CBO director, Dr. Keith Hall, these efforts are
likely to have significant negative consequences for our
economy and constituents we represent. All of us sitting on
this dais today have a responsibility to get our fiscal house
in order. And raising taxes that will stifle growth and
investment is not the answer.
As I have said before, we do not have a revenue problem--in
fact, quite the opposite. With the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act,
federal revenues in Fiscal Year 2019 are expected to increase
by $186 billion. What we have is a spending problem, a fact
many Democrats are choosing to ignore. Today, mandatory
spending accounts for about 70 percent of all federal spending.
Without taking into account proposals for massive new trillion-
dollar entitlement programs, mandatory spending is expected to
increase to 78 percent at the end of the 10-year budget window.
I hope that our discussion today illuminates for my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle that the Tax Cuts and
Jobs Act is helping local business owners, like Ms. Pol, to
create more jobs, increase paychecks and create more economic
opportunities for families. And to truly address the fiscal
challenges facing our nation today and future generations, we
must tackle the core driver of our ballooning debt, and that is
out-of-control spending.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the opportunity
and I yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Steve Womack follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Yarmuth. I thank the gentleman. And in the
interests of time, if any other members have opening
statements, you may submit those statements in writing for the
record.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Yarmuth. Now we will begin our testimony from the
witnesses.
I first yield five minutes to Dr. Gale.
STATEMENTS OF WILLIAM G. GALE, Ph.D., ARJAY AND FRANCES FEARING
MILLER CHAIR IN FEDERAL ECONOMIC POLICY, BROOKINGS INSTITUTION,
CO-DIRECTOR OF TAX POLICY CENTER; CHYE-CHING HUANG, DIRECTOR OF
FEDERAL FISCAL POLICY, CENTER ON BUDGET AND POLICY PRIORITIES;
CAROLINE BRUCKNER, EXECUTIVE IN RESIDENCE, DEPARTMENT OF
ACCOUNTING AND TAXATION, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY; AND LANA POL,
PRESIDENT, GEETINGS, INC.
STATEMENT OF WILLIAM G. GALE
Mr. Gale. Chairman Yarmuth, Ranking Member Womack, members
of the committee, thank you for inviting me to testify this
morning. As was mentioned, I am affiliated with the Brookings
Institution and the Tax Policy Center. My statements today
represent my own views, not those of any institution.
The 2017 tax cut was the biggest overhaul since 1986. It
definitely made some needed changes to the tax system. But my
overall assessment, based on my own research and that of
others, is that, on the whole, the tax cut was the wrong thing
at the wrong time. Why was it the wrong thing? Good policy
generally meets three tests. First is a growth test, it makes
the economy stronger. Second is a fairness test, it makes the
economy more fair. And third is a fiscal test, it is fiscally
sustainable. TCJA does not pass any of those tests and it
clearly fails two of them.
Let's start with the growth effect. That is the one that it
does not pass. The Congressional Budget Office has indicated
that national income after 10 years will go up by 0.1 percent
because of the tax cut. That is a gross income number. If you
looked at net income, it would actually be zero or lower. So it
clearly does not pass the growth test.
Let's look at the fairness test. The tax cut increases
disparities in after-tax income. It gives the largest absolute
and relative tax cuts to high-income households. So on that
ground alone, it fails the fairness test. But it is actually
worse than that. If you consider that the tax cut has to be
financed in some way, Representative Womack mentioned the long-
term fiscal issue, if you consider that the tax cut has to be
financed some way and you consider reasonable ways to finance
the tax cut, you will find that most households will actually
be worse off with the tax cut plus the financing than they
would have been without the tax cut. So, it fails the fiscal
test--I'm sorry, it fails the fairness test.
The third test is the fiscal test and the tax cut clearly
makes the government's already difficult long-term fiscal
status even worse. I do not want to waste your time and I do
not want to insult anyone's intelligence. But it is important
to state the tax cut did not pay for itself, it will not pay
for itself. You can look at the analysis of any reputable
organization, including the CBO, including the Tax Policy
Center, including the Tax Foundation and you will find that
that is the case. So it fails the fiscal test as well.
All right. The combination of not passing the growth test
and failing the fairness test and failing the fiscal test means
that what the tax cut will actually do is give more money to
current generations of high-income households. And that will
come at the expense of low- and middle-income households and of
members of future generations. At the very least, I think we
could agree that is not a model for what good public policy
ought to do.
There are other issues as well that make TCJA the wrong
thing. It made tax policy more complicated, it increased
uncertainty, it will reduce health insurance coverage, it will
raise the cost of health insurance, it will likely reduce
contributions to charitable causes. Again, these are not
hallmarks of good public policy.
So those are the reasons why I think it was the wrong
thing. Why was it at the wrong time? Well, it was enacted at a
time when the economy was already going strong. We had been
expanding for eight years at that point, unemployment was low.
It was a prime time to deal with the fiscal situation. As
President Kennedy said, the time to fix the roof is when the
sun is shining. We had an opportune chance to address the
fiscal situation while the economy was strong and instead, we
squandered that, making the deficit larger and giving tax cuts
to high-income households.
You should also be aware that the 2017 tax cut will make it
harder for policymakers to fight future recessions. It reduces
the ability of the tax system to cushion the effects of the
recession. It reduces the automatic stabilizer function of the
tax system.
In terms of what you should do in response to these issues,
I will just touch on three issues. One is to fix the issues in
TCJA. A second is to give the IRS more resources to be able to
do its job. And a third is to start thinking about longer-term
revenue needs. Even if we do make judicious cuts in spending,
the laws of arithmetic dictate that we will need to raise
revenues and a value-added tax and particularly a carbon tax
are the best options in that regard.
I thank you very much for inviting me and I look forward to
talking about all of these issues.
[The prepared statement of William G. Gale follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Yarmuth. Thank you very much for your testimony. I
just want to remind the panelists that all of your written
statements have been submitted and received by the committee.
They will be part of the formal record of the committee, so you
don't have to worry about that.
And I now yield five minutes to Ms. Huang.
STATEMENT OF CHYE-CHING HUANG
Ms. Huang. Chairman Yarmuth, Ranking Member Womack and
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today about how the 2017 tax law largely
left behind low and moderate income Americans and, in many
ways, even hurts them.
Since 1979, the real incomes of working-class Americans,
that is the racially and geographically diverse set of people
often defined as workers without a college degree, have been
virtually stagnant. The lowest income 60 percent of Americans
saw their share of the nation's household income fall while
those at the top saw their share gain by roughly the same
amount.
The 2017 tax law could have focused on helping those facing
the steepest challenges in this economy but it largely left
them behind. And here is a prime example. The law increased the
maximum child tax credit from $1,000 to $2,000 per child. But
it denied that full increase to millions of children in low-
income working families. Eleven million children in the lowest
income working families got either no increase in the credit or
a token increase of just $1 to $75. Another 15 million children
got an increase of more than $75 but much less--but less often
much less than the full $1,000 per child increase.
Another example is the law's failure to expand the earned
income tax credit, a provision that encourages work, lifts the
living standards of millions of working families and helps
children do better.
And here are six ways that the law may, in fact, hurt many
low and moderate-income households. First, it puts workers'
wages and workplace standards at risk through its 20 percent
deduction for passthroughs. That is an incentive for firms to
buy workers' services without employing them directly, such as
through hiring them as independent contractors or through
another firm. And workers hired in some of these ways tend to
be paid less than when workers are employed directly.
Second, it retains and even creates new incentives to shift
profits and investments offshore, risking workers' wages here
in the U.S.
Third, the law will leave millions more people uninsured or
facing higher premiums because it repealed the Affordable Care
Act's requirement that most people enroll in health insurance
or pay a penalty.
Fourth, it erodes the value of earned income tax credit.
The law uses a slower measure of inflation to adjust tax
brackets and other provisions each year. For working families,
that means that the earned income tax credit grows more slowly
over time. And by 2027, a family that has two children, earning
$40,000 will see their federal earned income tax credit shrink
by roughly $300.
Fifth, it ended the child tax credit for 1 million children
who are overwhelmingly dreamers who were brought to the U.S. by
their immigrant parents.
And sixth, it adds $1.9 trillion to deficits over 10 years.
That raises the pressure on policymakers down the road to
squeeze or cut critical economic security programs and
investments that have widely shared benefits.
Overall, in 2025, households in the bottom 60 percent will
receive average tax cuts worth 1 percent of their after-tax
income. But that pales in comparison to the top 1 percent's tax
cuts worth 3 percent of their much larger incomes, or about
60,000 each per year on average.
That skew of the tax law increases racial inequalities.
Decades of policy choices have set up barriers for households
of color so they are overrepresented at the bottom of the
income distribution, while white households are overrepresented
at the top. That means that white households in the top 1
percent get tax cuts worth more than the tax cuts for the
bottom 60 percent of households of all races combined, ITEP and
Prosperity Now estimate.
Other winners are the tax advisers and lobbyists who are
calling this law a bonanza.
Looking ahead, policymakers consider new course and pursue
true tax reform that in fact prioritizes people with low or
modest incomes, raises revenue to meet national needs and
strengthens the integrity of the tax code.
Thank you, and I look forward to addressing your questions.
[The prepared statement of Chye-Ching Huang follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Yarmuth. Thank you very much for your testimony.
I now recognize Ms. Bruckner for five minutes.
STATEMENT OF CAROLINE BRUCKNER
Ms. Bruckner. Thank you for inviting me and, by extension,
the American University students who are here with us today.
Today, I want to share with you how my research indicates the
need for a comprehensive strategy to study how some of the
business tax expenditures included in tax reform impact women
business owners, 99 percent of whom are small businesses; how
health care costs for small businesses have been impacted by
tax reform; and, lastly, the need to consider the budget
implications of tax reform's failure to address the tax
compliance challenges of the gig economy.
First, this committee needs to develop a comprehensive
strategy to study and give oversight to business tax
expenditures to consider their impact and effectiveness with
respect to women business owners. This research matters because
40 percent of U.S. businesses are women business owners, yet
they remain primarily small businesses operating as service
firms and continue to have challenges growing their receipts
and accessing capital. Notably, women of color are the driving
force behind the growth of women-owned firms. And while we do
have good news on their growth in numbers, women business
owners still struggle to access capital to grow and scale their
businesses. At the same time, tax plays a key role in the
survival and growth of small businesses, primarily through its
effect on equity infusion. However, to date, there has been no
formal government or congressional study on how the U.S. tax
code's more than $303 billion of expenditures targeted to small
businesses impact women-owned firms. This is troubling
considering in 2017, I found--I published groundbreaking
research that found that Congress has a billion-dollar blind
spot when it comes to understanding how business expenditures
help these firms. In fact, three of the four small business
expenditures I studied either explicitly excluded service firms
and, by extension, the majority of women-owned firms, or
effectively bypassed women-owned firms who are not incorporated
or who are service firms with few capital-intensive equipment
investments altogether.
Congress doubled down on this billion-dollar blind spot
during tax reform when it made additional multibillion-dollar
investments in tax expenditures that our research suggests are
less favorable to women business owners. For example, JCT's
analysis of the new Section 199A deduction for individuals with
business income shows that the majority, 90 percent, of the
revenue distribution loss will flow to firms who have incomes
greater than $100,000 of revenue. Eighty-eight percent of women
business owners have revenues below $100,000. This inequitable
distribution of the revenue loss is even greater and more stark
at the higher income levels. Only 1.7 percent of women business
owners have revenues over a million dollars, yet 44 percent of
the revenue loss flows to those firms in this year alone.
A second concerning aspect of tax reform is its impact on
health care costs for the smallest of small business owners,
those self-employed workers who buy insurance on the private
markets. However, as part of tax reform, Congress effectively
repealed the individual mandate, which CBO estimated would
result in 4 million fewer people carrying insurance this year,
another 13 million in 2027, and that premiums would increase by
10 percent in most years of the next decade. Recent evidence
shows that CBO was correct. In fact 2019 premiums, according to
at least one estimate, will be an average 6 percent higher as a
direct result of the individual mandate repeal and the
expansion of more loosely regulated plans than would otherwise
be the case.
And it is not just an increase in premiums that are a cause
of concern with respect to the impact of tax reform. The
reported lower refunds taxpayers are receiving due to changes
in withholding may have unintended yet painful consequences for
taxpayers who anticipated a higher refund and put off health
care spending until they got their refund. Banking research
shows that Americans increase their out-of-pocket health care
spending by 60 percent in the week after receiving a tax
refund. For those taxpayers who are this year receiving lower
refunds, they may have to wait even longer to pay for much
needed health care costs.
Finally, I am really concerned about how tax reform failed
to address the tax compliance challenges of the 2.3 million
Americans working in a side hustle in the gig economy. In 2016,
I published research that shows that more than 60 percent of
these workers do not get any tax information reporting forms,
which means the IRS doesn't, either. Under current law, the
platforms are not required to publish these forms to the
workers or the IRS until those workers meet a $20,000, 200-
transaction threshold. But the reality is, most folks with a
side hustle in the gig economy never meet that $20,000
threshold and therefore are not getting the tax information
reporting forms that they need to actually pay their taxes.
This has dire consequences with respect to the budget, as well
as their ability to fund their own Social Security
contributions.
However, Congress was well aware of this issue and chose
not to act in connection with tax reform. These are issues that
Congress and this committee should be tracking and studying as
it moves forward with its oversight of tax reform.
Thanks so much and I am happy to answer any questions that
you have.
[The prepared statement of Caroline Bruckner follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Yarmuth. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Ms. Pol for five minutes.
STATEMENT OF LANA POL
Ms. Pol. Good morning, Chairman Yarmuth, Ranking Member
Womack and members of the House Budget Committee. My name is
Lana Pol. I am an owner of multiple small businesses in and
around Pella and Des Moines, Iowa. I serve as the president of
Geetings, Incorporated; G.I. Warehouse Corporation; Mowbility
Sales and Service; and Creative Inspirations. Thank you for
inviting me today to testify.
Geetings, Incorporated, was founded in 1972 by my father,
Delroy Wayne Geetings. Dad completed only a sixth-grade
education but his drive and motivation made him a successful
entrepreneur. His many businesses included a landfill, a
filling station, a pool hall, a car dealership and an
excavating company. Forty-seven years later, the company
continues to operate using Dad's motto for life, ``If it's
worth doing, it's worth doing right.''
In 1975, Geetings expanded to the nearby town of Knoxville
with the building of a warehouse and the founding of G.I.
Warehouse Corporation. Additional warehouses were built to
fulfill demand. Geetings, Incorporated, and G.I. Warehouse
Corporation continue to operate based on Dad's original values
of integrity, honesty, respect and loyalty and are committed to
delivering quality service one customer at a time.
I joined the company on a full-time basis in 1975. I bought
out my retiring brothers in 2011 and 2012 and became the sole
owner of Geetings, Incorporated, and G.I. Warehouse
Corporation. In 2015, I carried on my father Wayne's tradition
of entrepreneurship and opened two new small businesses along
with the next generation, my children. Mowbility Sales and
Service is an outdoor power equipment retailer and service
provider in Pella and Des Moines. Mowbility recently purchased
Odyssey Spas and moved into selling new products like spas,
swimming pools and hot tubs. Creative Inspirations is a
promotional product distributor, specializing in apparel and
customer fulfillment also in Pella. Both of these businesses
are rapidly expanding. I hope to pass the businesses on to the
third and fourth generations of our family.
The 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act provided tax relief that
allowed us to invest in our employees with raises and invest in
our businesses with a significant facility expansion and new
vehicles. The new tax law also increased local and national
business confidence. Together, these factors continue to
benefit our local and national economies. Two of the most
significant direct benefits from the new tax law for our
businesses were the creation of the new small business
deduction, Section 199A, and the expansion of the small
business expension, Section 179.
For tax filing purposes, our businesses are organized as S
corporations and LLCs, meaning the business earnings flow
through to my individual tax return. The vast majority of small
businesses are organized similarly. The creation of the new
small business deduction provides substantial tax relief for
businesses like ours, with a deduction up to 20 percent from
business income.
My accountant informed me that the new small business
deduction will provide around $40,000 in tax relief for our
businesses. This tax relief provides crucial cash flow that
allowed us to provide up to $4,000 raises to our employees, the
largest raises we have been able to provide in recent years.
These raises increased employees' take-home pay and helped us
retain employees. As you know, businesses across the country
are experiencing tight labor markets, an indicator of a strong
economy. The labor market is especially tight in Iowa.
Retaining high-valued employees is key for our business to
function.
Additionally, we invested $2 million in a nearly 40,000-
square-foot expansion of G.I. Warehouse Corporation, which was
completed in December. We are now up to 460,000 square feet in
warehouse space. We have filled the warehouse space, another
strong economic sign.
The new tax law doubled the small business expensing
thresholds of the tax code from 500,000 in 2017 to over a
million dollars in 2018. This expansion incentivized us to
purchase six new semi-trucks totaling a million dollars and
will allow us to immediately expense the cost of the trucks in
2018 instead of depreciating that amount over several years.
I have observed other small businesses in and around Pella
also investing in employees and companies. Multiplying our
experience by millions of small businesses around the country
demonstrates significant economic benefits resulting from the
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.
Many of the provisions benefitting individuals and small
businesses, like the small business deduction, sunset after
2025. That sunset date makes small business owners nervous
about future expansion. To provide long-term certainty and
confidence for small businesses, Congress should make these
provisions permanent. I urge Congress to pass bills like the
Main Street Tax Certainty Act.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I look forward to
answering any questions.
[The prepared statement of Lana Pol follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Yarmuth. I thank you all for your testimony. We
will now begin the question and answer part of the hearing.
And, as is our habit, the ranking member and I will defer our
questions to the end. So I now recognize Mr. Higgins of New
York for five minutes.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Firstly, Dr. Gale, you had talked about three criteria as
it relates to testing growth, fairness and a fiscal test, all
of which this tax cut failed. Is there any tax cut that
actually pays for itself?
Mr. Gale. There certainly are situations where reducing a
tax rate could pay for itself. For example, if you had a 95
percent tax rate on some form of income, you reduced it to 90
percent, you would likely end up raising revenues because you
are doubling the after-tax return there from 5 to 10 cents on
the dollar. But none of that really applies. We are way over on
the other side of the so-called Laffer curve.
Mr. Higgins. Mark Zandi from Moody's Analytics, a former
adviser to John McCain, had said that the best-case scenario
for a corporate tax cut is a return of 32 cents for every
dollar that you give away in a tax cut, corporate tax cut. So
that would say to me that your return on investment from that
tax cut is minus 68 percent. Is that a fair characterization?
Mr. Gale. We will clearly get some revenue offset from
corporate tax cuts. There will be some, we will not lose 100
percent. But it really depends on what part of the corporate
tax system is cut. Cutting the rate, which is what happened in
2017, is the least efficient way to generate new investment.
Because a huge amount of current corporate investment is income
from investment in the past. And so cutting the rate does not
do anything to boost investment in the past. You get a much
bigger bang for the buck if you give incentives to new
investment.
So, for example, if we raise the corporate rate to 25 or 28
but also moved all the way to expensing, we would get more
investment and more revenues than the current system.
Mr. Higgins. When this corporate tax bill was originally
made public as a proposal, the White House Council of Economic
Advisers had stated in a formal communication to the House Ways
and Means Committee that this proposed tax cut would increase
household income by between $4,000 and $9,000 and this would be
recurring, this would happen on an annualized basis. I do not
have any evidence that that materialized. Is there any evidence
that there has been an increase in household income to the
extent to which the White House Council of Economic Advisers
had stated that it would?
Mr. Gale. Well, the CEA was very careful not to specify a
date by which that would happen. So I do not think anyone
expected it to happen in the first year. But they expect income
to rise by 4,000 to 9,000 above what it otherwise would have
risen. I find that extremely unlikely and I will refer back to
the CBO numbers I mentioned earlier that, after 10 years,
national income will only go up by one tenth of 1 percent.
Mr. Higgins. Who is the Council of Economic Advisers?
Mr. Gale. The White House group of economists.
Mr. Higgins. And that would include perhaps the Treasury
Secretary?
Mr. Gale. No, sir. The CEA is set of staff members. There
are three members of the council, Kevin Hassett being the head
of the council right now. And I think there are about 15 or 20
staff members, that they work for the White House.
Mr. Higgins. Okay. How could they be so far off?
Mr. Gale. The document cites the literature in a number of
ways. But I and others, when we look at the literature, reach
different conclusions than the CEA does.
Mr. Higgins. Who is the author of the literature?
Mr. Gale. There are numerous, numerous articles.
Mr. Higgins. So they are economists. They are looking for
literature presumably from other economists. So I am just kind
of curious as to what the Council of Economic Advisers, who
would they defer to in order to inform them of a decision that
they have to make a formal report on the White House Council of
Economic Advisers stationery to Congress.
Mr. Gale. Normally, they would look at the academic
literature. But it is not always easy to interpret these
numbers. For example, there was a study in Germany that half of
the corporate tax is passed on to workers and people try to use
that in the United States but it is not a valid comparison
because the governmental units in Germany are much smaller than
the overall size of the U.S. economy, so the amount of shifting
of the tax will be different.
Mr. Higgins. I know my time has expired but let me just say
this. So the White House Council of Economic Advisers, who make
a report to Congress, may have made reference to the literature
on economics that was established by economists in Germany?
Mr. Gale. So they cite a lot of the literature. My point
is, I think that I and others who have looked at the same
literature would reach different conclusions from it.
Mr. Higgins. I yield back, thank you.
Chairman Yarmuth. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize Mr. Flores from Texas for five minutes.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the panel
for joining us today.
Some of the testimony today, I think, has been somewhat
inflammatory and a little bit reckless, particularly
economically reckless. I note that on the panel, there is
really only one person there who, like me, has signed the front
side of a paycheck. And I would submit that gives us a much
better understanding of the real-world economy versus the
understanding that may come from looking at a model.
I have a couple examples of the tax impact. I just
exchanged text messages with a person who owns Blackhawk Aero
in Waco, Texas. He describes this as a mom-and-pop business
that is celebrating its twentieth anniversary this year that
has gone from zero to $90 million in revenues during that 20-
year process.
Here is what he says. He says the tax cuts can be directly
attributable to our significant increase in business. Buyers
are able to take advantage of the 100 percent depreciation on
our products that we sell, so the sales uptick increased
dramatically by about 40 percent. And then I am going to go on.
He said, we have been able to raise pay, we have been able to
invest in new facilities, we have been able to grow our
employee base. And all of that made 2018 a record year, and
they believe 2019 will be equally as good, moving forward.
So then I go to another part of my district down in Bryan-
College Station, Texas. And there is a business there called
Village Foods and Pharmacies. And it says, to highlight the
direct results of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, the owner has said
that they have been able to put together bonuses and a brand
new 401(k) program for all employees.
And this is just like these stories you hear all over the
country. This is the real world. This is not something where we
are trying to reflect some sort of the inflammatory rhetoric
that we heard before.
One of the things that I think is interesting is the talk
about a carbon tax. A carbon tax would hit the families that
some of these witnesses talked about as having been impacted
adversely by the Jobs Act, even though they have more pay than
they had before and more job opportunities than they had
before. It has been said a carbon tax would hurt them the
worst. Their cost of living would go up dramatically under a
carbon tax regime. And with the somewhat promise that they
would get some of it back from Washington. We have seen
Washington break too many promises.
We have heard claims that the tax act has increased the
deficit. But, you know, as a person in the real world, when my
revenues go up, then I am better off. And the country's
revenues, the federal government's revenues have gone up from
2017 to a record in 2018, and they are on track to go up again
for another record in terms of receipts by the federal
government in 2019. It is hard for me to see how that increases
the deficit.
Now, what does increase the deficit is spending. And this
goes back to what the GOP leader said a minute ago, in that we
do not have a revenue problem, we have a spending problem. And
so we need to look at ways to address the spending.
What we have heard from the other side of the aisle are
huge programs they want to roll out like the Green New Deal,
which, just we got a cost estimate on it the other day of $93
trillion, which would represent about 90 percent of the wealth
of all the families in this country.
Ms. Pol, I have a question for you, since again you operate
in the real world, not in an academic world, and you have an
understanding of what it means, the challenges it means when
you hire somebody and you sign the front side of their paycheck
every few days.
Can you talk about the impact of some of the tax proposals
you heard from the other witnesses in their testimony?
Ms. Pol. One of the things that was talked about that
really stuck out to me was the health care, that it just, that
that cost health care to go up. My experience has been in the
last five years, we have had health care increases of 17
percent, 19 percent, 29 percent and again this year now to 9
percent. So I don't think that the tax, this law, had anything
to do with this. This is prior to that. And that was through
Obamacare when everything started skyrocketing on us. So that
was one of the reasons that we were having a hard time. We
have, since 1975, paid 100 percent of our employees' health
care costs, family and all. They have no cost out of pocket.
And it did not allow us to give any raises. And so that is why
this was significant for us to have the raises this year.
Mr. Flores. Thank you. I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Yarmuth. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize
Mr. Scott of Virginia for five minutes. Oh, Mr. Doggett is
back. Mr. Doggett of Texas for five minutes. Sorry.
Mr. Doggett. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. In many
ways, the best label for this tax law is the whopper. And there
has just been one whopper after another about it. I think Mr.
Higgins just referred to one of the most significant ones, the
claim that Americans would receive on average $4,000 in
additional household income every year. We now know that not
only do Americans have good reason to be asking, where is my
$4,000, or as Secretary Mnuchin put it, it would be $4,500 that
we would be getting because, in fact, the estimates I have seen
is that over 95 percent of American workers have not received
any bonuses or any wage hikes due to this Republican tax law.
So while there may have been a sugar high for the economy
in the short term, we know immense debt is coming our way. And
the $4,000 is just still not available for most Americans.
But that is not the only whopper. And, Ms. Huang, I would I
would like to discuss with you the portion of your testimony
that focused on the international side. Because certainly among
those who received the greatest rewards were multinational
corporations. In fact, they got a bonanza out of this.
Now, President Trump, on one of his many tours to the golf
course, apparently told executives that we could expect $4
trillion that would just come pouring back when they gave this
discounted rate on these so-called repatriated earnings abroad.
How near have they come to the $4 trillion of repatriated
earnings coming back to invest and create jobs here in America?
Ms. Huang. So I think nobody has been able to figure out
where that 4 trillion came from and, to date----
Mr. Doggett. Well, that is like a lot his numbers.
Ms. Huang. And to date, we have seen about 500 billion in
repatriated earnings. And we have also seen very little of that
flow through into increased investment or wages.
Mr. Doggett. Right. Because, as we expressed concern when
that tax law was being written, in fact what happened the last
time they had a repatriation, the same thing happened again.
And that is, the money flowed into stock buybacks and to
dividends. So, if you were one of the American families who had
stocks in one of these companies, you maybe did well. But very
few, a very small portion had that.
Is it correct that almost all of the money that has come
back has gone into stock buybacks and dividends and some
increase in executive pay?
Ms. Huang. And that is absolutely not surprising, as you
said. I think we mentioned earlier CEA Chair Kevin Hassett.
Before this bill was enacted, another one of his promises was
the suggestion that a lot of that money would flow through
directly into investments in factories and jobs in the U.S.,
combined with the cut in the corporate rate.
If you notice his language since the bill was enacted, he
has kind of changed his story since then and saying now, oh,
well, it was kind of expected that you would get this one-time
sort of glut of buybacks and dividends and so on and so forth.
So, the ultimate increase in wages for workers seems to be
getting further and further away in terms of what we are being
promised.
Mr. Doggett. And then another one of the whoppers that was
told was that there were things in this tax bill that were
going to prevent the outsourcing of American jobs. In fact, are
there not a number of provisions that have been added by
Republicans in this tax law, such as the fact that you might
pay nothing or no more than half of what you would pay here in
America in taxes if you invest in Shanghai instead of investing
in San Antonio?
Ms. Huang. That's absolutely right. The basic structure of
the law is that there is a permanently low discounted rate on
foreign profits as opposed to profits earned in the U.S. And
the law in a way recognizes that problem and it has a whole
series of guardrails to try to stop shifting of profits and
investment offshore. But one of these very measures creates its
own new incentive to actually shift investment offshore.
Mr. Doggett. As I think you know, I have outsourcing
legislation to try to close all those loopholes. Is it
important to protect American jobs by closing these giant
loopholes that Republicans created in their tax law to
encourage the outsourcing of jobs and investment from our
country to abroad?
Ms. Huang. It is vitally important. And also important to
protect that revenue that could be put to better use investing
in infrastructure and other shared priorities that would help
the economy at home.
Mr. Doggett. Thanks to all of you. I yield back.
Chairman Yarmuth. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize Mr. Johnson of Ohio for five minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank our
witnesses for being with us today to have this very, very
important discussion. You know, especially you, Mrs. Pol, for
providing a voice of reason for small businesses. That is so
vitally important here. Small businesses create roughly 60
percent of the jobs in America. And without what you and others
like you do, our economy falters in a very, very big way. So
thanks for being here.
You know, in my part of Ohio, small businesses like yours,
one for example, Bully Tools in Steubenville, are staples of
the economy and employ their neighbors in good paying jobs.
Bully Tools manufactures equipment for gardening, roofing and
other work and is in the planning stages of opening a second
factory, due to the tax reforms that were passed last session,
the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. They were also featured at President
Trump's ``Made in America Showcase'' in the summer of 2017 as
the business representative from Ohio.
The people I represent in eastern and southeastern Ohio
are, by and large, hardworking members of the middle class.
But, contrary to the rhetoric on the other side, they have seen
real benefits from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.
There have been some clear benefits for small businesses
like Bully Tools, such as increasing the thresholds for the
estate tax and the alternative minimum tax. And for the 85
percent of families in my district who take the standard
deduction, more of their money is tax free because the Tax Cuts
and Jobs Act nearly doubles the standard deduction for married
couples and individual filers. With more money at home,
families can support our small businesses.
So, Mrs. Pol, have you seen this type of indirect benefit
of tax reform in your community and businesses like yours?
Ms. Pol. Yes, we have seen our town really growing and we
have seen new businesses coming in. We have two large
corporations, Pella Corp. and Vermeer's, that supply a lot of
our small businesses with work. And that is one of the reasons
I am able to build a warehouse. So with this coming through,
even though some of it is going to the large corporations, they
are turning it around and also allowing small businesses to
gain from it, which allows employees to gain.
Mr. Johnson. Okay, well, thank you. You know, one of the
most often repeated criticisms of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act is
that they are supposedly driving our country off a fiscal
cliff. The reality is that, even with the tax cuts, the federal
government is projected to bring in a staggering $46 trillion
in revenue over 10 years. No nation in the world has ever
collected more. The federal government clearly has a spending
problem, not a revenue problem. And it is the out-of-control
mandatory spending that is the driver of our deficits.
What I find disconcerting is twofold. My Democrat
colleagues have proposed to dramatically increase mandatory
spending with a new spending wish list costing over $50
trillion over the next decade. And, second, they want to pay
for their new priorities by increasing taxes on Americans. I am
assuming this would include rolling back the tax relief that
the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act brought for all Americans.
I would refer my colleagues in the majority to an article
that came out in Roll Call just today. There are some examples.
Look at the big blue states, states like New York, California,
Illinois that are struggling to make ends meet. They have got
rising deficits. Look at states on the other hand--by the way,
those states have really high tax rates. Look at states like
Texas and Florida and other states who have understood that
there is a phenomenon that occurs when you allow the American
people to keep more of the money that they earn.
Now it does not match up with the static scoring of CBO and
others here in Washington, where we play funny money deals. But
I can tell you that the American people know real money when it
is in their pocket.
So, Dr. Gale, do you think it would be plausible to
increase taxes to fully pay for the spending wish list? And, if
so, what kind of tax increases would you suggest to pay for
this $50 trillion of new spending?
Mr. Gale. The CBO estimates of TCJA that show that TCJA
loses substantial amounts of revenue are not static estimates,
they are fully dynamic.
Mr. Johnson. That is not the question I asked you. I asked
you what kind of tax increase do you think it would take to pay
for this $50 trillion wish list?
Mr. Gale. I think there are a number of tax increases. We
should pursue the carbon tax with offsets for low-income
households as clearly one of them. The value-added tax with
offsets for low-income households is clearly another. How we
get all the way to the number you specified is a different
question. But it----
Mr. Johnson. That is not a number I specified; that is
their wish list. That is the Democrat wish list, 50 trillion,
so----
Mr. Gale. How we get to the number you asked me about is a
different question. I think that even if we do generate
judicious spending cuts in Social Security and Medicare, if you
look at the arithmetic of the budget outlook, we will need to
raise tax revenues.
Mr. Johnson. Please note, Mr. Chairman, I must qualify, I
never said cut Social Security and Medicare. I want to make
sure. Those were your words. That is not where I am suggesting
that we cut.
Chairman Yarmuth. Okay, the gentleman's time has expired. I
now recognize Mr. Scott of Virginia for five minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, the
ranking member has frequently asked us what our plan is, and I
just put this chart up here to show that during Republican
administrations, the deficit gets worse; during Democratic
administrations, the deficit gets better. We had PAYGO, where
if you have a wish list you have to pay for it. And therefore,
as opposed to tax cuts that are not paid for and put us in the
ditch.
So in response to the question, our plan is the blue, their
plan is the red. And in terms of jobs, next chart, you can see
where jobs have gotten better. In about 1990, there was a
bipartisan bill where President Bush, I guess we misread his
lips, and jobs got better. During the Clinton administration,
they got better. You can see it in 2009, at the bottom of 2009,
President Obama had an economic plan.
We passed a $1.5 trillion economic plan and you cannot
point to where on that chart it even made any difference. So in
terms of what our plan is, if we could get back to Democratic
administrations, we would have a much better budget.
Dr. Gale, let me ask you a question on tax cuts generally.
Some tax cuts stimulate the economy, some do not. Which tax
cuts tend to stimulate the economy?
Mr. Gale. You will get the biggest bang for the buck for
tax cuts that get spent rather than saved. And that, typically,
in terms of households, that is typically money that goes to
lower and middle-income households who tend to spend a greater
share of their income than high-income households who tend to
save more.
Mr. Scott. And so this tax cut where 80 percent of the
benefits went to the top 1 percent and corporations would miss
that mark?
Mr. Gale. This tax cut was not well designed to boost
short-term consumption, right.
Mr. Scott. And how did the tax cut miss? We heard how they
missed women businesses. How did they miss small businesses?
Mr. Gale. The small business literature issue is confusing.
It is actually young businesses that create most of the jobs.
Most of the small business sector is sort of sleepy and quiet.
And just as you would not want to confuse small people and
young people, you do not want to confuse small businesses and
young businesses. So, what is important is that we generate
incentives for young businesses to grow. But if we subsidize
all small businesses, we are spending a lot of money without
getting a lot of bang for the buck in terms of the economics.
Mr. Scott. Ms. Huang, you talked about how the passthrough
deduction hurts individual workers. Can you elaborate on that a
little bit?
Ms. Huang. The problem is that it actually might encourage
companies to replace good jobs with independent contractors or
to outsource those jobs to outside contractors. So, my
colleague, Brendan Duke, has research that shows that it risks
pushing more workers into low-wage firms or outside the
protection of labor laws. So many companies already outsource
their janitorial staff, the security guard jobs to outside
contractors, for example. But the passthrough deduction gives
them a tax incentive to do even more of that.
So, if you were to take a company that was considering
whether to retain its in-house IT department or to contract to
an outside firm to do that same work, if they contracted to the
outside worker, that would get the benefit of a passthrough
deduction that they could then split. So that is a tax
incentive to go in that direction. Now, that is not really
encouraging entrepreneurship or job creation, it is just
splitting firms up.
Mr. Scott. And what is wrong, why is the worker at a
disadvantage as an independent contractor?
Ms. Huang. Well, in the independent contracting case, there
is a lot of research that shows that pay and benefits and legal
protections for independent contractors go down. So even though
you might get a little bit of passthrough deduction, you could
be giving up a whole lot in terms of health benefits, workplace
protections and other benefits that usually come on top of
wages.
Mr. Scott. And, Ms. Bruckner, could you say a word about
how we missed small businesses with the tax cuts?
Ms. Bruckner. I think that we did not do careful thinking
about what type of small businesses we are going to invest in.
Women business owners start businesses at rates faster than
five times the national average and yet we have never
considered if small business tax expenditures generally
specifically target and help those women business owners grow.
And we do not know if the money we are investing in these
business expenditures at all helps these businesses start and
grow. And, in fact, my research shows that it bypasses the
majority of women business owners who are very small and in
services altogether. So, in essence, it could very well be that
you are subsidizing the same firms over and over again, as
opposed to investing where there is actually opportunity for
economic growth.
The absence of congressional research and study on these
issues means that you guys are operating completely blind.
Chairman Yarmuth. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize Mr. Hern of Oklahoma for five minutes.
Mr. Hern. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Womack.
You know, as a small business owner for the last 34 years, I
find it very interesting to listen to testimony of those who
actually pay the taxes and those who talk about the tax policy.
It is pretty fascinating.
I would like to ask each one of you, I know Ms. Pol has
created jobs. Have any of the three of you ever actually had to
use the tax code and whichever tax code to actually create
jobs, have employees and be responsible and be the last to get
paid?
Ms. Bruckner. Well, I am someone that is actively looking
for opportunities to start my own small business. But my
concern over health care cost is precluding me and my husband
from starting our own small business. It is something that we
are actively concerned about and has delayed. Like most of the
literature shows, when you are disproportionately concerned
about stability for health care, it delays entrepreneurship.
Mr. Hern. Perfect. You should have been around about eight
years ago.
Yes, ma'am, Ms. Huang.
Ms. Huang. I have not employed people. But I also would
like to say that, also in the real world are the millions of
workers who receive the paychecks. And I think their voices,
including the 11 million kids that get $75 or less from this
bill, is also important when thinking about the impacts on the
real economy.
Mr. Hern. Sure, absolutely. Mr. Gale?
Mr. Gale. I run a small consulting business and have had
people work for me. They were not employees, they were
contractors.
Mr. Hern. Fair enough. Thank you. I would like to thank
you, Ms. Pol, for all the work you do and being the last to get
paid, because anything that happens to expense your business
does affect what you take home. And you make sure, as you said,
that your employees get paid first and that all your vendors
get paid. And that is no easy task, as a small business owner.
You know, your story is fantastic. And fortunately, it is
not unique across the country, as many of my colleagues have
brought up. Many of my families in Oklahoma's first district
benefit from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, as well. Today, I would
like to highlight 22,000 of those people in my district.
A constituent of mine, Norm S. Bjornson, is the founder of
AAON, a Tulsa-based company who engineers, manufactures,
markets and sells air conditioning and heating equipment. Norm
employs approximately 2,000 individuals at his Oklahoma and
Texas facilities. Norm announced personnel employed by AAON on
January 1, 2018, excluding executives, will receive a $1,000
bonus in recognition of the new tax reform law.
Additionally, headquartered in Tulsa, QuikTrip Convenience
Stores employs over 20,000 people, started in Oklahoma, in
Tulsa, in 1961. Fortune has ranked QuikTrip on the list of best
companies to work for for 14 years running. QuikTrip also gave
their employees bonuses, including part-time employees, and
excluding those who are considered executives. QuikTrip also
credits the ability to provide these bonuses to the Tax Cuts
and Jobs Act. The bonuses range from $500 to $3,000 per
employee. Additionally, they are using savings to grow their
company and provide opportunities for their employees.
Finally, as a direct result of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act,
Cox Communications added roughly $450 million, additional
dollars, into their employee pension investments to bring
solvency to their plan.
You know, I would like to say that, as a direct result of
the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, families in my district ended up
with more money in their pockets this year. Small businesses
like my own invested over $2 million last year business of the
benefits that were brought forth. In addition to the bonuses,
added benefits and pay raises, the average family in my
district received a tax cut of around $1,888.
And to me, this sounds remarkably better than proposed
Green New Deal, which would cost each American family as much
as $650,000 per household, we can range from 50 trillion to 93
trillion, whichever number you want to pick. And I also find it
very interesting that all of a sudden that our colleagues and
the witnesses are talking more about debt after we started
putting taxpayer dollars back into people's pockets and no one
is talking about Democrat proposals coming from this Congress
alone that will cost upwards of $100 trillion, and why are we
not holding hearings talking about that, instead of how we are
going to spend more.
I yield back my time.
Chairman Yarmuth. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize Mr. Peters of California for five minutes.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We missed a real big
opportunity to do real tax reform. Real tax perform would have
promoted American growth and competitiveness. Instead,
Republicans chose a path that blows up the deficit and will
harm working families in the long run.
And I was at the microphone protesting this move at that
time, as were many Democrats. Because debt matters. Debt crowds
out private investment. Debt gives us less flexibility to
respond to emergencies. Debt increases the risk of financial
crisis. And I sincerely hope my colleagues on both sides of the
aisle will examine the long-term consequences of ignoring the
debt and how this tax bill contributed to this debt crisis.
Mr. Gale, I wanted to ask you, how much did the 2017 tax
law increase debt and deficits?
Mr. Gale. Under CBO's dynamic estimates, the full increase
in the deficit would be about $1.9 trillion over 10 years. That
is for the tax cut as it is written. If the tax cut, if the
temporary provisions were extended, the net debt, deficit
effect would be over $3.1 trillion.
Mr. Peters. Right. And someone suggested that these were
static analyses. Can you describe briefly what you mean by
dynamic in that context?
Mr. Gale. Sure. Static, what is called a static analysis
incorporates a lot of behavioral responses, but it keeps the
macroeconomic aggregates constant. So, it keeps output constant
but it allows people to shift, for example, between different
types of saving if it were a proposal to increase IRAs or
something like that.
A dynamic estimate is also called a macro-feedback
estimate. It includes the impact on the economy, as well as
then how that feeds back into revenues, as one of the
congressmen was discussing. So, it incorporates all of those
effects.
Mr. Peters. Fair to say it is a more comprehensive view to
do dynamic than static?
Mr. Gale. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Peters. Even after the law passed and independent
groups scored it as increasing the deficit by nearly $2
trillion, the administration claimed that it would pay for
itself. Secretary Mnuchin claimed, ``So we are humming along on
where projections are and, as I have said, at 3 percent
economic growth, this tax plan will not only pay for itself but
in fact create additional revenue for the government.''
Mr. Gale, is there any evidence to support this claim?
Mr. Gale. No. There is, in principle, a growth rate at
which the tax cut would be revenue neutral. But no one from the
CBO to the JCT to Mark Zandi who was mentioned earlier, to the
Tax Policy Center, to others, nobody predicts that the economy
will grow at that rate.
Mr. Peters. If I recall, it was something around over 4
percent was the assumed rate at best case?
Mr. Gale. I believe that's right.
Mr. Peters. And again, as you said, CBO shows that the tax
bill, even if some provisions expire on schedule, will add $1.9
trillion to the debt by 2028 and that extending it this year
would cost at least another $1.1 trillion through 2029.
You know, people like to take a shot at my home state of
California and their relatively high tax rates. I would just
say that growth in California has been pretty strong. Do you
agree with that understanding?
Mr. Gale. Yes, the economics literature is pretty clear on
this. There is a very weak relationship between state growth
rates and state tax rates.
Mr. Peters. Right. I would also note that in Kansas, where
there is a huge effort to cut taxes as unprincipled as this
effort in Congress in 2017, voters wised up and removed the
governor because they wanted to see public investment. And
public investment now is at a relatively low historical level
for the United States of America. And if we wanted to encourage
economic growth, and I hope we will discuss that in this
committee, that would be something we would want to consider to
invest in.
Finally, Mr. Gale, when you give tax cuts, when you
potentially debt finance tax cuts like we did in 2017, is it
fair to say that the growth impacts are less than debt
financing something like infrastructure?
Mr. Gale. I think in general, yes. It depends on how the
tax cut gets used. But if a significant percent of it gets used
simply to be spent, whereas if 100 percent of the
infrastructure gets focused on new investment, then the
infrastructure investment will have a bigger impact.
Mr. Peters. Well, on trade and on things like the deficit,
I invite Republicans back to their roots and hopefully we will
have that discussion.
Chairman Yarmuth. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize Mr. Smith of Missouri for five minutes.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity to have this hearing, for us to highlight the
benefits of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.
I am reminded of a gentleman from my home state, Mark
Twain. Mark Twain had a quote that said, you can't depend on
your eyes when your imagination is out of focus. That is what I
am reminded by so much of the conversation that I have heard
sitting on this panel today.
As one of the original co-sponsors and writers of the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act, there is a lot of not serious conversation
when we are talking, first off, about the statement of a $1.5
trillion debt over 10 years or a $1.9 trillion of debt over 10
years to pay for the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, whenever more than
half of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle have
signed onto House Resolution 109, the Green New Deal, which
reports showed yesterday would cost $94 trillion, $94 trillion.
That is $9.4 trillion a year and you all are saying that we are
exploding the debt over $150 billion that we allow American
taxpayers to keep of their money, not the government's money,
of their money.
So, my question is, to the other side, actually, is when
you are proposing 12 Democrat colleagues of mine on that side
of the aisle have co-sponsored the Green New Deal, who want to
add $94 trillion, this is what we are dealing with on the
budget committee, people that are not--not being realistic.
What I will say is I represent one of the poorest
congressional districts in Congress, maybe the poorest on this
committee. The median household income in my district is
$40,000 a year of a family of four. Southeast Missouri. And I
can tell you that, Mr. Gale, your judgment when you look at
things of whether it is the wrong thing at the wrong time in
your opening statement, well I will tell you the young lady who
got a very nice, sizeable bonus at Lowe's in Rolla, Missouri,
when I met with her because of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, she
was able to purchase a new car seat for her toddler because her
old car seat was broken. That was at the right time, it was not
at the wrong time, and it was for the right person.
I can talk to you about the bank teller in Hartville,
Missouri, who told me that U.S. Bank, because of the Tax Cuts
and Jobs Act is now paying all their employees at at least the
starting wage of $15 an hour. That is real money in Wright
County, Missouri.
I can tell you about the individuals at the call center in
Cape Girardeau, Missouri, that received a $1,000 bonus from
AT&T because of the passthrough of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act,
and the savings that they were able to pay for their kids'
college books. That is real, real money.
$850 in southeast Missouri is not crumbs. To some
politicians in San Francisco, California, it is crumbs. But
where they make their median income household of $40,000, that
is a couple months' rent, that is a couple car payments. So,
unless you have been to the bootheel of Missouri and you see
what my people are experiencing, don't you say that the people
of southeast Missouri have not benefitted.
We see a growing economy. Right now, we have the largest
increase in wages in over a decade. CBO said that. CBO
predicted more than 900,000 new jobs over the next 10 years.
These are facts.
Mrs. Pol, thank you for being here. And I also want to
thank you, the very last line in your statement, you encourage
Congress to pass the Main Street Tax Certainty Act. I am with
you, that is my legislation. So, thank you for highlighting
that. And that causes real growth for small businesses.
And Ms. Bruckner, I hope that you have the opportunity to
open up your small business. And I don't know why you were not
able to do it after the Democrats passed Obamacare, because we
have not changed health care from when they did until last
year. And when you look at the CBO report, they predicted that
by eliminating the mandate, it would take 14 million people
off. But CMS just reported that it is 2.5 million people that
chose not to purchase health care because they could find it
cheaper somewhere else.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Yarmuth. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize Mr. Horsford of Nevada for five minutes.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And first I would
like to start by saying, being an advocate of small business is
not a partisan issue. Coming from my district, Nevada's fourth
district, I work very closely with my small business community,
the metro chamber, the urban chamber, the Latin Chamber of
Commerce, the Asian chamber. I, myself, am a small business
owner and have helped to create jobs. And so, to suggest
somehow that this is a partisan issue, I just do not ascribe to
that thinking.
But what is a real fact is that the tax scheme that was
passed by the prior Congress gave a temporary tax benefit to
small business but gave a permanent tax break to big
corporations. So, while we have these slides today showcasing a
number of small businesses by my colleagues in their district
which we fully support, I guess the question would be why was
there not advocacy for them, to make their tax break permanent
instead of temporary?
My question is related to the facts and not fake news, is
since last year, corporate profits have increased by 13 percent
from already near record high levels. So why did we give
permanent tax cuts to big corporations and not help more small
businesses so that you could predictably plan for the future
and hire more people? Why did they approve a tax plan with no
public hearings in 51 days and not take into account the fact
that, again, according to the recent data available, wages are
essentially flat since the passage of this tax bill?
So Ms. Huang, the tax law delivered the largest tax breaks
for the wealthiest households, specifically corporations. Many
analysts predicted that because most of the benefits flowed to
the richest taxpayers, economic inequality would increase. Can
you briefly elaborate on how the tax law worsens economic
inequality as well as wage stagnation?
Ms. Huang. Absolutely. I think you are absolutely right, I
think we would like to, I think proponents of the law would
like us to picture family-run, Main Street businesses who are
actually investing and increasing wages. But the fact of the
matter is, the bulk of the dollars are hitting to, you know,
the big banks that are posting record profits, the private
equity firms that are reorganizing as corporations in order to
get the corporate tax cut, the pharmaceutical companies that
are getting big tax cuts without passing that on to their
consumers or investing in the U.S.
So overall, following those decades and decades of a larger
share of the nation's income going to the top 1 percent, this
tax law worsened that by giving bigger tax cuts to the very top
than to people at the bottom and in the middle. And that in
turn, as I mentioned in my opening, feeds racial inequities as
well.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you. Another point I want to touch on
is the reality, again, real facts, that millions of taxpayers
are now beginning to file their tax returns. And I received a
note from a constituent, Kevin, from Las Vegas, Nevada, who
wrote to my office and told me this is the first year that my
husband and I are filing married jointly. Our joint refund,
which should be in theory have been higher than we filed as
single, since we both still deduct at the single rate. The GOP
tax plan touted benefits for married couples making over
$120,000 per year. But when we looked at the tax filing
process, removing the married status and deduction, we would
have ended up owing the government several thousand dollars
more.
Can either of you speak to the reality that millions of
Americans are now going to owe more in their upcoming tax
filing because of the GOP tax scheme that was passed last
Congress?
Ms. Huang. I think there is undoubtedly a lot of confusion
around refunds and total tax liability. And that has not been
helped at all by the rushed enactment and implementation of the
tax law, along with some of these overblown promises that we
have heard before. And I think overall, we are hearing a lot of
evidence that the public knows that the law overall is tilted
toward the highest income filers.
I think one of the key examples that I have seen of the
misapprehension about what the law does is the repeated
statements, for example, from President Trump and Ivanka Trump
and Secretary Mnuchin about what families with children would
get, this $2,000 increase in their refunds or their child tax
credit. When, in fact, 11 million children in the lowest income
families will get $75 or less and millions more will get far,
far less than the full $2,000 refund.
So I think going forward, what we want to do is to actually
fix that and prioritize those families so that they can see
something of an improvement in their living standards.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Yarmuth. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired. I now yield five minutes to the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Woodall.
Mr. Woodall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for those
five minutes. I do not know if you are going to go around for a
second round of questions. I find when I want to spend my first
four and a half minutes making a point, it is tough to get to
the good witnesses after that.
I had something of value across the board. Ms. Pol, I
wanted to start with you. Did it ever dawn on you when you
thought about what Congress was doing as we were trying our
very best to get good tax policy that, when you read about
those committee hearings, that it would be one witness from one
side of the aisle and then maybe three witnesses or more from
the other side of the aisle, or did you think that it was not a
stacked deck but an even playing filed, just from a distance
back home?
Ms. Pol. No, I would not have expected that.
Mr. Woodall. I would not have either, and it is certainly
the way we ran the place when we were running it and it is the
way it is now and I think that is a shame on some issues like
this. I heard you say specifically you made different business
decisions, positive business decisions for your employees
because of the passage of the tax bill.
I heard other witnesses say unequivocally that they worried
employees were disadvantaged not by the tax bill in general but
specifically because of those passthrough provisions that were
targeted at your business. And that is a legitimate concern.
Everybody cares about employees. Do you have a more valuable
resource in your business than your employees? Can you just go
out and find new talent if you lose the talent that you have
today?
Ms. Pol. No, absolutely not. We have some specifics with
truck drivers, especially. I just lost one to a death. I am
going to have a hard time finding somebody in that position and
they are valuable. We welcome them to the Geetings family when
we hire anybody because that is what they are, they are our
family and they are our salespeople.
Mr. Woodall. Not surprisingly, Dr. Gale made a good point
when he distinguished between small businesses and young
businesses. It is not about maintaining a business model that
is failing, it is about growing a business model and providing
more opportunity in the community. Not to put you on the spot,
we have not talked about this. You come from a serial
entrepreneur family. Would you describe yourself as a small
business or as a young and growing business?
Ms. Pol. I would say we are young and growing yet. We are
looking forward to more expansion.
Mr. Woodall. I think of one of my constituent companies,
Boehringer Ingelheim. It is a family-owned business, started in
1885. They have been a young and growing business since 1885.
It is now a multinational company. They can do business
anywhere in the world they want to do business. They just
brought an additional 225 jobs to Georgia. This is an animal
health sciences company. These are high-paying jobs. This is
not a $15-an-hour job, which is a great job to get. These are
six-figure jobs that could have gone to Europe, could have gone
to Asia and are coming to America instead, because folks have a
choice. Multinationals do have a choice.
If you wanted to pick your business up and move it to
Europe or Asia, I suspect that would be a much more challenging
model.
I want to think about the women-owned businesses that Ms.
Bruckner referenced. She is absolutely right, we crafted the
tax code to focus on capital-intensive businesses because, and
Dr. Gale may be able to speak to this, because we believe that
capital-intensive businesses had a higher multiplier effect.
But, yes, more small businesses are service-oriented
businesses.
When you think about your peers in leadership back home,
have you heard that concern before? Folks who said, golly,
those capital-intensive small business owners did get a special
break that I did not get in my service business?
Ms. Pol. I am not really hearing as much of that, at least
in Iowa. I also belong NAWBO, National Association of Women
Business Owners. And so, I have been active in that for a
while. And a lot of what we are finding is, when we are
building, when the large companies are building, when we are
building small businesses, we actually use their services. And
so, you know, I think it is helping out all the way through.
And of course, we are looking at--I look at using women
business owners, and I support that.
Mr. Woodall. Candidly, I have not read the Billion Dollar
Blind Spot. I am now going to have to think through that,
because I thought that was a perfectly legitimate criticism.
And I wish, Mr. Chairman, we had more time to actually talk
about individual improvements. What Dr. Gale said about
generational inequities, I think that is critically important
that we talk about. You know, Dr. Kotlikoff has talked about
that on a regular basis in terms of how we measure tax input.
And one thing that I would like to get us to get back to,
Mr. Chairman, lots of talk about consumers and lower income
families being the stimulative effect in a tax cut. Certainly,
that is true. Except the Tax Policy Center reports that the
bottom quintile, bottom 20 percent, is paying a negative tax
rate today for income taxes. About the bottom 40 percent are
paying a negative income tax rate today. I would be interested
to come back and have the conversation. Of course, those
dollars are stimulative. Should we do it through the tax code
or should we do it through the income support spending level? I
am one of those, Dr. Gale, as you are, that believe tax
expenditures should be measured as spending programs, not as
tax programs, and we have not accurately measured those in the
past, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to that partnership.
Chairman Yarmuth. Thank you for the idea. We will consider
that. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize Mr. Panetta from
California for five minutes.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Womack. I appreciate this opportunity. And to all the
witnesses, thank you for your time and your preparation, not
just for this hearing but what you have done to be at this
hearing. So, thank you very much.
I am going to pick on Mr. Gale if that is all right. Just a
couple questions for you, sir. And I am sure you were probably
aware of this and you probably watched this hearing. But before
the tax law was passed, you had a number of senior
administration officials come actually into this committee and
talk about the tax law and what they attempted and what they
wanted to pass. And one of them was Mick Mulvaney and I am sure
he was, at that point, OMB or one of his many positions. I
think it was OMB at that point.
And he said, when he testified in front of this committee,
``We assumed for the sake of doing the budget that the tax plan
is deficit neutral, that removing the exclusions, the
deductions, the loopholes would lead us to a deficit-neutral
tax plan. The dynamic benefit is only counted one time and that
is toward the 3 percent economic growth, and I am happy to
explain that further to you if you like.''
What I would like for you to explain, Mr. Gale, have these
tax cuts been deficit neutral?
Mr. Gale. Every reputable organization that has looked at
this has found that the tax cuts, lo and behold, reduce
revenues. And that is including the macro feedback effect. And
that is a very wide range of organizations. The Congressional
Joint Tax Committee, the Congressional Budget Office, think
tanks like the Tax Foundation and the Tax Policy Center,
private modelers, everyone comes to the conclusion that the tax
cuts will reduce revenues.
There is, in theory, a growth rate that would be fast
enough to offset all the revenues. But nobody thinks we are
going to be anywhere near that growth rate.
Mr. Panetta. In theory, what is that?
Mr. Gale. It is above four. I am not sure exactly what the
right number is. But it would be great if we could grow at that
rate. But, and this comes back to the comments about
imagination and the anecdotes earlier. The anecdotes are
inspiring and we should all, you know, be moved by our
imagination. But there is no substitute for serious analysis.
Mr. Panetta. Understood, understood. I guess in discussing
analysis, I guess the CBO has done, you know, obviously many
analyses on this. And it has showed that the tax bill, even if
it does expire on schedule, it will add 1.9 trillion, I think
they are saying, to the debt by 2028, with interest and growth,
obviously. And extending it this year would cost at least, I
think, another 1.1 trillion through 2029, what they are saying.
Mr. Gale. Right.
Mr. Panetta. In your opinion, Mr. Gale, and if any other
witness would like to speak to this, can we afford $3 trillion
worth of tax cuts in this type of strong economy that we are
experiencing right now?
Mr. Gale. There are two issues here. One is the size of the
tax cuts and the second is the allocation of the tax cuts. The
size of the tax cuts are substantial. It is in the wrong
direction as far as long-term fiscal sustainability is
concerned. But if we had allocated the money really well to
pressing national needs, then it might have been worth it to
increase the deficit by that much.
But TCJA basically says the biggest problem in the country
is that high-income households do not have enough after-tax
income. And so, it is allocating an enormous amount of that
increase in deficits toward high-income households. Now, all of
the stuff about people buying a car seat or getting a job or
getting other benefits, those are inspiring and we should be
doing that. But this is an incredibly poorly way to target
those benefits. We do not have to pay off the top 1 percent of
the population to give benefits to the bottom half.
Mr. Panetta. And, I think Ms. Huang, you are shaking your
head.
Ms. Huang. In vehement agreement. And I think the other
part that Dr. Gale has also talked about is who ends up holding
the tab for those tax cuts for the very top. And we have seen
over and over again in both the statements and the budget
proposals of people who supported the 2017 tax law that their
preferred way of dealing with deficits is to cut programs that,
you know, on average help families of limited means, Medicaid,
cuts to job training and assistance, education programs. So
that is also another worry that I think is part of the picture.
Mr. Panetta. Thanks again to all of you. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you.
Chairman Yarmuth. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize
Mr. Crenshaw of Texas for five minutes.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here. I want to thank all our witnesses again.
And I want to remind everyone what we are really here
talking about. We are talking about a difference in philosophy.
It is not just tax rates. It is a question of whether the
government should be taking more of your money or whether you
should keep more of your money. It is a difference in the role
of government in what we believe.
It seems to me that you all believe that the role of
government is to tax the people as much as possible so that you
and your benevolent fellow academics can dream up more programs
for the government to spend money on. I don't believe that. I
don't believe that is what the role of government is for. The
role of government is to protect the God-given rights that we
have and to ensure that we live as free as possible.
The role of government is to tax people to the least extent
possible while still taxing them enough to cover basic needs
for government. And if we are questioning what those needs are,
we can just look at our Constitution. They are generally pretty
clear there. So that is what today is about.
You said that these anecdotes are imaginative. It is
literally not imagination to bring up anecdotes. It is
literally not that. It is reality. So here is some reality from
Texas. Direct results from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.
McDonald's increased educational opportunities by $150
million as a result of the tax cuts. $500 employee bonuses at
Camp Construction Services. Reduced prices for customers at
Center Point Energy. $500 employee bonuses at Group One
Automotive. $1,600 employee bonuses at Cabot Oil and Gas.
$2,000 employee bonuses at Waste Management. $1,000 to $4,000
bonuses paid to employees at Insperity, totaling 17 million.
Base wages raised to $15 an hour at Cadence Bancorp along with
an increased 401(k) contribution and employee stock purchase
plan. Covestro had a choice between three new facilities, a
$1.7 billion facility, between Asia, Europe and Houston, so
they chose Houston and they say it is directly because of the
tax cuts.
These are not imaginative anecdotes. These are real. You
said it, so----
Mr. Gale. I said the anecdotes were inspiring.
Mr. Crenshaw. I did not ask. That is okay, that is okay.
There is more money in the pockets of the people. That is
the reality, okay? Not imagination.
Professor Bruckner, again, we are speaking about
imaginative arguments. You acknowledge that there is a direct
benefit of the tax cut to people across all incomes but you are
claiming that women do not benefit as much. Is that correct,
yes or no?
Ms. Bruckner. No, I am claiming that we absolutely should
study this for the first time ever, to determine what the
impact is.
Mr. Crenshaw. Okay, but would you prefer another tax cut
for women entrepreneurs? Because we might find some common
ground there.
Ms. Bruckner. No. What I am saying is we should take a look
at JCT's analysis and we should coordinate among our government
resources to study where the distribution of the income is. Are
we investing in where there is actual growth and opportunity
for growth? Are we investing in businesses that will generate
more economic activity?
Mr. Crenshaw. Fair enough. But on the health care issue,
you took issue with the changes to the individual mandate. What
we have gone over is that those estimates of people, quote,
unquote losing their health care, of course, it is not losing
your health care, you are choosing a different health care
plan. Do you not believe in giving people that choice?
Ms. Bruckner. I believe in creating schemes that provide a
pathway for affordable health care for small businesses. It is
their number one concern.
Mr. Crenshaw. Obamacare hurt small businesses, as we know.
And I just want to point out, the law gives people the choice.
They are not losing something, they are choosing something
else, and I have got to move on because I have such limited
time.
Ms. Huang, you took issue with the 20 percent tax cut for
small businesses. You are claiming that that leads to lower
workplace standards, that it encourages independent
contracting. Do you not believe that small businesses also
deserved that tax cut?
Ms. Huang. So, let's look into what the definition of a
small business is. If you look at where the revenue went----
Mr. Crenshaw. Yes or no? You do not want them to take that
20 percent tax cut?
Ms. Huang. More than two thirds of the tax cut for
passthroughs went to the top 1 percent. Those are not
businesses that I would consider small.
Mr. Crenshaw. Okay, let's talk about the 1 percent. What is
the fraction of total federal revenue the top 1 percent paid?
Ms. Huang. What is the fraction of income that the top 1
percent gain?
Mr. Crenshaw. That is not the question. You cannot answer
it? All right, well, I will tell you what it is. It is around
37 percent, according to recent IRS data. Is that fair?
We talked about passing the fair test. So, the top 1
percent pays more than the bottom 90 percent. Is that fair? And
again, we have different definitions of fair.
Ms. Huang. I don't think it is fair to cherry pick one type
of tax----
Mr. Crenshaw. Again, we have--you guys have been cherry
picking this whole time.
Ms. Huang.----when other people pay payroll taxes, state
taxes----
Mr. Crenshaw. I am not done. I am not done, because I only
have 10 seconds left so I am going to use it to make a point
here. We have different definitions of fair. And that is okay.
But I wish we were honest about that. You believe fair is
proportionality or, sorry, I believe fair is proportionality;
you believe fair is egalitarianism. We have different
approaches to governance and that is really what this is about.
And I hope we have honest conversations in the future. Thank
you.
Chairman Yarmuth. Just to set the record straight, Dr. Gale
did not use the word imaginative, he called those inspiring.
Actually, the imaginative came from quoting Mark Twain by Mr.
Smith.
I now recognize Ms. Omar for five minutes.
Ms. Omar. Thank you, Chair.
Ms. Huang, thank you for your forthcoming testimony about
the impact of the GOP tax cut to the American people. The
details you shared were very insightful, though the underlying
message you are sharing should not be a surprise to anyone
here. Clearly, the 2017 tax cuts were just a tool that our
Republican colleagues used to help make their rich friends
richer.
As you illustrated, everyday working Americans have not
seen a dollar of the benefits that the Republicans and the
Trump administration promised them. So, promise is something
that came up quite a lot and I want to just go through some of
those promises.
There has not been any meaningful growth, wage growth, as
they promised. We are not seeing millions of jobs added to the
economy as a result of the cuts as they promised. We are not
seeing a major economic boost, certainly not one that offsets
the revenue decreases we are now facing, as they promised.
What we are seeing is a record $1 trillion in corporate
stock buybacks. What we are seeing is major corporations like
Amazon, a company that is valued at $800 billion, paying
exactly zero dollars in taxes. So, what is happening right now
is we are paying off, as Dr. Gale said, we are paying off the
top 1 percent on the backs of the rest of us.
So, these promises have been made. All the while, the
American workers are trying to balance a skyrocketing health
care cost, mounting student debt load and impossible high child
care costs. Where are their benefits and where are their
promises? These tax cuts are not helping them pay those bills.
In many cases, workers are seeing their wages go down while
everyday cost goes up.
So, my question to you is, giving everything that you have
shared in your testimony, does the GOP tax cut do anything to
improve the lives of everyday working families, families like
the ones in Minneapolis, families like the ones in everyone's
district that we have heard about?
Ms. Huang. They are not, in my view, the priority of this
tax law. I think actually something has gone seriously wrong
when you have a $1.9 trillion tax bill and there are a single
mother with two kids working full time minimum wage who gets
$75 from this law and there are 11 million kids and working
families just like her.
So, to really fix this and prioritize those working
families, we could have and should have seen a substantial
increase in the child tax credit and earned income tax credit
for those working families. And that should be the first thing
that lawmakers prioritize when fixing this law.
Ms. Omar. Thank you. And my colleague from Texas talked
about rights earlier. I believe we have a right to breathe
clean air, we have a right to have access to clean water, we
have a right to have a planet we can live on. And a lot of my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle talked about the
Green New Deal. The Green New Deal is one that has economic
growth and opportunity.
A recent op ed on the Hill called the Green New Deal is
Good for the Economy states that, while the Green New Deal is
not going to be cheap, it is pale in comparison to the damage
that unchecked climate change will inflict on the economy.
Can you speak to what the costs would be if we are not
investing in making sure that we have a planet we can live on?
Mr. Gale. Thank you. The right question about the cost of
the Green New Deal is compared to what? If we are truly on an
existential descent, then we should be doing a lot to try to
offset that. That does not mean--that is not carte blanche to
do anything. We should be choosing the most effective
interventions and most cost-effective interventions.
But just as the congressman was talking about imagination
earlier in respect to the tax cuts, we should be moved by the
potential to make the planet a cleaner place. Again, that
should not substitute for analysis of what works and what is
the best way to do it. But the goals and the ambition that are
laid out I think are exemplary.
Ms. Omar. And through taxes and subsidies we could have
economic growth and opportunity with the Green New Deal is
what----
Mr. Gale. Again, compared to what? If climate change, you
know, has increasing costs over time, then mitigating that
climate change, we should get credit for that in terms of
looking at the economic effect. So, yeah, I think there is a
positive outcome there.
Ms. Omar. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Yarmuth. The gentlelady's time has expired. I now
recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Meuser, for five
minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you, Chairman, very much. And thank you,
our guests here today, for your testimony. I--first off, I
represent a district, the PA 9th, where the median income is
$43,000. I don't represent the rich. Secondly, as the former
revenue secretary for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, I can
assure you that Amazon pays a lot of taxes. A lot of tax
revenue comes in from Amazon.
I think earlier, my colleague's main point that you guys
wanted to try to minimize was about honesty and trying to get
to the truth. I think that that would be a honorable baseline
to have a good conversation here with the budget committee that
understands the budget and the numbers.
So, I am certainly a little confused, call it frustrated,
with what I am hearing today from my friends on the other side
of the aisle. What has been wrongly argued as the Tax Cuts and
Jobs Act is responsible for this current budgetary deficit,
first of all, is inaccurate. Right? The number is $150 billion
and closing fast, by the way. And it is also inaccurate to say
that this was purely a tax cut for the wealthy at a cost to the
middle class. This could be nothing further from the truth. It
is simply inaccurate and is not focused on reality and facts.
The facts are middle income taxes were reduced by 3 to 4
percent. The standard deduction doubled. I am not sure if you
know what that means but $12,000 no longer is taxed of people's
income. Small business did receive a 20 percent reduction.
Seventy-five percent of the people employed in my district work
for small businesses. This was very important. Unemployment
nationwide is lowest since 1969 in all demographics.
Corporate taxes, we want to sit here and beat up on
corporations. Corporations buy most of the product from small
businesses. They work together. Our corporate tax, yes, it was
reduced to 21 percent. However, if you are aware of this,
Ireland's corporate tax rate is 12.5 percent, the U.K. is 19
percent and Vietnam is 20 percent. We have to be competitive.
And that is what is creating more investment and more
manufacturing in our country, and it is happening. And the
repatriation, everybody just scoffs at that, it is getting near
a trillion dollars. It just does not happen overnight.
So, the goals of the tax cut are real. And, you know, I
can't help but shake my head when I hear about all the woes and
sorrowfulness of the deficit. You know, we spent eight years
where there was $9.5 trillion spent and none of my friends on
the other side of the aisle said a word about it. And, frankly,
what do we have to show for it? Not much, not much.
So, thanks to the tax cuts that were signed into the law
last year by Republicans, not one Democrat voted for it,
businesses large and small are increasing wages. That data is
in, too. They are hiring more workers, they are investing in
growth.
There are many, many good American business stories in my
district. Every day, I hear from a contractor or a builder or a
store that tells me that they are doing better.
Can we do better? Absolutely. That is why I am in Congress,
to help that effort, to help create a more competitive
environment.
Government's role is not to create jobs. Government's role
is to create an environment where the private sector creates
the jobs and drives disposable income and overall incomes of
the people.
I want to give an example of one success story in my
district. It is a company in east-central Pennsylvania by the
name of Ashland Technologies. I asked them if we could speak on
their behalf and they were very excited at that prospect,
because they are very proud of what has been done. Thanks to
the tax reform, AshTech was able to open a new manufacturing
facility, hire 20 new workers and purchase nearly $2 million in
new equipment thanks to the 100 percent depreciation, just in
the last couple of years. This is an area where unemployment--
good paying jobs, we needed impetus such as this.
So, I have a question for Ms. Pol. Ms. Pol, would you say
that your business record over the last several years has been
similar to the one that I referred to as from AshTech, hiring,
expanding?
Ms. Pol. Absolutely.
Mr. Meuser. That is great to hear.
And with my last couple of seconds, can you provide any
recommendations as to further tax changes that would benefit a
business such as your own?
Ms. Pol. Well, in our business one of the ones that would
be great is the depreciation on buildings, because I have so
many of them. You know, it is over 39 years, and that is a long
time to depreciate out a building. So that is one that kind of
relates to me.
Mr. Meuser. Great. Thank you for your testimony. Thank you,
Chairman. I yield back my time.
Chairman Yarmuth. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired. I now recognize the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms.
Schakowsky.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I ask unanimous
consent for us to put into the record a one-pager from the
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities called 2017 Tax Law's
Passthrough Deduction Could Encourage ``Workplace Fissuring.''
Chairman Yarmuth. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Ms. Schakowsky. Let me just say to my colleagues, I really
do not think we ought to get into only you are telling the
truth and we are not. We may have different interpretations of
the data. But the idea that somehow, we are not telling the
truth, we are not dealing with facts, I think is a dangerous
place to go and unnecessary.
The White House Council of Economic Advisers said the 2017
tax law would raise the average worker's wages by $4,000 to
$9,000, claiming the main wage suppressant over the last 40
years, when their economic policies have been enacted, has been
international competition in terms of low tax rates.
Instead though, what we have seen are companies investing
more than $1 trillion in stock buybacks. That is over 130 times
the $7.1 billion corporations have given workers.
Dr. Gale, have workers seen $5,000 more, somewhere around
there, in their paychecks as a result of the Tax Cuts and Jobs
Act?
Mr. Gale. There is certainly no evidence to date that
workers' gains have been anything near the 4,000 to 9,000 that
the CEA claimed would occur. It is unclear from the CEA's
analysis what the time frame for their analysis is. But as I
noted earlier, CBO says that national income will only go up by
0.1 percent after 10 years because of the tax cut.
This is facts and analysis, by the way. And it is hard to
see how wages would go up by the 4,000 to 9,000 above what they
would have gone up anyway if national income is only going to
be 0.1 percent higher than it would have been anyway.
Ms. Schakowsky. Does not add up, does it? So, let's look
backward here. Ms. Huang, did the wealth trickle down to
workers in the form of wage increases after the 2003 Bush tax
cut?
Ms. Huang. The historical record is pretty poor on that.
Ms. Schakowsky. So, Dr. Gale, did the wealth trickle down
to workers in the form of wage increases after the 2001 Bush
tax cut?
Mr. Gale. The 2001 featured both similar cuts to 2017
income tax rates and estate tax rates, and then there was the
repatriation holiday a couple years ago. Wage growth was fairly
slow in that period. You certainly do not see a big boost in
worker compensation at that point. In particular, in the
repatriation, there is strong evidence that firms--if you
recall, the law then said that firms could not get the tax
holiday for the repatriation unless they invested the money--
they could not get the holiday if they used it for dividends
and buybacks. But subsequent evidence shows that the firms that
got the subsidy used it for precisely those reasons, dividends
and buybacks, rather than job expansion.
Ms. Schakowsky. Was that in the law, that they were
supposed to----
Mr. Gale. That was a provision in the law back during the
Bush administration, yes. Of course, money is fungible, so they
basically said, well, this money we brought back we are going
to pay to workers. But this other money which we used to be
paying workers, now we are going to pay out to shareholders.
Ms. Schakowsky. I see. Ms. Huang, are you aware if the
wealth trickled down to workers in the form of wage increases
after the 1981 Reagan tax cut?
Ms. Huang. No, and you can look back at many different
examples including that one, including the experience in
Kansas, and there is very little evidence that these tax cuts
for high income people and large businesses end up in workers'
wages over time.
Ms. Schakowsky. So I guess in general, I am asking both of
you if there are any examples that you can find that trickle
down? That is, cutting taxes for the wealthiest Americans has
actually improved the lot significantly then, or equally, of
ordinary working families. Dr. Gale?
Mr. Gale. Thank you. My reading of the literature is there
is an enormous amount of evidence, whether it is cross-country
evidence or historical evidence in the U.S. that says that
trickle-down economics falls far, far, far short of what is
claimed for it.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, I yield back.
Chairman Yarmuth. The gentlelady's time has expired. We
have one more Republican who is on his way back to testify so
if the ranking member agrees, we will yield to Mr. Sires for
his five minutes and then----
Mr. Womack. Absolutely.
Chairman Yarmuth. Oh, here is Mr. Burchett.
Mr. Burchett. Go ahead, go ahead.
Chairman Yarmuth. All right, Mr. Sires, you are recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for the
witnesses that have been here today.
Look, I am from New Jersey, a very high-tax state. We
probably got hit harder than any other state with this tax bill
that was passed last year. I am very concerned about what is
happening in terms of the real estate market and how it is
impacting the real estate market.
You have people in my--well, my district is across from New
York City. We get the overflow from New York City. They are
high wage, they make good salaries, they come to New Jersey and
they pay a lot of taxes, especially in the real estate market.
New Jersey benefits greatly from that.
I am starting to get a lot of questions from these people
who are making good money, that they are starting to go to
their accountant, they are starting to realize that their taxes
may be $25,000 a year, $30,000 a year, and it is capped at
10,000. So, some of them, this benefit that they are talking
about, it is offset. And then we also have a state tax that is
also capped. So, I think this tax bill stinks, quite frankly,
in terms of New Jersey.
I think this tax bill was put together, they rushed it,
they did not look at the impact that some of the states were
going to have. And obviously, it impacted a lot of the blue
states. And, quite frankly, I think we have to change it. I
think it is going to hurt the real estate market in New Jersey
a great deal after they file this year. Because people are
starting to realize that they cannot write off what they have
been writing off in the past.
And I know some of the Realtors are already making
appointments in my office to say this. I have seen it slow
down. I talked to some of the mayors in my district. They are
very concerned about the tax bill and how it is going to impact
their municipalities. They are concerned because they are not
going to be able to move some of this real estate that is
going.
The district I represent, they called it the Gold Coast,
you know, Hoboken, that whole area where there is a lot of
development, a lot of good real estate has been developed.
So, you know, how do we correct this? Do you think that
this tax bill aggravated the real estate market in some of
these areas? Can anybody talk to that? In other words, has
aggravated the downturn in home sales in certain regions of the
country.
Mr. Gale. It certainly did in a couple of ways. The shift
from personal exemptions to standard deduction greatly reduced
the number of people that took the mortgage interest deduction.
So, the number of people taking that deduction is falling from
on the order of 26 percent to on the order of 11 percent. I am
not sure those figures are exactly right, but it is that type
of thing. And that, of course, will have ramifications for the
value of real estate. The state and local tax deduction
limitation, as you mentioned, will also have a similar effect
in the high-tax states.
So, I mean, this is--I do not want in any way to minimize
the problem. This is just an example of when you change a lot
of things, a lot of things change. Some go up, some go down.
And it seems real estate, charitable giving, health insurance
and things like that are among the losers in this tax reform.
Mr. Sires. Anybody else?
Ms. Bruckner. I think that it is definitely something we
should measure and study after this first year of tax filing.
Let's get a precise number on whether or not people benefitted
with respect to the real estate provisions. I think it is
something that certainly should be flagged for further study.
Mr. Sires. Well, some people estimate that as many as 2
million people in New Jersey are not going to be able to write,
you know, the real estate tax above the 10,000 that they were
writing before. In my district, I have 10 minutes, but what was
good about it is that people used to come to New Jersey because
they realized that they could write that off because they made
high wages in New York and now they can't.
Ms. Bruckner. I would be worried and interested in looking
at the data on older people and older people who are still in
their homes. I think----
Mr. Sires. That, we have not gone into that but, obviously,
they are impacted greatly.
Ms. Bruckner. And that is something, and there is not data
on that, but that is something certainly to track.
Mr. Sires. Thank you.
Chairman Yarmuth. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize Mr. Burchett of Tennessee for five minutes.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, ranking member.
Everybody is wearing orange today. I want to thank you all so
much for recognizing the University of Tennessee in our
upcoming victory of Kentucky this weekend. I just want to make
note of that.
Ms. Bruckner, I am not going to ask you any questions due
to my collegiate history in accounting, so I am going to stay
away from you, all right? As I stated many times, I liked first
quarter accounting so much, I took it twice and then I pursued
a degree in education. So, thank you.
I guess, let's see, on the screen, Litton's Restaurant,
that is owned by my buddy, Barry Litton. He, like my father, he
served his country in the Marine Corps. He and his son, Eric,
and Barry's sister, they just run a great restaurant. If you
ever come to Knoxville and get near Fountain City, just ask
somebody where Litton's is. It is wonderful, and it is a great
restaurant.
And they have, as they have told me, they have actually
seen an uptick since the tax break and they are very grateful
for it. And it is a small business in Knoxville, just like 99
percent of the businesses in Tennessee are.
And I want to ask Ms. Pol, how do I say that name, Pol?
Ms. Pol. Yes, you are right.
Mr. Burchett. Okay, great. In your opinion, you are the
only small business owner on the panel, that seems to be
correct. How has the new tax law helped you? And just give a
specific. You know, everybody gives these numbers and
statistics and, frankly, I get lost in all that. I deal with
human interest and things like that. And thank you for being
here, ma'am.
Ms. Pol. Yeah, absolutely, thanks for having me. The
biggest thing was being able to feel confident to give raises
to our employees this past year. We have struggled with that
the last few years, just due to health care costs. It is one of
our major concerns. And so, we were able to give every one of
our employees a raise.
And, you know, being able to get money back on the new tax
law as far as the small business deduction, that has helped us
invest. We invested in a warehouse, $2 million, and then also
doing the 500,000 to the million dollars allowed us to invest
in six new trucks that cost a million dollars. And so, we have
not been able to do that for the last few years. But it gave us
confidence going forward.
Plus, the spark of new businesses and new business that is
coming our direction, because of the boost in the economy all
the way around our area.
Mr. Burchett. Great. Thank you so much for being here,
ma'am.
And is it Mr. Gale or is it Dr. Gale?
Mr. Gale. It's doctor.
Mr. Burchett. Doctor? All right, Doctor. You earned it, so
I am going to call you that. In the energy sector, what type of
taxes would you support? Would it be a carbon tax, a gasoline
tax? And if so, what is your justification? And I am not going
to jump you, I am not going to run for reelection on this.
Mr. Gale. I think the right approach is the carbon tax,
with an exemption for low-income households or a rebate for
low-income households. One of the numbers I came up with
recently was that we could pay every coal worker $250,000 in
severance pay and the total cost would be 1 percent of the 10-
year revenue of a carbon tax. So, the impact on low-income
communities is important. The impact on coal communities is
important. But they are totally solvable situations.
The advantage of a carbon tax over a gasoline tax is that a
carbon tax taxes many forms of carbon emissions, as gasoline is
just one of them. So as broad a base as possible. A carbon tax,
I think, is the right thing to do there. And it would not only
help the environment, it would help the fiscal situation and it
would fix a big imperfection in the way the economy operates,
which is right now people in businesses that emit carbon are
not paying the full social cost of that carbon emission.
Mr. Burchett. Are you familiar with--this isn't in my notes
and this always makes my folks nervous when I get off track,
but I always get off track, so it doesn't matter. There is a
new bill out, have you seen it, the one--and I had a group of
people in Knoxville just last week come to--when you said that,
it reminded me that they came to see me about that bill. It is
a new type of idea that actually gives rebates to folks and are
you familiar with that legislation?
Mr. Gale. There was a--I am not sure about the legislation.
There was an economists' statement that was signed by a couple
of dozen Nobel laureates and about 3,000 other people,
including me, saying that we should do a carbon tax and we
should rebate the money on a universal basis. That is my second
choice.
I signed it because it would be so much better than what we
are doing now. My first choice would be we use the revenues for
a variety of purposes. But the main issue is to get the carbon
tax in there.
Mr. Burchett. And I know I am out of time. But do you
actually trust government with another pool of money, that they
will actually do with it what they said they will do?
Mr. Gale. Compared to what, again? I feel like we have to
tax carbon and then the question is what to do about it. The
paying back, the people who want to pay it back mentioned
precisely the issue that you mentioned, which is they do not
trust government to use it, so they want to send the money
back. I trust government more than that. I think we can reduce
the debt, we could reform taxes, et cetera.
Mr. Burchett. Okay, thank you.
Chairman Yarmuth. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize Ms. Jackson Lee of Texas for five minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Chairman and ranking member, thank you
very much. I have always indicated my appreciation for this
committee because of the astuteness of all the witnesses. Let
me acknowledge Ms. Pol, who has come a distance to share her
story, and I think I have most of the facts of her story, and I
thank her so very much for her testimony.
But I think it is important for me to set the groundwork
very quickly to indicate sadly that this GOP tax scam is a
failure. It raises the nation's debt by 1.9 trillion at a time
when the economy was already strong. I lived through the 2009
debacle. In fact, I was a part of the discussion when the
Secretary of the Treasury came late to the Congress to
indicate, and that was of course some years before, that we
were about to see a collapse that we had never seen before.
That was Secretary Paulson.
And so, I have seen the trajectory and saw what we needed
to do, an infusion of capital that many criticized. But the
stimulus saved a lot.
So, we are now facing major, long-term budgetary challenges
driven by our aging population. And rather than devoting
resources to wise investments in our workers and small
businesses, the GOP tax scam further burdens workers, families,
endangers Americans' retirement security and worsens our
budgetary outlook.
Mr. Chairman, the verdict is in and none of the GOP tax
scam promises have borne out. Our long-term economic growth
trajectory is unchanged. There is no sign of an investment
boom. Real wage growth for workers remain modest. And factories
and jobs are more likely to go overseas. The federal deficit is
soaring. We have the sequester. And as corporate tax receipts
plummet into the government and the tax code is riddled with
even more special interest tax breaks and loopholes.
As I quickly asked you a question in testimony before one
of our committees dealing with pharmaceuticals, question was
asked, have you taken the tax savings and invested back into
research which would then help bring down the cost of
prescription drugs? To my knowledge, let me qualify my
recollection, that not one said that they had invested those
tax benefits to any of us.
Let me immediately go to Ms. Bruckner in my first question.
And that is, Professor Bruckner, what do typical women-owned
firms look like in terms of their type, size, revenues? Did the
GOP tax law address typical women business owners' needs in
terms of accessing capital and growing their businesses, in
particularly women of color?
May I just do this, if your memories are good, may I just
go to--excuse my papers here--go to, so you can remember, to
Ms. Huang. Some of my friends across the aisle have already
been rehearsing their calls to pay for the tax cuts by making
cuts to Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid. I just came from a
Medicare for All presentation. Who will be hurt if we pay for
the tax cut that way and what would this mean for Americans'
retirement security or their access to good health care?
And to Dr. Gale, are we experiencing a Trump economic boom
or simply a continuation of the Obama expansion began in 2009.
I have given you only a few seconds, but I know you are
succinct, because I need other get all three of you.
Thank you for all your presence here.
Ms. Bruckner. I think that when we look at the business tax
expenditures and how they were distributed among women business
owners, there is a real question as to whether or not there is
an equitable distribution, particularly when you measure it in
terms of the revenue lost. For example, 199A cost $415 billion
but more than 50 percent of that is going to go to firms that
have a million or more of revenues but only 1.7 percent of
women business owners, who are 40 percent of all U.S.
businesses, actually have revenues of a million dollars or
more. That is just one example that warrants the specific study
of tax expenditures.
Congress needs to know if where you are investing you are
getting a rate of return and women business owners tend to
start businesses more.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Quickly, Ms. Huang.
Ms. Huang. There is a big risk that low and moderate income
Americans end up being worse off by this tax law. If the
increase in deficits from those tax cuts primarily for the
wealthy end up in underinvestments in basic infrastructure,
child care, facing challenges like climate change and of aging
population, and in fact we have seen budget proposals from
proponents of the tax law that would cut supports in housing
and health care and in a variety of other programs that help
Americans achieve shared prosperity.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank you. Dr. Gale?
Mr. Gale. All right, I think there are five things that are
affecting the economy positively right now. The first, sorry,
the first is that we have been building on a long economic
boom. The second is the tax cuts have definitely had a positive
stimulus effect in the short run. Almost any tax cut that put
money in people's pockets would do that. Third, the 2018
spending deal that Congress reached has helped boost the
economy. Fourth, oil prices have gone up and the U.S. is now a
net supplier of oil so that helps the economy, whereas it used
to hurt the economy. And fifth, the Fed has indicated that it
is going to ease off on interest rate hikes, which also helps
the economy. So, the tax cut is part of that, but I would not
give all credit for everything positive to the tax cut.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And it is countered by the deficit that is
growing.
Mr. Gale. That is a longer-term effect. And over time, the
stimulative effects of the tax cut will wear out and the long-
term effects of the deficit will get bigger and that is why CBO
predicts that by the end of 10 years, there will be virtually
no impact on the size of the economy.
Chairman Yarmuth. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Yarmuth. So, it is now down to the ranking member
and me.
Mr. Womack. As it usually is.
Chairman Yarmuth. It is. The ranking member is recognized
for 10 minutes.
Mr. Womack. I want to thank each of the witnesses that have
been before us today. And thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having
this hearing.
Some of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle and
some of the witnesses have talked about how the Tax Cuts and
Jobs Act has led to income inequality. Let's just review some
facts. And if these are incorrect, please take issue with them.
Median household income is at an all-time high. More people
than ever live in households earning $100,000 or more, fewer
households earning less than 35,000. Share of income as it
pertains to the top 5 percent of income earners has remained
the same since 1995. And the share of income as it pertains to
the top 20 percent of income earners has remained the same
since 1995.
So I struggle with the claims that the Tax Cuts and Jobs
Act has led to a bigger gap in income inequality. And my thesis
going into my opening statement was about that Washington,
D.C., the federal government, has a spending problem not a
revenue problem. Revenues are up but spending is up on a much
bigger percentage of GDP.
And then I want to go back to what was said earlier, and I
think it is worth coming back to. And that is that, Dr. Gale,
you said that you had created some jobs for some contractors.
But in terms of let's just say risk, business risk, what risk
have you taken? You have read a lot of literature but what
risks have you taken that give you some inside view, some more
than just a theoretical view, but what risks have you taken,
what jobs have you created that give you authority on the
subject?
Mr. Gale. One of the biggest professional risks that I took
was opting to pursue a Ph.D. That is a long process, it is not
always a successful process.
Mr. Womack. Did that create any jobs?
Mr. Gale. You were asking me what risks I have taken. My
point, if you will let me finish, is there is----
Mr. Womack. Since I haven't got a lot of time, let me
reclaim my time. Have you created any jobs?
Mr. Gale. Depends what you mean by created jobs. When I
was----
Mr. Womack. Have you had to negotiate a health care
program? Have you turned the key in the door? Have you had to
buy equipment and hire people?
Mr. Gale. When I was the head of the economic studies
program at the Brookings Institution, from 2006 to 2009, the
program tripled in size and we funded that increase.
Mr. Womack. And that was someone else's money, it wasn't
yours?
Mr. Gale. No, it was not my money. I don't personally
finance the Brookings Institution.
Mr. Womack. All right, Ms. Huang, a question for you.
What----
Mr. Gale. We raised the jobs externally and hired people.
Mr. Womack. How many jobs have you created, Ms. Huang?
Ms. Huang. So, I think the premise of the question that you
are----
Mr. Womack. It is a real simple premise. How many jobs have
you created?
Ms. Huang. Well, I think it is not so simple to
understand----
Mr. Womack. What health care programs have you negotiated--
--
Ms. Huang.----that workers--the workers who take home a
paycheck and work hard----
Mr. Womack. Let me finish my question, respectfully. All
right?
Ms. Huang.----for low wages and spend that money are also
part of what keeps this economy vibrant.
Mr. Womack. Okay. My question is, you are an expert witness
on the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, sitting before the Budget
Committee of the United States House of Representatives. And a
member is asking how many jobs have you created that gives you
more than just some kind of academic background on the impact
of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act? How many?
Ms. Huang. I don't know. I don't know when I was----
Mr. Womack. Have you created any? Have you created any
jobs?
Ms. Huang. When I was a factory worker, working for minimum
wage, I don't know what impact that had throughout the
community.
Mr. Womack. Okay, the witness is not cooperating, Mr.
Chairman.
Ms. Huang. I don't know when I was advising startup
businesses what impact that had throughout the economy.
Mr. Womack. Let's turn to Ms. Bruckner. Ms. Bruckner you
did have some kind of a previous background in some kind of a
job creation situation, did you now?
Ms. Bruckner. Yes.
Mr. Womack. How many jobs were created?
Ms. Bruckner. I am not a business owner yet.
Mr. Womack. Okay, so I think it is safe to say that, of the
panelists here today, and we have four, that of the panelists
here today, to critique the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, to put under
impeachment, if you will, the very premise that the Tax Cuts
and Jobs Act is working, as evidenced by the fact that
unemployment is low, wages are higher and we have gone through
the whole litany of the benefits of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act,
that 75 percent, three out of the four witnesses here today,
haven't created jobs, haven't negotiated a health care
contract, haven't had to deal with signing the front of a check
as well as the back of a check. These are people that spend
most of their time in academia, through some kind of a
bureaucratic, in some kind of a bureaucratic maze, reading a
lot of numbers, a lot of literature, writing a lot of articles
about it.
But where the rubber meets the road, the only witness that
is standing or sitting before this committee today is Ms. Pol
from Iowa, flyover country.
Ms. Pol, how many jobs have you created?
Ms. Pol. Currently, we have 54 employees.
Mr. Womack. Fifty-four employees. And where did you start?
Ms. Pol. We started with one, my father.
Mr. Womack. Okay, so and as my friend, Mr. Woodall
characterized you, you are a kind of a serial entrepreneur. It
dates back into years.
So, Ms. Pol, I would trust that somebody that has actually
been in the business of creating jobs and opportunity for their
people has kind of an inside baseball look at what Tax Cut and
Jobs Act provisions have done for your business. So would you,
just in a matter of a few seconds, kind of give me a highlight
as to what it was able to do for you that you would not have
been able to do otherwise?
Ms. Pol. Sure. As I spoke before on, that we spent the
million dollars. And that helped, to be able to, you know,
deduct that immediately, expense it out immediately instead of
depreciating it out, it really, really helped us tax wise this
year. I am in the process of buying my brothers out so I have a
huge debt load on myself. And when we spent that money, we also
borrowed money. And also the same way with the warehouse. I am
not a wealthy person, you know. Even though we have these
companies, we give back to the community, we give back to our
employees.
And so by doing this, we needed to do it. But it was scary
to do in our position where we are financially with our
company. And so having to be able to have these deductions and
the help on that and to getting some cash flow back into our
company kind of revitalized us.
Mr. Womack. Giving you hope?
Ms. Pol. Yes.
Mr. Womack. For the future?
Ms. Pol. Absolutely.
Mr. Womack. Are you still thinking expansion, thinking of
hiring more people?
Ms. Pol. Yes, yeah. I am scared of the future, for the fact
that it is not permanent. That is what scares me going into the
next generation.
Mr. Womack. But to be fair, I would also say that it is not
just tax policy. There are a lot of other inputs rather than
tax policy, cost of energy and, you know, competition for labor
and a whole lot of other things. But I am going to take it
that, in your response, you are basically saying that the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act has helped you, an individual business owner
in small town Iowa actually help, help your cause, help your
business?
Ms. Pol. Yes, it has.
Mr. Womack. A question for Dr. Gale. CBO Director Keith
Hall testified before this very committee on a question that I
had raised about elevating the corporate income tax. Because
there is a movement afoot or at least a theory that we need
to--we went too far, we took it to 21, we cut it 14 points and
we need to move it back up. My friend right here from the great
Commonwealth of Kentucky thinks 28 is the right number.
Director Hall said that it would lead to the inverse of
what we have seen in the passage of the TCJA, and that is we
would see declining growth and employment.
Do you have concerns about what would happen if, in fact,
the corporate rate went back the other direction?
Mr. Gale. I have no interest in disputing what Director
Hall said. I would emphasize that the issues, the changes to
the corporate tax should be not just to the rate but to the
base. If we expanded the scope of expensing, we would encourage
new investment and hence encourage new jobs. And by raising the
rates, we would reduce the windfall gains that are currently
accruing to people who made investments in the past.
So, I would encourage something that raised the rate and
transformed the base. But I think Director Hall is right, if
you just raise the rates, you would undo some of the positive
effects.
Mr. Womack. All right, quickly, Ms. Huang, and I know I am
going to be out of time here in a minute. If you follow your
Twitter feed, it is obvious that you have an interest in a lot
of things that involve spending a lot more money. So maybe the
basis for your arguments about Tax Cuts and Jobs Act not
working is the fact that allowing more people to keep more of
their money prevents the government from having more of their
money, which allows the government to provide more things. And
you are big on a wealth tax, are you not?
Ms. Huang. I think that there is a lot of room and a lot of
different ways to raise progressive revenues to meet the fiscal
challenges that face this country.
Mr. Womack. You like the wealth tax, don't you?
Ms. Huang. I like a lot of different approaches.
Mr. Womack. What about the Green New Deal?
Ms. Huang. I don't know the details.
Mr. Womack. What about free college?
Ms. Huang. I don't know the details of that, either.
Mr. Womack. What do you think about policies about work
requirements for people that are on the social safety net
program that are not employed, that are single people without
dependents and able bodied? What do you think about that
policy?
Ms. Huang. Many people who are beneficiaries of Medicaid
and food stamps are, in fact, workers. And those social safety
nets----
Mr. Womack. Those that are not?
Ms. Huang.----are actually very important because they help
people over time do well in their homes and in their
communities and be able to work. So I think it is actually
really counterproductive to require----
Mr. Womack. I am out of time.
Ms. Huang.----paperwork tests that would increase the
number of bureaucratic hoops that they would have to go through
to get that basic assistance.
Mr. Womack. I appreciate the witnesses. Thank you.
Chairman Yarmuth. I thank the gentleman.
I now yield myself 10 minutes and begin by saying that the
ranking member is truly a friend and I have great respect for
him, as I do for all the members. And the strategy here from
the other side has been very clear. It has been to try and
discredit experts who have spent years doing research and
analysis of very important topics and to hold up individual
examples of business people for whom the tax cuts have been
helpful. And we understand, obviously, that the tax cuts have
helped some people.
My college classmate, Steve Schwarzman, who is the chairman
and founder of the Blackstone Group, was helped substantially
by the tax cuts. He made $700-plus million last year and I am
sure he is very happy with the tax act of 2017.
I started several businesses. I unlocked the door, I
negotiated health care contracts, I worried about who was
making payroll. I was always the last one paid. My brothers and
sister and my father all were entrepreneurs.
I don't think any of them, possibly my father, but I don't
think any of the four of us siblings who have started
businesses and run businesses would have ever said we are the
definitive answer to the impact across the country of a certain
policy of the federal government. I never would have been as
presumptuous to say, because a policy had certain impact on me,
that I know what the impact on the federal budget was. And that
is, of course, what the purpose of this hearing is, is to
determine what the impact of the tax cut has been and will be
on the federal budget.
So, let's focus on that for a second. And there seems to be
a substantial difference in a very important question in
relation to what the impact on the budget is. Republicans say,
and I am not disputing that they are wrong, that revenues have
never been higher for the federal government as they have been
since the tax cut was passed. We Democrats say, and some of you
in your testimony have said, revenues have been hurt by the tax
cut and will continue to be hurt by the tax cut.
How do you reconcile those two, assuming they are both
true? And I actually do believe they are true.
Dr. Gale, would you like to reconcile that?
Mr. Gale. Yet again, it is a compared-to-what question.
Revenues would be higher if we had not passed the tax cut. That
seems like a very clear conclusion from everything CBO and JCT
do. And I am sure when Director Hall testified on that, that
that was an implication of his testimony.
But, you know, the economy grows over time. There are more
people. So, there is more productivity. So, you know, there is
a natural upward trend in the level of revenues. That trend was
simply displaced somewhat by the tax cuts.
Chairman Yarmuth. Ms. Huang, do you want to answer?
Ms. Huang. As a share of the economy, which is really what
the nation can afford in terms of its resources, revenues as a
share of the economy are at its lowest level in 50 years
outside of a recession.
Chairman Yarmuth. And the fundamental conclusion or
estimate of CBO that the tax cut specifically is going to be
responsible for an additional $1.9 trillion worth of debt over
10 years, assuming the law stays as it is and the higher
amount, if we extend the expiring tax cuts, that has not
changed, right?
Ms. Huang. Not that I am aware of. And in fact, the 1.9
trillion, there was a question earlier, the 1.5 was the initial
estimate, the 1.9 is the re-estimate based on later data in
terms of how much it will cost.
Chairman Yarmuth. Mr. Womack talked about how, and again I
have no reason to dispute this, that income levels have not
substantially changed in terms of percentages over the last
decade or so. What about wealth? I did not hear him talk about
how wealth has changed, the disparity in wealth over the last
decade or so.
Mr. Gale. Both income and wealth have become more unequally
distributed in gradual processes over the last 40 years. The
sources of the widening distribution have changed over time,
but the trends are evident. The wealth trends are even starker
than the income trends in terms of how much has been
concentrated in the top 0.1 percent, 1 percent, et cetera.
Chairman Yarmuth. Getting back again to a question of, not
so much impact on the budget, although all of this has an
impact on the budget, but we talked about the question of
fairness early on. I believe Mr. Crenshaw was talking about
fairness.
And one of the things that occurs to me is that we have a
fundamental issue, philosophy, as to whether we tax rental
income or productive workers' income differently or similarly.
Does anybody want to address that? You know, I am looking at
these enormous incomes that we are seeing and many of those
people are in the top 0.1 percent, who derive such a huge
benefit from this tax cut. And it seems to me that many of
those incomes are derived from essentially rental, what is
referred to as rental income. They are basically not doing
anything on a daily basis, they are getting royalties, they are
getting dividends and so forth.
Dr. Gale?
Mr. Gale. Thank you. Perhaps the primary with the Section
199A, the passthrough provisions, is that it taxes business
income at a lower level than wage income. That gives people
incentives to shift wage income to business income, which is an
obvious form of tax shelter. It gives businesses incentives to
either divide or combine to take advantage of the odd limits in
the bill. It is incredibly complex.
You know, these are concerns with the provision. There is
no doubt that particular small businesses have gained from it,
they got a tax cut. The question is, is it a well-designed tax
policy? And by every principle we know of well-designed tax
policy, the answer is, no.
Chairman Yarmuth. Is there any justification you can think
of to maintain the carried interest tax rate, which President
Trump claimed that he was going to do away with but,
unfortunately, from my perspective, is still part of the law
after the 2017 act?
Mr. Gale. I think it is pretty clear that carried interest
should be taxed as labor income, not as capital gains. But in
terms of taxing wealthy households and raising revenues, there
is actually not much money in carried interest. There is much
more money in wealth tax, taxing capital gains at death,
undoing the 199 features and so on.
Chairman Yarmuth. One final question, and I am really
struck, Ms. Bruckner, by the amount of small businesses, the
number of small businesses generating, and probably these are
all new small businesses, growing small businesses--young, is
that the word?--small amounts of income, and the lack of
capital that they are dealing with. Isn't one of the issues
here, the fact that, very few businesses, big businesses, got
the corporate tax rate? By the way, I am not necessarily saying
28 percent is the right number. I said, Obama was willing to go
to 28 percent when the corporate tax rate was 35. I think we
could afford some additional taxes, 28 may or may not be the
right number.
But anyway, one of the things I have heard is there is so
much cash in the economy right now, in corporations, they have
so much liquidity that giving them more was not going to make
them invest because if they had opportunities to invest in
productive activities, additional ones, they would have had the
money to do that. At the same time, we have this problem, we
had so many young small businesses not being able to have
access, and this tax cut did nothing to help them. Is that kind
of a fair reading of where we are?
Ms. Bruckner. I think with respect to small businesses, the
quickest and most efficient place that you can get any kind of
equity infusion is from your profits. And one other way that
you can do that is from lower taxes.
I don't think there is a question that most businesses got
some sort of tax cut, right? The bill was designed that way.
But when we are looking at questions of equity and fairness,
are we looking at we need to request questions about did we
create lower taxes for the businesses who needed it most versus
for the businesses that might have been otherwise just as
profitable?
And I think the question really is, with larger businesses,
you are seeing lots of share buybacks, which is a way to
increase shareholder value without having to actually pay
dividends, which is a lower tax kind of strategy. Versus, you
know, very, very small businesses that are desperate for access
to capital, have trouble securing outside financing and might
have needed a greater share of tax breaks. I am not saying that
tax breaks are bad, I am saying we should be investing tax
breaks where we think, and we should study where they think
that we are going to have the most bang for our buck. And we
have not been doing that.
Chairman Yarmuth. Well, that concludes our hearing. I want
to thank all of the panelists for all of your testimony. Thank
you for traveling so far, Ms. Pol, we appreciate you being
here.
Please be advised, members can submit written questions to
be answered later in writing. Those questions and your answers
will be made part of the formal hearing record. Any members who
wish to submit questions for the record may do so within seven
days.
I thank the ranking member once again. And, without
objection, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:38 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]