- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON FOUR TELECOMMUNICATIONS BILLS
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON FOUR TELECOMMUNICATIONS BILLS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MARCH 22, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-113
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-754 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman
Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee
GENE GREEN, Texas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi
G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey
DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
JERRY McNERNEY, California
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
PETER WELCH, Vermont
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
PAUL TONKO, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
SCOTT H. PETERS, California
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
7_____
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee
Chairman
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey
MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman
Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
RAUL RUIZ, California
PETE OLSON, Texas
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
ANNA G. ESHOO, California
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
BILLY LONG, Missouri
G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
BILL FLORES, Texas
DORIS O. MATSUI, California
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Tennessee
JERRY McNERNEY, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................
2
Prepared statement...........................................
3
Hon. Robert E. Latta, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Ohio, prepared statement....................................
4
Hon. Michael F. Doyle, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................
4
Prepared statement...........................................
5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................
7
Prepared statement...........................................
8
Hon. Leonard Lance, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New Jersey, prepared statement..............................
108
Witnesses
Tim Donovan, Senior Vice President, Legislative Affairs,
Competitive Carriers Association...............................
10
Prepared statement...........................................
13
Answers to submitted questions...............................
137
David L. Donovan, President and Executive Director, New York
State Broadcasters Association, Inc............................
21
Prepared statement...........................................
23
Answers to submitted questions...............................
140
Robert Gessner, President, Massillon Cable TV, Inc., and
President, American Cable Association..........................
51
Prepared statement...........................................
53
Answers to submitted questions...............................
152
John H. Madigan, Jr., Vice President and Chief Public Policy
Officer, American Foundation for Suicide Prevention............
63
Prepared statement...........................................
65
Answers to submitted questions...............................
159
Sarah Morris, Director of Open Internet Policy, Open Technology
Institute, New America Foundation..............................
75
Prepared statement...........................................
77
Submitted Material
H.R. 2345, the National Suicide Hotline Improvement Act of 2017..
104
H.R. 2903, the Rural Reasonable and Comparable Wireless Access
Act of 2017....................................................
110
H.R. 3787, the Small Entity Regulatory Relief Opportunity Act of
2017...........................................................
115
Discussion Draft, the Preventing Illegal Radio Abuse Through
Enforcement Act................................................
122
Report of the New York State Broadcasters Association, ``Field
Measurements of Unauthorized FM Band Radio Signals in New York,
NY Metropolitan Area Phase 4,'' May 19, 2016, \1\ submitted by
Mr. Lance
Statement of Christine Moutier, Chief Medical Officer, American
Foundation for Suicide Prevention, March 22, 2018, submitted by
Mrs. Blackburn.................................................
127
----------
\1\ The information has been retained in committee files and also is
available at
https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=108059.
LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON FOUR TELECOMMUNICATIONS BILLS
----------
THURSDAY, MARCH 22, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:24 a.m., in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Marsha Blackburn
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Blackburn, Lance, Shimkus,
Latta, Olson, Kinzinger, Bilirakis, Johnson, Flores, Brooks,
Collins, Costello, Doyle, Welch, Loebsack, Eshoo, Engel,
Matsui, McNerney, and Pallone (ex officio).
Also present: Representatives Tonko, Schrader, and Chris
Stewart.
Staff present: Jon Adame, Policy Coordinator,
Communications and Technology; Robin Colwell, Chief Counsel,
Communications and Technology; Sean Farrell, Professional Staff
Member, Communications and Technology; Adam Fromm, Director of
Outreach and Coalitions; Elena Hernandez, Press Secretary; Tim
Kurth, Deputy Chief Counsel, Communications and Technology;
Lauren McCarty, Counsel, Communications and Technology; Austin
Stonebraker, Press Assistant; Evan Viau, Legislative Clerk,
Communications and Technology; Jeff Carroll, Minority Staff
Director; Jennifer Epperson, Minority FCC Detailee; David
Goldman, Minority Chief Counsel, Communications and Technology;
Tiffany Guarascio, Minority Deputy Staff Director and Chief
Health Advisor; Jerry Leverich, Minority Counsel; Jourdan
Lewis, Minority Staff Assistant; Dan Miller, Minority Policy
Analyst; and C.J. Young, Minority Press Secretary.
Mr. Shimkus [presiding]. We are going to call the hearing
to order and get our panelists to take seats. That's to help us
get our arrangement for how we ask questions. They've called
votes. So we are going to adjourn--I mean, recess.
We are going to go vote, and then we are going to come
back. So you can keep walking around. But your place in line
has been saved.
So with that----
[Recess.]
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE
Mrs. Blackburn [presiding]. All right. The committee will
reconvene, and I recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.
And I want to welcome you all. I apologize to everyone. We
thought we had votes at 10:00, and then it was going to be
10:10 and come on back over here--you know, it's just one of
those days--a getaway day, an omnibus day, and we are going to
go ahead and start this hearing because you never know when the
bell is going to go off.
A little less than 2 months ago, we did our first
legislative hearing. This is our second. We sat here in this
room discussing 25 pieces of legislation addressing broadband
infrastructure, representing all the views on the table.
Last month, we shocked the naysayers by shepherding many of
the subcommittee's top priorities through the full committee
unanimously in RAY BAUM'S Act.
Today, just as that package is about to head to the
President's desk, we've got four more bipartisan bills that
address everything from combating illegal pirate radio to
identifying ways technology can help prevent suicide across the
country.
I couldn't be more pleased with the work of members of the
subcommittee and all the important initiatives we've gotten
some work going on this year.
I'd also like to commend Congressman Stewart on being a
champion for the National Suicide Hotline Improvement Act,
which currently has 78 cosponsors, including seven of our
subcommittee members: Bilirakis, Clarke, Eshoo, Flores,
McKinley, Rush, and Tonko.
Suicide is the tenth leading cause of death in Tennessee,
and this legislation would make it easier for those facing a
mental crisis to get the help they need with a dedicated N-1-1
number.
We'll also be discussing Mr. McKinley and Mr. Welch's bill,
the Rural Reasonable and Comparable Wireless Access Act, which
takes a new perspective on getting wireless broadband out to
rural areas.
This subcommittee has long been looking for ways to close
the digital divide, and today we have got another potential
solution--bipartisan, I will add.
And speaking of infrastructure, another bill which could
help spur investment in broadband infrastructure is Mr. Latta
and Mr. Schrader's Small Entity Regulatory Relief Opportunity
Act, or SERRO.
Small entities across the country, regardless of
technology, face miles of red tape at the FCC to comply with
regulations designed for large providers.
Money that those small, often rural entities spend on
complying with regulations is money that could be used for
investing in broadband deployment, and it's important for us
and the Commission to keep this in mind instead of assuming
that one size should fit all in every case.
Finally, we'll be discussing Mr. Lance and Mr. Tonko's
PIRATE Act, which many members of the subcommittee have worked
on, including Mr. Collins, Tonko, Bilirakis, Green, Moulton,
King, and Mrs. Dingell.
Illegal pirate radio disrupts access to important public
safety communications, including our Nation's Emergency Alert
System and critical aviation frequencies. These illegal
broadcasts deprive Americans of important programming provided
by legitimate license holders serving the public interest.
It's high time we pay more attention to the harm being done
to consumers and broadcasters alike.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Blackburn follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Marsha Blackburn
Good morning and welcome to our second legislative hearing
of 2018. A little less than 2 months ago, we sat here in this
room discussing 25 pieces of legislation addressing broadband
infrastructure representing all the views on the table. Last
month, we shocked the naysayers by shepherding many of the
subcommittee's top priorities through the full committee
unanimously in RAY BAUM'S Act. Today, just as that package is
about to head toward the President's desk, we've got four more
bipartisan bills that address everything from combating illegal
pirate radio to identifying ways technology can help prevent
suicide across the country. I couldn't be more pleased with the
work of members of the subcommittee and all the important
initiatives we've got going on this year.
I'd also like to commend Congressman Stewart on being a
champion for the National Suicide Hotline Improvement Act,
which currently has 78 cosponsors, including seven of our
subcommittee members: Mr. Bilirakis, Ms. Clarke, Ms. Eshoo, Mr.
Flores, Mr. McKinley, Mr. Rush, and Mr. Tonko. Suicide is the
10th leading cause of death in Tennessee, and this legislation
would make it easier for those facing a mental crisis to get
the help they need with a dedicated N-1-1 number.
We'll also be discussing Mr. McKinley and Mr. Welch's bill,
the Rural Reasonable and Comparable Wireless Access Act, which
takes a new perspective on getting wireless broadband out to
rural areas. This subcommittee has long been looking for ways
to close the digital divide, and today we will be discussing
another potential solution.
And speaking of infrastructure, another bill which could
help spur investment in broadband infrastructure is Mr. Latta
and Mr. Schrader's Small Entity Regulatory Relief Opportunity
Act, or SERRO. Small entities across the country, regardless of
technology, face miles of red tape at the FCC to comply with
regulations designed for large providers. Money that these
small, often rural entities spend on complying with regulations
is money that they could instead be investing in broadband
deployment, and it's important for us and for the Commission to
keep this in mind instead of assuming that one size should fit
all in every case.
Finally, we'll be discussing Mr. Lance and Mr. Tonko's
PIRATE Act, which many Members of the subcommittee have helped
work on; including Mr. Collins, Mr. Tonko, Mr. Bilirakis, Mr.
Green, Mr. Moulton, Mr. King, and Mrs. Dingell. Illegal pirate
radio disrupts access to important public safety
communications, including our Nation's Emergency Alert System
and critical aviation frequencies. These illegal broadcasts
deprive Americans of important programming provided by
legitimate license holders serving the public interest. It's
high time we pay more attention to the harm being done to
consumers and broadcasters alike.
I'd like to thank our witnesses for being here, and with
that I will yield 1 minute to the vice chairman of the
subcommittee, Mr. Lance.
Mrs. Blackburn. I'd like to thank our witnesses for being
here, and Mr. Lance is not here, so would anyone like the 1
minute?
Mr. Latta, you're recognized.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Madam Chair, and I appreciate
you holding today's hearing on these four bills, including my
own, the Small Entity Regulatory Relief Opportunity Act, or
SERRO.
Recognizing that small businesses are the engines of our
economy and do not require the same level of regulatory
oversight as large entities, the gentleman from Oregon, Mr.
Schrader, and I put forth a commonsense proposal to create a
regulatory environment that encourages innovation, spurs
competition, and fosters consumer choice.
SERRO offers a pathway for regulatory relief for small
entities by directing the FCC to streamline their existing
waiver process. This will benefit small business and their
customers by providing greater certainty, fewer costs, and
administrative efficiency.
Since introducing H.R. 3787, Mr. Schrader and I have made
countless efforts to consider all stakeholder feedback and
input, and today's discussion is a continuation of those
efforts.
I look forward to hearing from our panelists, and I thank
the gentlelady, the chair of the subcommittee, for yielding.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Latta follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Robert E. Latta
Thank you, Chairman Blackburn. I appreciate the chairman
for holding today's hearing on four promising bills, including
my own--the Small Entity Regulatory Relief Opportunity Act or
SERRO.
Recognizing that small businesses are the engines of our
economy and do not require the same level of regulatory
oversight as large entities, Mr. Schrader and I put forth a
commonsense proposal to create a regulatory environment that
encourages innovation, spurs competition, and fosters consumer
choice.
SERRO offers a pathway for regulatory relief for small
entities by directing the FCC to streamline their existing
waiver process. This will benefit small business and their
customers by providing greater certainty, fewer costs, and
administrative efficiency.
Since introducing H.R. 3787, Mr. Schrader and I have made
countless efforts to consider all stakeholder feedback and
input, and today's discussion is a continuation of those
efforts. I look forward to hearing from the panelists. I thank
the chairman and yield back.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Doyle, you're recognized.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL F. DOYLE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this
hearing, and thank you to the witnesses for appearing before us
today.
Today we are considering four pieces of legislation. In
particular, I am happy to see before us a bill by my good
friend Peter Welch, H.R. 2903, the Rural Reasonable and
Comparable Wireless Act.
This bipartisan legislation seeks to establish national
standards for mobile service, mobile data service, and
broadband services in rural America that are comparable to
those in urban America.
I know this is an issue that my friend and colleague is
very passionate about, and as this bill points out, under the
Communications Act, Congress tasked the FCC with ensuring that
rural areas had similar access and availability of service as
their urban counterparts.
But I don't have to tell anyone here that we have fallen
short of that goal. Get on a highway that isn't the I-95
corridor, and wireless service gets spotty fast.
Or move from Pittsburgh or DC to rural Tennessee and try to
get fiber internet. We need to make sure that people in rural
America can get the same kind of widespread high-speed access
as we have in urban areas and along urban corridors.
I am proud the committee Democrats have proposed a plan
with Ranking Member Pallone's LIFT America Act that seeks to
close this gap with a $40 billion investment in capital
investments.
Congressman Lance and I have also introduced the AIRWAVES
Act along with a number of our colleagues on both sides of the
aisle that sets aside 10 percent of the revenue from the
spectrum auctions set out in the bill for deployment of
broadband infrastructure in unserved and underserved
communities in rural America.
Another bill we have under discussion today is
Congresswoman Bernice Johnson's National Suicide Hotline
Improvement Act, which would require the FCC to work in
coordination with SAMHSA to explore the feasibility of a three-
digit dialing code similar to 9-1-1 or 3-1-1 for suicide
prevention.
This legislation passed by UC in the Senate, a seemingly
rare feat these days, and I hope we can continue to move this
important legislation forward.
We are also discussing a bill on unlicensed radio
broadcasts today, and while I have heard anecdotes that there
is a problem on the rise in major cities like New York and
Miami, I am concerned that the proposed solution is to increase
fines for these broadcasts tenfold.
Years ago, I worked with Congressman Lee Terry on the Low
Power FM Radio legislation. We saw that there was an issue of
illegal broadcasts but also that there weren't many
opportunities for communities around the country to express
themselves on the air.
We sought to address this by increasing the opportunities
available to these communities by opening a Low Power FM
application window, which resulted in thousands of new stations
across the country.
As we consider this legislation, I think we need to balance
the legitimate concerns of broadcast licensees with the limited
opportunities for expression available to some communities.
My hope is as we consider this bill we can take an approach
that addresses both groups' needs.
And the last bill we are considering today is Congressman
Latta's H.R. 3787, the Small Entity Regulatory Relief
Opportunity Act.
I am very concerned about this bill. The way that it is
drafted would open up a huge regulatory hole at the FCC and
would enable companies with over a billion dollars in revenue
to be exempted from a wide range of rules intended to protect
consumers and, to be honest, small businesses as well.I am very
skeptical about the merits and need for this legislation.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Doyle follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Michael F. Doyle
Thank you, Madam Chairman, for holding this hearing, and
thank you to the witnesses for appearing before us today.
Today we are considering four pieces of legislation. I'm
happy that we've decided to take these up and hope that we can
proceed with consideration of these bills under regular order.
In particular, I'm happy to see before us a bill by my good
friend Peter Welch: H.R. 2903 the Rural Reasonable and
Comparable Wireless Act. This bipartisan piece of legislation
seeks to establish national standards for mobile service,
mobile data service, and broadband services in rural America
that are comparable to those in urban America. I know this is
an issue that my friend and colleague is very passionate about.
As this bill points out, under the Communications Act, Congress
tasked the FCC with ensuring that rural areas had similar
access and availability of service as their urban counterparts.
I don't have to tell anyone here that we have fallen far short
of that goal.
While we've done an enviable job of electrifying the rural
parts of our country, we've fallen far short in getting
broadband not just to people's homes, but to the areas they
live, work, and commute. Get on a highway that isn't the I-95
corridor, and wireless service gets spotty fast. We need to
make sure that people in rural America can get the same kind of
widespread high speed access as we have in urban areas and
along urban corridors.
I'm proud that committee Democrats have proposed a plan
with Ranking Member Pallone's Lift America Act that seeks to
close this gap with $40 billion in capital investments.
Congressman Lance and I have also introduced the AIRWAVES
Act along with a number of our colleagues on both sides of the
aisle that would set aside 10 percent of the revenue from the
spectrum auctions set out in the bill for the deployment of
broadband infrastructure in unserved and underserved
communities in rural America.
Another bill we have under discussion today is
Congresswoman Bernice Johnson's National Suicide Hotline
Improvement Act, which would require the FCC to work in
coordination with SAMHSA to explore the feasibility of a three-
digit dialing code similar to 9-1-1 or 3-1-1 for suicide
prevention. This legislation passed by UC in the Senate, a
seemingly rare feat these days, and I hope we can continue to
move this important legislation forward.
We are also discussing a bill on unlicensed radio
broadcasts today. While I have heard anecdotes that this is a
problem on the rise on major cities like New York and Miami,
I'm concerned that the proposed solution is to increase fines
for these broadcast tenfold.
Years ago I worked with Congressman Terry on Low Power FM
radio legislation. We saw that there was an issue of illegal
broadcasts, but also that there weren't many opportunities for
communities around the country to express themselves on the
air. We sought to address this by increasing the opportunities
available to them by opening a Low Power FM application window,
which resulted in thousands of new stations around the country.
As we consider this legislation I think we need to balance the
legitimate concerns of broadcast licensees with the limited
opportunities for expression available to some communities. My
hope is that as we consider this bill, we can take an approach
that addresses both groups' needs.
The last bill that we are considering today is Congressman
Latta's H.R 2787, the Small Entity Regulatory Relief
Opportunity Act. I am very concerned about this bill. The way
that it is drafted would open up a huge regulatory hole at the
FCC and would enable companies with over a billion dollars in
revenue to be exempted from a wide range of rules intended to
protect consumers and, to be honest, small businesses as well.
I'm very skeptical about the merits and need for this
legislation.
With that I want to yield the balance of my time.
Mr. Doyle. With that, Madam Chair, I want to yield the
balance of my time to my good friend and colleague, Mr. Welch.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much.
You know, as we sit here today we all know that rural
broadband infrastructure is insufficient and rural America is
being left behind.
The FCC, in my view, is not meeting its congressionally
mandated goal, which is ensuring rural America has access to,
quote, ``reasonably comparable service to their urban areas.''
We basically haven't had a definition of what ``reasonably
comparable'' is, and my bill, with Mr. McKinley, is designed to
get at this issue and make ``reasonably comparable'' real and
meaningful in rural America, just like electricity was when we
made that public policy commitment in the 1930s to wire rural
America.
The FCC, under this bill, would have to gather data from
the 20 most populous metro areas and detail the average signal
strength and speeds of mobile voice and mobile internet
services.
It would also require the FCC to determine the extent to
which mobile and fixed broadband service provided in rural
areas is reasonably comparable.
That's what the bill would do. It is absolutely essential
we do that in order to be able to say yes or no, that rural
America has reasonably comparable services.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you, Ranking Member
Doyle.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Doyle. I yield back.
Mrs. Blackburn. Chairman Walden is not here. Are there
Members seeking to claim the chairman's time for an opening?
No one seeking the time?
Mr. Pallone, you're recognized for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Our hearing today will examine four bipartisan
communication bills. Though communications is the thread that
binds them all, they each touch on vastly different but
important issues.
First, I am pleased we are considering the National Suicide
Hotline Improvement Act of 2017, which aims to quickly connect
individuals experiencing a mental health crisis with a
professional.
Suicide is the tenth leading cause of death for people of
all ages, and every year hundreds of thousands of people are
injured in attempted suicides or other mental health
emergencies, and this bill would require the Federal
Communications Commission to study how to establish a
nationwide three-digit number to access the National Suicide
Prevention Lifeline.
With rates of suicide increasing each year, we must do all
we can to get support services to those in need, and I'd like
to thank one of our witnesses, Mr. Madigan, for all the
important work you do at the American Foundation for Suicide
Prevention, and thanks also for being with us today.
We will also be discussing the Rural Reasonable and
Comparable Wireless Access Act introduced by Congressmen Welch
and McKinley.
This bill would shine a light on the quality of voice and
broadband services offered in rural areas. It would direct the
FCC to examine whether people in rural communities actually
receive the same level of service as those in urban areas, and
the FCC has talked a lot over the past year about improving
connections in rural areas.
This bill would require the FCC to collect and analyze the
facts on the ground and make sure that it's actually getting
the job done.
I am also glad we will be discussing the problems caused by
pirate radio broadcasters--people who broadcast illegally on
our public airwaves. Pirate broadcasters flout the law and
interfere with the licensed broadcasters who follow the law.
These pirate broadcasts can be frustrating for people but,
more critically, they prevent people from hearing important
communications and public safety information in times of
emergency, and that's simply unacceptable, and I look forward
to hearing about ways that we can work to solve this problem.
And finally, we will discuss the Small Entity Regulatory
Relief Opportunity Act. While I certainly appreciate the
difficulties faced by small businesses across the country, I
have concerns with the ways this bill would try to solve those
problems.
The bill would allow the FCC to roll back or delay consumer
protections for subscribers of telecommunications and cable
companies that serve as many as 6.5 million customers.
These supposedly small businesses could be larger than 35
States, and many of the millions of customers of the providers
have fewer or no choices.
But aside from size, given the current FCC's animosity for
consumer protections, I don't think this is the right time for
Congress to encourage the agency to strip away more safeguards
for millions of people, and we would be better off figuring out
ways to better protect the American people.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.
Our hearing today will examine four bipartisan
communications bills. Though communications is the thread that
binds them all, they each touch on vastly different, but
important, issues.
First, I am pleased we are considering the National Suicide
Hotline Improvement Act of 2017, which aims to quickly connect
individuals experiencing a mental health crisis with a
professional. Suicide is the tenth leading cause of death for
people of all ages, and every year hundreds of thousands of
people are injured in attempted suicides or other mental health
emergencies. This bill would require the Federal Communications
Commission to study how to establish a nationwide three-digit
number to access the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline. With
rates of suicide increasing each year, we must do all we can to
get support services to those in need. I'd like to thank one of
our witnesses, Mr. Madigan, for all the important work you do
with the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention, and thanks
also for being with us today.
We will also be discussing the Rural Reasonable and
Comparable Wireless Access Act, introduced by Congressmen Welch
and McKinley. This bill would shine a light on the quality of
voice and broadband services offered in rural areas. It would
direct the FCC to examine whether people in rural communities
actually receive the same level of service as those in urban
areas. The FCC has talked a lot over the past year about
improving connections in rural areas. This bill would require
the FCC to collect and analyze the facts on the ground to make
sure that it is actually getting the job done.
I'm also glad that we will be discussing the problems
caused by ``pirate'' radio broadcasters-people who broadcast
illegally on our public airwaves. Pirate broadcasters flout the
law and interfere with the licensed broadcasters who follow the
law. These pirate broadcasts can be frustrating for people, but
more critically, they prevent people from hearing important
communications and public safety information in times of
emergency. That is simply unacceptable. I look forward to
hearing about ways that we can work to solve this problem.
Finally, we will discuss the Small Entity Regulatory Relief
Opportunity Act. While I certainly appreciate the difficulties
faced by small businesses across the country, I have concerns
with the ways this bill would try to solve these problems. The
bill would allow the FCC to roll back or delay consumer
protections for subscribers of telecommunications and cable
companies that serve as many as 6.5 million customers. These
supposedly small businesses could be larger than 35 States. And
many of the millions of customers of the providers have few or
no choices.
But aside from size, given the current FCC's animosity for
consumer protections, I do not think this is the right time for
Congress to encourage the agency to strip away more safeguards
for millions of people. We would be better off figuring out
ways to better protect the American people.
I look forward to the discussion today and hearing from all
of the witnesses before us. Thank you.
Mr. Pallone. So I look forward to discussion today and
hearing from all the witnesses, and I'd like to yield my
remaining 2 minutes to Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the ranking member for yielding
and I thank the committee for having this hearing today.
I am very glad that we were able to get the Improving
Broadband Access for Veterans Act into the omnibus bill, and I
say this is an important piece of legislation that will set us
on a path towards closing the digital divide for veterans. I'd
like to thank my colleague, Mr. Kinzinger, for working with me
on the bill.
One of the bills before us today would help further achieve
the critical goal of closing the digital divide by setting
targets for building out high-speed broadband in rural
America--very important in my district.
Another bill before us would help Americans, including
veterans, when they are in crisis. I am glad these commonsense
proposals are before us today.
However, I have a concern about one of the bills, the Small
Entity Regulatory Relief Opportunity Act. While I am very open
to finding ways to streamline compliance for small businesses,
I am troubled by the larger trend we are witnessing of
protections across the board being eliminated.
I am very concerned that this bill will be another step
backwards for consumer protection.
And with that, I'll yield back to the ranking member and to
the committee.
Mrs. Blackburn. Gentleman yields back.
This concludes our Member opening statements. Members are
reminded that all opening statements are made a part of the
record.
At this time, I want to welcome our witnesses and give them
the opportunity for their opening statements, which will be
followed by a round of questions.
We are welcoming Mr. Tim Donovan, vice president of
legislative affairs at the Competitive Carriers Association;
Mr. David Donovan, president and executive director of the New
York State Broadcasters Association; Mr. Robert Gessner,
president of MCTV; Mr. John Madigan, vice president and chief
public policy officer of the American Foundation for Suicide
Prevention; and Ms. Sarah Morris, director of Open Internet
Policy at the Open Technology Institute at the New America
Foundation.
We appreciate that you are each here today. We will begin
today with you, Mr. Tim Donovan, and you are recognized for 5
minutes for your opening statement.
STATEMENTS OF TIM DONOVAN, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, LEGISLATIVE
AFFAIRS, COMPETITIVE CARRIERS ASSOCIATION; DAVID L. DONOVAN,
PRESIDENT AND EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NEW YORK STATE BROADCASTERS
ASSOCIATION, INC.; ROBERT GESSNER, PRESIDENT, MASSILLON CABLE
TV, INC., AND PRESIDENT, AMERICAN CABLE ASSOCIATION; JOHN H.
MADIGAN, JR., VICE PRESIDENT AND CHIEF PUBLIC POLICY OFFICER,
AMERICAN FOUNDATION FOR SUICIDE PREVENTION; AND SARAH MORRIS,
DIRECTOR OF OPEN INTERNET POLICY, OPEN TECHNOLOGY INSTITUTE,
NEW AMERICA FOUNDATION
STATEMENT OF TIM DONOVAN
Mr. Tim Donovan. Thank you.
Chairman Blackburn, Ranking Member Doyle, and members of
the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify on
meeting Congress' mandate for universal service and policies
that will help close the digital divide for mobile connectivity
between urban and rural areas.
I am here on behalf of CCA, representing nearly 100
wireless carriers as well as the companies that make up the
wireless ecosystem.
All CCA members have an interest in closing the digital
divide, and the vast majority of CCA members employ the same
consumers that live and work in their communities.
I thank the subcommittee for steadfast efforts to preserve
and expand mobile broadband nationwide. We support several
committee initiatives included in the Consolidated
Appropriations Act, and thank the leadership, Members, and
staff for their hard work and long hours to make that happen.
Today, I will focus primarily on H.R. 2903, the Rural
Reasonable and Comparable Wireless Access Act of 2017.
While the title is a mouthful, the underlying issue is
critically important: making sure that rural America has the
same opportunities as urban areas, from economic growth and
jobs to public safety, health, and education because of access
to robust mobile broadband services.
CCA thanks Representatives McKinley, Welch, and their nine
bipartisan cosponsors for focusing on this important issue.
Universal service is not only a good policy objective, it
is the law. Congress was clear in its mandate to the FCC to
ensure that all consumers have access to reasonably comparable
services as those provided in urban areas.
H.R. 2903 will provide important transparency into whether
the FCC is meeting the universal service mandate or if work
remains by having the FCC promulgate regulations to determine
whether services available in rural areas are reasonably
comparable to those in urban areas.
This committee has been hard at work on addressing issues
necessary to expand broadband and pave the way to 5G. CCA
supports those efforts.
While 5G promises to support services that were once
considered science fiction, we cannot neglect Americans living
in areas that lack service.
We need not look far to see how H.R. 2903 will immediately
support the FCC in its USF mission. The FCC recently released a
map depicting areas initially deemed eligible for Mobility Fund
phase 2 support.
Because the technical parameters selected by the FCC were
not sufficient to produce a map that reflects the experience
you have as you travel your districts, significant portions of
your States may not be eligible for funding through the
mobility fund.
It is now clear that standardizing data as directed in the
House-passed Rural Wireless Access Act as part of RAY BAUM'S
Act is not enough to produce an accurate map if the standard is
not sufficiently calibrated to meet the goal of the program.
Final maps for eligible areas must reflect the statute's
call for reasonably comparable services. Further, without a set
standard, it is not clear that resources allocated by the FCC
are sufficient.
Without a goal, it is not possible to set a budget. H.R.
2903 will help guide funding levels necessary to achieve
universal service.
Other important policy decisions also rest on comparable
service, including access to spectrum and streamlined
deployment of infrastructure.
Any evidence that rural Americans do not enjoy comparable
services as their urban peers should reinvigorate the need for
policymakers to take steps to support deployment.
For example, spectrum is a finite resource, and all
carriers must have access to low-, mid-, and high-band spectrum
to deploy next-generation mobile broadband, whether in urban or
rural areas.
It is necessary to make additional spectrum available for
all carriers to provide rural areas with the latest services,
and Congress should first complete the 600 megahertz repack as
safely, swiftly, and efficiently as possible to allow winning
bidders to put the spectrum to use to serve consumers, and
second, auction all available millimeter wave bands as soon as
possible.
I thank Representatives Lance, Doyle, and a dozen
bipartisan cosponsors for their leadership on setting time
lines to auction this spectrum in the AIRWAVES Act and creating
a fund from auction proceeds to support deployment in rural
areas. This makes the bill a win-win for rural America.
Carriers cannot provide comparable services without
comparable infrastructure, and any challenges with cost delays
or permitting are magnified in areas with sparse populations.
The goals of H.R. 2903 again demonstrate how important
efforts from the FCC and Congress are to support deployment.
Separately, CCA appreciates H.R. 3787, sponsored by
Representatives Latta and Schrader, also under consideration
today.
Smaller carriers already must overcome challenges larger
carriers take for granted, and any appropriate regulatory
relief Congress can provide will allow them to marshal
resources to better serve their customers.
With Congress, the FCC, and the administration all focused
on closing the digital divide, the time to act is now, and H.R.
2903 provides a yardstick to measure where efforts remain
necessary to make sure that rural America is not left behind.
CCA looks forward with you to making the promise of
reasonably comparable services a reality as access to mobile
broadband becomes even more essential for modern life.
Thank you again for holding today's hearing, and I welcome
any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tim Donovan follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mrs. Blackburn. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Donovan, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF DAVID L. DONOVAN
Mr. David Donovan. On behalf of the New York State
Broadcasters Association and along with the National
Association of Broadcasters, I am honored to support the PIRATE
Act.
Let me start by thanking Congressman Leonard Lance and
Congressman Paul Tonko for their leadership in drafting this
legislation. I also want to thank Congressman Chris Collins,
who's been a leader on this issue for several years.
But before I begin, I also want to thank the committee for
their work in helping to secure repacking funding, which is in
today's omnibus, and I truly want to thank you for all your
work in that, and also Congressman Pallone for his work in the
SANDy Act.
FCC Chairman Pai and Commissioner Mike O'Rielly have made
pirate enforcement a priority, and I want to recognize Rosemary
Harold, who works in the enforcement bureau, and her team for
her efforts.
They were on the front lines, and their work is essential.
But despite these efforts, it's become clear that the FCC needs
additional tools to combat this problem, and the PIRATE Act
provides those tools.
There are hundreds of illegal stations transmitting from
balconies and rooftops of residential and commercial buildings
across New York City and northern New Jersey. There are more
illegal stations in the New York metropolitan area than there
are legally licensed stations, and the problem is growing. It
is spreading to Boston, it is spreading to Connecticut, and it
is spreading throughout the United States.
Pirates disrupt the emergency alert system. Their
interference prevents listeners from hearing life-saving
information broadcast by legal stations.
Pirates do not participate in the EAS system. So consumers
listening to these stations will not hear EAS messages.
But more importantly, they undermine the basic fabric of
the entire EAS system, which is premised on one station
monitoring another station, and so on down the line, similar to
a row of dominoes.
Pirate interference breaks this chain, which means stations
who are relying on the EAS messages and consumers listening to
those EAS messages will not hear them.
Moreover, in the event of an emergency, whether it's local
news or public affairs, that lifesaving information consumers
won't hear because of pirate interference.
Pirates threaten public health. Their transmitters operate
and they threaten the health of unsuspecting citizens to RF
frequency radiation.
Let me provide you just with a few examples from our
engineering analysis in 2016. You have slides before you, and
they're also appearing on the board.
[The slides appear at the end of Mr. David Donovan's
prepared statement.]
What you see before you are pictures of illegal pirate
radio stations operating in New Jersey and in New York. But the
critical issue here, why I want you to see these stations, is
because none of these stations comply with FCC and Government
RF radiation standards.
They're broadcasting at power levels between 10 and 3,000
watts, and if you look at the slides, included in there is how
close you should be to these pirate antennas. And as a result,
there are folks who are receiving above Government standard
levels of RF radiation that can range from 20 to 80 feet.
Now, on the last slide I will also notice it's right next
to the East Orange, New Jersey, police station, which we found
ironic.
But the bottom line is that, if you live in the top floors
of these buildings or if you use a rooftop deck, you are being
exposed to levels that are above Government standards, and this
is occurring in communities throughout New York, throughout New
Jersey.
They're occurring in--we have pirates in Albany. You're
seeing them in Connecticut. You're seeing them in Boston.
This requires, we believe, action. But pirates also
interfere with airport communications on frequencies assigned
to the FAA, creating an extremely dangerous situation. They
ignore all consumer protections laws, whether it's sponsorship
ID laws, indecency, public file requirements, alcohol and
tobacco advertising laws.
They have absolutely flouted all FCC political rules and
regulations. Whether it's access to candidates, equal time, all
the rules that have been set down by the Federal Communications
Commission are flatly ignored.
The PIRATE Act solves this problem. It gives the FCC
additional tools. It significantly increases the fines for
operating an illegal station. It clarifies existing law with
regarding to liability for those who facilitate pirates.
It also provides working with State laws and recognizes
those State laws, and it streamlines the FCC's enforcement
process.
In conclusion, in 2015, 33 Members of Congress asked the
FCC to increase its pirate radio enforcement. The FCC under
Chairman Pai have done that. But they need more tools.
The fundamental purpose of the FCC is to manage the
spectrum and avoid interference.
I thank you and look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement and slide presentation of Mr. David
Donovan follow:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Gessner, 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF ROBERT GESSNER
Mr. Gessner. Good morning.
Chairman Blackburn, Ranking Member Doyle, members of the
subcommittee, my name is Robert Gessner.
I am president of Massillon Cable TV, a small family-owned
broadband and cable company serving 50,000 customers in five
Ohio counties. Mostly, really nervous, as this is my first time
testifying in any sort of venue.
I also currently serve as chairman of the American Cable
Association, which represents more than 700 small and mid-size
companies, a mixture of municipalities, telephone companies,
electric companies, rural co-ops, as well as cable TV
operators.
The majority of ACA members have fewer than 1,000
customers, fewer than 10 employees, and almost none have an
attorney on staff.
Despite our small size, we make large investments in our
networks to provide critical connectivity to the communities we
serve--typically, rural communities.
And I thank you for inviting me to testify about H.R. 3787,
the Small Entity Regulatory Relief Opportunity Act, or SERRO.
SERRO is a narrowly tailored bipartisan bill whose purpose
is to streamline the process by which deserving small
communications entities may request--and I stress that word
request, regulatory relief.
Many regulations at the FCC are one-size-fits-all. Because
of our limited size, small entities often are not the source of
the specific harms that the FCC is targeting. Now, in theory,
the FCC waiver process gives small entities an opportunity to
show good cause for an exemption or a delay in the application
of a one-size-fits-all rule.
But, in practice, deserving small entities often are
deterred from seeking relief because of the administrative
costs and the uncertainty of the waiver process.
To give you just one example, in 2010, my company, which
had recently converted to an all-digital platform, went to
considerable expense to petition the FCC for a waiver of
certain analog-based technical performance testing
requirements.
It was not until last September, more than 7 years after we
filed our waiver request, that the FCC finally addressed our
concerns.
Now, the goal of SERRO is to ensure that the FCC is more
attentive to small entities' well-founded need for exceptions
to or relief from one-size-fits-all rules and it accomplishes
that in three provisions.
First, SERRO directs the FCC to adopt streamlined
provisions to reduce the administrative burdens faced by small
entities that file waiver petitions and to expedite the
resolution of those petitions.
Second, SERRO clarifies that Congress intends for the FCC,
as part of its mandated triennial review process to consider
the impact of its rules on any and all small entities within
its jurisdiction.
SERRO further instructs the FCC to modify or repeal the
application of particular regulations to small entities where
the commission determines there is good cause to do so.
And third, SERRO establishes an automatic referral period
of at least 1 year in the application of most new regulations
to small entities, subject to exceptions for rules that address
public safety concerns or that reduce waste, fraud, and abuse.
If SERRO had been in place in 2010, my company would not
have been subjected to 7 years of regulatory uncertainty,
waiting for the FCC to act on our petition. In fact, we might
not have needed to go to the expense of filing the petition in
the first place.
I want to stress that SERRO is focused only on the
procedures by which small entities can request regulatory
relief. That's the O in SERRO--an opportunity. Nothing in the
bill would change the substantive legal standard for obtaining
that relief.
And I also want to emphasize that while I am here
representing the American Cable Association, SERRO is not a
cable-only bill. SERRO will apply to and has the support of
small entities in every sector of the communications industry,
as evidenced by this letter that was sent to Chairman Walden.
Now, in conclusion, I do want to express my thanks to
Representatives Latta and the absent Mr. Schrader to move SERRO
forward.
As Representative Latta stated in this introduction, while
small businesses are the engines of the economy, generating two
out of three new jobs, they also are the most susceptible to
burdensome regulations that harm their ability to grown,
expand, and hire new employees.
ACA looks forward to working with you on this sensible and
important piece of bipartisan procedural regulatory relief
legislation and be happy to answer any questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gessner follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Madigan, 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF JOHN H. MADIGAN, JR.
Mr. Madigan. Madam Chairman and Ranking Member Doyle, thank
you very much for inviting the American Foundation for Suicide
Prevention to testify this morning.
My name is John Madigan. I have the honor and privilege of
being the association's chief public policy officer. We are a
nonprofit health agency about 30 years old and we are organized
in all 50 States, and I believe my team has provided all
members of the subcommittee with fact sheets that illustrate
the suicide issue in your particular State.
I am also here to testify about H.R. 2345, the National
Suicide Prevention Hotline Improvement Act of 2017. We want to
thank, obviously, Representative Chris Stewart from Utah and
Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson from Texas for her
leadership on this important issue, and the other cosponsors in
the House, which is somewhere around seven cosponsors.
Let me speak frankly. Suicide is now the tenth leading
cause of death in our country for adults age 18 to 64. For
every one suicide, there are 25 suicide attempts.
The annual age-adjusted suicide rate is 13.42 per 100,000
individuals. After adjusting for differences in age and sex,
risk for suicide is 19 percent higher for male veterans than
for U.S. non-veteran male adults.
Risk is 2.5 times higher among female veterans when
compared to U.S. non-veteran women. Men die by suicide three
and a half times more than women and white males account for
seven out of 10 deaths in 2016.
Suicide is often the result of unrecognized and untreated
mental illness. Get this. One in four Americans have a
diagnosable mental illness but only one in five are seeking
professional help for this condition.
Suicide tends to be the highest when multiple risk factors
or precipitating events occur in an individual with mental
illness.
Despite public perception, most people with mental illness
do not die by suicide. Mental illnesses such as depression,
bipolar disorder, alcohol and drug dependence, post-traumatic
stress, and traumatic brain injury may create the underlying
risk that, when combined with life stressors such as transition
from military life, job loss, relationship, financial, or legal
problems increase risk.
There's good news. There's a grass roots movement that's
now being formed, like it has for many other disease groups.
Our movement is being catalyzed by both survivors of
suicide loss--I lost my younger sister, Nancy, 21 years ago
when she was 37--and also the emerging voices of those that
have what we call the lived experience--those people who have
survived their own suicide attempts.
So as I said earlier, I am here today to talk about why
H.R. 2345 could be a game changer for our national public
safety net. It was discussed by Chairman Pallone. Essentially,
the FCC is going to look into the possibility of converting the
1-800-273-TALK number into an easy-to-remember three-digit
number like 9-1-1.
It will require SAMHSA to study the effectiveness of the
current system and also to assess how veterans are being helped
in this system.
Finally, the study will provide cost estimates and resource
needs for increasing Federal support for phone hotline, chat,
and text.
To hear some important facts, a national easy-to-remember
single point of access free, anonymous, and toll-free for all
American residents is necessary to provide a health safety net
for all persons in the United States.
The experience of SAMHSA's national suicide prevention
lifeline indicates that a national hotline number has been
essential in addressing this public health crisis.
Since 2005, the lifeline has served more than 11 million
callers. In 2017, the national network answered 2 million
calls. According to independent evaluators of the service, 75
percent are non-suicidal and 25 percent are suicidal.
So the bottom line, in closing, is that this legislation is
critically important. When my 25-year-old daughter texted me
this morning and asked me, ``Daddy, why are you testifying
before the Communications and Technology Subcommittee?'' I
said, ``Preventing suicide is all about communication, and in
the 21st century it's all about technology.''
So I will be glad to answer any questions you have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Madigan follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mrs. Blackburn. We thank the gentleman.
Ms. Morris, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF SARAH MORRIS
Ms. Morris. Thank you, Chairman Blackburn, Ranking Member
Doyle, and subcommittee members for the opportunity to testify
today at this legislative hearing on four communications bills.
My name is Sarah Morris and I represent New America's Open
Technology Institute, or OTI, where I am the director of open
internet policy.
New America is a nonpartisan nonprofit civic enterprise
dedicated to the renewal of American politics, prosperity, and
purpose in the digital age.
OTI is a program within New America that works at the
intersection of technology and policy to ensure that every
community has equitable access to digital technology and its
benefits.
OTI promotes universal access to communications
technologies that are both open and secure, using a multi-
disciplinary approach that brings together advocates,
researchers, organizers, and innovators.
Our primary focus areas include net neutrality, broadband
access and adoption, surveillance and security, and consumer
privacy.
My testimony will focus on concerns related to one of the
four bills under consideration today: H.R. 3787, or the Small
Entity Regulatory Relief Act, which I will refer to as SERRO.
OTI's concerns are fourfold. First, it is not clear that an
immediate problems exists that this bill would effectively
solve.
Indeed, against the backdrop of the current heavily
deregulated landscape, the proposed bill seems particularly
unnecessary.
Second, to the extent that a need for waivers from or
exemptions to certain regulations exist, numerous processes for
securing them also already exist at the Federal Communications
Commission.
Third, the definition of small entities in the bill is
unclear. Finally, the proposed triennial review process reforms
would create a high degree of confusion and uncertainty at the
commission.
I've submitted a detailed written testimony to the
subcommittee already and I will use my time here to briefly
explain each of those four concerns.
Regulations of general applicability are the standard in
Federal regulatory policy making, and for a good reason. The
point of consumer protection laws, from telecommunications to
food service to health care, is to protect all consumers from
harmful practices, not just consumers of the biggest entities.
All consumers are entitled to the protections of Federal
telecommunications laws. There may be instances where waivers
from certain regulations under the Communication Act are
appropriate. As I will discuss shortly, there are mechanisms
for addressing the need for specific waivers.
However, neither Mr. Gessner nor the bill's cosponsors have
demonstrated widespread and significant harms that would be
most effectively remedied by the reforms proposed in SERRO.
It is unclear why the triple play proposed in the bill, an
expedited waiver application process, a near blanket exemption
from all future regulations for a period of 1 year and an
expanded triennial review of the applicability of all
regulations to small entities as necessary.
Indeed, the commission already provides numerous avenues of
recourse for a small business that believes an existing or
proposed regulation is unduly burdensome.
The most obvious and fundamental opportunity to discuss
burdens on small businesses is to engage with the commission
during the notice and comment periods that are required each
time new rules are created.
In those proceedings, the commission has opportunities to
hear from multiple perspectives on the parties' assertion of
burdens and can appropriately weigh those burdens with the need
for the regulations in question.
In addition, as the bill itself acknowledges, the
commission's rules already allow the commission to waive
specific requirements of the rules on its own motion or upon
request.
The best approach for ensuring certainty and reducing
administrative burdens is to use existing processes to identify
the need for a narrow waivers when a need for such a waiver is
clearly demonstrated.
This bill, however, uses an arbitrary definition of small
entity that creates considerable confusion and shifts the
burden of the defending the applicability of a given regulation
onto consumer groups and other parties every single time a
regulation is considered.
Not only is this a significant administrative cost to bear
on its face, the problem is compounded by the fact that the 2
percent market share threshold will need to be defined every
single time a regulation is considered.
As we have seen in antitrust analysis, this type of market
share definition is entirely dependent on how a given market is
defined. As telecom industries become more integrated and
services evolve, defining relevant market could become even
more difficult.
Finally, the modifications to the 257 triennial review
requirement proposed in this bill could create significant
administrative burdens for consumer groups and other parties.
As written, the amendments to 257 would allow the
commission to, once the bill is enacted, re-litigate every
single regulation currently on the books at the commission.
This reevaluation would require multiple proceedings to be
reopened and create enormous bureaucratic strain throughout the
communications part as well as uncertainty for consumers.
Each of the three proposals in SERRO raise concerns. Taken
together, however, they represent a fundamental shift in
burdens and advocacy before the Federal Communications
Commission.
I urge the subcommittee to reject H.R. 3787.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Morris follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentlelady concludes her statement.
At this time, that concludes all of our opening statements.
We are going to move to questions. I do want everyone to be
mindful--it looks like 12:15 to 12:30 will be the next vote
series, and I want to move through as many of these questions
as we can.
So, Mr. Shimkus, I will begin with you. You're recognized
for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Madam Chair, thank you. You're very kind.
Let me--let me go to Tim, and I want to ask Mr. Gessner
this question, because I've just been wrestling with it.
So we want competition. We want deployment. You're in the
rural areas--very difficult. You're trying to get 5G in.
I keep hearing from my local municipalities the concern
that their input as to siting for 5G--they're not going to--you
know, they'll weave a story. We've got this great park. We
don't want a refrigerator-sized 5G sitting in there.
So talk me through this on competition 5G and how do we
make sure that the concerns of local communities are still, at
least, listened to?
Because a lot of this is these regulatory burdens get it
moved, right?
Mr. Tim Donovan. Thank you, Congressman, and you're
probably also hearing from them about how they want to be one
of the first smart cities and want to make sure that all of
your constituents are able to connect to the latest services.
So you do need to have the infrastructure to provide that.
We are working together with ways to look at it not as a
zero sum gain but how can we make the application process both
easier for carriers for deploying this as well as reduce the
resources needed by municipalities to review.
If there's some low-hanging fruit of places that make sense
to streamline the review then that also means one less
application--a couple less hours that somebody who works for
the municipality has to spend reviewing that application.
Mr. Shimkus. So, Mr. Gessner, obviously, from the rural
cable perspective, there also could be, you know, debates. You
have already done negotiations with local communities on right-
of-ways and wires.
And talk to me about the competitive pressure or what would
be the response as there is a great desire to also move 5G in
the areas and the local communities have been able to--the old
historic models--what, the historic model is the cable company
comes in, they negotiate, there's fees, they work with the
local communities.
5G could disrupt the way this paradigm has been
established. But a lot of us want the competition.
So can you talk through that, from your perspective?
Mr. Gessner. Good question. We haven't had a great deal of
interaction between the 5G proponents and traditional cable
companies, at least not in our size markets.
We look forward, actually, to working with the 5G operators
because we know they're going to need a lot of back haul. When
you have got a 5G transmitter every few hundred feet, it has to
connect to something.
So companies like mine are certainly prepared to work with
them through our high-capacity fiber networks to bring all of
that 5G data back without having to have more repeater towers
and that sort of thing.
Mr. Shimkus. Great. And I was going to spend time asking
you to talk about some of the other challenges and problems you
have.
But in lieu of the time, Madam Chair and everybody else
wants to ask questions. I yield back.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Doyle, 5 minutes.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Under the Regulatory Flexibility Act, Congress created an
independent office of advocacy within the Small Business
Administration, and the job of that office is to go out and
advocate before Congress, the White House, and Federal agencies
on behalf of small businesses in America.
The Office of Advocacy has come on against regulation that
harms small businesses like the FCC's order to deregulate
business data services.
Much like the FCC's rollback of business data protections,
I am worried that this small entity bill would actually hurt
small businesses.
I want to ask you, Ms. Morris, do you believe that H.R.
3787 could unfairly disadvantage some small businesses over
others?
Ms. Morris. Sure. I thank you, Ranking Member, for the
question.
And I certainly think that there is a high risk of harm to
all types of entities, whether it's consumers, other small--and
consumers can include small businesses that are purchasing
broadband from an entity that would be covered by this act.
In the case of the net neutrality protections where a
waiver was granted for certain parts of the rules, a more
automatic and sweeping waiver in that case would have resulted
in many small businesses that rely on an open internet access
to be harmed by the lack of that access in certain instances.
We want all consumers to have access to the protections
afforded by the commission, not just those of the largest
entities.
Mr. Doyle. So let me ask you, under this bill, the
threshold for expedited small business relief is set at 2
percent or fewer of the consumers receiving such subscription
service in the United States. It seems like a vague standard
but also a rather overly inclusive one as well.
In the video market, for example, 2 percent of the market
would be over 1.6 million customers, and when you look at a
couple of companies that fall into that range, they have annual
revenues of over $1.5 billion.
That doesn't seem like a small business to me. Does that
seem small to you? And what effect would exempting these
companies from the FCC's rules have on consumers?
Ms. Morris. We certainly agree that the definition is both
unclear and potentially much too large and as you point out,
Ranking Member Doyle, this--implementation of this bill has the
potential to remove protections for millions of Americans
across the country--protections that the FCC would have
otherwise be deemed necessary in a thorough rulemaking process.
Mr. Doyle. Yes. I think more to the point, the FCC
interacts with a wide range of small businesses from radio and
TV stations, voice video, data providers, device manufacturers,
wireless licensees, and many of the FCC's rules that these
businesses comply with are not only tailored to the size of
those businesses but also to ensuring that these entities
uphold their obligations under the Communications Acts.
So what effect would granting these wide-ranging waivers
have on industry sectors under the FCC's jurisdiction?
Ms. Morris. We think it would create a significant
uncertainty as we try to figure out which application--which
regulations apply to which entities--which ones apply to
other--or don't apply to other entities.
And meanwhile, I will just repeat that consumers in those
industries will be harmed in the process when those protections
don't apply to their providers.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you.
Madam Chair, in the interest of time, I yield back.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Lance, 5 minutes.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Madam Chair.
To the distinguished panel, thank you all for being here.
Mr. Donovan, can you comment on some of the limitations of
the FCC's current enforcement tools against pirate radios? Have
you seen issues with the commission's ability to shut down
pirates in your role as president of New York Broadcasters?
Mr. David Donovan. Thank you, Congressman Lance.
Yes. I think that there is some limitations and those
limitations now are based on the statute. Let me give you some
examples.
Under the Communications Act, the fine, for example, for an
entity not licensed by the FCC is, roughly, $10,000. Pirate
radio operators--this is big business, and a $10,000 fine is
absolutely nothing. When you actually look at someone who's
been violating the law literally for decades, this is just a
cost of doing business.
The second piece is is that in order to get a seizure order
or an order to enforce the fine, the FCC is required to go
through the--through the U.S. attorney's office. They are busy
on things like terrorism, drug interdiction, and this becomes
the fourth level issue.
What I think--and I worked at the commission for 10 years--
I think what we really need to do is to give the FCC the
authority to go to court to defend its own orders and also to
get seizure orders as well.
The FCC currently has the authority to go to the U.S. Court
of Appeals to defend its orders at the appellate level. It
seemed it would make sense to get rid of the number one issue,
which is would love to help you but the U.S. Attorneys Office
just isn't interested.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. I am working on this issue, as you
know, and the PIRATE Act and I want to continue to work with
you and the other distinguished members of the panel, and I
certainly agree with you.
And Madam Chair, I ask unanimous consent to submit the New
York Broadcasters' report on pirate radio into the record.
Mrs. Blackburn. Without objection.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at
https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=108059.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Lance. Thank you, and I yield back 3 minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Matsui, you are recognized.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Madam Chairman.
Since its creation in 2004, the Spectrum Relocation Fund
has become a critical tool for Federal agencies relocating or
sharing spectrum for wireless broadband use.
In 2015, Congress made improvements to the SRF that allowed
agencies to use funds in SRF to support engineering research
that could lead to the repurposing of spectrum for commercial
use.
The improvements have worked. Last month, NTIA and DOD
identified 100 megahertz of spectrum that could potentially be
repurposed.
However, current law limits how much of existing SRF funds
can be used for this research and related activities. This has
created an unintended situation that could prevent agencies
from accessing existing SRF funds and potentially prevent more
spectrum entering the commercial marketplace.
I am working on legislation called the Spectrum Now Act to
address this problem.
Mr. Donovan--Tim--would you support this effort to ensure
that we are maximizing the amount of spectrum that could be
repurposed for wireless broadband use?
Mr. Tim Donovan. Thank you, Congresswoman, and thank you
for your leadership on these efforts. I think you are--it's a
proven case model that it works and working with spectrum
relocation fund to reallocate Federal spectrum for commercial
use, your leadership on that issue led to the single highest
grossing spectrum auction ever in the AWS-3 auction.
So this money is clearly well spent. We absolutely support
your efforts to continue that. You know, spectrum is something
that we are not making any more of it. So if we can be more
efficient then that research is money well spent.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you.
To successfully expand broadband access to the rural and
remote areas of this country, broadband maps must accurately
identify where service is and where it isn't.
One of the most effective ways to get better maps is by
collecting better standardized coverage data. I understand that
a consensus proposal to get better mobile wireless coverage
data was put forward as part of the Mobility Fund II Challenge
Process.
Specifically, that proposal suggested modelling 4G LTE
coverage at download speeds of 5 megahertz per second at a 90
percent cell edge probability under cell loading factor of 50
percent.
Mr. Donovan--Tim again--how can accurately modelling mobile
broadband data help expand coverage?
Mr. Tim Donovan. Thank you, and this has been an important
issue going on, on making sure that we know where there is
service and where there isn't so that we can direct funding
where it's appropriate.
One thing that is missing from that model that is included
in Congressman McKinley and Congressman Walters' bill is also
looking at signal strength.
And while it gets technical quickly, it's important. We
measure signal strength in decibel milliwatt loss, but a
difference of only five leads to a difference of about a 100
percent geographic coverage.
In rural areas a difference of 10 we've developed 300
percent geographic coverage. When you look at that, you know,
while there was consensus to move forward before, the factors
selected by the FCC produced this map that we now know from
looking at it that it doesn't pass the test that you all know
from your travels across your States that it's not the
experience that your consumers are receiving.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Well, thank you very much, and I yield back
the remainder of my time.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentlelady yields back.
Mr. Latta, you're recognized for five.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Madam Chair.
And Mr. Gessner, when I travel around my district and meet
with a lot of my business owners, especially the smaller
business owners, they talk about the over regulations
occurring, especially on the Federal side.
And then also how that regulation affects your business and
also a lot of times as legislators and then the regulators they
don't really see the after effect of what happens.
And I was wondering if you might be able to look, as a
small business owner and also in telecommunications, if you can
thing of some real-world examples where SERRO could have helped
your business and, consequently, your customers.
Mr. Gessner. Thank you for the question.
I offered a brief explanation of my situation in 2010
during my testimony. I will expand on it a little bit.
We converted from an analog cable system to an all-digital
system in 2010. We thought that was the right thing to do. We
were well before everybody else and we went along with the
broadcasters at the same time.
Shortly thereafter, we realized that we could no longer
complete analog testing as required by the FCC because we had
no analog signals to test.
So we requested a waiver from analog testing and it was
supposed to--should have been very, very easy because there had
already been one operator who had received a waiver from analog
testing. So we thought just give me one of those.
So we went to the expense. We went to the time. Produced
the affidavits and all that sort of thing, and there were
several, maybe a half dozen of us, who were doing the same
thing at the same time.
Radio silence. We didn't hear anything for 7 years, and
what finally happened was the FCC changed the rules and told
all of us that our petitions were moved.
Now, if SERRO had been in effect then, we could have been
those 7 years of regulatory uncertainty. If SERRO had been in
place then, the FCC would have been through at least two
triennial reviews and had recognized that analog testing by
digital systems was something that had to be addressed and they
could have addressed it and no waivers would have been--no
waiver petitions would have been required in the first place.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, Madam Chair.
And I will yield back the balance of my time.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Eshoo, you're recognized.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you to
each of the witnesses. It's good to see you, and I think that
you all did a good job in presenting what you want to present.
To Ms. Morris, in your written testimony you noted that the
small entity bill, 3787, is vague in its definition of a small
entity.
Now, some entities may have very few subscribers, in the
thousands. But the language also applies to companies with
millions of subscribers, and I wouldn't consider millions of
subscribers as small.
If this were to become law, well, first of all, I think
it's an ambiguous definition, obviously, because millions is
not small.
So if this were to become law, what's the outcome of this?
What would actually take place?
Ms. Morris. Thank you, Congresswoman Eshoo. I appreciate
the question.
And on this issue of the definition of small entities, I
would note that the bill may seem like it clearly and cleanly
defines what a small entity is.
But it creates worry that gamesmanship could be used to
sort of water down the definition and that that can change over
time and be very costly and complicated to determine on a
recurring basis.
And because, as you point out, that the range of potential
entities covered in the definition is so expansive, as I noted
earlier, we risk disenfranchising millions of consumers from
the important consumer protections that the commission
determines that they need once they're in----
Ms. Eshoo. Because tied to this are what you just
described, correct?
Ms. Morris. Yes. Essentially, what this bill would do would
be every time the commission makes a determination that a
regulation is needed at a general level, what would be
otherwise a regulation of general applicability that there
would be essentially an automatic waiver for a year's time for
small entities as defined, broadly, in the act.
And so for that period of time those customers and
consumers would be--would not have access to the protections
afforded to those who were customers of larger companies.
Ms. Eshoo. I think that this is an area of this bill that
really needs to be tightened up because otherwise it can swing
one way or another.
One way it could be determined that small is in the
thousands and waivers can be granted for those that have
millions.
It just doesn't--it would have been better if they just
said ``waive everything,'' because that seems to be the intent.
In your testimony, you also said, quote, ``the point of
consumer protection laws is to protect consumers from all
harmful practices, not just those from the biggest entities.''
It seems to me that this is a Trojan Horse, because it's
going to hamstring the FCC's ability to do the job that's been
laid out relative to the protection of consumers.
Again, small companies would not have to play by the rules
that everyone else has to play by in terms of the--how it's
defined or not defined in the language of the bill.
Can you describe if there's an alternative to burden? Is
there significant consumer risk there as well?
Ms. Morris. I am sorry. If there's an alternative burden--
if a new burden is placed on--I think that, you know, there is
the sort of immediate risk of the what happens when the 1-year
waiver is in place. I think that there is also a concern that
this will just overly complicate rulemaking processes at the
FCC.
We are going to have to pre-litigate what counts as a small
entity in every proceeding. We'll probably have to litigate
after the fact as well, and meanwhile there will be less focus
on the--making sure that we get the rules right so that they
don't create the types of situations that----
Ms. Eshoo. Well, I think that there is always a legitimate
case to be made for streamlining. But I think that this is
going to turn into a hairball. I really do. And I would just
suggest to the authors that they tighten up the language
because the definition is so wide a Peterbilt truck can drive
through it.
Thank you.
Mrs. Blackburn. All right. The lady yields back.
And if everyone, I am told, can try to keep it 3 minutes or
less, we should be able to dismiss our panel before we go for
votes.
Mr. Olson, you're recognized.
Mr. Olson. I thank the Chair.
Welcome to our five witnesses. My comments and questions
are for you, Mr. Madigan, on suicide and H.R. 2345.
Like you, suicide has hit me directly as a Congressman and
even in my family.
In 2014, a Marine veteran, Casey Owens, killed himself in
Colorado. He was 32 years old. I met Casey in 2007 in our
hometown of Sugarland, Texas.
He had lost both legs. PTSD, TBI--when a small Humvee hit a
tank mine, the thing flew up 30 feet in the air. He found peace
in Colorado, snow skiing. He was a competitive monoskier. His
goal was to ski for our country in the Paralympics.
But he never found true piece. He was on CBS News in 2012
and he responded this way, quote, ``I really don't think I will
ever be free. I don't think the burden of war is ever gone,''
end quote. And, sadly, it wasn't.
And now my family. When I was in high school, my mom got a
master's in family therapy for kids. She met a little girl
named Sherri Silvas at the Harris County Youth Village.
Sherri had been abused by her father. Her mom was
worthless. She was in the gangs, drugs, and she also had a
natural chemical imbalance. All those came together to make her
regularly think about committing suicide.
Mom became very close to Sherri. In fact, she became a de
facto fourth child in my family. But she was a handful. She
disappeared for three months. My dad found her halfway across
the country. He brought her back.
But 2 years after that, Sherri took her own life, as well.
My mom, my dad, and my entire family are still haunted we
couldn't stop her from taking her own life.
And in your written testimony you said that having a verbal
counselor--a line to call a person--is so effective that it
actually reduces suicides and their feelings of hopelessness.
Would that have helped Sherri, and how important is that
number to have, that 3-1-1 number?
Mr. Madigan. Well, Congressman, first of all, I am sorry
for all of your experiences, and I hope you find some closure
and peace.
And I think the legislation that we are looking at today is
one piece of the puzzle in that, the data that we have, 25
percent of the callers have some suicidal ideation.
So they do get immediate help in terms of talking out what
is currently going on.
Clearly, with veterans, there's a whole host of--as I
described in my oral statement but more detailed in my written
statement--the life stressors that then set off a preexisting
mental health condition.
So that's the bottom line, is that we, as a nation, need to
more quickly recognize someone's mental illness situation, much
like you would someone having a diabetic attack or having heart
disease, and then--I love to talk about the face when you go
ask a 5-year-old, you know, what's the biggest organ in the
body and they normally say the heart.
And I say, well, wrong--the biggest organ in the body is
the brain. And if your heart is broken, you gp to the heart
doctor to get it fixed. If your brain is broken, you need to go
to the brain doctor.
So it's part of that process, and we believe a three-digit
number would make access for counseling more readily available.
Mr. Olson. Yes, and hopefully DOD can use that three-digit
number, because there has been a report by JO that says, hey,
you guys were overwhelmed by some calls--people aren't getting
the therapy they need via phone call.
So hopefully this helps them, gives them a chance to get to
guys like Casey.
Mr. Madigan. Yes. The phone calls from this January to now
versus January last year have increased 60 percent. So the need
is clearly there, sir.
Mr. Olson. I am sorry for your loss as well.
Madam Chairman, I yield back.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. McNerney, you're recognized.
Mr. McNerney. I thank the Chair.
As I mentioned earlier in my opening statement, I am
concerned about the larger trend we are seeing with consumer
protections across the board being eliminated from my
constituents.
Ms. Morris, what protections do consumers currently have
with respect to their online privacy and the information that
is shared with their broadband provider?
Ms. Morris. None. None from the Federal Communications
Commission. They were repealed.
Mr. McNerney. OK. What protections do consumers have with
respect to their broadband provider keeping their data secure?
Ms. Morris. I do less data security work. But I would
imagine very little, because the work I did was in the
broadband privacy.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Well, what about with respect to
consumers' access to information being--online being throttled
or blocked? Will there soon be any protections left for
consumers from blocking and throttling?
Ms. Morris. Once the 2017 December order takes effect, no.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I am certainly open to finding ways to
streamlining regulatory compliance for small business but I am
worried that the SERRO bill would move us further in the
direction of eliminating safeguards for consumers, many of
which have already been eliminated.
Ms. Morris, in your written testimony you stated that
triennial review process would create a high degree of
confusion and possibly legal uncertainty at the commission. Can
you explain how a high degree of confusion at the commission is
likely to impact consumers?
Ms. Morris. Sure. And what I mean by that is that once the
bill would take effect there is this--every 3 years the
triennial review but there's also the initial review when it
seems like it would be essentially open season on any
regulations in the FCC's currently on the books. There's no
sort of limitation. It would be a retroactive review as part
of--I can tell from the text of their bill.
So that would mean that what small protections remain for
consumers in this deregulatory environment at the commission
would be under scrutiny once again, presumably with new
proceedings open to reconsider the application of all those
regulations, which could tie up the commission's hands for
months or years on end.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Madigan, in written testimony your organization
submitted it was noted that veterans, in particular male
veterans, are more often at risk of suicide.
In my experience serving in the Veterans Affairs Committee
I found that veterans sometimes feel isolated when they return
home. Do you think that's one of the contributing factors?
Mr. Madigan. Absolutely. Isolation, alcohol, access to
guns--I mean, all those kinds of things are something that
contribute to veterans contemplating suicide.
Mr. McNerney. Do you think that making sure veterans have
access to 21st century infrastructure like broadband could help
our veterans?
Mr. Madigan. Well, as I said at the closing of my oral
statement, I think yes, communication is the key. Talking about
mental health issues like any other health issue and if
technology can be increased and broadened I believe that's--our
organization believes that's the way to go.
Mr. McNerney. Good. And I thank the Chair, and I will yield
back.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Bilirakis, and I remind everyone if we can keep it to 3
minutes, then we'll probably be able to gavel out.
Mr. Bilirakis, you're recognized.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Madigan, as vice chairman of the Veterans Affairs
Committee, the full committee, I know the veterans are a
uniquely situated population and their experiences and
challenges.
The last OIG report on the veterans crisis line identified
a number of problems, including a considerable volume of calls
going to voicemail, which is unacceptable.
Since some time has passed since then, I agree with the
intent of H.R. 2345 to study how the needs of veterans are
addressed by the National Suicide Prevention Hotline--the
lifeline.
In your testimony, you say that one in three callers to the
suicide hotline are veterans or members of the military
families because they suffer as well.
Can you explain the unique challenges that these callers
face and in your position have you seen specific issues related
to a call responder's ability to address these needs through
the hotline?
In other words, also if some of the responders--are the
veterans? Can they identify with the veteran?
Mr. Madigan. Yes, that's a great question.
When you call 1-800-273-TALK and press 1, you're
immediately handed over to a peer-to-peer counseling service
where veterans who have been through the same experiences that
most callers have been through are there.
So I think it's an awesome program. The budget needs to be
increased. The number of counselors need to be increased and,
clearly, with the fact that, sir, that we lose anywhere from 18
to 22 veterans a day that we know of----
Mr. Bilirakis. That we know of. Exactly. Yes.
Mr. Madigan. That we know of--that's a major problem. So we
are committed. Again, that's why we support this legislation,
to look at the whole picture, see what's working.
But the bottom line, when Orrin Hatch called me last May to
talk about this bill, I said, Senator, it's a great idea, but
if you make it easier to call and there's no one there on the
other end to answer the call or they're not competent to answer
the call then that's a big problem.
Mr. Bilirakis. So a veteran can speak--a combat veteran can
speak to a combat veteran. Is that correct?
Mr. Madigan. Absolutely. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bilirakis. Was in a similar situation?
Mr. Madigan. More and more any of the veteran hotlines that
I am aware of employ peer-to-peer counsellors.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. I would like to speak with you on that.
Mr. Madigan. Yes. I will also tell you about something.
Let's talk offline about the--that's for warriors out of New
Jersey, which is Rutgers University sponsors it and it's
upstream counselling of veterans.
So before someone gets to a bridge or puts a gun in their
mouth, it helps veterans when they might lose their home,
they're having personal problems or financial problems.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. I am going stick with the 3 minutes. But
the three-digit number is obviously more--it's easier to
remember----
Mr. Madigan. Yes.
Mr. Bilirakis [continuing]. As opposed to the 1-800 number.
Mr. Madigan. It's 1-800-273-TALK, but I imagine, you're in
the middle of a suicidal ideation, unless it's written
somewhere, it's hard to remember.
So I even think a 5-year-old knows to dial 9-1-1 when they
need to call the police, and we also think that having a
dedicated number like 3-1-1 or whatever it might be would
reduce the burden on 9-1-1 and get people to the right location
the first time.
Mr. Bilirakis. Agreed.
Thank you. I yield back, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Blackburn. Gentleman yields back.
Mr. Engel, you're recognized.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. David Donovan, nice to see New Yorkers here. Welcome to
Washington.
I am interested in the enforcement requirements of the
PIRATE Act.
Mr. David Donovan. Yes, sir.
Mr. Engel. You testified that pirate radio stations
outnumbered licensed stations in some major markets and, as in
understand it, the draft legislation in front of us today would
require, and I quote it, ``sustained enforcement and attention
on pirate broadcasting,'' unquote, including the requirement
that the FCC conduct pirate radio enforcement sweeps in some
markets.
So to your knowledge, has any agency--DOJ, FCC, or any
other--conducted regular pirate radio enforcement sweeps in the
past? Do you have a sense for the amount of time, money, and
personnel these sweeps would require?
Mr. David Donovan. To my knowledge, the Department of
Justice had not done any sweeps. The FCC may have done one.
In terms of time to do a sweep, for example, it took us
four days to find 76 pirates in New York City and in northern
New Jersey.
So the actual amount of those sweeps does not take that
amount of time, and in fact, with technology you can actually
reduce the amount of time that you need.
For example, there are pirate--there are radios that are
currently on the market that you connect to the internet and
you place them throughout New York City or northern New Jersey
and you can sit in the FCC's office in Washington or in New
York and literally turn the dial and you know what stations you
have licensed and you will be able to hear what stations aren't
licensed.
That will tell you, depending on the location of where that
radio is, that we know we have 30 pirates near Flatbush or we
have some in the Bronx.
What it does is by using technology in a smart way we'll
actually reduce the ability or reduce the burdens that are
imposed by doing sweeps.
But, frankly, we've done sweeps--I've done four sweeps over
the last several years and, again, I found 76 pirates in four
days. So it's not--the burden of doing the spectrum sweep is
really not--it can be done, and the FCC has the capability and
equipment to do it.
And, sir, to be blunt, I will be more than happy work with
the Federal Communications Commission to help get those sweeps
done.
Mr. Engel. Thank you.
Ms. Morris, let me ask you a quick question. I think you
point out something really important in your written testimony
regarding the small entity regulatory bill.
The Paperwork Reduction Act and the Regulatory Flexibility
Act already requires the FCC to contemplate the effects of new
protections on small businesses and there is already a number
of opportunities for small cable or phone companies to get
waivers under the FCC's procedures.
So, in your view, are there too few avenues for small
business to be accommodated in FCC proceedings?
Ms. Morris. It is my view that there are not too few--that
there are sufficient avenues already at the FCC. I am
sympathetic to situations where a waiver, as in Mr. Gessner's
case in his testimony, was not able to be achieved in a timely
fashion.
We would simply advocate for a more surgical solution to
those specific problems rather than the blunt tools that are--
would be employed under SERRO.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I yield back my time.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Johnson, you're recognized. Three minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Mr. Gessner, first of all, thanks for what you do in your
role as the president of Massillon Cable. You serve a large
number of people in one of my counties of 18, so I appreciate
that.
I saw in your comments that you highlighted one example
where the waiver process did not work in a timely fashion for
you. Do you have other statistics or insights that you could
share with us about that dynamic?
Mr. Gessner. Thank you. Thank you for your question.
Yes, I probably have four or five current examples that
would probably be more anecdotal than anything else. But by way
of description, I would refer to a staff report that was issued
to this committee in 2011 and it was entitled ``The Staff
Report on Workload at the FCC.''
And part of their conclusion was, and I quote, ``the
commission faces significant challenges in its work including a
significant backlog of unanswered petitions,'' and they went on
to note that more than 5,300 petitions, which was 20 percent of
the total petitions at that time, had been at the FCC for more
than 2 years, and that more than 3,000 petitions had been
pending before the FCC for more than 5 years.
And I think that's--it speaks volumes to the ability of
small entities who don't have on-staff attorneys to keep after
this process to see their petitions for needed relief through
to a conclusion.
Mr. Johnson. And to give our Members and the American
people some idea of what that means on the business side, I am
told that this cost can be up to $50,000 per year for a small
company that, while they're awaiting resolution.
So you have got 5 years, that's $250,000 out of that small
business. That's a--that's a big pot of money.
Mr. Gessner. Correct. That came from a more recent petition
request where a small telephone company applied for relief, and
while it was granted in about 3 years, they estimated the cost
to be about $50,000 a year, which for them is enough to hire
another full time associate to actually serve customers.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Well, thank you.
Mr. Donovan, Mr. McKinley and Mr. Welch's bill, H.R. 2903,
embodies the spirit of our effort to close the digital divide
between rural and urban areas.
What kind of data is necessary to close this divide on
wireless broadband coverage?
Mr. Tim Donovan. Thank you, Congressman.
As you know, the data that's currently on hand is not
reflecting the experience that you have. Your portion of Ohio
on the map looks like it's covered with service.
I think you have explained to me before how that's not the
case.
Mr. Johnson. We know that's not true.
Mr. Tim Donovan. So what the bill does is it takes a look
at the services that are available in urban areas and uses that
as a measuring stick to see what services should be available.
With that in place, you can then collect data based on the
experience that other Americans are having to make sure that
there's services available to everyone.
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you.
I wish we had more time to talk about it. But I understand
you need to yield.
Thank you, Madame Chair.
Mrs. Blackburn. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
Mrs. Brooks for 3 minutes, please.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I am going to follow up on what my colleague from Ohio just
talked about, Mr. Donovan. Let's go on and allow you to answer
a bit with a bit more time.
What kind of analysis does the FCC do as to whether or not
its USF policies are meeting the goals of the program and do we
have information on how effective USF program is in ensuring
that comparable service that you just started to talk about?
Mr. Tim Donovan. Thank you, Congresswoman, and thank you
for joining the bill as a cosponsor. We appreciate the support.
So right now, as Mr. Welch noted during his opening
statement, there is no determination of what is reasonably
comparable services.
So the FCC collects data. They collect Form 477 data. They
collected, in the case of mobility fund, a special one-time
collection of data.
But they're not then going back and applying any sort of
report card over whether that's working, whether we are getting
the job done.
And so we are continuing to move forward and as we are
talking frequently about 5G, there are places in the country
that don't have any G.
We have a saying at CCA that you have to keep up with your
G's and when you start falling behind on the digital divide it
gets harder and harder to catch up.
That becomes even more important as so many different
aspects of our society are connected.
Mrs. Brooks. Is it fair to say if we--if we do resolve some
of these issues involving the digital divide, whether it is the
targeted support through the USF program and siting reform,
access to spectrum, is it possible that those rural areas will
jump to 5G?
Mr. Tim Donovan. Well, you just nailed the three-legged
stool of infrastructure, spectrum, and USF. Those are all
important to solving these problems in rural areas.
And yes, so carriers that are now looking at making sure
you get to the 4G services or looking at how you can layer on
top of that at the same time the 5G services, whether it's
through technology or they're using different spectrum bands to
make sure that the same services are available in urban areas
and rural areas.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. I will yield back the balance of my
time. I know we are trying to get other Members in. Thank you.
Mrs. Blackburn. I thank the gentlelady.
Mr. Collins, you're recognized.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Madam Chair.
My question is directed to David Donovan.
Thank you again for your testimony today on pirate radio.
This bill is going to create a database of licensed radio
operators. I call that a commonsense kind of bill.
I've been battling this for years, primarily with our
former Chair Tom Wheeler, who, frankly, as Chair of the FCC did
not seem interested at all.
I can assure you Ajit Pai, our new FCC Chair, does take
this seriously, to which I think we are going to see a big
change.
You know, obviously, these pirate radio operators are
raising money. In some cases we have advertisers who have no
idea it's a pirate radio so, again, our commonsense bill will
let them easily scan through and say oops, I am not going to be
sending money this way.
So to keep this brief, I will just turn it over to you,
David, to maybe comment on how this should work in helping
deprive these stations of revenue.
Mr. David Donovan. Congressman, and thank you for your
leadership on the issue.
I think one of the problems that you have in not just in
New York but in Florida, in Boston, in Connecticut is that your
illegal operators take on the aura of a legitimate station.
As a result, advertisers, including folks buying political
time, have no idea that they're buying advertising on an
illegal station.
I think it would be important for the FCC to create
transparency, which would be to list all the stations in a
market that are in fact licensed by the FCC.
List all the stations that it knows are illegal, and that
list, making it easily accessible so you don't have to dig down
12 layers into the FCC database, would make it--a Web site
that's publically available and easily accessible would go a
long way towards advertisers understanding oh, OK, this person
isn't licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.
And I think that transparency in the marketplace would be
very, very important to helping to resolve those who are
facilitating illegal pirate operations, sir. I think it's a
great idea.
Mr. Collins. And, hopefully, as you say, let's list the
illegal operators, hopefully under Chairman Ajit Pai, he'll be
putting them out of business instead of listing.
Mr. David Donovan. We hope. Absolutely we hope, and with
the help of Congress to actually increase the enforcement tools
and your suggestion, I think that will go a long way.
Mr. Collins. Well, thank you for your testimony.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back.
I have questions that I am going to submit in the interests
of time and, Tim and Mr. Gessner, they'll come to you--looking
at the efforts we are doing on streamlining and how those, with
the FCC, how that will help speed broadband deployment. But I
will submit that.
Mr. Madigan, I've got one that will come to you. We will UC
Mr. Tonko on for either submission or questions or a real quick
ask?
Mr. Tonko. Real quick ask, and I thank you for waiting
beyond to the subcommittee, Madam Chair.
I have several serious concerns with pirate radio and the
weakness of current enforcement, which, in turn, has encouraged
pirate radio operators to continue undeterred.
For years now, I, along with many members of New York and
New Jersey delegations, have voiced our concerns on this issue,
yet pirate radio operators are as prevalent as every and their
actions have been met with few consequences.
This legislation, obviously, comes in response to the
growing number of pirate radio broadcasters in the region that
are harming consumers and public safety.
According to complaints filed with the FCC, the number of
pirate FM radio stations throughout New York City could
outnumber the number of licensed operations while the problem
in northern New Jersey may be equally as pervasive.
In Albany, we had a problem with private radio operators
where a private--a pirate radio station was interfering with
another legitimate station and was a nuisance to my
constituents who were exposed oftentimes to what was vulgar
language.
I've worked on this legislation and am proud to have done
so in a bipartisan way with Congressman Leonard Lance, and I
hope that this committee will work and move this forward.
To Mr. Donovan--Mr. David Donovan, what effect can pirate
radio have on the emergency alert systems?
Mr. David Donovan. What it does is it interferes with those
who rely on the emergency alert system--consumers who are
listening to the radio.
Pirate stations don't participate in the alert system and
the pirate stations actually interfere with the EAS signals
that consumers rely on.
In addition to that, it also interferes with any important
lifesaving news that follows up. You take it one step beyond,
and apart the EAS, the interference to FAA frequencies is
rather scary because the enforcement is post hoc.
The interference occurs while the plane is trying to land,
and then you have to go try to find the pirate, and those
situations, taken together, create a very dangerous situation,
sir.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you for that clarification.
Mrs. Blackburn. Mr. Tonko, I need to limit you to that
question.
Mr. Schrader has come in, and they have called the vote. If
you don't mind.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Thank you. OK. Thank you.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Schrader, you're recognized, 3 minutes.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Madam Chair and Ranking Member
Doyle, for allowing me to sit in.
Sorry I couldn't spend more time here throughout the
hearing. We are bouncing back and forth. We've got another
hearing in the Health Subcommittee that we are talking care of,
too.
I just want a few minutes to speak in favor of H.R. 3787,
the Small Entity Regulatory Relief Opportunity Act. It's a bill
I am working on with Representative Latta. I want to thank him
and his team for all their help and support. Good bipartisan
effort here.
Every member of the committee wants to expand rural
broadband. The answer to doing that isn't necessarily always
more money. Burdensome regulations harm many of these small
entities' ability to grow, expand, and hire new employees, and
maybe we can do something to alleviate some of those burdens.
Hopefully, by establishing some of these streamlined
procedures in the bill, by obtaining waivers from regulations
that are often unnecessary and not even designed for these
smaller entities we provide a little relief for our small
telecom providers, with a little greater certainty and
efficiency to help them to continue to do the things they do
best for our very, very small and rural communities.
At the basic level, we are finally recognizing locally
based small business do not have the same ability as major
corporations to comply.
Many of these small entities have an entire workforce of,
like, eight or 10 people. They don't have the resources or
floor of lawyers to file petition after petition with the FCC.
I think it's incumbent we all recognize and acknowledge
that these unique--that there are unique business regulatory
challenges for these small entities and we are trying to help
them with this bill here and would hope the committee and
Congress and gentleman out there would share and consider this
bill.
Thank you very much.
Mrs. Blackburn. And I think there's been plenty of support
expressed for that today, and also Representative Stewart has
entered the room and we thank him for the work that he has done
on the suicide bill.
Seeing there are no further Members wishing to ask
questions for the panel, I want to thank our witnesses very
much for your patience today, for being here with us.
As we've said, it is a busy day, just a few things going
on, both in Energy and Commerce and on the floor.
Before I conclude, I ask unanimous consent to enter the
following documents in the record: Mr. Donovan's slides, and
Mr. Lance, the New York State Broadcasters' pirate radio study.
Without objection, so ordered.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The slides appear with David Donovan's prepared statement. The
New York State Broadcasters' study has been retained in committee files
and also is available at
https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=108059.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mrs. Blackburn. Pursuant to committee rules, I remind
Members that they have 10 business days to submit additional
questions for the record, and I ask that each of you witnesses
respond to these questions within 10 business days upon receipt
of those questions.
Seeing no further business to come before the subcommittee
today, the committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:42 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Leonard Lance
Thank you, Madam Chairman, and thank you to our
distinguished panel for appearing before us today.
I am pleased we are considering the Preventing Illegal
Radio Abuse Through Enforcement, or PIRATE, Act.
Unlicensed FM and AM radio operators are a significant harm
to public safety and public health. By disrupting and
interfering with licensed broadcasts, these ``pirate radios''
can cause radio listeners to miss important updates during
times of emergency by blocking the Emergency Alert System. As
they do not adhere to FCC regulations, pirate radios also emit
a harmful level of Radio Frequency radiation, posing a health
risk to nearby residents and workers.
I commend Chairman Pai and Commissioner O'Rielly for their
leadership in enforcing against pirate radio operators at the
FCC. However, as Commissioner O'Rielly has stated before this
subcommittee, the FCC's current enforcement tools are not
sufficient to eliminate these bad actors. My bill would
increase the FCC's ability to crackdown on pirates by
increasing the maximum fine, streamlining enforcement and
holding facilitators liable among other things.
I thank Congressmen Tonko, Collins, and Bilirakis for their
leadership on this issue and for working with me on this
important legislation. Our States are among the most affected
by pirate radio operators in the country and I am pleased we
are able to work bipartisanly to protect our constituents from
these menaces to public safety and health.
Thank you also to David Donovan from the New York
Broadcasters for your advocacy on this issue and for testifying
today. I look forward to our discussion.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]