- CYBER CRIME: AN EXISTENTIAL THREAT TO SMALL BUSINESS
[Senate Hearing 116-47]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-47
CYBER CRIME: AN EXISTENTIAL THREAT
TO SMALL BUSINESS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
MARCH 13, 2019
__________
Printed for the Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-838 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
----------
MARCO RUBIO, Florida, Chairman
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland, Ranking Member
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
JEANNE SHAHEEN, New Hampshire
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JONI ERNST, Iowa
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
CHRISTOPHER A. COONS, Delaware
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JOHN KENNEDY, Louisiana
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri
Michael A. Needham, Republican Staff Director
Sean Moore, Democratic Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Opening Statements
Page
Rubio, Hon. Marco, Chairman, a U.S. Senator from Florida.........
1
Cardin, Hon. Benjamin L., Ranking Member, a U.S. Senator from
Maryland.......................................................
3
Witnesses
Panel 1
Roat, Ms. Maria, Chief Information Officer, U.S. Small Business
Administration, Washington, DC.................................
5
Romine, Dr. Charles, Director, Information Technology Laboratory,
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Washington, DC.
13
Panel 2
Smith, Ms. Stacey, President & CEO, Cyber Association of
Maryland, Inc., Baltimore, MD..................................
36
Hyman, Ms. Elizabeth, Executive Vice President, CompTIA,
Washington, DC.................................................
41
Harper, Ms. Karen A., President, Charles River Analytics, Inc.,
Cambridge, MA..................................................
50
Alphabetical Listing
Cardin, Hon. Benjamin L.
Opening statement............................................
3
COLSA Corporation
Statement dated March 26, 2019...............................
92
Harper, Ms. Karen A.
Testimony....................................................
50
Prepared statement...........................................
52
Responses to questions submitted by Chairman Rubio...........
89
Hyman, Ms. Elizabeth
Testimony....................................................
41
Prepared statement...........................................
43
Responses to questions submitted by Chairman Rubio...........
86
Roat, Ms. Maria
Testimony....................................................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
7
Responses to questions submitted by Chairman Rubio...........
72
Romine, Dr. Charles
Testimony....................................................
13
Prepared statement...........................................
15
Responses to questions submitted by Chairman Rubio...........
78
Rubio, Hon. Marco
Opening statement............................................
1
Smith, Ms. Stacey
Testimony....................................................
36
Prepared statement...........................................
39
CYBER CRIME: AN EXISTENTIAL THREAT
TO SMALL BUSINESS
----------
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 13, 2019
United States Senate,
Committee on Small Business
and Entrepreneurship,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:31 p.m., in
Room 428A, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. Marco Rubio,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Rubio, Scott, Ernst, Young, Kennedy,
Hawley, Cardin, Cantwell, Shaheen, Markey, Duckworth, and
Rosen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARCO RUBIO, CHAIRMAN, A U.S. SENATOR
FROM FLORIDA
Chairman Rubio. The Senate Committee on Small Business and
Entrepreneurship will come to order. I want to thank everyone
that is here today, and I want to welcome our witnesses. We'll
have two panels. I'll introduce them in a moment.
This hearing will discuss one of the most challenging
issues facing small businesses: cybersecurity.
It's hard enough for small businesses to get up and running
with changing markets, regulatory hurdles, and the cost of
starting a business, but cyberattacks can bring a quick end to
all of one's hard work.
Foreign hackers and other cyber criminals are increasingly
targeting small businesses to steal their intellectual
property, trade secrets, and valuable information, and an
equally nefarious practice is to hold hostage small businesses'
operational and customer data in order to get a ransom payment.
Small businesses are the victims in approximately 43
percent of all attacks. While ransomware attacks on individuals
have fallen, those attacks, ransomware attacks targeting
businesses, rose 12 percent in the last year. Almost 55 percent
of small businesses were victim to phishing attacks in 2017.
That is up 30 percent from just 2 years before that.
The risk of cybercrime is greater to small businesses,
which lack, many cases, the dedicated IT staff, the
sophisticated equipment that larger companies have in order to
try and stay safe. Cybercriminals know that. They know small
businesses may be unprepared for attacks, which is why small
businesses are twice as likely to be targeted by phishing
attacks.
Consequences of cybercrime are also greater for small
businesses, which operate on a smaller profit margin and are
not always able to bounce back after a costly attack.
The Department of Justice's Internet Crime Complaint Center
recorded more than 300,000 cybersecurity complaints in 2017
alone, which added up to more than $1.4 billion in losses, and
we know that cyberattacks on small businesses are significantly
underreported because either they do not know who to call or
they do not want their customers to know that they are, or have
been, potentially compromised.
Because the risks to small businesses are so high today, I
introduced, along with Senator Shaheen, the Small Business
Cyber Training Act to create a cyber-strategy training program
for the counselors at the small business development centers
across the country. The bill will prepare them, these
counselors, to provide vital advice on cybersecurity to
entrepreneurs when it matters most: at the beginning of their
businesses' life cycle. And perhaps, most importantly,
counselors can make small businesses more aware of the very
real cyber threats that they face.
In addition to internal controls and protections for their
own operations, businesses that want to work with the Federal
Government are required to meet an extra level of cybersecurity
protection under NIST contracting requirements.
It is important for the Government to maintain a high level
of security with its contractors, but the inability to meet
certain cybersecurity criteria can begin to disqualify smaller
companies, who cannot afford to build up the cyber capability
necessary to service the Government.
In fact, many times small businesses cannot even understand
what the Government requires of its contractors. It is complex.
We hope that NIST, the SBA, and other Government agencies will
work together to educate and train small business contractors
so that they can be equipped to take on business with the
Government.
Federal agencies face very real cyber threats, including
the SBA. It may be a small Government agency in comparison to
others, but for many small businesses, the SBA is an important
gateway to loans, disaster relief, and business training. And
that's why it's especially important that the IT system at the
SBA be secure enough to protect very sensitive data that small
businesses and lenders entrusted to the agency.
The SBA Office of Inspector General has consistently ranked
SBA's IT as one of the most serious challenges facing the
agency. Specifically, the IG has recommended that the SBA
continue to improve IT controls to address operational risks,
such as cyberattacks.
The SBA is moving quickly to modernize its systems, but we
know that criminals often move even faster. In recent years, we
have seen what happens when Government agencies let their guard
down, as was the case with OPM in 2015 when personnel data of
more than 4 million current and former Federal Government
employees was stolen.
The risk of cyberattacks for small businesses also
compromises data that could harm U.S. national security. Our
adversaries are laying the groundwork for cyber espionage by
embedding their technology into the systems we depend on to do
business, be it a small business or a Government business.
Just last week, reports emerged showing that the Chinese
hacking group APT40 has infiltrated IT systems of at least 27
universities worldwide, including MIT, in an attempt to steal
U.S. military information from less secure sources.
These cybercriminals operate with the full backing of the
Chinese Communist Party, and we must take proactive steps to
deny the Chinese government and others access to our networks
and to the personal information of small businesses.
This is why I, along with the Rank Member Senator Cardin,
introduced the SBA Cyber Awareness Act, which would require the
SBA to develop a cyber strategy and to examine where the
components in its IT system are manufactured.
This bill would also require the SBA to report to this
Committee about the cyber breaches and threats it faces so that
we can give the SBA the tools that it needs to defend itself
against future attacks.
So we look forward to talking with our witnesses about ways
to protect small business information from cybercriminals,
while also helping them understand cyber guidelines and
requirements that allow their full participation in the market.
Now I recognize the Ranking Member.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, RANKING MEMBER, A
U.S. SENATOR FROM MARYLAND
Senator Cardin. Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all, thank you
for convening this hearing on a very important topic for small
businesses.
As I go around and meet with small business owners around
the State of Maryland, around our Nation, cybersecurity and
their capacity to deal with cyberattacks is always mentioned,
and it is an area of great concern to the future growth of
small businesses in our community.
In recent years, the Senate has played close attention to
the risk that cybercrime poses to our national security and our
democracy. We have also confronted the risk posed to consumers
when their private data is exposed by hacks at large
corporations and Federal agencies like Target, Equifax, and
OPM.
As large companies and Government agencies continue to
invest in cybersecurity and harden defenses, cybercriminals are
increasingly turning their sights to softer targets, like small
businesses that are unable to invest in the most cutting-edge
cybersecurity technology.
According to the 2018 Verizon report, 58 percent of data
breech victims globally are small businesses. Small businesses
with their narrow margins and lower capital reserves are unable
to maintain trained cybersecurity personnel or purchase the
most up-to-date tools. So for most small businesses, a data
breach is a fatal blow.
A 2017 Better Business Bureau survey revealed that more
than half of all small businesses reported that they could not
remain profitable for only--they could have remained profitable
for only one month if they permanently lost access to the
essential data, and only 35 percent reported that they could
survive more than 3 months. These statistics are cause of great
concern.
So our goals for this hearing are twofold. First, we want
to learn how SBA plans to comply with the Federal Data
Management Standards outlined by the Federal IT Acquisition
Reform Act, also known as FITARA. I was pleased to read last
year's OIG report that found that the SBA has made substantial
progress towards full compliance with FITARA. So I am looking
forward to hearing from the SBA Chief Information Officer,
Maria Roat, today about the tools and resources the SBA needs
to achieve full compliance.
Second, we want to know how we can help small businesses
keep their data out of the reach of cybercriminals. I am
grateful to the National Institute of Standards and Technology,
which is one of many Federal, commercial, and academic
cybersecurity assets in my home State of Maryland. It is
already working to improve cybersecurity for small businesses,
and I am eager to examine what is working well but also
interested in learning how NIST is tailoring its guidance into
practical steps that small businesses can take.
Earlier this week, I was at NIST and had a chance to hear
firsthand some of the work that you are doing. I am proud that
in Maryland, we have the National Cybersecurity Center of
Excellence, which partners with the State of Maryland, which
provides incredible services in this challenging field.
We also have the Information Tech Lab at NIST, which is an
important asset for us to have to try to understand how we can
be more effective in dealing with this challenge.
Maryland is also home for U.S. Cyber Command, and we have
University of Maryland. And, Mr. Chairman, I could go on and on
about Maryland, but I know the State of Washington or Florida
will want equal time. So I will move on.
Just that I am proud that Maryland is a national leader in
helping to expand cybersecurity resources to small businesses
so they can not only be prepared for cyber threats but recover
when hackers strike.
Last year, our State enacted first-of-its-kind legislation
to provide tax credits to small businesses that purchase
cybersecurity products or services from a local qualified firm.
The bill also created a tax credit for investors who invest in
Maryland cybersecurity companies.
Stacey Smith, the executive director of Cyber Association
of Maryland, is here to share some of the lessons we have
learned in Maryland, so we have a better understanding of how
to help small businesses with cybersecurity.
Lastly, I would like to thank all the witnesses that are
here today that have joined us in this discussion. My hope is
that by the end of this hearing, we will know where we are in
our effort to keep the SBA and small businesses safe from
cybercrime, a clear sense of where we need to go to ensure our
data is kept safe, and ideas on the best way to achieve these
results.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Rubio. Thank you.
And just claiming my time on behalf of Florida, we have no
snow.
[Laughter.]
And I can see the Bahamas from my backyard.
All right. Our fist panel of witnesses is Ms. Maria Roat,
the Chief Information Officer at the U.S. Small Business
Administration. She previously served as the CIO at the
Department of Transportation, was the Deputy CIO for FEMA,
Chief of Staff and the CIO at DHS, and in numerous other
Government IT roles. In addition, she retired from the U.S.
Navy with the rank of Master Chief Petty Officer following 26
years of active duty and reserve service.
Charles Romine is the Director of the Information
Technology Laboratory at the National Institute of Standards
and Technology, NIST, under the Department of Commerce. At the
ITL, Dr. Romine develops and disseminates the cybersecurity
standards and guidelines for Federal agencies and U.S.
industry. The ITL also uses emerging IT to help meet national
priorities such as homeland security applications.
We all want to thank both of you for being here, and we
will begin with you, Ms. Roat.
STATEMENT OF MARIA ROAT, CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER, U.S. SMALL
BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION, WASHINGTON, DC
Ms. Roat. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Cardin,
and members of the Committee.
I joined SBA 2 and-a-half years ago after serving as the
Chief Technology Officer at the Department of Transportation.
Prior to that, I worked for 10 years at the Department of
Homeland Security. At the time I came on board at SBA, the
agency had experienced eight CIOs over a 10-year period. The
lack of consistency negatively impacted the agency's technology
footprint, and since taking over the position, my team and I
have tackled many issues head on.
I am pleased to present a different picture today than what
I inherited. We significantly upgraded the agency's technology
stack and through comprehensive improvements generated $11
million in savings and cost avoidance.
Along the way, I have enjoyed the support of Administrator
McMahon. I am proud of the work of my team and colleagues.
Under my direction, we continue to drive innovation and
move aggressively to address deficiencies and improve SBA's
cybersecurity posture. The result is that SBA is now a leading
Federal agency in its cybersecurity capabilities.
Today, SBA employees have greater access to secure modern
technology and productivity tools. Small businesses and
entrepreneurs have an improved user experience, and they can be
assured that we are protecting their information assets.
A key part of achieving this is taking an enterprise
approach to modernization and moving our application systems
and data to the cloud. In early 2017, we were the first agency
to deploy DHS's Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation, CDM,
into the cloud. We ingest data from our on-prem assets,
multiple cloud services, and even legacy IT to provide a
detailed picture of our environment. This greatly reduced the
number of tools and services in use while strengthening
protection and detection capabilities.
Like many organizations, the number one threat to SBA is
email. Phishing attacks are not just a nuisance. They are a
serious and effective means to gain unauthorized access to
sensitive information.
Over the past 6 months, my cybersecurity team identified
and investigated nearly 500 phishing attacks. We purged over
6,800 malicious emails from employee mailboxes, and working
with DHS, we removed nearly 300 malicious internet websites
that were being used for phishing or distribution of malware.
The agency's website at sba.gov is the first place many
small business owners engage with SBA, and the site receives
more than 10 million unique visitors per year.
In 2018, during National Small Business Week, we launched
our agency website to simplify customer access to SBA services.
In addition to this complete website re-platforming and
design, my office continues to partner with our program offices
to introduce modern technologies, help them manage large
datasets, and develop much needed system improvements for our
small business community.
In 2017, we worked with the Office of Capital Access to
launch the Lender Match Tool to better connect borrowers with
lenders. We helped the Office of Disaster Assistance deploy a
new disaster credit management system to enhance our disaster
loan processing. We are working with our Office of Investment
and Innovation on a new platform for our SBIC program to allow
us to better manage the lifecycle of SBICs.
We are beginning a project with our Office of Capital
Access to replace our micro loan IT system to better manage
data and loan information.
We will soon engage our Office of Entrepreneurial
Development to replace the centralized Web-based reporting
system used by our resource partners: SBDCs, SCOREs, Women
Business Centers, and our Veteran Business Outreach Centers.
And we continue to support the work of Administrator
McMahon on the launch of the new Women's Digital Learning
Platform. I believe she discussed this with you during a recent
testimony before the Committee.
These are examples of actions that are helping transform
SBA from an agency with many stovepipes, unstable technology
and infrastructure, to a more proactive and innovative
enterprise services organization. We are becoming much more
responsive to the business technology needs of SBA program
offices, and we are recognized across the Federal and industry
IT community as a technology leader and innovator. We have
certainly come a long way in a short period of time.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today. I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Roat follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Thank you.
Dr. Romine.
STATEMENT OF CHARLES ROMINE, Ph.D., DIRECTOR, INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY LABORATORY, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND
TECHNOLOGY
Dr. Romine. Chairman Rubio, Ranking Member Cardin, and
members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today to discuss NIST's cybersecurity efforts
as they relate to small businesses.
Small businesses are more innovative, agile, and productive
than ever, thanks to the capabilities delivered by information
technology, but the IT security challenge for small businesses
looms larger than ever.
In the cybersecurity realm, NIST has worked with Federal
agencies, industry, and academia since 1972, and NIST's role
has been expanded to research, develop, and deploy information
security standards and technology to protect the Federal
Government's information systems against threats as well as to
facilitate and support the development of voluntary industry-
led cybersecurity standards and best practices for critical
information.
NIST has a longstanding and ongoing effort supporting small
business cybersecurity. This is accomplished by providing
guidance through publications, meetings, and events.
NIST has worked with interagency partners, including the
Small Business Administration, the Federal Trade Commission,
Federal Bureau of Investigations' InfraGard program, and DHS's
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency to host
cybersecurity workshops, training webinars, and has provided
online resources for small businesses.
More recently, in response to the NIST Small Business
Cybersecurity Act, NIST launched the NIST Small Business
Cybersecurity Corner website to put key resources in one place.
Small Business Administration, CISA within the Department of
Homeland Security, and Federal Trade Commission are
contributors to this website. These agencies as well as
nonprofit organizations are providing small business-focused
resources to be shared through that site, and they will promote
awareness and use of the site.
In 2016, NIST released a major revision to the popular
report ``Small Business Information Security: The
Fundamentals.'' The report is designed for small business
owners with little cybersecurity expertise and provides basic
steps needed to help protect their information systems.
I would like to highlight a document that the Committee may
be familiar with, ``The Framework for Improving Critical
Infrastructure Cybersecurity,'' or the Cybersecurity Framework,
which many organizations, including many small businesses, use
to manage their cybersecurity risk.
Published in 2014 and revised in 2017 and 2018, the
framework provides a voluntary, risk-based, flexible,
repeatable, and cost-effective approach that relies on
voluntary standards, guidelines, and practices to help
organizations identify, assess, manage, and communicate
cybersecurity risks.
In addition to the Cybersecurity Framework, NIST has
developed extensive cybersecurity standards and guidelines,
including a risk management framework that can be customized
for small businesses and implemented on a voluntary basis to
help protect a small business' intellectual property and
organizational assets.
Building further on the success of the Cybersecurity
Framework, NIST released the draft Baldrige Cybersecurity
Excellence Builder, a self-assessment tool to help
organizations of all sizes better understand the effectiveness
of their cybersecurity risk management efforts.
Small businesses constitute the backbone of the U.S.
manufacturing sector. Within NIST, the Manufacturing Extension
Partnership, or MEP, has a specific focus on assistance to
small manufacturers and operates a nationwide network with MEP
centers located in every U.S. State and Puerto Rico.
In 2008, the National Initiative for Cybersecurity
Education, or NICE, a public-private collaboration among
Government, academic, and industry, was established to enhance
the overall cybersecurity capabilities of the United States.
In August 2017, NIST released the NICE framework, which is
a national resource that categorizes and describes
cybersecurity work.
The NIST National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence is a
collaborative hub where industry organizations, Government
agencies, and academic institutions work together to address
businesses' most pressing cybersecurity issues. This public-
private partnership enables the creation of practice
cybersecurity solutions for specific industries as well as for
broad cross-sector technology challenges.
NIST recognizes that it has an essential role to play in
helping small businesses. The NIST programs that I have
demonstrate that NIST's cybersecurity portfolio is applicable
to a wide variety of users, from small- and medium-sized
enterprises to large private and public organizations.
Thank you for the opportunity to present NIST views
regarding cybersecurity challenges facing small businesses, and
I will be pleased to answer any questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Romine follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Thank you both.
I am going to defer the majority of my time at the front
end.
I just want to start actually with a story and then a kind
of comment. I would love your input on this.
So, about 2 years ago, according to an account that was
shared with me, a small midsized company in South Florida
shared with me that they got to work on a Monday morning and
found that their entire system had been locked, and they had
gotten, somehow, notification. I believe they said by email,
but basically, all of their financial and proprietary business
records had been stolen. And that in the message, they
basically said to them, ``We want you to send us $500,000 in
Bitcoin. We know you can afford it because we have your
financials. We are not asking for a million. We are asking
$500,000.''
They contacted law enforcement and were basically told,
well, if you want your information back, you are going to have
to pay it.
This was a company that--I would not say they are tiny.
They are certainly profitable and a growing business but
certainly not a large company. They had bars on the windows and
an alarm system in their office, but they were wholly unaware
that anybody even knew they existed, much less that a foreign
actor from North Korea or somewhere else would target them.
What do you assess writ large is the awareness that exists
today among the millions of small and midsized businesses in
America that they can be targeted this way, and what are we
doing to create more awareness that this could happen to them?
Dr. Romine. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the
question.
It is certainly the case that businesses of all sizes are
susceptible to cybersecurity risk, and I think we are seeing
increasingly that that is manifested through attacks on
organizations of all sizes, so I understand the concern.
From our perspective, from the NIST perspective, the way
that we manage that is by trying to communicate more
effectively to small and medium businesses that the size of
your organization does not make you immune to the potential for
cyber risk and that you have a responsibility in the same way
that every organization manages financial risk and reputational
risk and HR risk and all other types of risk. You have a
responsibility as an organization to also manage your
cybersecurity risk.
Now, stating that after the fact, after someone has been
attacked, I am not trying to blame the victim here. I am just
saying that the goal for NIST is to try to raise that awareness
across all sectors of the economy and at all scales that there
is a responsibility to manage that risk, and that we have
resources available that can help you do that.
Chairman Rubio. What's your sense of the general awareness?
I know it is not directly your department but just interacting
with this issue.
Ms. Roat. So with the SBA, I think the Small Business
Development Center is working with the Office of
Entrepreneurial Development. Working with those small
businesses, many times it is not that the tools are not there
and toolkits are not there, but I think there needs to be more
engagement and more communication with the small businesses to
get out in front of that and facilitation and getting that
information sharing out there.
You can tell a small business, ``Protect your
enforcement,'' but how do you do it? What is that checklist? I
think there needs to be more engagement on that, adding on to
what Dr. Romine said.
Chairman Rubio. Ranking Member.
Senator Cardin. Well, thank both of you for your testimony.
Ms. Roat, on April 25th of last year, this Committee held a
hearing in regards to preparing small businesses for
cybersecurity success. After that hearing, then Chairman Risch
and I sent a letter to Administrator McMahon with some of the
suggestions that came out of that hearing, and we asked her
view on requiring a number of Small Business Development Center
counselors to be certified in cybersecurity assistance, a
certification program for part-time cybersecurity professionals
to fill the void that exists and IT workers that will service
small businesses, a cybersecurity boot camp for small
businesses, and forming a cybersecurity co-op to pull together
willing buyers from various cybersecurity products and
services, lowering the costs to small businesses for these
products.
We have not gotten a reply to that letter. Are you aware
that that letter was sent, and can you just tell us what
progress has been made in regards to those suggestions?
Ms. Roat. So I am aware of the letter. I think in the
context of the work that SBA's Office of Entrepreneurial
Development has done with DHS, they are working on the Small
Business Development Center, the cyber strategy for those small
businesses, those SBDCs, and I think some of the elements that
are in that letter should be incorporated as part of what
should be done as part of that plan.
I know that plan is in final clearance right now, but those
elements should be at least vetted and worked through as part
of that plan with SBA, the Office of Entrepreneurial
Development, the SBDCs, as well as DHS.
Senator Cardin. So when can we expect to receive that?
Ms. Roat. It is in final clearance right now, going through
SBA and DHS.
Senator Cardin. A couple weeks? A month?
Ms. Roat. I am not entirely sure. I do know that it is
complete, and it is being vetted through SBA up to the
Administrator now and through DHS.
Senator Cardin. Well, I would encourage you to try to get
that to us, particularly in response to our letter.
There was an OIG report dealing with SBA's most serious
management and performance challenges, and several categories,
the OIG report gives you progress for implementing the
recommendations. However, the OIG report also states at SBA,
outstanding IT security vulnerabilities remain, and the agency
had significant deficiencies in IT security controls.
Can you tell us the progress in implementing those
recommendations or those findings?
Ms. Roat. So the original management challenges, they were
handed to me in October of 2016 when I walked in the door at
SBA.
I can tell you over the last 2 years, we have made
significant progress, and we have actually taken not small
steps, but very big steps to improve our cybersecurity posture
at SBA.
Not only have we gotten our arms around the entire
technology stack from the infrastructure upgrading, all of our
servers patching, we have consolidated our tool sets. We are
now using cloud-based tool sets to monitoring all of our on-
prem environment, all of our cloud-based environments. We are
taking log data, and that includes our legacy systems, taking
all that data. So we have visibility of our entire enterprise.
We are current on our patch levels across the entire
organization. We are not running old operating systems and
anything like that anymore. We have taken care of that. We have
gotten rid of old equipment, old hardware, old software, and we
have consolidated a lot. And we are actually taking an
enterprise view of SBA.
Last fall, we launched our Enterprise Security Services,
and we are nearly completing onboarding the program offices,
where there were previously stovepipes.
So we have taken not little steps; we have taken some very
big steps to get our arms around what is going on at SBA
through the entire technology stack for our cybersecurity to
make sure that that data is protected.
Senator Cardin. I would ask that you keep our staff updated
as to the progress you are making and complying with those
concerns. I would appreciate that.
Ms. Roat. Will do.
Senator Cardin. Dr. Romine, you mentioned the Cyber
Framework, NIST's Cyber Framework. I would be interested in how
that is tailored towards small businesses and making it more
useful for small businesses.
Also, if you could, as you know, Congress passed the Small
Business Cybersecurity Act. It was signed into law August of
last year. I understand the implementation is not what--it
would be unrealistic to expect that it is fully implemented,
but if you could give us an idea of how you are implementing
those requirements, I would appreciate it.
Dr. Romine. Thank you, Senator.
First, let me take the opportunity to thank you for your
recent visit on Monday to NIST. We are really grateful for the
interest that you display in the Institute.
With regard to the Cybersecurity Framework, I would like to
point out that during the development of the framework, we
sought input from a very wide array of stakeholders and
potential stakeholders, including small businesses, and we
strove mightily to ensure that the Cybersecurity Framework as a
framework was scalable across sectors, up and down the supply
chain, and from large to very small businesses. So we tried to
keep it in plain language.
We focused on just the five functions of identify, protect,
detect, response, and recover, and tried to give a common
lexicon so that people could discuss cybersecurity posture and
their cybersecurity requirements with vendors, for example.
So we feel that we have anecdotal evidence that many small
businesses are adopting the framework in whole or in part to
either begin a cybersecurity risk management program for their
company or to augment and buttress one that already exists.
With regard to the Act that you mentioned that specifically
calls on NIST to provide more support for small businesses, I
just want to reiterate that we rolled out just a few weeks ago
what we call the ``Small Business Cybersecurity Corner,'' which
is a website that is dedicated to providing as much useful
information to small businesses as we possibly can. This
includes resources from NIST but also resources from our other
Federal partners as well as from nonprofit organizations that
may have useful content that they can provide for small
businesses to help manage their cybersecurity risk.
Senator Cardin. Thank you.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Shaheen.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you. Thank you both very much for
being here and what you are doing to help small businesses.
Ms. Roat, last week, we had a hearing on Chinese industrial
policy, and one of the questions that I asked one of the
witnesses had to do with what SBA is doing to help small
businesses deal with the cyber threat, whether it is from the
Chinese or others.
You just laid out very clearly what is happening internally
with controls at the SBA, but can you talk about what else SBA
is doing to help those small businesses deal with cyber
threats? Because, unfortunately, one of our witnesses at that
hearing said that the SBA really is not doing very much and
that they need to step up the game in order to help small
businesses deal with an issue that is a huge challenge.
Ms. Roat. So I am aware of the training that the SBDCs are
offering. In some of the programs last fall, I reviewed some of
their materials, and the training runs from very basic
cybersecurity, things that you should be doing as a small
business, and then stepping into a little bit more detail. So
they are providing some of that training.
I cannot answer if they are telling people specifically do
not buy these products or do not buy this software. That, I do
not know, but I have seen some of the materials and that they
are training those small businesses.
Senator Shaheen. Is there further discussion about what
else either the SBDCs or other arms, other ways in which the
SBA can help small businesses?
Ms. Roat. I think through our partnership with DHS, the
SBDC--again, I mentioned earlier the cyber plan that has been
put together that is in final clearance. I think that that will
go a long way to education, the role of the SBDCs and what they
need to do, not just offering basic training, but what other
things they should be doing to help address exactly what you
are talking about.
Senator Shaheen. Have you thought about partnering with
other agencies, whether it is Homeland Security, with the plan?
I know last year, there was a requirement that in order to
bid on certain defense contracts, there had to be certain
cybersecurity measures in place for small businesses, and that
presented a huge challenge to many of our businesses in New
Hampshire because they just did not have the capacity, the
resources to get the help they needed in order to quality.
Has the SBA thought about partnering with DoD or other
Government agencies that are requiring certain cybersecurity
protections in order to bid for Government contracts?
Ms. Roat. I know the program offices are working closely
with other agencies on those requirements for cybersecurity as
well as other things. There are a number of different groups,
whether we work with DHS or DoD or others, and I know there are
certifications in many of the other programs that SBA offers.
To your question specifically, how are we engaged on that,
I am not sure that I have a complete answer on that----
Senator Shaheen. Yeah. I think----
Ms. Roat [continuing]. As far as the certifications and the
requirements.
I work with small businesses in my office all the time, and
I do hear from them. I was on the FedRAMP program as the
director, and I heard from many small businesses about the
requirements around FedRAMP and security and cloud and how they
get their applications to the cloud and the security
requirements and should they be partnering with an AWS and a
Microsoft and those big cloud providers, for their
applications. I understand some of the challenges that they are
having because they have brought those to me specifically when
I was on the FedRAMP program.
Senator Shaheen. Well, thank you. It is an area that I
think we should be looking at ways in which we can be creative
and provide more assistance because it is clearly needed.
Dr. Romine, one of the entities that exists that helps
small businesses--and you mentioned that in your written
testimony--is the Manufacturing Extension Partnership. They
have done a great job in New Hampshire with providing
assistance, whether it is around cyber issues or in other ways,
manufacturing processes with our businesses, and yet it is one
of those programs which is consistently recommended by this
Administration to be eliminated.
So can you talk about the importance of maintaining the MEP
programs and what kinds of things they do to help business?
Dr. Romine. Certainly. Thank you for the question.
From our perspective, the MEP program is a really effective
means of spreading the word on many different aspects of what
my laboratory works on and most particularly in cybersecurity.
So we have collaborated with MEP to provide additional guidance
specifically related to the previous question, which is how to
satisfy the requirements the Department of Defense has in
pointing back to our guidance, Special Publication 800-171,
which is the protection of controlled unclassified information.
So there is additional guidance that helps to clarify for small
businesses what they can do that is being distributed through
the MEP programs.
With regard to the program itself, if Federal funding
should be suspended--and that is something that, of course, is
up to Congress and the Administration to work out, and I have
no purview to speak on that score, but the States, as you know
in your home State, also provide significant funding to those
MEP centers. So although they might be required to reduce their
scope, I think they would still continue.
Senator Shaheen. I would just correct you on New Hampshire.
Dr. Romine. All right.
Senator Shaheen. While we provide some support to the MEP
program, without the Federal support, I think it is very
unlikely that our program would continue.
Dr. Romine. Okay. All right.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Rubio. Thank you.
Just as a follow-up to both of you, last February, we heard
from the Director of the FBI before the Senate Intelligence
Committee in an open hearing, and he discussed how smartphones
made by Chinese government-owned companies and -backed
companies like ZTE and Huawei--and this is a quote from him--
have the capacity--this is a quote--``capacity to maliciously
modify or steal information.''
Then in the 2019 NDAA, the National Defense Authorization
Act, it restricted the Federal Government's use of products
manufactured by Chinese-based technology firms for substantial
or critical components of any systems or as critical
technology.
Can you discuss a little bit about what the Federal
Government is doing to ensure that not only are we not using
these products, but that we are also cautious against white
labeling, which is basically the buying of technology parts
from one of these companies where they are just not labeled as
manufactured by one of these companies? They put a generic
label on it, sometimes even their own label, and we are
concerned because sensitive government work and essential
government work in America, we rely heavily on the private
sector and so if they are compromised with the existence of
this technology, be it in routers or handheld devices or what
have you, a potential liability for the whole system, what are
we doing to address that particular component?
Dr. Romine. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am happy to address
that question.
Although NIST has no role in specifying a specific nation
state or other threat that is directly coming from a specific
country, we do have an active program, an ongoing program in
supply-chain risk management. This is the kind of guidance that
we put out in consultation and collaboration with other Federal
agencies on principles and practices that organizations can use
to try to ensure that the equipment they purchase has the
integrity that they expect it to have by ensuring, to the
extent practicable, the supply chain of that product or
service.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Ernst.
Senator Ernst. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to our
witnesses for being here today as well.
I am excited. First, Ms. Roat, I want to congratulate you
on the progress that you and your team have made to improve
cybersecurity capabilities and protect the valuable personal
information of millions, and that is just so far. We still have
work to do, but congratulations. Thank you so much.
Now that the Small Business Administration has caught up,
what are you viewing as tomorrow's top cybersecurity
challenges, and what can we do to combat those emerging
threats?
Ms. Roat. Like you said, Senator, we have come a long way
over the last 2 and-a-half years, and while we have built the
foundation, we have put some walls on what we have done, we are
continuing to build out our house around cybersecurity.
We are actually a leader across the Federal Government now
in the tools and the capabilities we have. We have been pilots
for DHS on their CDM and their tech programs. We are going to
continue to build on that and really continue to drive that
innovation in our cybersecurity practices so they are not
waiting on somebody else. We are using those tools that are
using artificial intelligence that are really applying machine
learning, so that we understand what is in our environment,
where our data is going, how it is moving across the
organization, building in things like SD-WAN across our
application and building security in through our entire
technology stack.
We are continuing to work with our program offices. While
we still have legacy systems in our environment and we are
continuing that work, our modernization path is taking us,
looking at the enterprise as a whole, where previously it used
to be in stovepipes, so that as we are looking at our data, how
is our data being used, how is it moving across the
organization, who is using it, both within the agency and
externally with our partners.
So next steps around cybersecurity are continuing on that
path with our data strategy, getting our arms around our data,
making sure we know exactly where it is, who is using it, and
putting those role-based access controls around all of that.
Senator Ernst. Yes. Thank you for that.
I am not sure if Senator Shaheen had mentioned it, but
yesterday we had a subcommittee in Armed Services on emerging
threats and capabilities. The focus of our subcommittee was
artificial intelligence and machine learning and that type of
technology. So it just even discussed how can we best utilize
and leverage different departments, different agencies within
the Federal Government working together through research and
development and then applying those technologies. Do you see
that that synchronization could possibly exist between our
agencies as each of you look into cybersecurity and artificial
intelligence?
Ms. Roat. So I think a lot of that activity through the CIO
Council is going on right now around a lot of the artificial
intelligence, a lot of those things really looking at how that
can be applied. Zero-trust networks is one of those things as
well. But through the CIO Council, the committees under the CIO
Council are actually--the information sharing is going on, the
pilots, the testing, and gathering that.
So through the CIO Council--let me put a plug in for them.
Senator Ernst. Yeah, very good.
Ms. Roat. But there is a lot of work already under way in
that area.
Senator Ernst. Very good. Well, I appreciate that.
Dr. Romine, thank you so much for being here as well. Those
new small businesses and small businesses that have gained new
capabilities such as access to rural broadband may be
especially vulnerable to cyberattacks.
I come from a rural area. I know this is a concern that so
many of our businesses do have. What steps can we take to
ensure that these types of small businesses that are newly
exposed to those cyber threats are equipped with the tools and
the resources they need to be cybersecure as quickly as
possible?
Dr. Romine. Thank you, Senator.
I think the best way I can address that is to again talk
about the urgency of getting the word out on the importance of
managing cybersecurity risk at all businesses, at all levels,
regardless of size or location.
That word, we are trying to spread more effectively, and
this hearing, I am grateful is going to be doing that in part.
We get a spotlight on this issue.
The resources that we are making available through the
Small Business Cybersecurity Corner can be a good starting
point, the NIST website that we have stood up to specifically
address the concerns of small business in the cybersecurity
arena.
So I would just point to that and to the Cybersecurity
Framework as a flexible way of helping initiate the management
of cybersecurity risk in any organization.
Senator Ernst. Very good. We just need to ensure that they
know the path forward and how to make sure that they are secure
and that their clients or customers are secure as well, so
thank you.
Thank you very much to our witnesses, and thank you, Chair
and Ranking Member.
Chairman Rubio. Thank you.
Senator Rosen.
Senator Rosen. Mr. Chairman, thank you for being here today
and for the work that you are doing.
I was an original cosponsor of the NIST Small Business
Cybersecurity Act. I am very happy it was passed into law last
session.
So can you tell me how you think the situation has improved
since we have put that bill in?
I would also like to know--you said we have the website up,
and there are on-ramps for small businesses. Do you have the
data or the numbers of the amount of usage of those websites?
Dr. Romine. Thank you for the question.
We do not yet. The website is relatively new. We will be
tracking the number of times that it is visited and downloads
of any documents that we have, not to origin, but just in terms
of numbers of downloads.
Senator Rosen. I think it would be really helpful if you
provided us, those analytics, even with region of the country
or where it is, because if that website is not getting utilized
enough, then what is our challenge to be sure that people know
that they have this way to use it as an on-ramp?
Dr. Romine. Absolutely right. I appreciate that.
I think we still have a lot of work to do to get the word
out. As I said, the website has been stood up for just a few
weeks, and so it is very early days yet, but our goal is to
ensure that we do the maximum that we can to ensure that there
is awareness of the site.
Senator Rosen. How are you spreading the word?
Dr. Romine. We are doing that in part through--again, this
is very, very early days.
Senator Rosen. Uh-huh.
Dr. Romine. But we are doing this in part through our
partnership with SBA. We are doing it through our partnership
with the Manufacturing Extension Partnership program within
NIST. So we have collaborated on resources to help support
small businesses in some of the requirements that the
Department of Defense has in their acquisitions requirements.
So we are going to leverage that because that is a
nationwide system that is designed to get the word out to small
businesses, specifically manufacturers, but we think it is
broadly applicable.
We have a number of people who are subscribers to
information services to keep abreast of activities that are
going on in cybersecurity, and then we have a huge number of
private-sector partners with whom we work collaboratively on a
regular basis. We want them to get the word out as well.
Senator Rosen. I would hope you consider partnering with
our Chambers of Commerce, and particularly in the States, maybe
each governor probably has an office of small business, and
that through our State legislatures, we would be able to
disseminate the information.
Dr. Romine. Absolutely.
Senator Rosen. I think that would be something terrific.
Senator Rosen. And as we disseminate this information at
NIST, we are sure that we have a well, robust, trained
cybersecurity workforce. What kind of investments do you think
we can make in helping provide the people pipeline and trying
to promote good business practices there?
Dr. Romine. NIST is privileged to lead the interagency
activity, the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education,
or NICE, and that is dedicated to strengthening the pipeline of
highly qualified workers in the cybersecurity arena, both
cybersecurity-educated workers who we expect to work in the
cybersecurity field as well as a greater understanding of the
importance of cybersecurity and some of the elements in a
generally more educated workforce.
Senator Rosen. Who are your partners with that in our
States that we can point to?
Dr. Romine. Let us see. In the State, I know that we are--
--
Senator Rosen. How are we getting the information?
Dr. Romine. I know that we are working with a lot of other
Federal agencies in that space. We have, again, a pretty active
website of available activities. We have contractors who have
developed a website that is specifically designed to display
where jobs are available across the Nation and where there is a
concentration of workers.
Senator Rosen. If it does not get down to individuals who
want to seek training for these things, the problem I see in a
lot of these is we pass these frameworks, but then the
information is not really--it is not disseminated to people who
really need it.
Dr. Romine. Right.
Senator Rosen. School guidance counselors, college guidance
counselors, career and technical education, apprenticeships.
So it is great that we have these websites. It is great
that you have all this information and you have some partners,
but if it is not ultimately sent out to everyone in a way that
we can turn that into action, then it is not very useful.
So that is why I am hoping we are going to see some future
analytics from you that will point us as to how we can educate
our schools, guidance counselors, and all the like to prepare
students for these kinds of jobs.
Dr. Romine. Right. We certainly do intend to be more
aggressive about getting the word out, and we routinely
interact with both the U.S. Chamber of Commerce as well as
local Chambers of Commerce in some of the dissemination of
information that we have.
Senator Rosen. Thank you.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Markey.
Senator Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
There is a Dickensian quality to the internet. It is the
best of liars and the worse of liars simultaneously. It can
enable. It can ennoble. It can degrade. It can debase. It all
depends upon how it is used.
So we have a situation where IoT, the Internet of Things,
is also IoT, the Internet of Threats. You just cannot separate
them out unless you are realistic and want to build in the
protections, the safeguards to ensure that the vulnerabilities
are minimized.
Last Congress, I introduced a bill called the Cyber Shield
Act, which I will introduce again this year. I am doing it with
Congressman Lieu, over in the House, and what the bill would do
is to create an advisory committee on cybersecurity, experts
from academia, industry, small businesses, consumer advocacy
communities, and the public to create cybersecurity benchmarks
for IoT devices, such as baby monitors, cameras, toasters,
refrigerators, toys, et cetera.
The IoT manufacturers can then voluntarily certify that
their products meet these industry-leading cybersecurity and
data security benchmarks and display the certification in
public, like Energy Star. There it is. Now for cyber, you have
the same kind of information.
My bill would reward manufacturers adhering to the best
data security practices while also ensuring small businesses
can make more informed choices. They are going to need
information so they can make the right choice.
Ms. Roat, how could we help reward small IoT businesses
that are adhering to and investing in the best cybersecurity
and data security protections?
Ms. Roat. So as we are working with the small business, I
know the Small Business Development Committees, the SBDCs, are
working with small businesses to try to educate them on what
they need to do.
I had read the bill on the Cyber Shield. I think one of the
challenges around that is making sure that it is kept up to
date and that people want to volunteer to participate in that
to get the information out, so that the small businesses in
turn know how to use and get to that information. And that is
critically important.
But that education piece and the communication and the
constant facilitation, not just providing, say here is
something, go look at it, but really facilitating that
discussion with the small businesses so they really understand
and truly understand what it really means and what those
threats are.
You said IoT, the Internet of Threats, but how does the
small business not just--how do you get through to them to
really understand what that threat factor is?
Senator Markey. I appreciate that. I do not know a lot
about electricity or other, but I know what Energy Star is. So
I am just an ordinary consumer trying to figure it out, and I
am kind of saying, ``Okay. That is a voluntary standard, and I
will trust that.'' If I find out I do not trust it, next time I
am in the store, I am just going to say that was a piece of
crap that I got sold, just so you know, sir or ma'am. So that
is kind of how I view this. It is just information.
Then one of the problems in cybersecurity is you do have to
keep updating it.
Ms. Roat. Mm-hmm.
Senator Markey. It is just not a static thing. So the
industry that is selling the devices should have a
responsibility to keep updating, so that the consumer or the
small business knows that this is a 2019 standard, not a 2016
standard, and there it is, a 2019 five-star or a four-star or a
three-star. But then you can choose. If you do not want to pay
for the five-star, fine, but you understand that at a three-
star and two-star, you are taking a risk.
Would you think that would be helpful to small businesses
to have that kind of information, especially the ones that have
a little bit of--maybe they have got a 23-year-old on staff who
can tell them what it means, you know, making the decision.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Roat. I think it could be helpful, especially for those
small businesses where you have folks that may have that 23-
year-old, but that 23-year-old really, again, needs to
understand what--like the Energy Star, what that really means
and what the importance of it is.
Senator Markey. Right.
Ms. Roat. So having something like that definitely would be
useful for the small businesses because they could have a list
and say okay, this, this, this, and this is what I need.
Senator Markey. Right. And I agree with you. I mean, it is
a way of not having a mandate, but yet it is voluntary. You do
it or you do not do it. You do not even have to do it. You just
have your product out there without a cybersecurity, but when
you are trying to buy a car and it says five stars for safety,
four, three, two, you can ask extra questions. If you have a 3-
year-old, you can ask extra questions. What is the security
that is missing in this vehicle? If you want to just go
discount, you can do it, but you are taking the risk, in other
words. It is right there for you to see.
Having the information ultimately, from my perspective, is
going to be something that it drives the whole industry because
people will gravitate towards excellence. They will gravitate
towards security and especially every day that there is another
breach, and you are now purchasing something for your company,
your small company, that could help to avoid something that
happened at Equifax or TJ Maxx or something where their whole
system went down, and then you find out later, they were using
a three-star safety system, which in a lot of instances, that
is what the big companies were using.
So you really want to make this a virtuous technological
competition, and then those that are doing the best let you
know. And I think then people would gravitate towards it.
I am hoping I can work with the community towards achieving
that goal.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Rubio. Thank you.
I want to thank both of you.
Do you have any further questions?
[No response.]
So thank you both for being here. I appreciate it. We are
grateful for your testimony and for answering our questions.
We will transition to the second panel as I begin to
introduce them, so thank you. I guess we will have to get one
more chair up there.
So let me introduce the second panel as they come up and
get ready. Karen Harper of Cambridge, Massachusetts, is the
president of Charles River Analytics, Inc., which uses
international property to serve Government and private clients.
Ms. Harper is also the principal scientist at Charles River,
specializing in developing unmanned systems and other
innovative products.
Elizabeth Hyman is an executive vice president at CompTIA,
here in Washington, D.C. She has extensive experience with IT
policy from working with Lenovo and the Consumer Technology
Association. Her role in government affairs for this technology
association began by working for the Attorney General, the Vice
President, and the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative.
Stacey Smith is the president and CEO of the Maryland Cyber
Alliance.
Senator Cardin. You can tell by her scarf.
Chairman Rubio. You can tell by the scarf, he says.
The Maryland Cyber Alliance or CAMI. Is that right? At
CAMI, Ms. Smith works with business partners, cybersecurity
professionals, and Maryland government to create cybersecurity
jobs. Previously, she was a small business owner and served as
the Cyber Community Manager for the Maryland Department of
Commerce.
Thank you all for being here with us today.
Ms. Smith, we will begin, if you have a statement for us.
STATEMENT OF STACEY SMITH, PRESIDENT AND CEO, CYBER ASSOCIATION
OF MARYLAND, INC.
Ms. Smith. Thank you.
As you mentioned, I am Stacey Smith, the president of the
Cybersecurity Association of Maryland, Incorporated, or CAMI,
as we are known, for short. Our organization is a statewide,
nonprofit organization based in Baltimore City, and we are with
a mission of job creation and sales generation through
Maryland's cybersecurity industry.
Our members include almost 450 of Maryland's cybersecurity
product and service companies, many of which are small
companies focused on helping small businesses be more
cybersecure.
In 2017, the Better Business Bureau conducted a national
study and published the ``State of Cybersecurity Among Small
Businesses in North America'' report. Eighty-five percent of
the businesses surveyed had 50 or fewer employees and were in
various industry sectors, including retail, construction,
financial, manufacturing, real estate, health care, and others.
The research found that small businesses are becoming more
aware of cyber threats and are taking proactive steps to
enhance their cybersecurity. In fact, 9 out of 10 said they
have some form of cybersecurity in place, with the most common
being antivirus and firewalls.
But that is not nearly enough to ensure a business is safe
from today's advanced cyber threats. As a result, they leave
themselves vulnerable and may even lose more through a
cyberattack than they would have spent implementing
cybersecurity protections to prevent them.
If small businesses are more cyberaware than ever, why are
not they doing more to protect themselves, their data and their
customers?
The BBB's research found that companies are ill-equipped,
primarily due to a lack of resources, including funds, and the
lack of knowledge--what to do, who to consult or hire.
Here are a few real-world cyberattack examples provided by
some of our members.
A small marketing firm in Baltimore was hit with a
ransomware attack. Everything on their server, including client
documents, financial spreadsheets, and the project tracking
software at the core of their day-to-day business, were locked
and held for ransom.
Hackers had used automated bots to search the internet for
vulnerable servers without the necessary security controls.
When the bots reached the agency's server, they hit pay dirt.
The agency reached out to a Maryland cybersecurity company
that restored their systems, and 317,000 files had to be
painstakingly restored. Two days of client work were lost. It
took 4 days to fully restore everything, and the business spent
thousands of dollars to mitigate the situation.
In another example, the CFO for a small Maryland
construction company fell target to an email phishing scam. He
received a message from what looked to be one of their regular
payees asking him to update wire information and transfer
money. He did so.
Seeing a vulnerable target, the hacker sent another message
that ultimately allowed access for a ransomware attack through
which the company's files were locked until the company paid
the ransom money.
In total, the company lost almost $200,000 through the wire
transfer, ransom payment, and cost for a Maryland cybersecurity
company to completely restore and rebuild their network.
Lastly, another recent example, a small organization
noticed anomalies affecting the CEO's electronic calendar and
documents and reached out to a Maryland legal firm for help.
The firm's data security breach response team's investigation
revealed that the organization's recently fired head of
Information Technology had hacked back into the organization's
systems and deleted key events and documents of the CEO and ex-
filtrated electronic personal health information of thousands
of Marylanders.
The U.S. Attorney's Office and FBI were notified. The
hacker was charged and sent to prison. The legal firm helped
the organization notify affected individuals.
Had these businesses had proper protections and employee
training in place, it is possible that the cyberattacks could
have been prevented or mitigated, saving them from immeasurable
stress; time, production and financial losses; and even
reputational damage.
But, as previously mentioned, small businesses often do not
know what help they need or where to go for help, and the fear
of the cost keeps many of them from investing in cybersecurity
before they are faced with a cyberattack.
Luckily, for Maryland businesses, CAMI exists to connect
them to companies within our State with answers to their
questions and products and services they need to be
cybersecure.
They can connect online through our directory of Maryland
cybersecurity providers. They can also attend events, including
our upcoming Maryland Cyber Day Marketplace, to connect face-
to-face with local cybersecurity companies.
If funding is the issue, our State legislators passed a
nationally unique bipartisan bill in 2018, making it more
affordable for businesses to be cybersecure. The bill provides
a tax credit for Maryland businesses with 50 employees or less
for 50 percent of what they spend on cybersecurity products and
services purchased from a qualified Maryland cybersecurity
seller, up to $50,000 annually for that tax credit.
In 2019, we have $4 million to award in tax credits to
small businesses through this program.
Our organization has partnered with the Maryland Department
of Commerce, the Better Business Bureau of Greater Maryland,
Regional Manufacturing Institute of Maryland, Maryland
Manufacturing Extension Partnership, and others to make small
businesses aware of the tax credit program to incentivize them
to be proactive rather than reactive in their efforts to be
cybersecure.
This local bill provides a tool for Maryland cybersecurity
companies to generate local sales, grow, and ultimately add
jobs as they do so, and it incentivizes Maryland businesses to
purchase the cybersecurity products and services they need,
thus ensuring a more cybersecure business environment in
Maryland.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to
answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Smith follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Ms. Hyman.
STATEMENT OF ELIZABETH HYMAN, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, COMPTIA
Ms. Hyman. Chairman Rubio and Ranking Member Cardin, on
behalf of the Computing Technology Industry Association,
CompTIA, thank you so much for having me here today.
CompTIA is the leading voice and advocate for the $1.6
trillion U.S. information technology ecosystem and the more
than 11.5 million IT professionals who design, implement,
manage, and safeguard the technology that powers the world's
economy.
As we have discussed, small businesses are the backbone of
our economy, but they are fertile targets for cybercriminals
looking to exploit vulnerable defenses. Small businesses have
fewer employees and resources than large enterprises and
because of this have less to invest in cybersecurity.
CompTIA works with small businesses and customers on a
daily basis, and we are committed to ensuring that they are
educated on and protected from the threats that they are
facing.
At one time, cyberattacks were considered just an IT
problem, and that is certainly not the case anymore.
Cybersecurity issues have grown in size and scope, becoming
more sophisticated, harder to detect, and more widespread.
As Senator Cardin has already noted, according to the 2018
Verizon Data Breach Investigation Report, 58 percent of breach
victims were characterized as small businesses. Research by
Cybersecurity Ventures estimates that by 2021, cybercrimes will
cost $6 trillion per year.
While improved cybersecurity is needed across the board,
small companies are the ones with the steepest challenge.
According to our research, 62 percent of small businesses have
internal resources focused on security compared to 91 percent
for medium-size businesses and 96 for large firms.
Understanding the problems facing small businesses is only part
of the challenge.
We must also aggressively put forward solutions and enlist
the help of public partners like the Small Business
Administration and NIST to help address these challenges.
We must focus on improving three key elements of modern
security. The first are technology tools. SMBs need advice and
guidance on what a modern security toolset should include. This
can range from data loss prevention software to more proactive
tools and methods, such as penetration testing which assesses
the strength of a defense system.
Secondly, focus is needed on helping small businesses
develop business processes that reflect how to build security
policies and establish proper enforcement. This will include
internal operations as well as relationships with outside
suppliers of services or partners. A great place to start in
this discussion is to develop metrics to track the
effectiveness of security programs and processes, such as, for
example, tracking results from phishing expeditions.
Lastly, we need effective employee education. Many small
businesses have a small team or a solo IT professional who
needs to have a solid foundation in security skills, sufficient
specialized expertise in a few key areas, and then the ability
to work with an outside partner, such as a managed security
services provider, when deep expertise is called for.
CompTIA is one of several vendor-neutral certifying bodies
that offer certifications, high-stakes exams, that are ANSI-
and ISO-accredited.
CompTIA is the market leader, having certified more than 2
million people in more than 100 different countries. There are
many ways our certifications can help support small businesses
and enhance their cybersecurity.
CompTIA's Cybersecurity Pathway includes certifications
that describe the basics of IT systems, such as our IT
fundamentals exam or an A-plus exam, and others that describe
the technical aspects of cybersecurity, such as Security Plus,
CompTIA Cybersecurity Analyst Plus, and Penetration Testing
Plus.
Completion of at least IT Fundamentals and A-Plus would
position a small business IT professional to successfully
handle internal cybersecurity matters and oversee third-party
managed security firms.
Finally, it is vital that we focus on establishing a
culture of cybersecurity within any organization, including
small business owners and principals. As CompTIA outlined in
our white paper, ``Building a Culture of Cybersecurity: A Guide
for Executives and Board Members,'' there are six principles
that all organizations can adopt on a scale that is appropriate
for their business.
One, integrate cybersecurity into a business strategy.
Two, insist that the corporate structures reinforce a
culture of cybersecurity, otherwise leadership is not sending
the message that this matters.
Understand that employees are the biggest risks. Consider
education for the employees, even considering access to company
data to mitigate damage.
Focus on detection. The longer it takes to detect a data
breach, the more expensive that breach becomes.
Emphasize data protection, that is, collect what is needed.
Share only what needs to be shared.
And, finally, develop robust contingency plans and test
them.
By working together and continuing to embrace the private-
public partnership that has long benefited the cybersecurity
ecosystem, we can do a great deal to help better prepare small
businesses and businesses of all sizes for the cybersecurity
threats they are facing.
I thank you for the opportunity to participate in the
hearing today and look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hyman follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Ms. Harper.
STATEMENT OF KAREN A. HARPER, PRESIDENT, CHARLES RIVER
ANALYTICS, INC.
Ms. Harper. Good afternoon. Thank you, Chairman Rubio,
Ranking Member Cardin, and members of the Senate Committee on
Small Business and Entrepreneurship for inviting me to testify
today on the current state of cyber vulnerabilities facing
America's small businesses and the impacts that current
policies, though well intended, are having on small business.
My name is Karen Harper. I serve as president of Charles
River Analytics, a small research and development company
employing 180 people, headquarters in Cambridge, Massachusetts,
with a satellite presence in Wakefield, Rhode Island, and
remote presence across the country.
Since 1983, Charles River has been delivering intelligent
systems software to transform our customers' data into mission-
relevant tools and solutions across Federal agencies.
For a small business, we bring an impressive array of deep
technical expertise to these efforts, including artificial
intelligence, sensor and image processing, human systems
integration, and notably for today's hearing, cybersecurity.
Charles River has been on the cutting edge of research and
development related to cyber defense for many years. Through
this research, we have gained a deep understanding of the
vulnerabilities of our Nation's public and private
institutions, corporate entities, and private citizens. It is
imperative to provide the Nation's small businesses with
straightforward, pragmatic policy guidance and effective
support to improve our own cyber defense systems.
Recent efforts to standardize cyber defense strategies have
been implemented in the defense industry through the adoption
of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, or NIST,
Special Publication 800-171, to protect controlled unclassified
information, or CUI, in non-Federal IT systems.
While we are small, business leaders understand the good
intentions of the NIST standard. Compliance with it is
currently extremely costly and overly burdensome.
The publication includes 110 IT control requirements. Many
contractors are still grappling not only with the technical
complexities of the requirements, but also with a lack of
clarity about what actually constitutes controlled unclassified
information.
This lack of clarity has been a critical concern in Charles
River's NIST compliance program. Because CUI is not always
clearly identified, we declared that all data on our corporate
networks must be treated as CUI. It may sound simple; it has
been far from it.
Our IT and software engineering teams took on the challenge
of NIST compliance with gusto. However, they encountered
multiple issues in their efforts. First, NIST requirements are
vague. All of the 110 NIST controls can be implemented in a
variety of ways, and there is a dearth of specific guidance on
preferred implementation methods.
As a result, we spent approximately 800 person-hours to
simply interpret the control requirements.
Second, we found that many of our customers seemed equally
confused and unable to provide helpful clarification and
guidance throughout Federal agencies.
Fortunately, our team is very technically savvy. After
deciphering all of the NIST controls, we were able to develop a
risk-gap analysis and formulate a plan of action. We then spent
an additional 1,500 person-hours to implement that plan.
While we are confident that Charles River is now fully
NIST-compliant, we remain unsure of how and when that
compliance will be confirmed through audit.
The costs of NIST compliance are quite burdensome. We spent
more than $300,000 in hardware, software, and vendor
maintenance contracts. We estimate that we will spend an
additional 30 percent each year on non-labor IT to maintain our
compliance. Our IT staff has almost doubled in size and cost,
specifically to support NIST compliance.
Now, I recognize that as an advanced software engineering
company, our IT infrastructure is more complex than the average
U.S. small business, and so our costs are likely higher than
most. However, we cannot kid ourselves that true NIST
compliance can currently be achieved at a reasonable cost to
small business.
Finally, NIST compliance places a significant burden on our
technical staff. Creating and maintaining compliant
infrastructure drains resources from project work, resulting in
less progress per dollar.
Perhaps most importantly, NIST compliance hinders and
frustrates our top-performing staff, causing them to seek
employment in other sectors, thus making it difficult to
maintain competitive business advantage and, at the end of the
day, competitive national advantage.
Given the challenge, expense, and business impacts of our
NIST compliance program, we recommend improvements to the
Government specification and support for its implementation
across three areas.
First, we require clarity in the definition and management
of CUI, both provided by our DoD customer base, but also
generated by our company in the course of doing business.
Second, we require flexibility in the application of
defined NIST controls. IT requirements across industry varies
widely, and the implementation of NIST-compliant controls
should reflect this diversity.
Finally, we require clear guidance to support proper
compliance, and that guidance must be delivered in easily
accessible implementation guides.
Thank you for allowing me to testify before the Committee
today. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have
for me.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Harper follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Thank you.
I'm going to defer my question time to Senator Hawley, who
I think has to go and do something right away.
Senator Hawley. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Ranking Member, and thank you to the witnesses for being
here.
Ms. Harper, I just want to stay with you. The citizens of
Missouri, my home State, have been faced with a series of
cyberattacks across a range of industries.
Last year, Blue Springs, which is in the Greater Kansas
Area, the Blue Springs Family Care was hacked by malware and
ransomware, and nearly 45,000 patient records were stolen,
including patients' Social Security numbers, account numbers,
driver's licenses, medical information, and so on.
We had another case in Fort Leonard Wood, which I think the
Chairman mentioned earlier, in which Fort Leonard Wood, our
military installation there removed surveillance cameras made
by Chinese manufacturers due to significant security concerns.
As I just listened to your testimony, as I read your
written testimony and those of your fellow panelists, I was
struck by the sheer magnitude of the problem, but also what you
have just been talking about, the incredible difficulty of
complying with the NIST standards.
You suggested something I found interesting, which was in
your written testimony, which was incentivizing large IT
commercial vendors to develop NIST-compliant variance of
market-leading IT products. Can you just say something more
about that idea?
Ms. Harper. Absolutely.
We all agree that the threat is paramount. It is a targeted
threat in many cases. It is a challenging threat for the entire
Nation, for all of our institutions, our companies, small
businesses, and us as individuals. We cannot minimize the
threat, but the way that we address that threat is still very
nascent in my opinion.
As we have gone through our NIST compliance program, which
took an immense amount of effort and challenge for a very
savvy, high-tech software engineering company, small businesses
in this country that do not do the work we kind of do, do not
stand a chance to be as effectively implementing something like
NIST 800-171, at least.
So can we transfer some of the requirement for that on to
the IT sources that we all already rely upon? So Office 365 for
Microsoft and AWS with their Web service and cloud
infrastructure. Is there a way that the Government can
incentivize those players in the industry as well as the
hardware side with Cisco, et cetera, to augment and provide
NIST-compliant versions that will take the complexity of this
process out of the game for small businesses that do not have
the technical savvy that my staff does?
Senator Hawley. Is it your thought or hope that this would
make these sort of protections, effective cybersecurity, more
affordable for small business as well? I mean more widely
available, more affordable, easier to implement.
Ms. Harper. Many of us already pay a great deal of money to
manage our software licenses for these very common tools.
Augmenting that cost to get a NIST-compliant collection at a
reasonable cost seems a very reasonable approach.
If my IT staff could have bought AWS NIST-dot-1, dot-2, we
absolutely would have done it, and we probably would have spent
a lot less than $300,000 in doing it.
Senator Hawley. Yeah. The costs that you outlined in your
testimony here are just extraordinary.
What can we do? What might this Committee do to help make
this happen?
Ms. Harper. So, first of all, I think recognizing the NIST
Standard 800-171 is a really valiant attempt to address this
set of threats that is facing us.
I do not want it to go away. I want it to be a more
manageable process. I want it to be more accessible, even to a
staff like mine.
When we were introduced to the requirements for NIST--and I
will say this anecdotally at best--my IT team pulled me and my
CFO into a conference room and spoke to us for about 2 and-a-
half hours, and we left the room feeling quite ill. We could
see exactly the cost that was coming at us, but the cultural
impact that this has also had on our company.
So I do not want to dismiss any of the value of NIST. I
want to recognize that where we are right now is not good
enough in supporting its implementation. I would like to see
Congress able to support NIST and other organizations like SBA
to provide access to recipe guidelines for various companies
that have IT requirements--X, Y, and Z. Here are the five
things you need to buy and implement. If you need to do lots of
other things in A, B, and C, then here is the extra
complexity--more complex set of things that need to be done.
That level of documentation, spending, 4 of our 8 months of
implementation, just trying to interpret the controls was
disconcerting, at best.
Senator Hawley. That is extraordinary.
Yeah. Thank you so much for your testimony. Thank you for
being here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Rubio. Ranking Member.
Senator Cardin. Well, I thank all of you for your
testimony.
Ms. Harper, I am trying to get a handle on exactly how we
can accomplish the objective that is critically important when
you are dealing with Federal agencies that have sensitive
information, and we expect the contractors to have security for
that information, how we achieve those objectives, but do it in
a way that is less burdensome and certainly less impact on the
work of your talented people.
We appreciate the follow-up for today. You certainly have
piqued our interest, and we are still a little bit confused as
to how we should proceed in order to deal with some of the
issues that you have raised. So I hope you will feel
comfortable in working with us to try to figure out how we can
accomplish this.
Ms. Harper. I and my staff would be more than happy to help
to shape some activities.
I think that it will be important to recognize different
requirements and recognize the different companies.
Yes, we are a defense contractor. We hold a great deal of
sensitive information that is not classified, and we recognize
the importance of that.
We equally recognize the importance of our own data and our
staff data.
So protecting all of it is imperative, but there has to be
a more flexible way to go about implementing this kind of
standard than we have accomplished.
Senator Cardin. And I appreciate it. I appreciate that
attitude, recognizing we need to do it.
Ms. Harper. Yes, absolutely.
Senator Cardin. So let us figure out the best way to do it.
Ms. Hyman, I looked at some of your numbers, and I am
thinking that there are a lot of small businesses that have
been compromised that do not come forward and tell us. Either
they are embarrassed or they do not want their customers to
know they have been infiltrated. So we do not even have the
full numbers of small businesses that have been compromised
through cyberattacks.
What have you found is the best selling point to get a
small businesses owner focused in the right direction as to how
to deal with their cybersecurity needs?
Ms. Hyman. Senator, thanks for the question.
To your point, one thing that I would present to you is
that we have a very robust research department at CompTIA, and
we are open to and would welcome the opportunity to do more
research into the small business situation, try to get to the
bottom of what some of the challenges are that they are facing
in addition to what we have put in our written testimony.
But we work day-to-day with a lot of small businesses and
particularly on the managed service side of things. We have an
IT security community which is sort of a crowdsource group of
companies, and so we are able to talk to them about the dollar
value, what is their exposure from a business point of view.
And it is really the title of this hearing. It is an
existential threat, and they could ultimately go out of
business if they are not paying attention to some of the basic
issues that are out there.
The other thing is because we are a certifying body for the
workforce, we are very focused on trying to attract talent and
make sure that that one person in that small business has the
requisite knowledge and can validate their skill sets, so that
they can at least have an opportunity to manage what they need
to manage on a day-to-day basis, but also have the education
and expertise to work with managed service providers, managed
security providers. That third-party relationship is really
vital I think to a lot of small businesses, particularly not
those that are in software, but like an HVAC company.
Senator Cardin. Certainly.
Ms. Hyman. Yeah.
Senator Cardin. Thank you. That is very helpful.
Ms. Hyman. Yeah.
Senator Cardin. Of course, I am very proud of what Maryland
has done. Ms. Smith, congratulations on getting that
legislation through the Maryland General Assembly because
obviously cost is an issue. There is not a lot of flexible
funding for a company that has one employee. So for them to get
the expertise they need to deal with cyber, it is a challenge
financially.
So the credit in Maryland seems like a very attractive
tool. I think I heard you say somewhere around $4 million in
credits for----
Ms. Smith. Yes, sir. Yes. That is the year 2019. There is
$4 million available for tax credits for that program.
Senator Cardin. So it is a little early, I guess, to know
the exact impact here, but can you just tell us what you have
been hearing from the small business community in regards to
the attractiveness of this tool and getting the focus on
cybersecurity?
Ms. Smith. Sure.
I hear more on the side of our cyber companies telling us,
``How do I apply? How do I get approved as a seller?'' But we
work closely with the Better Business Bureau of Greater
Maryland and Regional Manufacturing Institute, as I mentioned,
and they are getting the word out to their businesses who are
excited about it, trying to figure out how do they access it.
I think because it is so new, just in October, we got the
final details all worked out and are able to release it.
But working even with the MEP group organization in our
State, we have done some programming to let the businesses know
about it, and they are very excited that it is there. It is
just right now figuring out who is the qualified sellers that
they can purchase those products from and what do they need. A
lot of them do not even know what do I need, where do I start.
So just connecting them with the right resources, that is where
we are playing a role in helping them identify those.
Senator Cardin. I am a believer in federalism. So we are
watching very closely what you are doing in Maryland. We might
try to take some of those programs and look at them as national
programs. So we will be following very closely what is
happening in the great State of Maryland. So thank you very
much.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Kennedy.
Senator Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to
thank our witnesses for being here today.
I mean, most small businesswomen and businessmen are busy
earning a living and trying to make payroll. They read about
the need to enhance their cybersecurity, but most of them--and
many Senators--do not know where to start.
Tell me again what Maryland has done to try to educate
small business people.
Ms. Smith. Well, our organization is primarily focused on
our cybersecurity companies growing and generating sales. So we
have partnered with a lot of business organizations in the
State that do help the small business community or even larger
businesses to access whatever they need to be cybersecure.
So we create programs throughout the year. We have a big
event coming up in April where they can connect face-to-face.
It is called our Maryland Cyber Day Marketplace. We will have
about 100 of our cyber companies there. This year, we have
created what we call ``Information Station,'' so they can come
and, if you do not know where to start, somebody will guide
you. So just partnering, I think, with those organizations,
other organizations, and also having an online directory. Most
States do not.
Senator Kennedy. Tell me what, if anything, does the SBA do
here. I mean, if I am a small businessman and I want to enhance
my cybersecurity and I call SBA and say, ``How do I enhance my
cybersecurity?'' What are they going to tell me?
Any of you.
Ms. Smith. I know that we see SBA members or staff people
at some of the events that we go to, so I know they are out
there.
I was not aware that the SBA had cybersecurity resources
until I was asked to testify here, so I do not know.
Senator Kennedy. What would you advise me as a small
businessman? I come to you and I say, ``I want to enhance my
cybersecurity. Where do I go? What do I do?''
Ms. Hyman. I would say there are a number of different
avenues, but I think one of the--well, I mean, there is the
National Cybersecurity Alliance. There are the SBDCs, which are
starting to try to take a more vocal----
Senator Kennedy. What is an SBDC?
Ms. Hyman. The Small Business----
Ms. Harper. Development Center.
Ms. Hyman [continuing]. Development Center. Thank you.
So they are localized. For example, I was looking at the
Michigan SBDC earlier today, and they have developed a very
comprehensive website, which is great. It is a start.
But we also work with NIST, for example, in terms of what
they do, or DHS has local--localized efforts to reach out to
small businesses. But I will tell you it is a very dispersed
conversation.
So, as a nonprofit trade association, we are constantly
trying to educate our membership, and it ranges from managed
service providers to small companies to large companies, but we
are trying to educate them as to the resources that are out
there. That is a role that we can play, partnering with these
various public entities.
Senator Kennedy. Ms. Harper, do you want to add anything?
Ms. Harper. Senator, I believe that being a small business
owner and not having the technical background that my company
does--and you recognize that there is this threat out there
that you do not understand; you do not understand how it
impacts your systems, your payroll systems, anything else that
you are housing in your organization--sadly, I would say I bet
people start with google.com and start looking for some
resources.
I would hope that the presence of SBA and the NIST
Cybersecurity Framework and things would pop out as resources
to that small business owner to provide that, but I am quite
confident that they do not know about it today.
Senator Kennedy. Okay. You may or may not know this, but I
assume most small business people start thinking about
cybersecurity after they have had a problem.
Would that be----
Ms. Harper. As a research company very focused in
cybersecurity, I would like to think we are a little ahead of
the game, but understood.
Senator Kennedy. With the exception of your company.
How do we reverse that? I try to put myself in the shoes of
the small businessperson. Again, you are working hard. You are
trying to make payroll. You read these articles about
cybersecurity, but you do not know where to start.
Ms. Harper. And furthermore, sir, when you see the news and
you recognize that TJ Maxx and OPM are being compromised, how
do you even hope to start----
Senator Kennedy. That is a great point. That is a great
point.
Ms. Harper [continuing]. And provide that? So you are
hoping that industry is going to rally around you and provide
you, hopefully, with the tools that are being developed to
protect those kinds of industries, and hopefully, you can
afford them once they are available.
Ms. Hyman. I wonder also if there is a message to be
delivered, which is that it is a competitive advantage for a
small business to have taken on certain steps that show they
are aware of cybersecurity and that they need to differentiate
themselves from the guy down the street. That is certainly one
thing to talk about.
But you are right. This is a very comprehensive effort
required from an educational point of view, from providing
reasonably affordable tools that are out there, and making that
business case.
Ms. Smith. As I indicated in my testimony, one of the
reasons that companies say they do not implement cybersecurity
programs or invest in cybersecurity is they do not know who to
use. That Google search is going to turn up a ton of resources,
so maybe having resource directories of cyber providers.
Senator Kennedy. That is just going to give you Google's
preferred providers.
Ms. Smith. Right, right. Who pays Google, right, would be
at the top of the list.
Ms. Harper. And, by the way, the phishing folks on the
other side using that as a capture.
Senator Kennedy. That is a good point.
Thank you, all three of you. It was very interesting, very
helpful.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Duckworth.
Senator Duckworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Hyman, we all know that cybersecurity has become more
important than ever for businesses of all size, and I wanted to
sort of follow on the thread of the discussion so far.
Say you have an entrepreneur coming to you. Can you explain
why entrepreneurs in businesses of all size, including the
smallest startups, should be thinking about cybersecurity and
how it plays an essential role in protecting their customers?
As you said, it is a competitive advantage. So you have someone
who is starting a company. They are just getting started, and
they come to you. How do you talk them through this? How do you
talk them into making the investment in cybersecurity, when
they are just trying to get this thing set up? And how do you
explain what the steps should be as they go through this
process?
Ms. Hyman. It is a great question. Thank you, Senator.
I think what I would like to do is just take one step back
and share with you a little bit of research that we have done
recently at CompTIA with small businesses that was not directly
related to cybersecurity, but had some interesting results.
So the five technology areas of concern among SMBs, the top
five, number one was figuring out how to integrate different
applications, data sources, platforms, devices, number one.
Number two, effectively managing and using data, because any
company now is trying to figure out how to make that customer
experience a better one. Number three, cybersecurity and data
cybersecurity. Number four, modernizing aging equipment or
software; and number five, getting more ROI or a bang for the
buck, if you will, from technology investments.
The reason I raise that with you is those are the top-line
concerns for 650 SMBs that we actually surveyed, and I think
that is representative of a lot of companies around the
country. So what are they asking for? They are asking for tools
to be able to figure out how to do all these things.
One of the proposals, I believe, in the legislation is to
have an SBDC official who might be able to provide assistance
and guidance on some of these things. We would recommend that
that individual be certified with an industry-recognized
credential so that they have the wherewithal to help answer
some of these questions. That is the beginning of a
conversation.
I would also say in terms of what resources are needed,
training for the companies themselves. I mentioned earlier that
oftentimes in a small company, there might be one person that
is sort of responsible for taking care of the computers. Well,
if that person had, for example, the investment in some sort of
training--for us, it might be IT fundamentals, which gives a
basic overview of what the technology landscape looks like and
starts to get into some basic security issues or even an A-plus
exam, and there are other groups like ours that do this. But if
they have that initial training opportunity and the investment
for that, they can do some of the basic things that they need
to do, and they can also interact well with third parties.
One thing I want to point out that I think is very
interesting is on the updating and modernizing of equipment. So
I understand a startup may well have newer issues, but pretty
soon, they are going to have some of those problems as well.
I do not know if you have looked at your Microsoft 7 and
said, ``Oh my God, I cannot even get service for it anymore.''
So how do we continuously upgrade and modernize technology? I
think that is an important investment to be made.
So I hope that answers your question.
Senator Duckworth. It does.
Is there any move towards a certification program or
something where either the businesses can be certified if they
are handling a lot of data as, hey, we have gotten this Good
Housekeeping Seal of Approval, good cybersecurity is installed,
that becomes an advantage that they have over their
competitors?
Then also, on the other side of that, as they are looking
for people who are experts, they go to the Google search. How
do they know which companies are legit and which ones are
really going to provide them with the right advice to move
forward?
Ms. Hyman. Well, I will share that CompTIA had a Trustmark
program in place, and the IT Security Trustmark is an
organizational credential. It is totally voluntary.
When we first unveiled it, it was mapped to the NIST
Framework. We found even thought we had pared that down rather
significantly, it was still a big challenge for small
businesses to meet a lot of the requirements of that Trustmark.
But one of the things that we raised in our written
submission was that perhaps that is something, working with
companies like Charles River and elsewhere, where we can start
to really define and pare down more significantly what that
organizational credential looks like.
We are happy to volunteer and give our organizational
credential so that there is at least a basis for that
conversation, and you can look at it. And then we can figure
out how do we make that even a more effective credential going
forward.
Senator Duckworth. Thank you.
Ms. Harper or either of one of you, do you want to add
something to that?
Ms. Smith. One of the things I wanted to mention is we have
talked with our local Better Business Bureau about doing
something like that, but looking at us as a small nonprofit
saying where do we start with this, it was too much of an
uphill climb for us. But the BBBs are there to ensure as a
consumer, who are you buying from, who do you trust, and maybe
that is an organization that would be good to involve if
something like that would happen.
And we have talked about it even in the procurement process
for the State if a business was certified, whatever that is,
that they might get a preferential treatment in the procurement
process with our local State government.
Senator Duckworth. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Cardin. Mr. Chairman, just for one observation, if
I might, because Senator Kennedy raised a very good point about
the capacity of the SBA.
The SBDCs are clearly an entity that could help on cyber.
The letter that we wrote, this Committee, to SBA urged them to
look at the SBDC's capacity to deal with cyber-trained helpers.
I just mention that.
Then Ms. Roat's testimony was they have limited resources
in order to deal with it.
Just one observation, if I might, since this is the week
the President's skinny budget came out. He happens to cut--the
Trump budget cuts the SBDCs by 23 percent. I know that we will
do things here that will be different than the President's
budget. I understand that, but I do think we also have to be
realistic about the resources that are made available to the
SBA.
Chairman Rubio. Thank you.
I just have one. I mean, my colleagues have covered a lot
of the topics that I wanted to ask, but there is one. I think
you have touched on it just a little bit.
But I am curious about CAMI and its role in representing so
many small businesses that are afraid to come forward and
discuss vulnerabilities. Obviously, it has business impacts. On
the one hand, obviously, if there is a breach of some sort, you
want people to know about it; on the other hand, many
businesses that are small and midsized businesses would
struggle with a public disclosure that could theoretically,
reputationally wipe them out.
So how is CAMI handling that? What is it doing? First, it
sort of highlights the number and severity of the attacks that
are on small business, and then, in particular, helping small
businesses that are afraid to come forward and discuss their
vulnerabilities because, frankly, from those attacks is how we
can improve our method of responding and preventing them.
Ms. Smith. Sure. One of the things that we are
implementing--and it will come out in our revised website in
April--is case studies, which allows our members to talk about
businesses that have been breached and what they did to remedy
the situation and the cost involved and the steps that they
took and things that they might have been able to do ahead of
time to prevent that.
So I think illustrating it through this is a manufacturer,
this was a small retail organization, so they can say ``okay,
that is me,'' just to know that someone else has gone through
it.
And contacting us, one of the things we do is anonymously
put out a plea to our members. If anybody is available to
handle this situation, so the business is not--their contact
information or name is not out there, to then connect them with
resources and give those resources to the business that is
looking for that. They can also directly contact the businesses
through our website.
But that fear factor is certainly there, but that is also
after they have been breached. If we can get to them before
they have been breached and say, ``Put these protections in
place,'' many of them would not suffer those breaches or
attacks.
Chairman Rubio. But the existence of those case studies,
without outing a company, is very helpful to a small company
that sees themself reflected in the case study----
Ms. Smith. Absolutely.
Chairman Rubio [continuing]. And understands that someone
like them could also be hit by this.
Ms. Smith. Absolutely.
One of the things that we find all the time in what we do,
even our organization when we were first created, we expected
businesses to come to our programs and hear a talk on
cybersecurity and how to be cybersecure. They do not do that.
Our local SBA rep said the same thing, that they have tried
to do programs for the small businesses, and they do not come.
They know they have got to be secure. They are too busy or it
does not apply to them, whatever.
But going to organizations that are already doing things
and making it a piece of their conference, put the information
on their website in addition to the SBA website, things like
that, small things that can be done, taking the message out to
the business and marketing.
We deal with our local government. They do not want to
spend money on marketing and getting the word out, but you have
got these great programs. How do you get the word out? And
there has got to be some kind of method for telling the message
and promoting what resources are available to those.
Chairman Rubio. Well, I want to thank all three of you for
being patient and being with us today. We have had a great
hearing, and your input, as you saw from the questions and
comments of some of our members I think has elicited thinking
about, number one, things people may want to take back to their
own States, but more holistically some of the challenges we
face as we move forward on what SBA can do and what the Federal
Government can do to empower small businesses to confront this
very real 21st century challenge, and again, we thank you for
being willing to be a part of this today because it is very
helpful to us.
The hearing on the record will remain open for 2 weeks, and
any statements or questions for the record should be submitted
by Wednesday, March 27th, at 5:00 p.m. and again, thank you so
much for being here, and with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:11 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]