- ONLINE IMPOSTERS AND DISINFORMATION
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
ONLINE IMPOSTERS
AND DISINFORMATION
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS
AND OVERSIGHT
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
SEPTEMBER 26, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-47
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
37-739PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma,
DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
Ranking Member
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
MO BROOKS, Alabama
AMI BERA, California,
BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair
RANDY WEBER, Texas
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania
BRIAN BABIN, Texas
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas
KENDRA HORN, Oklahoma
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey
MICHAEL CLOUD, Texas
BRAD SHERMAN, California
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PETE OLSON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California
ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
PAUL TONKO, New York
JIM BAIRD, Indiana
BILL FOSTER, Illinois
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
DON BEYER, Virginia
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
Rico
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
VACANCY
KATIE HILL, California
BEN McADAMS, Utah
JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
------
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight
HON. MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey, Chairwoman
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina,
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
Ranking Member
DON BEYER, Virginia
ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
C
O
N
T
E
N
T
S
September 26, 2019
Page
Hearing Charter..................................................
2
Opening Statements
Statement by Representative Mikie Sherrill, Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..
10
Written Statement............................................
11
Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................
12
Written statement............................................
12
Statement by Representative Don Beyer, Subcommittee on
Investigations and Oversight, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................
13
Statement by Representative Michael Waltz, Subcommittee on
Investigations and Oversight, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................
14
Written statement............................................
14
Written statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................
15
Written statement by Representative Ralph Norman, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..
16
Witnesses:
Dr. Siwei Lyu, Director, Computer Vision and Machine Learning
Lab,
SUNY - Albany
Oral Statement...............................................
17
Written Statement............................................
19
Dr. Hany Farid, Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science and the School of Information, UC, Berkeley
Oral Statement...............................................
24
Written Statement............................................
26
Ms. Camille Francois, Chief Innovation Officer, Graphika
Oral Statement...............................................
31
Written Statement............................................
33
Discussion.......................................................
38
Appendix: Additional Material for the Record
Report submitted by Ms. Camille Francois, Chief Innovation
Officer, Graphika..............................................
58
ONLINE IMPOSTERS
AND DISINFORMATION
----------
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 26, 2019
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:01 p.m., in
room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mikie
Sherrill [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Sherrill. The hearing will now come to order.
Good afternoon, and welcome to a hearing of the Investigations
and Oversight Subcommittee. We're here today to discuss online
impostors and disinformation. Researchers generally define
misinformation as information that is false, but promulgated
with sincerity by a person who believes it is true.
Disinformation, on the other hand, is shared with the
deliberate intent to deceive. It turns out that these days the
concepts of disinformation and online impostors are almost one
in the same. We all remember the classic scams and hoaxes from
the early days of e-mail--a foreign prince needs help getting
money out of the country. But today the more common brand of
disinformation is not simply content that is plainly
counterfactual, but that is being delivered by someone who is
not who they say they are. We are seeing a surge in coordinated
disinformation efforts, particularly around politicians, hot-
button political issues, and democratic elections.
The 2016 cycle saw Russian troll farms interfering in the
American discourse across Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram,
trying to sway public opinion for their preferred candidate.
But at the same time they were after something else much
simpler--to create chaos. By driving a wedge into the social
fissures in our society, sowing seeds of mistrust about our
friends and neighbors, exploiting social discord, they think
they might destabilize our democracy, and allow the oligarchy
to look a little more attractive by comparison.
When I was a Russian Policy Officer in the Navy, I learned
how central information warfare is in Russia's quest to
dominate Western nations. And, unfortunately, modern technology
makes information warfare a far easier proposition for
antagonists--foreign or domestic. In fact, it's perhaps too
easy today to proliferate convincing, harmful disinformation,
build realistic renderings of people in videos, and impersonate
others online. That's why the incidents of harmful episodes
have exploded in the last few years. They range from fake
reviewers misleading consumers on Amazon, to impersonating real
political candidates, to fake pornography being created with
the likenesses of real people. Earlier this year an alleged
deep fake of the President of Gabon helped trigger an
unsuccessful coup of the incumbent government. Deep fakes are
particularly prone to being weaponized, as our very biology
tells us that we can trust our eyes and our ears.
There are social science reasons why disinformation and
online impostors are such a confounding challenge. Research has
shown that online hoaxes spread 6 times as fast as true
stories, for example. Maybe human nature just likes a good
scandal, and confirmation bias shapes how we receive
information every time we log on, or open an app. If we
encounter a story, a video, or an influence campaign that seems
a little less than authentic, we may still be inclined to
believe it if the content supports the political narrative
already playing in our own heads. Our digital antagonists,
whether the intelligence service of a foreign adversary, or a
lone wolf propagandist working from a laptop, know how to
exploit all of this.
Our meeting today is the start of a conversation. Before
we, as policymakers, can address the threat of fake news and
online frauds, we have to understand how they operate, the
tools we have today to address them, and where the next
generation of bad actors is headed. We need to know where to
commit more resources, in the way of innovation and education.
Our distinguished witnesses in today's panel are experts in the
technologies that can be used to detect deep fakes and
disinformation, and I'm glad they're here to help us explore
these important issues. We're especially thankful that all
three of you are able to roll with the punches when we had to
move the hearing due a change in the congressional schedule, so
thank you all. I'd also like to thank my Republican
counterparts who have been such great partners in this matter.
He will be here shortly, but Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio is joining us
today to inform his work on deep fakes, and I'm proud to be a
co-sponsor of his bill, H.R. 4355, here he is, and I thank you
for being here, Mr. Gonzalez.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Sherrill follows:]
Good morning and welcome to a hearing of the Investigations
and Oversight Subcommittee.
We're here today to discuss online imposters and
disinformation. Researchers generally define misinformation as
information that is false but promulgated with sincerity by a
person who believes it is true. Disinformation, on the other
hand, is shared with the deliberate intent to deceive.
It turns out that these days, the concepts of
disinformation and online imposters are almost one and the
same. We all remember the classic scams and hoaxes from the
early days of email - a Nigerian Prince needs help getting
money out of the country! But today, the more common brand of
disinformation is not simply content that is plainly
counterfactual, but that it is being delivered by someone who
is not who they say they are.
We are seeing a surge in coordinated disinformation efforts
particularly around politicians, hotbutton political issues,
and democratic elections. The 2016 election cycle saw Russian
troll farms interfering in the American discourse across
Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, YouTube and beyond, trying to
sway public opinion for their preferred candidate. But at the
same time, they were after something else much simpler: to
create chaos. By driving a wedge into the social fissures in
our society, sowing seeds of mistrust about our friends and
neighbors, exploiting social discord, they think they might
destabilize our democracy and allow the oligarchy to look a
little more attractive by comparison. When I was a Russian
policy officer in the Navy, I learned how central information
warfare is in Russia's quest to dominate western nations. And
unfortunately, modern technology makes information warfare a
far easier proposition for our antagonists, foreign or
domestic.
In fact, its perhaps too easy today to proliferate
convincing, harmful disinformation, build realistic renderings
of people in videos, and impersonate others online. That's why
the incidence of harmful episodes has exploded in the last few
years. They range from fake reviewers misleading consumers on
Amazon, to impersonating real political candidates, to fake
pornography being created with the likenesses of real people.
Earlier this year, an alleged deepfake of the President of
Gabon helped trigger an unsuccessful coup of the incumbent
government. Deep fakes are particularly prone to being
weaponized, as our very biology tells us that we can trust our
eyes and ears.
There are social science reasons why disinformation and
online imposters are such a confounding challenge: research has
shown that online hoaxes spread six times as fast as true
stories, for example. Maybe human nature just likes a good
scandal. And confirmation bias shapes how we receive
information every time we log on or open an app. If we
encounter a story, a video or an influence campaign that seems
a little less than authentic, we may still be inclined to
believe it if the content supports the political narrative
already playing in our own heads. Our digital antagonists,
whether the intelligence service of a foreign adversary or a
lone wolf propagandist working from a laptop, know how to
exploit all of this.
Our meeting today is the start of a conversation. Before we
as policymakers can address the threat of fake news and online
frauds, we have to understand how they operate, the tools we
have today to address them, and where the next generation of
bad actors is headed. We need to know where to commit more
resources in the way of innovation and education.
Our distinguished witnesses on today's panel are experts in
the technologies that can be used to detect deep fakes and
disinformation, and I'm glad they are here to help us explore
these important issues. We are especially thankful that all
three of you were able to roll with the punches when we had to
move the hearing due to a change in the Congressional schedule.
I'd also like to thank my Republican counterparts who have
been such great partners on this matter. Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio
is joining us today to inform his work on deep fakes. I'm proud
to be a cosponsor of his bill H.R. 4355, and I thank you for
being here, Mr. Gonzalez.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Unfortunately Ranking Member Norman
could not be with us today, but we are happy to have the full
Committee Ranking Member in his place, so the Chair now
recognizes Mr. Lucas for an opening statement. Thank you, Mr.
Lucas.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Chairwoman Sherrill, for holding this
hearing on the growing problem of disinformation on social
media. We all know that photos these days can be digitally
altered so easily that it's almost impossible to tell what's
real and what's not. Now there's a growing problem where audio
and video can be altered so convincingly that it can appear
that someone has said or done something that never happened.
These deep fakes can be produced more and more easily.
You know, there was once a rumor that I myself was a deep
fake, just impersonating the real Frank Lucas. The good news,
or, depending on your perspective, perhaps the bad news, is the
technology hasn't come quite that far, and I'm the real deal.
But once it's on the Internet, it never goes away. But deep
fake technology is getting more and more sophisticated, and
it's also getting easier to produce. As our witnesses will
discuss today, the technology for generating deep fakes is
improving at a rapid clip. Soon anyone with a decent computer,
and access to training data, will be able to create
increasingly convincing deep fakes that are difficult to detect
and debunk. False and misleading content like this undermines
public trust, and disrupts civil society. Unfortunately, the
technology for generating deep fakes is developing at a speed
and a scale that dwarfs the technology needed to detect and
debunk deep fakes. We must help level the playing field.
This Committee took the first steps to do this yesterday by
passing a bipartisan legislation aimed at improving research
into the technology to detect deep fakes. I want to commend
Representative Anthony Gonzalez for introducing this bill, and
his leadership on the issue of technology and security. I often
say that one of our most important jobs on the Science
Committee is communicating to the American people the value of
scientific research and development. Legislation and hearings
like this are a great example of how the work we do here can
benefit directly people across the country, and I look forward
to hearing from our witnesses, and I yield back my time, Madam
Chair.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lucas follows:]
Thank you, Chairwoman Sherrill, for holding this hearing on
the growing problem of disinformation on social media.
We all know that photos these days can be digitally altered
so easily that it's all but impossible to tell what's real and
what's not.
There's now a growing problem where audio and video can be
altered so convincingly that it can appear that someone has
said or done something that never happened. These deepfakes can
be produced more and more easily.
You know, there was once a rumor that I MYSELF was a
deepfake, just impersonating the real Frank Lucas. The good
news-or maybe the bad news-is that technology hasn't come quite
that far and I am the real deal.
But deepfake technology IS getting more sophisticated. And
it's also getting easier to produce. As our witnesses will
discuss today, the technology for generating deepfakes is
improving at a rapid clip. Soon, anyone with a decent computer
and access to training data will be able to create increasingly
convincing deepfakes that are difficult to detect and debunk.
False and misleading content like this undermines public
trust and disrupts civil society.
Unfortunately, the technology for generating deepfakes is
developing at a speed and scale that dwarfs the technology
needed to detect and debunk deepfakes. We must help level the
playing field.
This Committee took the first step to do that yesterday by
passing bipartisan legislation aimed at improving research into
the technology to detect deepfakes.
I want to commend Representative Anthony Gonzalez for
introducing this bill and for his leadership on the issue of
technology and security.
I often say that one of our most important jobs on the
Science Committee is communicating to the American people the
value of scientific research and development. Legislation and
hearings like this are a great example of how the work we do
here can directly benefit people across the country.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses, and I yield
back my time.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Well, thank you, Ranking Member Lucas.
And we have an additional opening statement today from my
colleague across the aisle, Representative Waltz of Florida.
Unfortunately, Mr. Waltz could not make it to the hearing
today, but considering his great interest in the issue, I
allowed him to submit a video of his opening statement, so
we'll now hear from Mr. Waltz.
Mr. Waltz. Hello, everyone. I'm sorry I can't be in town
for the hearing today, but I wanted to make sure to share my
concerns about digital impostors. Everyone in this room relies
on social media, video messages, and other digital technology
to connect with our constituents. We listen to their concerns,
we share information about our work in Congress. But deep fake
technology, which can literally put words in our mouths,
undermines public trust in any digital communication. Today's
witnesses will paint a picture of just how sophisticated the
technology has become for creating realistic images, videos,
and personalities online.
Before I conclude my statement, I want to say a few words
about our distinguished Subcommittee Chairwoman, Mikie
Sherrill. I think we can all agree that Mikie is one of the
most intelligent, accomplished, and persuasive Members of
Congress. In fact, she's so persuasive that she convinced me, a
Green Beret, to cheer on Navy football in this year's rivalry
game. Thanks, Chairwoman Sherrill, for bringing attention to
the problems of deep fake technology, and go Navy, beat Army.
Chairwoman Sherrill. What a pleasure. As you all saw that--
thank you so much for your work. That was obviously a deep
fake. That is what we're looking at, and that is what we're
discussing today. Thank you so--right? How nice is that? And,
sadly, knowing how deep the commitment to our respective
services' football is, I do know that that was not actually
your sentiment, although it should be. So thank you, Mr. Waltz
and Mr. Beyer, for your willingness to participate in our deep
fake demonstration, and thank you to our distinguished
witnesses, Dr. Lyu, for creating this video.
I'll now recognize Mr. Beyer and Mr. Waltz for a few
remarks. Mr. Beyer?
Mr. Beyer. Yes. Thank you, Madam Chair, very much.
Congressman Waltz and I really had fun making the deep fake
video. You can see that it clearly was in jest. As an Army
brat, I would never throw a Green Beret under the bus. But you
also see how dangerous and misleading it could be. I'm sure we
fooled a couple of people. For instance, what if I had said,
instead of go Navy, go beat Army, I had said, it's time to
impeach the President? Well, that would be viral everywhere. I
mean, the things would be ringing off the hook, and the social
media----
Mr. Waltz. Please do not do that to my staff.
Mr. Beyer. No. And Mr. Waltz would be the first to know, so
my friends might appreciate it, but I don't think he would at
all, so obviously the potential for serious harms with these
deep fakes is quite great on elections, international stage for
diplomatic purposes, and even for our private lives. That's why
we, as a country, need to take swift action and invest in the
research and the tools for identifying and combating deep
fakes, and create a national strategy immediately, especially
for election integrity, and ahead of the 2020 presidential
election.
The stakes are high. We've got to act now. We already know
of Russia's intentional campaign to spread disinformation
throughout the last one, and I don't even want to imagine what
Russia, or China, or just private players, the havoc they could
wreak on our elections and on our personal lives. So thank you
very much to Mikie Sherrill and Frank Lucas for leading this
effort. I yield back.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you very much. Mr. Waltz?
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And while I do
certainly hold you in the highest regard, that was not me. But,
just to add to my colleagues, that's just an example, and a
small example, of what a deep fake synthetic video can do. And
we've seen this insidious capability. We're seeing, I think,
the birth of it. But I certainly support my colleagues in how
we can get our arms around this as a country. I think it's
important to note that Mr. Beyer and I both consented to that
video, but as, you know, putting words in the mouth of a U.S.
Army Green Beret and cheering on for Navy is not the worst
application of this technology, and it's certainly not
difficult to imagine how our enemies or criminal groups can
wreak havoc on governments, on elections, on businesses, on
competitors, and the privacy of all Americans. So these videos,
and this technology, have the potential to truly be a weapon
for our adversaries.
We know that advanced deep fake technology exists within
China and Russia. We know that they have the capability, and
that both countries have demonstrated a willingness to use
asymmetric warfare capabilities. So, as the technology for
generating deep fakes improves, we do risk falling behind on
the detection front. That's why this hearing is so important,
and I certainly commend you for calling it. It will help us
examine solutions for both detecting and debunking the deep
fakes of the future. And, you know, at the end of the day, I
just have to say go Army, beat Navy. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Waltz follows:]
What you just saw was an example of a ``deepfake,'' or
synthetic video that can be generated thanks to advancements in
artificial intelligence and machine learning.
As we have just seen, deepfakes have the ability to make
people-myself included-appear as though they have said or done
things that they have never said or done. And advancements in
the underlying technology, as we will hear today, are making it
much more difficult to distinguish an authentic recording from
synthetic, deepfake impersonations.
Importantly, Mr. Beyer and I both consented to and
participated in the creation of this deepfake. But a Green
Beret cheering for Navy is not the worst application of the
technology.
It's not difficult to imagine how deepfakes of
nonconsenting individuals could be used to wreak havoc on
governments, elections, business, and the privacy of
individuals.
Deepfakes have the potential to be a weapon for our
adversaries and we know that advanced deepfake technology
exists in China and Russia and that both countries have
asymmetric warfare capabilities.
As the technology for generating deepfakes improves, we
risk falling behind on the detection front. That's why today's
hearing is so important. It will help us examine solutions for
detecting and debunking deepfakes of the future.
Thank you Chairwoman Sherrill and Ranking Member Norman for
convening this important hearing.
Yield back.
Chairwoman Sherrill. I don't know why I let you testify in
my--no, thank you very much. Those were really sobering
comments, and I appreciate you both for showing us a little bit
of what we're contending with.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]
Thank you Madam Chair, and I would like to join you in
welcoming our witnesses this morning.
I'm glad we're holding this hearing today. It's worth
acknowledging just how deeply the phenomenon of online
disinformation affects most of our lives these days. As long as
there's been news, there's been fake news. But the American
people are far more connected than they used to be. And the new
tools that enable fake images, misleading public discourse,
even long passages of text are alarming in their
sophistication. Maybe we all should have seen this coming, the
explosion of disinformation that would accompany the
information age.
I suspect my colleagues here in the House are already
taking this matter seriously, because in a way, online
imposters and twisted facts on the internet present a real and
active threat to the way we do our own jobs. We all use social
media to connect with our constituents and to hear about their
concerns. My staff want to read the comments and the posts from
the people in Dallas and hear what they have to say. If I am to
believe that a large percentage of the comments on Twitter are
coming from ``bots'' or some other source of disinformation,
the waters get muddy very quickly.
We have to acknowledge the serious legacy of disinformation
is in this country. In the late 1970s, I was working under
President Carter as a Regional Director for the Department of
Health. Around that time, the Soviet Union's KGB kicked off a
campaign to plant the idea that the United States government
invented HIV and AIDS at Fort Detrick. The KGB wrote bogus
pamphlets and fake scientific research and distributed them at
global conferences. It sold a complex narrative in which the
United States military deliberately infected prisoners to
create a public health crisis -- biological warfare against our
own people. The KGB's efforts were so pervasive that by 1992,
15% of Americans considered it ``definitely or probably true''
that the AIDS virus was created deliberately in a government
laboratory. Decades later, a 2005 study found that a
substantial percentage of the African American community
believed that AIDS was developed as a form of genocide against
black people.
How absolutely devastating such disinformation can be. It
is clear that information warfare can have such profound,
destructive effects. I think it is long past time to recognize
how vulnerable we are to the next generation of hostile actors.
As Chairwoman Sherrill said, the first step in addressing a
big problem is understanding it. Not every Member of this
Committee, myself included, is well-versed in what a ``deep
neural network'' is or how a ``GAN'' works. However, we have a
sense already that the federal government is likely to need to
create new tools that address this issue.
We also need to have a serious conversation about what we
expect from the social media platforms that so many of us use
every day. These companies have enjoyed a level of growth and
success that is only possible in the United States. They were
created in garages and dorm rooms, but they stand on the
shoulders of giants like DARPA, which created the internet, and
the National Science Foundation, which developed the backbone
of computer networks that allowed the internet to blossom. The
American consumer has been overwhelmingly faithful to social
media over the past decade. We will need those companies to
help combat disinformation. It can no longer be ignored.
I am pleased to welcome our witnesses today, and I'm also
pleased that we had bipartisan agreement in yesterday's markup
on a bill that would enable more research on deep fakes. These
issues require a bold bipartisan response. I thank my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle for working together to
address these important issues. With that, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Norman follows:]
Good afternoon and thank you, Chairwoman Sherrill, for
convening this important hearing.
We are here today to explore technologies that enable
online disinformation. We'll look at trends and emerging
technology in this field, and consider research strategies that
can help to detect and combat sophisticated deceptions and so-
called ``deepfakes.''
Disinformation is not new. It has been used throughout
history to influence and mislead people.
What is new, however, is how modern technology can create
more and more realistic deceptions. Not only that, but modern
disinformation can be spread more widely and targeted to
intended audiences.
Although media manipulation is nothing new, it has long
been limited to altering photos. Altering video footage was
traditionally reserved for Hollywood studios and those with
access to advanced technological capabilities and financial
resources.
But today, progress in artificial intelligence and machine
learning have reduced these barriers and made it easier than
ever to create digital forgeries.
In 1994, it cost $55 million to create convincing footage
of Forrest Gump meeting JFK. Today, that technology is more
sophisticated and widely available.
What's more, these fakes are growing more convincing and
therefore more difficult to detect. A major concern is this: as
deepfake technology becomes more accessible, the ability to
generate deepfakes may outpace our ability to detect them.
Adding to the problem of sophisticated fakes is how easily
they can spread. Global interconnectivity and social networking
have democratized access to communication.
This means that almost anyone can publish almost anything
and can distribute it at lightspeed across the globe.
As the internet and social media have expanded our access
to information, technological advancements have also made it
easier to push information to specific audiences.
Algorithms used by social media platforms are designed to
engage users with content that is most likely to interest them.
Bad actors can use this to better target disinformation.
For example, it is difficult to distinguish the techniques
used in modern disinformation campaigns from the those used in
ordinary online marketing and advertising campaigns.
Deepfakes alone are making online disinformation more
problematic. But when combined with novel means for
distributing disinformation to ever more targeted audiences,
the threat is even greater.
Fortunately, we are here today to discuss these new twists
to an old problem and to consider how science and technology
can combat these challenges.
I look forward to an engaging discussion with our
distinguished panel of witnesses on how we can better address
online disinformation.
Thank you again, Chairwoman Sherrill, for holding this
important hearing, and thanks to our witnesses for being here
today to help us develop solutions to this challenge. I look
forward to hearing your testimony.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Sherrill. At this time I would like to introduce
our three witnesses.
First we have Dr. Siwei Lyu. Dr. Lyu is a Professor at the
University of Albany's College of Engineering and Applied
Sciences. He is an expert in machine learning, and media
forensics. Next is Dr. Hany Farid. Dr. Farid is a Professor at
the University of California Berkeley School of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science and the School of Information.
Dr. Farid's research focuses on digital forensics, image
analysis, and human perception. Last we have Ms. Camille
Francois. Ms. Francois is the Chief Innovation Officer at
Graphika, a company that uses artificial intelligence to
analyze online communities and social networks.
As our witnesses should know, you will each have 5 minutes
for your spoken testimony. Your written testimony will be
included in the record for the hearing. When you all have
completed your spoken testimony, we will begin with questions.
Each Member will have 5 minutes to question the panel. And
we'll start with you, Dr. Lyu.
TESTIMONY OF DR. SIWEI LYU,
PROFESSOR, DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE,
DIRECTOR, COMPUTER VISION AND MACHINE LEARNING LAB,
UNIVERSITY AT ALBANY, STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK
Dr. Lyu. Good afternoon, Chairwoman Sherrill, Ranking
Member Lucas, and Members of the Committee. Thank you for
inviting me today to discuss the emerging issue of deep fakes.
You have just seen a deep fake video we created for this
hearing, so let me first briefly describe how this video, and
similar fake videos, are made.
Making a deep fake video requires a source and a target. In
this case, the source was Representative Beyer, and the target
was Representative Waltz. Mr. Beyer's staff was kind enough to
prepare a video of the Congressman for this project. While Mr.
Waltz's office consented to this video demonstration, it is
important to know that we didn't use any video from his office.
Instead, we conducted an Internet search for about 30 minutes,
and found one suitable minute-long YouTube video of Mr. Waltz,
and that's our target video. The next step involves a software
tool we developed, which used deep neural networks to create
the fake video. It is important to note that our tool does not
use a generative adversary network, or GAN.
It first trains the deep neural network models using the
source and the target video. It then used the models to extract
facial expressions in the source video of Mr. Beyer, and
generate a video of Mr. Waltz with the same facial expressions.
The audio track is from the original video of Mr. Beyer, and
was not modified. The training and the production are performed
on a computer equipped with a graphical processing unit, or
GPU. The computer and the GPU can be purchased from Amazon for
about $3,000. The overall training and production took about 8
hours, and were completely automated, after setting a few
initial parameters.
So a similar process was also used to generate the fake
videos that are being displayed on the screen right now.
Although we do not distribute this particular software, true,
similar software making deep fakes can be found on code-sharing
platforms like GitHub, and are free for anyone to download and
to use. With the abundance of online media we share, anyone is
a potential target of a deep fake attack.
Currently there are active research developments to
identify, contain, and obstruct deep fakes before they can
inflict damages. The majority of such research is currently
sponsored by DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency),
most notably the MediFor (Media Forensics) program. But it is
also important that the Federal Government fund more research,
through NSF (National Science Foundation), to combat deep
fakes. As an emerging research area that does not fall squarely
into existing AI (artificial intelligence) or cybersecurity
programs, it may be wise to establish a new functional program
at NSF dedicated to similar emerging technologies. It can serve
as an initial catch-all for similar high-risk and high-impact
research until either an existing program's mission is
expanded, or a new dedicated program is established.
We should also examine the approaches we share software
code and tools, especially those with potential negative
impacts like deep fakes. Therefore, it may be wise to consider
requiring NSF to conduct reviews of sponsored AI research and
enforcing controls on the release of software codes or tools
with dual use nature. This will help to reduce the potential
misuses of such technologies.
Last, but not least, education on responsible research
should be an intrinsic part of AI research. Investigators
should be fully aware of the potential impact of the sponsored
research, and provide corresponding trainings to the graduate
students and post-docs working on the project. Again, NSF could
enforce such ethics training and best practices through a
mandatory requirement to sponsored research projects. The
creation of new cross-function NSF programs for emerging
technologies, the introduction of controls on the release of
NSF-funded AI research with potential dual use, and required
ethics training for NSF-funded AI research will go far in
defending against the emerging threat posted by deep fakes.
Thank you for having this hearing today, and giving me the
opportunity to testify. I'm happy to answer any questions you
may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Lyu follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you very much. Dr. Farid?
TESTIMONY OF DR. HANY FARID,
PROFESSOR, ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING AND
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND THE SCHOOL OF INFORMATION,
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY
Dr. Farid. Chairwoman Sherrill, Ranking Member Lucas, and
Members of the Committee, thanks for the opportunity to talk
with you today on this important topic. Although disinformation
is not new, what is new in the digital age is the
sophistication with which fake content can be created, the
democratization of access to sophisticated tools for
manipulating content, and access to the Internet and social
media, allowing for the delivery of disinformation with an
unprecedented speed and reach.
The latest incarnation in creating fake audio, image, and
video, so-called deep fakes, is being fueled by rapid advances
in machine learning, and access to large amounts of data.
Although there are several variations, the core machinery
behind this technology is based on a combination of traditional
techniques in computer vision and computer graphics, and more
modern techniques from machine learning, namely deep neural
networks. These technologies can, for example, from just
hundreds of images of the Chairwoman, splice her likeness into
a video sequence of someone else. Similar technologies can also
be used to alter a video of the Chairwoman to make her mouth
consistent with a new audio recording of her saying something
that she never said. And, when paired with highly realistic
voice synthesis technologies that can synthesize speech in a
particular person's voice, these deep fakes can make a, for
example, CEO announce that their profits are down, leading to
global stock manipulation; a world leader announcing military
action, leading to global conflict; or a Presidential candidate
confessing complicity to a crime, leading to the disruption of
an election.
The past 2 years have seen a remarkable increase in the
quality and sophistication of these deep fakes. These
technologies are not, however, just relegated to academic
circles or Hollywood studios, but are freely available online,
and have already been incorporated into commercial
applications. The field of digital forensics is focused on
developing technologies for detecting manipulated or
synthesized audio, images, and video, and within this field
there are two broad categories: Proactive and reactive
techniques.
Proactive techniques work by using a specialized camera
software to extract a digital signature from a recorded image
or video. This digital signature can then be used in the future
to determine if the content was manipulated from the time of
recording. The benefit of this approach is that the technology
is well-understood and developed. It's effective, and it is
able to work at the scale of analyzing billions of uploads a
day. The drawback is that it requires all of us to use
specialized camera software, as opposed to the default camera
app that we are all used to using, and it requires the
collaboration of social media giants to incorporate these
signatures and corresponding labels into their systems.
Notice that these proactive techniques tell us what is
real, not what is fake. In contrast, reactive techniques are
focused on telling us what is fake. These techniques work on
the assumption that digital manipulation leaves behind certain
statistical, geometric, or physical traces that, although not
necessarily visually obvious, can be modeled and
algorithmically detected. The benefit of these techniques is
that they don't require any specialized hardware or software.
The drawback is that, even despite advances in the field, there
are no universal forensic techniques that can operate at the
scale and speed needed to analyze billions of uploads a day.
So, where do we go from here? Four points. One, funding
agencies should invest at least as much financial support to
programs in digital forensics as they are in programs that are
fueling advances that are leading to the creation of, for
example, deep fakes. Two, researchers that are developing
technologies that can be weaponized should give more thought to
how they can put proper safeguards in place so that their
technologies are not misused. Three, no matter how quickly
forensic technology advances, it will be useless without the
collaboration of the giants of the technology sector. The major
technology companies, including Facebook, Google, YouTube, and
Twitter, must more aggressively and proactively develop and
deploy technologies to combat disinformation campaigns. And
four, we should not ignore the non-technical component of the
issue of disinformation, us--the users. We need to better
educate the public on how to consume trusted information, and
not spread disinformation.
I'll close with two final points. First, although there are
serious issues of online privacy, moves by some of the
technology giants to transform their platform to an end-to-end
encrypted system will make it even more difficult to slow or
stop the spread of disinformation. We should find a balance
between privacy and security, and not sacrifice one for the
other. And, last, I'd like to re-emphasize that disinformation
is not new, and deep fakes is only the latest incarnation. We
should not lose sight of the fact that more traditional human-
generated disinformation campaigns are still highly effective,
and we will undoubtedly be contending with yet another
technological innovation a few years from now. In responding to
deep fakes, therefore, we should consider the past, the
present, and the future as we try to navigate the complex
interplay of technology, policy, and regulation, and I'm sorry
I'm 15 seconds over.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Farid follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you very much. Ms. Francois?
TESTIMONY OF MS. CAMILLE FRANCOIS,
CHIEF INNOVATION OFFICER, GRAPHIKA
Ms. Francois. Chairwoman Sherrill, and Ranking Member
Lucas, Members of the Committee, thank you for having me here
today. We're here to discuss the growing issue of online
imposters and disinformation. As you know, this problem is
nuanced and complex. I've been looking at disinformation
campaigns for many years, and I have seen great diversity in
the types of actors, techniques, and impacts that those
disinformation campaigns can have. I want to highlight that,
while we tend to focus on fake content, the most sophisticated
actors I have seen operate online actually tend to use
authentic content weaponized against their targets. This is
what I want to talk about a little bit more.
It's really hard to give a sense of the growing and global
scale of the issue, but here are a few recent examples. Today a
report by my colleagues over at the Oxford Internet Institute
highlighted that more than 70 countries currently use
computational propaganda techniques to manipulate public
opinion online. Since October 2018, Twitter has disclosed
information around more than 25,000 accounts associated with
information operations in 10 different countries.
Twitter is one thing. On Facebook, over 40 million users
have followed pages that Facebook has taken down for being
involved in what they call coordinated inauthentic behavior.
Those may seem like huge numbers, but, in fact, they represent
a needle in a haystack, and the danger of this particular
needle is its sharpness. Targeting specific communities at the
right time, and with the right tactics, can have a catastrophic
impact on society, or on an election. That impact remains very
difficult to rigorously quantify. For instance, if you take a
fake account, what matters is not just the number of followers
it has, but who those followers are, how they have engaged with
the campaign, and how they have engaged both online and
offline. Similarly, for a piece of content, it's not often the
payload that matters, but really the delivery system, and the
targeted system.
We are finding more and more state and non-state actors
producing disinformation. What keeps me awake at night on this
issue is also the booming market of disinformation for hire.
That means troll farms that one can rent, bot networks that one
can purchase, for instance. These tools are increasingly
attractive to domestic political actors, who also use them to
manipulate American audiences online. I see that you discovered
how easy it was to make a deep fake, and I encourage you to
also discover how easy it is to buy a set of fake accounts
online, or, frankly, to purchase a full blown disinformation
campaign.
The good news here, if there is any, is that, as a society,
and as a professional field, we've come a long way since 2016.
These problems began long before 2016, but it really took the
major Russian interference in the U.S. election to force us
toward a collective reckoning. In 2016 the top platforms, law
enforcement, and democratic institution sleepwalked through the
Russian assault on American democratic processes. Those who
raised the alarm were, at best, ignored. Today we're in a
better place. We have rules, definition, and emerging processes
to tackle these campaigns. Coordination between researchers,
platforms, and public agencies have proven successful, for
instance, in protecting the U.S. 2018 midterms from Russian
disinformation efforts. Then, those actors worked hand in hand
to detect, take down, and, to a certain extent, document the
Russian attempts to deceive an manipulate voters.
We still have a long way to go, but the scale of the
problem is staggering. Sophisticated state actors, and, again,
a growing army of hired guns, are manipulating vast networks'
interactions among billions of people on dozens of platforms,
and in hundreds of countries. This manipulation is
discoverable, but almost in a way that a submarine is
discoverable under the ocean. What you really need is
sophisticated sensors that must evolve as rapidly as the
methods of evasion. That requires a serious investment in the
development of analytic models, computational tools, and domain
expertise on adversary trade crafts. We need better technology,
but also more people able to develop and adopt rapidly evolving
methods.
Accomplishing this also requires access to data, and that
is currently the hardest conversation on this topic. The task
at hand is to design a system that guarantees user security and
privacy, while ensuring that the corps of scientists,
researchers, and analysts can access the data they need to
unlock the understanding of the threats, and harness innovative
ways to tackle the issue. Today we're very far from having such
a system in place. We critically need not just the data, but
the community of scholars and practitioners to make sense of
it. That emerging field of people dedicating to ensuring the
integrity of online conversation needs support, funding, and a
shared infrastructure.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Francois follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you, Ms. Francois. We'll have to
get to the rest of it as we go through the questions, but thank
you very much. At this point we'll begin our first round of
questions, and I'm going to recognize myself for 5 minutes.
I'd just like to start with Dr. Farid and Dr. Lyu, because
we read a lot about the potential for deep fakes to be used on
political candidates, and we watched Dr. Lyu's very compelling
example here in this room, so thank you for that brilliant
demonstration. I hope my fellow Members of Congress who aren't
in the room today will actually get a chance to see for
themselves, and hear just how limitless the potential impacts
of deep fakes can be.
Let's talk about some hard truths. On a scale of 1 to 10,
what do you think are the chances of a convincing video deep
fake of a political candidate, someone running for Congress, or
President, or Governor, emerging during the 2020 election
cycle, and why do you think that?
Dr. Farid. I'm going to save five, to minimize my chances
of being wrong. I am--and for another reason too, that I think
we shouldn't--despite the sophistication of deep fakes, we
shouldn't overlook that traditional disinformation works really
well, and it's easy, right? Teenagers in Macedonia were
responsible for a lot of the disinformation campaigns we saw in
2016. So I think it's coming. I don't know whether it'll be in
2020, or 2022, or 2024, but largely because the cheap stuff
still works, and it's going to work for a while. I think we'll
eventually get out ahead of that, and then this will be the new
front.
But I think it is just a matter of time. We've already seen
nefarious uses of deep fakes for cases of fraud, and I think
the bigger threat here is not going to be--the first threat I
predict is not going to be an actual deep fake, but the
plausible deniability argument, that a real video will come
out, and somebody will be able to say, that's a deep fake. And
that, in some ways, is the larger threat that I see coming down
the road, is once anything can be faked, nothing is real
anymore. And I think that's probably more likely to happen
before the first real deep fake comes out.
Chairwoman Sherrill. That's interesting. Dr. Lyu?
Dr. Lyu. Yes. Thank you for the question. As, actually, I
mentioned in the opening remarks, the technical capability of
making high-quality deep fakes is already at the disposal of
whoever wants to make it. As I mentioned, for the deep fake
videos we made, we have a specially made software, but anybody
can potentially also develop similar softwares based on the
open-source software on the GitHub, and then they can just buy
a computer for about, you know, a couple thousand dollars, and
then run this for a couple hours. Everything is automatic. So
this is really the reality that, you know, people, whoever want
to make these kind of videos, they have that capacity.
However, the question whether we will see such a video in a
coming election really--as Professor Farid mentioned, depends
on a lot of other factors, especially, you know, deep fake is
not the only approach for disinformation. So it is kind of
difficult to come up with a precise number there, but the
possibility is certainly substantial. Thank you.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you. And then, Ms. Francois, you
have a lot of experience observing how trolls and bots behave
when they identify a hoax they might want to spread. If a
convincing deep fake of a politico emerges next year, what do
you expect the bot and troll participation to look like in
proliferating the video? In other words, will we see this sort
of erupt all at once, or does it percolate in dark areas of the
Internet for a short-period of time before it emerges? How does
that work?
Ms. Francois. All of the above are possible. I will say
that, if we are facing a sophisticated actor able to do a
convincing deep fake, they will be able to do a convincing
false amplification campaign, too.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you very much. And then, Dr.
Farid, you said in your testimony that researchers working on
technologies to detect disinformation should give more thought
to proper safeguards so their work cannot be misused or
weaponized. What kind of safeguards do you believe could be
adopted voluntarily by the research community to protect
against the spread of disinformation?
Dr. Farid. Good. So I think there's two things that can be
done. So, first, you have to understand in computer science we
have an open source culture, which means we publish work, and
we put it out there. That's been the culture, and it's
wonderful. It's a wonderful culture. But when that technology
can be weaponized, maybe we should think about putting the
data, and the code, and the GitHub repository, where anybody
can download it, as Professor Lyu was saying. So that's number
one, is just think about how you disseminate. We can still
publish and not put the details of it out so that anybody can
grab it, No. 1.
No. 2 is, there are mechanisms by which we can incorporate,
into synthetic media, watermarks that will make it easier for
us to identify that. That can become a standard. We can say
academic publishers who are going to post code should
incorporate into the result of their technology a distinct
watermark. That is not bulletproof, it's not that it can't be
attacked, but it's at least a first line of defense. So those
are the two obvious things that I can see.
Chairwoman Sherrill. That was perfect timing. Thank you
very much, I appreciate it. I would now like to recognize Mr.
Lucas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Madam Chair. Dr. Farid, following up
on what the Chair was discussing, in your written statement you
say that no matter how quickly forensic technology for
detecting deep fakes develops, it'll be useless without the
cooperation of the technology giants like Google and Facebook.
How do we bring those people to the table to begin this
collaboration?
Dr. Farid. Yes. So the bad news is they have been slow to
respond, for decades, really. It's not just disinformation.
This is the latest, from child sexual abuse, to terrorism, to
conspiracy theories, to illegal drugs, illegal weapons. The
technology sector has been very slow to respond. That's the bad
news. The good news is I think a combination of pressure from
here on Capitol Hill, from Brussels, from the UK, and from the
public, and from advertisers, there is now an acknowledgement
that we have a problem, step number one.
Step number two is, what are we going to do about it? And I
still think we are very slow here, and what you should
understand is we are fighting against business interests,
right? The business model of Facebook, Google, YouTube, Twitter
is data, it's content. Taking down content is bad for business.
And so we have to find mechanisms and either through regulatory
pressure, advertising pressure, public pressure, bring them to
the table. I will say the good news is, in the last 6 months,
at least the language coming out of the technology sector is
encouraging. I don't know that there's a lot of action yet.
So I will give you an example. We all saw a few months ago
an altered video of Speaker Pelosi. This was not a confusing
video, we all knew it was fake, and yet Facebook gleefully let
it on their platform. In fact, defended the decision to leave
it on their platform, saying, we are not the arbiters of truth,
OK? So we have two problems now. We have a policy problem, and
we have a technology problem. I can help with the technology
problem. I don't know what I can do about the policy problem,
when you say, we are not the arbiters of truth. So I think we
have to have a serious look at how to put more pressure on the
technology sector, whether that's regulatory, or legislative,
or advertising, or public pressure, and they have to start
getting serious as to how their platforms are being weaponized
to great effect in disrupting elections, and inciting violence,
and sowing civil unrest. I don't think they've quite come to
grips with that reality.
Mr. Lucas. Well, when that moment comes, and inevitably it
will, in your opinion, what will that collaboration look like?
There's a government element, there's an academic element,
there's a public-private partnership element.
Dr. Farid. Yes.
Mr. Lucas. Can you just----
Dr. Farid. Sure.
Mr. Lucas [continuing]. Daydream for a moment here with me?
Dr. Farid. So I think the good news is the Facebooks and
the Googles of the world have started to reach out to
academics, myself included, Professor Lyu included. We now
receive research funding to help them develop technology.
That's good. I think the role of the government is to coax them
along with regulatory pressure. I think what we've noticed over
the last 20 years of self-regulation is not working. I'd like
it to work, but it doesn't work in this particular space.
So I think the role of the government can be through
oversight, it can be regulatory, it can be through a cyber
ethics panel that is convened to talk about the serious issues
of how technology is being weaponized in society. But very much
I think the academic/industry model has to work, because most
of the research that we are talking about is happening at the
academic side of things, and obviously the industry has
different incentives than we do in the academy, so I think
there is room for everybody.
I'll also mention this is not bounded by U.S. borders. This
is very much an international problem, so we should be looking
across the pond to our friends in the UK, in the EU, and New
Zealand, and Australia, and Canada, and bringing everybody on
board because this is a problem for not just us, but for the
whole world.
Mr. Lucas. One last question. In your written testimony you
suggest there's a non-technological component to solving the
problem related to deep fakes and disinformation. Specifically,
you wrote that we need to educate the public on how to consume
trusted information, and how to be better digital citizens.
What should this public education initiative----
Dr. Farid. Yes.
Mr. Lucas [continuing]. Look like?
Dr. Farid. I'm always reluctant to say this, because I know
how taxed our schools are in this country, but at some point
this is an educational issue, starting from grade school on the
way up. And, as an educator, I think this is our role. We have
to have digital citizenry classes. Some of the European
countries have done this. France is starting to do this, the UK
is starting to do it. Public service announcements (PSAs)
explaining to people how information can be trusted, what
disinformation is, but we've got to start taking more seriously
how we educate the next generation, and the current generation.
And whether that's through the schools, through PSAs, through
industry sponsored PSAs, you know, I think all of those are
going to be needed.
Mr. Lucas. And you would agree that our technology giant
friends have a role in that education process?
Dr. Farid. They absolutely have a role. They made this
mess, they need to help fix it.
Mr. Lucas. Very concise. Thank you, Doctor. I yield back,
Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you, Mr. Lucas. And now, Ms.
Wexton, I recognize you for 5 minutes.
Ms. Wexton. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to the
panelists for appearing today. I want to speak a little bit
about the explosive growth that the major social platforms have
experienced over the past few years, because I'm worried that
these companies are more focused on growth, and getting more
users, than they are about essential oversight and user support
functions. And, in fact, as has been noted, they disclaim
responsibility for any information that goes out onto the web
by the users. And, in fact, it seems to me that they have a
disincentive to purge suspicious, or fake, or bot accounts.
You know, I have here an article from July of last year,
where Twitter's stock price went down by about eight and a half
percent after they purged, over the course of two months, 70
million suspicious accounts. Now, don't feel too bad for
Twitter, because their stock price went up 75 percent over that
six month period, but, you know, by being socially responsible,
or by being responsible, it hurt their bottom line.
Now, the platforms are incredibly powerful. We have already
seen the power that they have here in the capitol, not just
because of the lobbyists and everything, but because we all use
them. We all have those platforms on our phones, and on our
various devices. And, Dr. Farid, you spoke a little bit about
how the basic features of the technology and the business model
at social media companies kind of help exacerbate the
proliferation of disinformation. Can you explain, from a
business perspective, what benefit a bot account or a fake
account might represent for a social media company?
Dr. Farid. Sure. So, first of all, I think you're
absolutely right that growth has been priority No. 1. And
because the metrics of Silicon Valley are number of users,
number of minutes online, it's because that's what eventually
leads to advertising dollars. What we have to understand is
that Silicon Valley, for better or worse, today is driven by ad
revenue, and ad revenue is optimized by having more engagement,
OK? So fake account, real account, don't care. Fake like, real
like, fake tweet, doesn't matter, right, because at the end of
the day, you get to report big numbers to the advertisers who
are going to pay more money. Whether 50 percent of those
accounts are fake or not, who's to know?
So that's the underlying poison, if you will, of Silicon
Valley, I think, and is the reason why the system is entirely
frictionless, by design. There's no friction to creating an
account on Twitter, or on Facebook, or on YouTube, because they
want that to be easy. They want bots to be able to create these
things because that is what elevates the numbers. And I think
this is sort of our core problem that we have here.
Ms. Wexton. So, related to that, why would social media
companies allow, or even encourage, their recommendation
algorithms to----
Dr. Farid. Good.
Ms. Wexton [continuing]. Put people, you know, to direct
users to----
Dr. Farid. Good.
Ms. Wexton [continuing]. Suggested videos, or things like
that, that are sensational, or even false? Why would they do
that?
Dr. Farid. The metric on YouTube is engagement, how long do
you stay on the platform? And so what the algorithms learn is
that, if I show you a video that is conspiratorial, or
outrageous, you are more likely to click on it and watch it. If
you are more likely to click or watch, you're going to stay on
the platform longer, right? So the algorithms are not trying to
radicalize you. What they are trying to do is to keep you on
the platform for as long as possible. And it turns out, in the
same way that people will eat candy all day long instead of
broccoli, people will watch crazy videos all day long instead
of PBS. I don't think this is surprising. And so the underlying
algorithms, what they are being optimized for, in part, is
exactly this.
And we have been studying the nature of these conspiracy
videos for over a year now, and I will tell you that, despite
claims to the contrary, there is a rabbit-hole effect, that
once you start watching the slightly crazy conspiratorial
videos, you will get more and more and more of that because you
are more likely to click, you are more likely to view, they're
going to get more data, and they're going to sell more
advertising. That's the underlying business model, is how long
do you stay on my platform? And, in that regard, the quality of
the information is utterly unimportant to the platforms. It is
what keeps you there.
Ms. Wexton. So maybe we should all have more cats and
kittens, and less conspiracy?
Dr. Farid. I'm all for cat videos.
Ms. Wexton. So, switching gears a little bit, yesterday
this Committee--we marked up a bill, it was Congressman
Gonzalez's bill, that would expand research into technologies
to help us better identify deep fake videos. And I had an
amendment which was made in order, and approved by the
Committee, to help increase education to help people identify
deep fake videos, and so I was encouraged to hear you talk
about that. So I would inquire of the panel, do you have any
advice on what the most important elements of a public
education campaign on deep fake videos should be?
Dr. Farid. Again, you know, I am reluctant to put this on
our public schools. I think they are overtaxed, and overworked,
and underfunded. But at the end of the day, this is sort of
where it belongs. And I think if we can do this, not as an
unfunded mandate, but actually give them the resources to
create courses of digital citizenry, of how you are a better
digital citizen, how you can trust information and not trust
information.
I'll point out too, though, by the way, it's not just the
young people. The senior citizens among us are more likely to
share fake news than the young people, so this is across the
spectrum. So I'm more--this--for me, the education level is
more about the next 20, 30, 40 years than necessarily today. So
I think a combination of PSAs, about returning to trusted
sources, and about educating kids not just, by the way, about
trusted information, but how to be a better digital citizen,
how to interact with each other. The vitriol that we see online
is absolutely horrific, and the things that we accept online we
would never accept in a room like this, and I think we have to
start teaching the next generation that this is not a way that
we interact with each other. We need a more civil discourse.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you, Dr. Farid. And I'd now like
to recognize Mr. Biggs for 5 minutes.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I appreciate each of
the witnesses for being here. It's a very, very interesting
hearing, and appreciate the Chair for convening this hearing.
So one of the main things I'm worried about is the de facto
gray area between misinformation and disinformation, despite
the seemingly clear definitional difference between these
concepts. While disinformation may be defined in terms of the
malicious intent on the part of the sender, such intent, as
we've seen today, can at times be very difficult to identify.
And then, on top of that, we need to make sure the gatekeepers,
themselves trying to police content, are objective. Objective
enough to identify potential misinformation, and able to do so
as expeditiously as possible.
It seems to me that, even if we have the technological
anti-disinformation tools that we've learned about in this
discussion, and that we anticipate seeing developed over time,
human judgment will always be a key component of any anti-deep
fakes effort, and human judgment can, of course, be fallible.
In short, the difficulties and nuances of the battle pile up
the deeper we delve into this topic. Maybe that's why I find it
so interesting to hear what you all have to say today.
But I want to just get back to something, and I would say I
feel like we've been doing what I would call an endogenous
look, and that is what's the technology here? And you mentioned
it, Dr. Farid, in item four on page four of your
recommendations in your written report, but it really gets to
what I think is a real-world problem I'd like all of you to
respond to, and the last questioner just kind of touched on it
a bit as well. What do you tell a 13- or 14-year-old that
you're trying to warn of potential disinformation,
misinformation? How do you do it as a parent, as a grandparent,
as someone who cares for, loves, an individual. I mean, that
really becomes a part of the equation as much as anything else
on the technological side.
Dr. Lyu. Well, thank you for asking the question, because
the nature of my work, I usually show a lot of fake videos to
my 12-year-old daughter, and she actually grow the habit of
distrust for any video I showed to her. So I think this may be
a very effective way to actually tell them--to show them that
the existence of fake videos will make them aware that those
are something they should be careful about.
Ms. Francois. I can take the question on, you know, what
goes beyond technology, and I want to talk about one specific
example. I think, when you look at the most sophisticated
campaigns that have leveraged disinformation, and we're talking
about actors who are willingly doing this, there's still a lot
that we don't know. So, back to the Russian example, for
instance, which is largely seen as the best-documented
campaign, right, on which the platforms have shared a lot of
data. I have myself worked with the Senate Select Intelligence
Committee to document what happened. There are still essential
pieces of that campaign that we know nothing about, and on
which there's no data, in the eye of the public, to really
understand how that technology was leveraged to manipulate
audiences, direct messages, and how the Russians used to target
deliberately specific journalists to feed them sources. We
don't know anything about the scale of how much of that was
going on.
Similarly, what the GRU was doing, alongside the IRA, is
something that there's zero available data on. So I would go
back to those important and large-scale campaigns that we know
have really disrupted society and interrogate, where are our
blind spots? How can we do better? How can we produce this data
so that we actually are able to fully understand those tactics?
And then, of course, to build the tools to detect it, but also
to train people to understand it, and to build defense.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you. Dr. Farid? What are you going to tell
your kid?
Dr. Farid. I, fortunately, don't have kids, so I don't have
to struggle with this problem.
Mr. Biggs. They're a blessing and a curse.
Dr. Farid. I think this is difficult, because the fact is
this generation is growing up on social media----
Mr. Biggs. Yes.
Dr. Farid [continuing]. And they are not reading The
Washington Post, and The New York Times, and MSNBC, and Fox
News. They think about information very differently. And I can
tell you what I tell my students, which is, do not confuse
information with knowledge. Those are very different things.
And I think there is this tendency that it's online, therefore
it must be true. And so my job as an educator is to make you
critically think about what you are reading. And I don't know
how to do that on a sort of day-to-day basis, but I do that
every day with my students, which is critical reasoning. And
with critical reasoning, I think everything comes.
And, if I may, I wanted to touch one--because I think you
made a good point about the--sort of the nuance between mis-
and disinformation, and we should acknowledge that there are
going to be difficult calls. There is going to be content
online that falls into this gray area that it's not clear what
it is, but there is black and white things out there, and we
should start dealing with that right now, and then we'll deal
with that gray area when we need to, but let's not get
confounded with that gray area, and not deal with the real
clear cut harmful content.
Mr. Biggs. Right. So information's not knowledge. I'd like
to tell people in Congress, activity is not progress either,
so, I mean, we----
Dr. Farid. We agree on that.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you, Mr. Biggs. And next I would
like to recognize Mr. Beyer for 5 minutes.
Mr. Beyer. Madam Chair, thank you very much. Dr.--Ms.
Francois--so Dr. Lyu talked about funding more civilian
research through the National Science Foundation, and setting
up an emerging technologies directorate, and you spoke about
this emerging field of interdisciplinary scholars,
practitioners, that needed support, funding, and shared
infrastructure. How best do you see us making that happen? Do
we need congressional legislation? How big a budget does it
have to be? Is it only NSF, or NIST (National Institutes of
Standards and Technology), or----
Ms. Francois. That's a great question, thank you. I think
it can be a whole of government effort, and I do think that a
series of institutions have to get involved, because indeed, as
I say, it's very interdisciplinary. I do think that regulation
has to play a role too, not only to address those critical and
complex questions, like the one of data access that I
discussed.
I want to build on a point that Dr. Farid made about the
algorithmic reinforcement, as an example. This is something
that we know is impacting society. People watch one video, and
seem to end up in a filter bubble of conspirational video. But,
unfortunately, we have very little serious research on the
matter. We are making those observations on a purely empirical
basis out of, you know, people who let their computers run. We
can't afford to be in the dark on the impact of technology on
society like this. And in order to do serious scientific
research on those impacts at scale, we need data, and we need
the infrastructure to systematically measure and assess how
this technology is impacting our society.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you very much. Dr. Farid, I was fascinated
you talked about determining what's real, rather than what's
fake, and specifically talking about the control capture
technologies. We've had a number of Science Committee hearings
on blockchain technology, which inevitably lead into quantum
computing (QC) technology. Is blockchain, and ultimately QC,
the right way to deal with this?
Dr. Farid. I think blockchain can play a role here. So the
basic idea, for those who don't know, blockchain--basically all
you have to know is that it's an immutable distributed ledger.
So immutable, when you put information on there, it doesn't
change. Distributed as it's not stored on one central server,
but on millions of computers, so you don't have to rely on
trust of one individual.
So one version of control capture is, at the point of
capture, you extract that unique signature, cryptographically
sign it, and you put that signature on the blockchain for
public viewing of it, and public access to it. It's a very nice
application of blockchain. I don't think it's critical to the
solution. If you have a trusted central server, I think that
would work well, but the reason why people like the blockchain
is that I don't have to trust a Facebook, or an Apple, or a
Microsoft, I can trust the globe. So I do see that as being
part of the control capture environment, and being part of the
solution of a universal standard that says, if you want your
content to be trusted, take it with this control capture, and
then we can trust that going down the line. I think we're
eventually going to get there. I think it's just a matter of
time.
Mr. Beyer. And, Dr. Lyu, how would you contrast
watermarking technology with the blockchain, with the control
capture? And is one better than the other, or do you need both,
or----
Dr. Lyu. I think these technologies are somehow
complementary. So watermark is the content you actually embed
into the image, and blockchains are ways to actually
authenticate if the watermark is consistent with the original
contents we invited into the signal. So they can work together.
You can imagine that we have watermark also being part of the
blockchain, uploaded to the remote distributed serer. So they
can work hand in hand in this case. But watermarks can also
work independently from a single capture control mechanism for
authenticity of digital visual media.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you. And Ms.----
Dr. Lyu. Thank you.
Mr. Beyer. Ms. Francois, again, you talked about how the
big data players, the Facebooks and Twitters, obviously are a
huge part of the potential problem--source material, and have
to be part of the solution, and you mentioned regulation as one
of the pieces of the NSF/NIST piece. Not that you can do it in
45 seconds, but anything that you guys can prepare to help our
Energy and Commerce Committee, the committees in both houses,
looking at how we manage the social media giants would be very,
very appreciated. Because understanding how they've gone from
basically unregulated unicorn game changers in our society, to
how they can properly play within the rules, is going to be a
really, really big challenge for us.
Ms. Francois. I think it's going to be a lot of moving
pieces. It's a complex problem, as I said, and I do believe
that there's a lot of different bodies of regulation that can
be applied and brought to bear to tackle it. One that is often
left out of the conversation that I just want to highlight here
is consumer protection. Dr. Farid talked about how the
advertisers are getting the fake clicks. This can be a consumer
protection issue. So different bodies of regulation, from cyber
security to consumer protection, to address a whole of the
disinformation problem, plus serious pressure to ensure that
the data that the field needs is being shared in a way that
makes it--for people.
Mr. Beyer. Yes. Thank you very much, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you. Next I'd recognize Mr.
Waltz for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Ms. Francois, going
back to the disinformation campaigns that the Russians, the
Iranians, and others have ongoing, the FBI and Department of
Homeland Security have briefed us that they're confident, at
least at this point in time, that active hacking into our
election infrastructure has diminished, at least for now.
Although I, and other colleagues, have worked to ensure
that critical infrastructure is secured going forward, and this
Committee has done work on that as well, but I'm interested in
the disinformation piece of it, are you seeing increasing
evidence of our adversaries conducting disinformation against
individuals, whether they're thought leaders, journalists,
politicians? For example, I could foresee hawks on Iran policy,
or Russia, or others being specifically targeted during an
election in order to change that election outcome, and
therefore change our policy and voices. Are you seeing an
increase there? What types of techniques are you seeing, and
where are you seeing it, aside from the United States?
One of the things that I've pushed is for us to share what
we're gathering. For example, the Taiwanese elections, or other
elections, for us to create a collaborative approach with our
allies as well. This is a problem with the West, and I think
with free speech and free thought, as much as it is with, you
know, 2020 elections. And I'd welcome your thought.
And then second, sorry, what would you think the response
would be if we took more of a deterrence measure? For example,
sending the signal that the Iranians, the Russians, and other
bad actors, they have their own processes, and they have their
own concerns, and often these regimes are more concerned with
their own survival than they are with anything else, and at
least demonstrating that we have that capability to interfere
as well. I know that may present a lot of moral and ethical
questions of whether we should have that capability, and
whether we should demonstrate we should use it, but we've
certainly taken that approach with nuclear weapons. And so I'd
welcome your thoughts there.
Ms. Francois. Thank you. I want to start by saying that
part of it--yes, I am seeing an increase. Part of it is an
increase, the other part is simply just a reckoning, as I said.
Iran is a good example. We see a lot of disinformation
campaigns originating from the Iranian state, who's a very
prolific actor in that space.
Now, people often ask me, is Iran following the Russian
model. In reality the first Iranian campaign to use social
media to target U.S. audiences date back from 2013, where we
were asleep at the wheel, and not looking for them. So, despite
our reckoning with sort of the diversity of actors who have
been engaged with these techniques to target us, there is also
an increase in both their scale and their sophistication. This
is a cat-and-mouse game, and so what we also see is, as we
detect actors and their techniques, they increase the
sophistication. They make it harder for us to do the forensics
that we need in order to catch those campaigns as they unfold.
Thank you for raising the question of deterrence. I do
think that this ultimately is a cyber policy issue too, and
therefore the government has a role to play. In the case of the
U.S. midterms in 2018, we saw U.S. Cyber Command target the
Internet Research Agency in St. Petersburg in an act of this
attempted cyber deterrence. So I do think that there is a
governmental response too by putting this problem in the
broader context of cyber issue and cyber conflict.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you for raising that. I think it's
important for my colleagues to note that was a policy change
under this Administration that then allowed Cyber Command to
take those kind of, what they call active defensive measures,
and taking election security very seriously. I want to
distinguish, though, between active defense and the potential,
at least, and sending the signal that we have the potential for
offense. And your thoughts there on the United States also
participating in disinformation, or at least a deterrent
capability?
At the end of the day I think we can only do so much in
playing defense here. We can only counter so much of this cat-
and-mouse game. We have to fundamentally change our
adversaries' behavior, and put them at risk, and their regimes
at risk, in my own view. But I'd welcome your thoughts in my
remaining time.
Ms. Francois. Yes, I think the--8 minutes to answer this
complex question on the dynamics of deterrence and resilience
in cyberspace. I will say what immediately comes to mind is, of
course, a question of escalation. How much of these dynamics
contribute to escalation is something that is an unknown in
this space.
So far I think that the approach of being much more
aggressive in both catching these campaigns, deactivating them,
and publicly claiming that we have found them, and this is what
they look like, seems to be a welcome move in this area. I
think by exposing what actors are doing, we are also
contributing to raising the cost for them to engaging in these
techniques.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Well, that was well done----
Mr. Waltz. Thank you.
Chairwoman Sherrill [continuing]. Ms. Francois. Thank you.
Next I recognize Mr. Gonzalez for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for
being here, to our witnesses, and your work on this topic. A
very important topic, and one that's a little bit new to
Congress, but one that, alongside of Madam Chair, and others on
this Committee, we've been excited to lead on, and I think
we're making progress, unlike some other areas of Congress that
I'm a part of.
So, that being said, Dr. Lyu, I want to start with you, and
I really just want to understand kind of where we are in the
technology, from the standpoint of cost. So if, call it 2
decades ago, I used the Forrest Gump example, yesterday. You
know, Forrest Gump, if you've seen the movie, makes it looks
like he's shaking hands with Presidents, and all kinds of
things, and you can't tell the difference, except for you just
know that there's no way that happened. Hollywood studio
could've produced that, but it was costly back then, right,
however much it costs. Today I think some numbers came out that
you were citing that as, you know, roughly a couple thousand
dollars. How quickly is the cost going down, to the point that
this will be a weapon, if you will, that, you know, a 16-year-
old sitting behind his computer could pull off?
Dr. Lyu. I think this is basically, you know, we used to
call this Moore's Law, where the computational power just got
doubled every 18 months, and I think Moore's Law has already
been broken with the coming of GPUs. The computational power
that are at our hand is extremely higher than we have imagined
before, and this trend is growing. So I will predict in the
coming years it will become cheaper and easier, and also better
to produce these kind of videos, and the computer hardware and
algorithms will all get rapid improvements.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes.
Dr. Lyu. So that's coming. I think it's a coming event.
Thank you.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thanks. And I actually think, you know, we
talk a lot about great power competition in Iran, and China,
and Russia, and I think that makes sense. I'm also maybe
equally concerned about just a random person somewhere in
society who has access to this, and can produce these videos
without any problem, and the damage that that can cause. And I
don't know that we've talked enough about that, frankly.
But switching to Ms. Francois, you talked about how you
found 70 countries use computational propaganda techniques in
your analysis. And obviously a lot of this is spread through
the platforms, and I think you talked really well about just
how you can go down rabbit holes in the engagement metrics, and
things like that. What do you think, and Dr. Farid, I'd welcome
your comments as well, what do the platforms themselves need to
be doing differently? Because it strikes me that they're being
somewhat, or I would say, I would argue grossly irresponsible
with how they manage some of the content on their systems
today.
Ms. Francois. That's a great question. I just want it
precise that the 70 countries method comes from the Oxford
Internet Institute report that was published today.
Mr. Gonzalez. OK. Thank you.
Ms. Francois. For me, the platform's play here is actually
quite simple, and I would say clearer roles, more aggressive
action, more transparency.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes.
Ms. Francois. Let's start with clearer roles. Some
platforms still don't have a rule that governments are not
allowed to leverage their services in order to manipulate and
deceive. And they will say they have rules that kind of go to
this point, you know, tangentially, but there's still a lot of
more clear rules that need to be established. To the second
point, aggressive enforcement. There's still a lot of these
campaigns that go under the radar, and that go undetected. They
need to put the means to the table to make sure that they
actually are able to catch, and detect, and take down as much
of this activity as possible. My team, this week, published a
large report on a spam campaign that was targeting Hong Kong
protestors from Chinese accounts, and then they----
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes.
Ms. Francois [continuing]. Had to take it down. There's
more that they can do. Finally, transparency. It's very
important that the platform continue, and increase, their
degree of transparency in saying what they're seeing on their
services, what they're taking down, and share the data back to
the field.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes. I think that makes a lot of sense. My
fear is, you know, we're going to do the best we can. I don't
know that, one, this is intellectually difficult to figure out,
as Congress, and it's also politically difficult, which, to me,
puts it in that, like, Never Never Land, if it's going to take
a while. So my hope is that the social medial platforms
understand their responsibility, and come to the forefront with
exactly what you said, because if not, I don't know that we're
going to get it right, frankly.
But with my final question, I'll throw just the word mental
health, and the platforms themselves, and misinformation. Any
studies that you're aware of that are showing the impacts on
mental health, in particular teenagers, with respect to what's
going on on the platforms today? Anybody can answer that.
Ms. Francois. Again, I want to say that in this field we
direly lack the data, infrastructure, and access to be able to
do robust at-scale studies. So there is a variety of wonderful
studies that are doing their best with small and more
qualitative approaches, which are really, really important, but
we're still direly lacking an important piece of doing rigorous
research in this area.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you. And I'll follow up with additional
questions on how we can get that data, and be smarter about
that in Congress. So, thank you, I yield back.
Mr. Beyer [presiding]. Thank you very much, sir. Dr. Farid,
I understand you developed a seminal tool for Microsoft called
PhotoDNA that detects and weeds out child pornography as it's
posted online. Can you talk about how this tool works? Could
this be used to address harmful memes and doctored images? And
how do the social media companies respond to this?
Dr. Farid. So PhotoDNA was a technology that I developed in
2008-2009 in collaboration with Microsoft and the National
Center for Missing and Exploited Children (NCMEC). Its goal was
to find and remove the most horrific child sexual abuse
material (CSAM) online. The basic idea is that the technology
reaches into an image, extracts a robust digital signature that
will allow us to identify that same piece of material when it
is reuploaded. NCMEC is currently home to 80 million known
child sexual abuse material, and so we can stop the
proliferation and redistribution of that content.
Last year alone, in one year, the National Center for
Missing and Exploited Children's CyberTipline received 18
million reports of CSAM being distributed online. That's 2,000
an hour. 97, 98 percent of that material was found with
PhotoDNA. It has been used for over a decade, and has been
highly effective. Two more things. That same core technology
can be used, for example, to find the Christchurch video, the
Speaker Pelosi video, the memes that are known to be viral and
dangerous. Once content is detected, the signature can be
extracted, and we can stop the redistribution.
And to your question of how the technology companies
respond, I think the answer is not well. They were asked in
2003 to do something about the global distribution of child
sexual abuse material, and for 5 years they stalled, they did
absolutely nothing. We're not talking about complicated issues
here, gray areas. We are talking about 4-year-olds, 6-year-
olds, 8-year-olds being violently raped, and the images and the
videos of them, through these horrific acts, being distributed
online. And the moral compass of Silicon Valley for the last
decade has been so fundamentally broken they couldn't wrap
their heads around their responsibility to do something about
that.
That doesn't bode well, by the way, for going forward, so I
think that history is really important, and we have to remember
that they come begrudgingly to these issues, and so we have to
coax them along the way.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you very much. So there--these images have
digital signatures, even before we talk about the capture
control technology----
Dr. Farid. Yes.
Mr. Beyer [continuing]. Or the watermark----
Dr. Farid. That's exactly right. These don't have to be
captured with specific hardware. So what we do is, after the
point of recording, we reach in and we find a distinct
signature that will allow us to identify, with extremely high
reliability, that same piece of content. And that can be child
abuse material, it can be a bomb-making video, it can be a
conspiracy video, it can be copyright infringement material. It
can be anything.
Mr. Beyer. But it has to show up first----
Dr. Farid. That's right.
Mr. Beyer [continuing]. In the public space----
Dr. Farid. Yes.
Mr. Beyer [continuing]. At least once, and we have to know
that it's there in order to capture this----
Dr. Farid. That's the drawback. But the good news is that
technology works at scale. It works at the scale of a billion
uploads to Facebook a day, and 500 hours of YouTube videos a
minute. And that's a really hard engineering problem to tackle,
but this technology actually works, unlike many of the other
algorithms that have extremely high error rates, and would
simply have too many mistakes.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you very much. Dr. Lyu, you talked about
using AI to find AI, and that more deep neural networks are
used to detect the fakes, but there's the sense that the good
guys are always trying to catch up with the bad guys, you know,
the cat-and-mouse. Is there any way around the cat-and-mouse
nature of the problem? Which, by the way, we just saw before,
it's got to be out there before you can tag it and chase it
down.
Dr. Lyu. That's a very good question. Actually, I think on
this point, I'm more pessimistic because I don't think there's
a way we can escape that, because that's the very nature of
this kind of problem. Unlike other research areas, where the
problem's fixed, we're basically dealing with a moving target.
Whenever we have new detection or deterrent algorithms, the
adversaries will always try to improve their algorithm to beat
us. So I think, in the long run, this will be the situation
that will keep going.
But I--that also emphasize Dr. Farid's point that we need
more investment onto the side of detection and protection for
the sake that, you know, we have a lot more resources put into
making deep fakes for, you know, all kinds of reasons, but the
investment in detection has not been catching up with that
level. So that's part of my testimony, is encouraging the
Federal Government to put more investment into this important
area. Thank you.
Mr. Beyer. Ms. Francois?
Ms. Francois. Yes, if I may add a very simple metaphor
here, I think we also have a leveling of the playing field
issue. We're currently in a situation where there are a lot of
cats, and very few mouses. We need to bring the resources to
the table that correspond to the actual scale and gravity of
the problem.
Mr. Beyer. OK. Great. Thank you very much. I now recognize
the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Gonzalez.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thanks. Didn't know I was going to get a few
extra seconds. So I just want to drill down on that data-
sharing component. So you mentioned that we just need a better
data-sharing infrastructure. Can you just take me as deep as
you can on that? What do we need specifically? Just help me
understand that.
Ms. Francois. Yes. There are many different aspects to what
we need, and I think that the--both the infrastructure, people
involved, and type of data depend on the type of usage. So, for
instance, facilitating academic access to at-scale data on the
effects of technology on society is ultimately a different
issue than ensuring that cybersecurity professionals have
access to the types of forensics that correspond to a high-
scale manipulation campaign that enables them to build better
detection tools. And so I think the first step in tackling this
problem is recognizing the different aspects of it.
Mr. Gonzalez. Got it.
Ms. Francois. Of course, the key component here is security
and privacy, which here go hand in hand. What you don't want is
to enable scenarios like Cambridge Analytica, where data abuses
lead to more manipulation. Similarly, when we see
disinformation campaigns, we often see a lot of real citizens
who are caught into these nets, and they deserve the protection
of their privacy.
If you go down sort of the first rabbit hole of ensuring
that cybersecurity professionals have access to the type of
data and associated forensics that they need in order to do
this type of detection at scale, and to build the forensics
tool we need at scale, there's still, as I said, a lot we can
do. The platforms right now are sharing some of the data that
they have on these types of campaigns, but in a completely
haphazard way. So they're free to decide when they want to
share, what they want to share, and in which format. Often the
format, they're sharing them in are very inaccessible, so my
team has worked to create a database that makes that accessible
to researchers. That's one step we can take.
And, again, and I'll wrap on that, because this can be a
deep rabbit hole----
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes.
Ms. Francois [continuing]. You pushed me down this way.
Again, if we take the Russia example, for instance when we
scope a collection around something that we consider to be of
national security importance, we need to make sure we have the
means to ensure that the picture we're looking at is
comprehensive.
Mr. Gonzalez. Right.
Ms. Francois. Our own false sense of security, in looking
at the data, thinking that they represent the comprehensive
picture of what happened, and was directed at us, is a problem
in our preparations for election security.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you. Dr. Farid, any additional thoughts
on that?
Dr. Farid. Yes. I just wanted to mention, and I think Ms.
Francois mentioned this, there is this tension between privacy
and security, and you're seeing this particularly with
Cambridge Analytica. And I will mention too that this is not,
again, just a U.S. issue, this is a global issue. And with
things like GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation), it has
made data sharing extremely more complex for the technology
sector.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes.
Dr. Farid. So, for example, we've been trying to work with
the sector to build tools to find child predators online, and
the thing we keep running up against is we can't share this
stuff because of GDPR, we can't share it because of privacy. I
think that's a little bit of a false choice, but there is a
sensitivity there that we should be aware of.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes. That's fair. I agree with you.
Certainly, I think what you highlight, which I agree with, is
there are gray areas----
Dr. Farid. Yes.
Mr. Gonzalez [continuing]. OK, but there also, like, big
bright lines. Child pornography, let's get that off our
platforms.
Dr. Farid. Yes, I agree. And feels to me like, if you share
child pornography, you have lost the right to privacy. I don't
think you have a right to privacy anymore once you've done
that, I should have access to your account. So I think there's
a little bit of a false narrative coming out here, but I still
want to recognize that there are some sensitivities,
particularly with the international standards. The Germans have
very specific rules----
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes.
Dr. Farid [continuing]. The Brits, the EU, et cetera.
Mr. Gonzalez. So the last question, and this is maybe a bit
of an oddball, so with the HN site that was ultimately brought
down, I believe Cloudflare was their host, is that----
Dr. Farid. Yes.
Mr. Gonzalez. So we talk a lot about the platforms
themselves, right, but we don't always talk about the
underlying infrastructure----
Dr. Farid. Yes.
Mr. Gonzalez [continuing]. And maybe what responsibilities
they have.
Dr. Farid. Yes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Any thoughts on that? Should we be looking
there as well?
Dr. Farid. You should. And it is complicated, because----
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes.
Dr. Farid [continuing]. When you go to a Cloudflare--as the
CEO came out and said, I woke up 1 day, and I thought, I don't
like these guys, and I'm going to kick them off my platform.
That is dangerous.
Mr. Gonzalez. That's very----
Dr. Farid. Yes. But Ms. Francois said it very well. Clear
rules, enforce the rules, transparency. We have to have due
process. So define the rules, enforce them consistently, and
tell me what you're doing. I can fix this problem for the CEO
of Cloudflare. Just tell me what the rules are. So--but I don't
think they get a bye just because they're the underlying
hardware of the Internet. I think they should be held to
exactly the same standards, and they should be held to exactly
the same standards of defining, enforcing, and transparency.
And, by the way, I'll also add that cloud services are
going to be extremely difficult. So, for example, we've made
progress with YouTube on eliminating terror content, but now
they're just moving to Google Drive, and Google is saying,
well, Google Drive is a cloud service, so it's outside of this
platform. So I do think we have to start looking at those core
infrastructures.
Mr. Gonzalez. OK. I appreciate your perspective. Frankly, I
don't know what I net out on it, I just know it's something
that I think we should be looking at----
Dr. Farid. I agree.
Mr. Gonzalez [continuing]. And weighing, so thank you.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you. Dr. Lyu, you know, Ms. Francois just
talked about a level playing field, you know, that, the bad
guys have a lot more tools and resources than the good guys.
Dr. Lyu. Right.
Mr. Beyer. We talked a lot about the perils of deep fakes,
but are there any constructive applications?
Dr. Lyu. Actually----
Mr. Beyer [continuing]. Where we want to use deep fakes in
a good way?
Dr. Lyu. Yes, indeed. Actually, the technology behind deep
fake, as I mentioned in my opening remark, is of dual use. So
there's a beneficial side of using this technology. For
instance, the movie industry can use that, reduce their costs.
There are also ways to actually make sure a message can be
broadcast to multilinguistic groups without, you know,
regenerating the media in different languages. It is also
possible to use this technology to protect privacy. For
instance, for people like whistleblowers, or, you know, victims
in violent crime. If they don't want to expose their identity,
it's possible to use this technology, replacing the face, but
leaving the facial expression intact there.
The negative effect of deep fake, this kind of technology,
you get a lot of spotlight, but there's also this dual use that
we should also be aware of. Thank you very much.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you. Ms. Francois, are there any good
bots?
Ms. Francois. Yes. They're really fun. One of them
systematically tweets out every edit to Wikipedia that is made
from the Congress Internet infrastructure. In general what I'm
trying to say is there are good bots. Some of them are fun and
creative, and I think they do serve the public interest. I do
not think that there are good reasons to use an army of bots in
order to do coordinated amplification of content. I think when
you are trying to manipulate the behavior to make it look like
a broader number of people are in support of your content than
actually is the case, I do not see any particularly good use of
that.
Mr. Beyer. I want to send you one of my daughter's bots.
She has a perfectly normal Twitter account, and then she has
the Twitter bot account, where she leverages off of her
linguistics background, and I cannot make heads nor tails of
what it does. But perhaps----
Ms. Francois [continuing]. Can look at it.
Mr. Beyer [continuing]. You can. Yes, it's----
Ms. Francois. OK.
Mr. Beyer. She says it's OK. Dr. Farid, you talked--it
would be a mistake for the tech giants to transform their
system from end-to-end encrypted systems, that would make the
problem only worse. Can you walk us through that?
Dr. Farid. Sure, and I'm glad you asked the question. So
let's talk about what end-to-end encryption is. So the idea is
I type a message on my phone, it gets encrypted, and sent over
the wire. Even if it's a Facebook service, Facebook cannot read
the message. Under a lawful warrant, you cannot read the
message. Nobody can read the message until the receiver
receives it, and then they decrypt. So that's called an end-to-
end encryption. Everything in the middle is completely
invisible. WhatsApp, for example, owned by Facebook, is end-to-
end encrypted, and it is why, by the way, WhatsApp has been
implicated in horrific violence in Sri Lanka, in the
Philippines, in Myanmar, in India. It has been linked with
election tampering in Brazil, in India, and other parts of the
world, because nobody knows what's going on on the platform.
So last year, you heard me say, 18 million reports to the
National Center for Child Sexual Abuse Material, more than half
of those came from Facebook Messenger, currently unencrypted.
If they encrypt, guess what happens? Ten million images of
child sexual abuse material, I can no longer see. This is a
false pitting of privacy over security, and it's completely
unnecessary. We can run PhotoDNA, the technology that I
described earlier, on the client so that, when you type the
message and attach an image, we can extract that signature.
That signature is privacy preserving, so even if I hand it to
you, you won't be able to reconstruct the image, and I can send
that hash, that signature, along with the encrypted message,
over wire, pull the hash off, compare it to a database, and
then stop the transmission.
And I will mention, by the way, when Facebook tells you
that this is all about privacy, is that on WhatsApp, their
service, if somebody sends you a link, and that link is
malware, it's dangerous to you, it will be highlighted in the
message. How are they doing that? They are reading your
message. Why? For security purposes. Can we please agree that
protecting you from malware is at least as important as
protecting 4-year-olds and 6-year-olds and 8-year-olds from
physical sexual abuse?
We have the technology to do this, and the rush to end-to-
end encryption, which, by the way, I think is a head fake.
They're using Cambridge Analytica to give them plausible
deniability on all the other issues that we have been trying to
get them--progress on, from child sexual abuse, to terrorism,
to conspiracies, to disinformation. If they end-to-end encrypt,
we will lose the ability to know what's going on on their
platforms, and you have heard very eloquently from my colleague
that this will be a disaster. You should not let them do this
without putting the right safeguards in place.
Mr. Beyer. So you were just making a powerful argument now
for national and international level banning end-to-end
encryption?
Dr. Farid. I wouldn't go that far. We want end-to-end
encryption for banking, for finance. There are places where it
is the right thing to do, but there are other places where we
have to simply think about the balance. So, for example, in my
solution I didn't say don't do end-to-end encryption. I said
put the safeguards in place so that if somebody's transmitting
harmful content, I can know about it.
I have mixed feelings about the end-to-end encryption, but
I think, if you want to do it, and we should think seriously
about that, you can still put the safeguards in place.
Mr. Beyer. And blockchain is not end-to-end encryption?
Dr. Farid. No, it is not.
Mr. Beyer. But it gets close?
Dr. Farid. These are sort of somewhat orthogonal separate
issues, right? What we are talking about is a controlled
platform saying that--everything that comes through us, we will
no longer be able to see. That is super convenient for the
Facebooks of the world, who don't want to be held accountable
for the horrible things happening on their platforms, and I
think that's the core issue here.
Mr. Beyer. Great, thanks. Anything else? All right. I think
Mr. Gonzalez and I are done and thank you very much. It's a
very, very interesting mission, and don't be discouraged that
there weren't more Members here, because everyone's in their
office watching this, and have their own questions. So thank
you very much for being here, and thanks for your witness
stuff. And the record will remain open for 2 weeks for
additional statements from the Members, and, additionally, we
may have questions of you to answer in writing. So thank you
very much.
Dr. Farid. OK.
Mr. Beyer. You're excused, and the hearing is adjourned.
Dr. Farid. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 3:26 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
Appendix
----------
Additional Material for the Record
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]