- DOE MODERNIZATION: THE OFFICE OF CYBERSECURITY, ENERGY SECURITY, AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
DOE MODERNIZATION: THE OFFICE OF CYBER-
SECURITY, ENERGY SECURITY, AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
SEPTEMBER 27, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-170
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-776 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman
Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee
GENE GREEN, Texas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi
G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey
DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
JERRY McNERNEY, California
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
PETER WELCH, Vermont
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
PAUL TONKO, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
SCOTT H. PETERS, California
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
(ii)
Subcommittee on Energy
FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman
Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
SCOTT H. PETERS, California
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
GENE GREEN, Texas
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi
MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
KATHY CASTOR, Florida
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
PAUL TONKO, New York
BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
Massachusetts
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
officio)
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
3
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................
4
Prepared statement...........................................
5
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
8
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................
9
Prepared statement...........................................
10
Witness
Karen Evans, Assistant Secretary, Office of Cybersecurity, Energy
Security, and Emergency Response, Department of Energy.........
11
Prepared statement...........................................
14
Answers to submitted questions \1\...........................
58
Submitted Material
Report of the Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy
Reliability, Department of Energy, ``Multiyear Plan for Energy
Sector Cybersecurity,'' March 2018, submitted by Mr. Upton \2\
Letter of January 24, 2018, from Mr. Walden, et al., to Rick
Perry, Secretary, Department of Energy, submitted by Mr. Upton.
46
Letter of March 13, 2018, from Rick Perry, Secretary, Department
of Energy, to Mr. Walden, submitted by Mr. Upton...............
49
Letter of September 26, 2018, from American Public Power
Association, et al., to Hon. Paul D. Ryan, Speaker of the House
of Representatives, submitted by Mr. Upton.....................
56
----------
\1\ Ms. Evans did not answer submitted questions by the closing
of the record.
\2\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at
https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID
=108725.
DOE MODERNIZATION: THE OFFICE OF CYBERSECURITY, ENERGY SECURITY, AND
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
----------
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 27, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:16 a.m., in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Fred Upton
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Member present: Representatives Upton, Olson, Barton,
Shimkus, Latta, McKinley, Griffith, Johnson, Long, Flores,
Mullin, Hudson, Walberg, Duncan, Walden (ex officio), Rush,
McNerney, Welch, Tonko, Schrader, Kennedy, and Pallone (ex
officio).
Staff present: Samantha Bopp, Staff Assistant; Kelly
Collins, Legislative Clerk, Energy and Environment; Margaret
Tucker Fogarty, Staff Assistant; Jordan Haverly, Policy
Coordinator, Environment; Ryan Long, Deputy Staff Director;
Mary Martin, Chief Counsel, Energy and Environment; Sarah
Matthews, Press Secretary, Energy and Environment; Drew
McDowell, Executive Assistant; Brandon Mooney, Deputy Chief
Counsel, Energy; Brannon Rains, Staff Assistant; Mark Ratner,
Policy Coordinator; Annelise Rickert, Counsel, Energy; Peter
Spencer, Senior Professional Staff Member, Energy; Austin
Stonebraker, Press Assistant; Madeline Vey, Policy Coordinator,
Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection; Hamlin Wade, Special
Advisor for External Affairs; Rick Kessler, Minority Senior
Advisor and Staff Director, Energy and Environment; John
Marshall, Minority Policy Coordinator; Alexander Ratner,
Minority Policy Analyst; and Tuley Wright, Minority Policy
Advisor, Energy and Environment.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN
Mr. Upton. Good morning, everybody.
Today's hearing will enable the subcommittee to consider
the current setup and plans for the Department of Energy's new
Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency
Response. So the CESER office, as we fondly call it, represents
an important new element of the Department with a mission to
carry out DOE's energy security and energy emergency functions
more effectively.
Throughout this Congress, we have identified key features
of departmental modernization. These include the need for
sufficient leadership and coordinated attention across the
agency's many programs and operations to get ahead of the risks
to our modern energy systems.
To underscore this, we move through committee H.R. 5174,
the Energy Emergency Leadership Act, which would establish
permanent Assistant Secretary-level leadership over emergency
response and cybersecurity functions. While enacting this into
law takes time, I commend the Secretary of Energy for assigning
this level of leadership under his authority and for creating
the CESER office earlier this year.
And we are reminded weekly of the urgency for getting this
leadership structure up and running smoothly. The risks are
varied and complex. We have devastating weather events and
other natural hazards that can deprive communities of energy
supplies. We are seeing increasing risk to our energy delivery
systems by nation states intent on using cyber controls and
vulnerabilities to threaten to leave regions of the Nation
without power for perhaps weeks at a time. And the work to be
better prepared for these risks and to be responsive when
incidents occur is as urgent as ever.
There are critical gaps. And we have learned over the past
year that energy supplies through pipeline systems to power our
bulk electric system may not fully be coordinated within the
electric sector to prepare for or respond to cyber or other
risks. So I cosponsored H.R. 5175 to help increase DOE's
coordination with other agencies and stakeholders on this
front.
The pieces are, in fact, coming together for DOE to
confront these risks, and we now have a Senate-confirmed head
of the CESER office.
And I am pleased to welcome you this morning.
Assistant Secretary Karen Evans was sworn in about a month
ago, but her background in government suggests that she brings
some necessary skills to improve coordination across the agency
and across the Federal Government.
Prior to her recent work leading the U.S. Cyber Challenge,
a private-public partnership to reduce the skills gap in
cybersecurity, Ms. Evans served as the top information
technology official at OMB during the Bush administration,
effectively the Federal Government's chief information officer.
Prior to that, she was the Chief Information Officer at
DOE, so she knows the Department pretty well. And I would like
to learn today what other pieces are necessary to ensure that
the new office can fully carry out DOE's responsibilities.
One important area concerns the Department's role as the
specific agency for energy-related emergencies, including
cybersecurity threats to our energy systems. It would be
helpful to understand CESER's role in carrying out this
responsibility and how the Assistant Secretary plans to work
with other agencies, especially the Department of Homeland
Security. What does DOE bring to the table to enhance the
overall Federal effort to guard our energy systems against
cyber attacks and provide the resources if those attacks are
successful?
In addition, what DOE is learning from recent natural
disasters, and what additional steps it plans to take to more
effectively respond to energy supply disruptions. We heard in
an earlier hearing with the Under Secretary of Energy that the
expectations for what DOE can do in emergency exceeds its
authorities. Let's discuss what more DOE can do and work to see
if we can address the authorities.
Without question, DOE serves on the front lines in the
Federal effort to assure critical energy infrastructure
protection from all hazards. It provides the technological,
operational, and informational expertise to assist stakeholders
and other agencies. I want this hearing to help clarify just
what DOE is doing to ensure that we can meet the critical
mission.
And with that, I yield to the ranking member of the
subcommittee and my friend, Mr. Rush.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton
Today's hearing will enable the subcommittee to consider
the current setup and plans for the Department of Energy's new
Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency
Response.
The CESER office, as we have come to call it, represents an
important new element of the Department, with a mission to
carry out DOE's energy security and energy emergency functions
more effectively.
Throughout this Congress, we have identified key features
of Departmental modernization. These include the need for
sufficient leadership and coordinated attention across the
agency's many programs and operations to get ahead of the risks
to our modern energy systems. To underscore this, we moved
through committee H.R. 5174, The Energy Emergency Leadership
Act, which would establish permanent assistant-secretary-level
leadership over emergency response and cybersecurity functions.
While enacting this into law takes time, I commend the
Secretary of Energy for assigning this level of leadership,
under his authority, and for creating the CESER office this
year.
We are reminded weekly of the urgency for getting this
leadership structure up and running smoothly. The risks are
varied and complex.
We have devasting weather events and other natural hazards
that can deprive communities of energy supplies. We are seeing
increasing risks to our energy delivery systems by nation
states, intent on using cyber controls and vulnerabilities to
threaten to leave regions of the Nation without power.
The work to be better prepared for these risks, and to be
responsive when incidents occur is as urgent as ever. There are
critical gaps. We have learned over the past year that energy
supplies through pipeline systems to power our bulk electric
system may not be fully coordinated within the electric sector
to prepare for or respond to cyber or other risks. I sponsored
H.R. 5175, to help increase DOE's coordination with other
agencies and stakeholders on this front.
The pieces are coming together for the Department to help
DOE confront these risks. We now have a Senate confirmed head
of the CESER office. And I'm pleased to welcome her this
morning.
Assistant Secretary Karen Evans was sworn in just 1 month
ago, but her background in government suggests she brings some
necessary skills to improve coordination across the agency, and
across the Federal Government.
Prior to her recent work leading the U.S. Cyber Challenge,
a public private partnership to reduce the skills gap in
cybersecurity, Ms. Evans served as the top information
technology official at OMB during the Bush administration--
effectively the Federal Government's Chief Information Officer.
Prior to that she was Chief Information Officer at DOE, so she
knows the department.
I'd like to learn today what other pieces are necessary to
ensure the new Office can fully carry out DOE's
responsibilities. One important area concerns the Department's
role as a sector specific agency for energy-related
emergencies, including cybersecurity threats to our energy
systems.
It would be helpful to understand CESER's role in carrying
out this responsibility, and how the Assistant Secretary plans
to work with other agencies, especially the Department of
Homeland Security. What does DOE bring to the table to enhance
the overall Federal effort to guard our energy systems against
cyber attacks and provide the resources if those attacks are
successful?
In addition, what DOE is learning from recent natural
disasters and what additional steps it plans to take to more
effectively respond to energy supply disruptions? We heard in
an earlier hearing with the Under Secretary of Energy that the
expectations for what DOE can do in an emergency exceed its
authorities. Let's discuss what more DOE can do, and work to
see if we can address its authorities.
Without question, DOE serves on the front lines in the
Federal efforts to assure critical energy infrastructure
protection, from all hazards. It provides the technological,
operational, and informational expertise to assist stakeholders
and other agencies. I'd like this hearing to help clarify just
what DOE is doing to ensure it meets this critical mission.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS
Mr. Rush. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to
thank you for holding this important and timely hearing. And I
want to join with you to welcome Assistant Secretary Evans to
the Energy Subcommittee for the very first time.
Mr. Chairman, the issue of cybersecurity is always a
permanent component of our mindset among members of this
subcommittee, as well as the mindset of the American public, as
we have heard of many instances of cyber attacks and cyber
probes both domestically and abroad over the past few years.
As recently as April, we heard from the FERC Commissioners
that our energy grid is constantly being attacked, almost
daily, by state actors as well as by other entities who would
try to do us harm.
While we have not yet seen widespread outages due to cyber
attacks on our electric grid, it is imperative that we take
proactive steps to mitigate the risk of these attacks to the
maximum extent possible.
It is my hope, Mr. Chairman, and my expectation that
installing Assistant Secretary Evans into her new role as head
of the Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency
Response, or CESER, will go a long way in achieving that
objective.
As you know, Mr. Chairman, I have worked with my colleague
Mr. Walberg of Michigan on a bill that codifies the work that
DOE has already been conducting when we introduced H.R. 5174,
the Energy Emergency Leadership Act, back in March. I want to
acknowledge my friend Mr. Walberg for his leadership on this
issue and convey my appreciation to all of my colleagues on
both sides of the aisle for their support of the legislation
that has passed through both the subcommittee and the full
committee earlier this spring.
As you know, Mr. Chairman, H.R. 5174 would basically codify
this new position by amending Section 203(a) of the Department
of Energy Organization Act and establishing the Assistant
Secretary position responsible for cybersecurity and emergency
response issues.
The newly created Assistant Secretary will have
jurisdiction over all energy emergency and security functions
related to energy supply, infrastructure, and cybersecurity.
This bill will also authorize the new Assistant Secretary to
provide DOE technical assistance as well as support and
response capabilities with respect to energy security risks to
State, local, or Tribal governments upon request.
Mr. Chairman, this legislation, along with the work that
DOE is already doing, will go a long way in helping to protect
the Nation's electric infrastructure from hackers who would
attempt to disrupt our energy grid and cause untold harm to our
economy, our daily lives, and to our overall national security.
However, as a letter my office received yesterday, Mr.
Chairman, from the American Public Power Association, the
Edison Electric Institute, and the National Rural Electric
Cooperative Association urges, we must act in a bipartisan way
to get this bill and other legislation addressing cybersecurity
concerns out of committee and onto the House floor in a timely
manner.
As policymakers, we all want to ensure that we are
providing DOE and each of the agencies all of the authorities
and resources that they need to comprehensively address the
cyber threats that our Nation faces.
So, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to this hearing. I look
forward to Assistant Secretary Evans' feedback on this bill as
well as some of her top priorities in her new position.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rush follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Bobby L. Rush
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for holding this
important and timely hearing, and I want to welcome Assistant
Secretary Evans to the Energy Subcommittee for the first time.
Mr. Chairman, the issue of cybersecurity is always
prevalent in the minds of members of this subcommittee, as well
as in the minds of the American public, as we have heard of
many instances of cyber attacks and cyber probes, both
domestically and abroad, over the past few years.
Mr. Chairman, as recently as April we heard from the FERC
Commissioners that our energy grid is constantly being
attacked, almost daily, by state actors, as well as by other
entities who would try to do us harm.
While we have not yet seen widespread outages due to cyber
attacks on our electric grid, it is imperative that we take
proactive steps to mitigate the risk of these types of attacks,
to the maximum extent possible.
It is my hope and expectation that installing Assistant
Secretary Evans into her new role as head of the Office of
Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response, or
CESER, will go a long way in achieving that objective.
Mr. Chairman, as you know, I have worked with my colleague,
Mr. Walberg of Michigan, on a bill to codify some of the work
that DOE has already been conducting when we introduced H.R.
5174, the Energy Emergency Leadership Act, back in March.
I want to acknowledge Mr. Walberg for his leadership on
this issue and convey my appreciation to all of my colleagues
from both sides of the aisle for their support of the
legislation as it passed through the both subcommittee and full
committee earlier this spring.
As you know, Mr. Chairman, H.R. 5174 would basically codify
this new position by amending Section 203(a) of the Department
of Energy Organization Act and establishing the Assistant
Secretary position responsible for cybersecurity and emergency
response issues.
The newly created Assistant Secretary would have
jurisdiction over all energy emergency and security functions
related to energy supply, infrastructure, and cybersecurity.
Mr. Chairman, this bill would also authorize the new
Assistant Secretary to provide DOE technical assistance as well
as support and response capabilities with respect to energy
security risks to State, local, or Tribal governments upon
request.
Mr. Chairman, this legislation, along with the work that
DOE is already doing, will go a long way in helping to protect
the Nation's electric infrastructure from hackers who would
attempt to disrupt our energy grid and cause untold harm to our
economy, our daily lives, and to our overall national security.
However, as the letter my office received yesterday from
the American Public Power Association, the Edison Electric
Institute, and the National Rural Electric Cooperative
Association urges, we must act in a bipartisan way to get this
bill and other legislation addressing cybersecurity concerns
out of committee and onto the House floor in a timely manner.
As policymakers, we all want to ensure that we are
providing DOE and each of the agencies all of the authorities
and resources that they need to comprehensively address the
cyber threats that our Nation faces.
So, I look forward to hearing from Assistant Secretary
Evans on her feedback on this bill, as well as some of her top
priorities in this new position.
And with that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Upton. Thank you.
The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair would recognize the chair of the full committee,
the gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Walden, for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON
Mr. Walden. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing is an important and timely opportunity to
learn about Department of Energy's efforts to protect our
Nation's energy infrastructure against cyber threats and
physical threats.
Whether it is the constant cybersecurity attacks on our
Nation's grid or the physical threats of emergencies such as
hurricanes, it is DOE's job to ensure our critical energy
infrastructure is secure from all hazards and that energy is
delivered to consumers throughout all situations.
Now, Secretary Perry has promised to strengthen the
Department's cyber and energy security capabilities. And he
followed through with the establishment of a new Office of
Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response, known
as CESER.
I want to welcome our witness today: Assistant Secretary
Karen Evans.
Good to have you here.
She was recently confirmed as head of the CESER office. I
had the pleasure of speaking with the Secretary last week, when
the administration released its National Cybersecurity
Strategy.
So it is good to have you here before the committee.
Protecting our Nation's energy infrastructure is critical
to maintaining so much of the American way of life. The
reliable supply and delivery of energy is vital to our Nation's
economy, our national security, and the public health and
welfare of our citizens.
With energy systems now massively digitized and
interconnected, we know about the new threats and
vulnerabilities that have emerged. So it is a whole-of-
government effort. But DOE, in particular, must be vigilant and
prepared when it comes to ensuring energy access and delivery
through cyber threats, physical threats, and emergencies.
DOE has authority and responsibilities for the physical and
cybersecurity of energy delivery systems based upon laws that
Congress has passed and that the President has passed and
Presidential directives. Congress provided DOE with a wide
range of emergency response and cybersecurity authorities,
beginning with Department of Energy Organization Act and most
recently with the Fixing America's Surface Transportation Act.
As the sector-specific agency for energy, Department of
Energy has a crucial coordinating role to play in securing our
energy infrastructure.
And I know you know that.
Under Assistant Secretary Evans' leadership, we understand
that CESER will work to bolster energy-sector cybersecurity
preparedness, coordinate cyber incident response and recovery,
and accelerate research, development, and demonstration of more
resilient energy delivery systems.
When it comes to energy security and emergency response,
this new office with analyze infrastructure vulnerabilities, it
will recommend preventive measures, and help other agencies
prepare for and respond to energy emergencies. CESER's ultimate
mission is to mitigate the risk of energy disruptions. So this
includes DOE conducting emergency energy operations during a
declared emergency or a situation of national security.
So, when it comes to research, when it comes to
development, when it comes to the demonstration of more
resilient energy delivery systems, Department of Energy's
National Laboratories have incredible, tremendous capabilities
that can be brought to bear.
Earlier this year, I had the opportunity to visit DOE's
Idaho National Lab, INL, which utilizes cybersecurity
researchers in collaboration with a broad range of industries
and vendors to develop mitigation techniques and tools. INL
also has the unique capability to test cyber and physical
security applications on a full-scale electric grid.
And as you know, Madam Secretary, we were able to get some
of those experts back here to give us on the committee a
classified briefing about the threat and their ability to cope
with it.
Our Nation's energy infrastructure is largely privately
owned and operated. Because of this, DOE works closely with
energy-sector owners and operators to better detect risks and
mitigate against them. Specifically, CESER collaborates with
government and private-sector partners to develop technologies,
tools, exercises, and other resources.
One example of DOE's efforts to strengthen public-private
partnerships is through its Clear Path IV regional exercise. In
April of 2016, DOE hosted the Clear Path IV energy-focused
disaster response exercise in my home State of Oregon. The
exercise scenario consisted of a magnitude-9.0 earthquake and
subsequent tsunami occurring along the 700-mile-long Cascadia
Subduction Zone, which, of course, would cause catastrophic
damage.
This 2-day event in Portland and Washington, DC, included
roughly 200 participants from Federal, State, and local
governments as well as the electric sector and oil and gas
industries. This exercise provided valuable insights and
recommendations for the energy sector on the government and
industry sides to help improve policies, plans, and procedures
for energy emergencies.
So today's hearing is of the utmost importance because the
reliable and uninterrupted flow of energy impacts every aspect
of our daily lives. So I look forward to hearing more about
DOE's new CESER office and its role in overseeing
cybersecurity, energy security, and emergency response for the
energy sector.
And, again, thank you for being here.
And, as a caveat, we have another hearing going on
downstairs, so I have to bounce back and forth between the two,
as other members may have to do.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden
Today's hearing is an important and timely opportunity to
learn more about the Department of Energy's efforts to protect
our Nation's energy infrastructure against cyber threat and
physical threats. Whether it is the constant cybersecurity
attacks on our Nation's grid or the physical threats of
emergencies such as hurricanes, it's DOE's job to ensure our
critical energy infrastructure is secure from all hazards, and
that energy is delivered to consumers throughout these
situations.
Secretary Perry promised to strengthen the Department's
cyber and energy security capabilities, and he followed through
with the establishment of a new office of Cybersecurity, Energy
Security, and Emergency Response, known as CESER. I want to
welcome our witness today, Assistant Secretary Karen Evans, who
was recently confirmed as head of the CESER office. I had the
pleasure of speaking with Assistant Secretary Evans last week
when the administration released its National Cybersecurity
Strategy. I look forward to hearing more from her on this new
strategy and CESER's role in it.
Protecting our Nation's energy infrastructure is critical
to maintaining so much of the American way of life. The
reliable supply and delivery of energy is vital to our Nation's
economy, national security, and the public health and welfare
of its citizens. With energy systems now massively digitized
and interconnected, new threats and vulnerabilities have
emerged. It's a whole of government effort, but DOE, in
particular, must be vigilant and prepared when it comes to
ensuring energy access and delivery through cyber threats,
physical threats, and emergency situations.
DOE has authority and responsibilities for the physical and
cybersecurity of energy delivery systems based upon laws that
Congress has passed and Presidential directives. Congress
provided DOE with a wide range of emergency response and
cybersecurity authorities, beginning with the Department of
Energy Organization Act, and most recently with the Fixing
America's Surface Transportation Act (FAST Act).
As the sector-specific agency for the energy, DOE has a
crucial coordinating role to play in securing our energy
infrastructure. Under Assistant Secretary Evans' leadership, we
understand that CESER will work to bolster energy sector
cybersecurity preparedness, coordinate cyber incident response
and recovery, and accelerate research, development, and
demonstration of more resilient energy delivery systems. When
it comes to energy security and emergency response, this new
office will analyze infrastructure vulnerabilities, recommend
preventative measures, and help other agencies prepare for and
respond to energy emergencies. CESER's ultimate mission is to
mitigate the risk of energy disruptions. This includes DOE
conducting emergency energy operations during a declared
emergency or situation of national security.
When it comes to research, development, and demonstration
of more resilient energy delivery systems, DOE's National
Laboratories have tremendous capabilities that can be brought
to bear. Earlier this year, I had the opportunity to visit
DOE's Idaho National Lab (INL), which utilizes cybersecurity
researchers in collaboration with a broad range of industries
and vendors to develop mitigation techniques and tools. INL
also has a unique capability to test cyber and physical
security applications on a full-scale electric grid.
Our Nation's energy infrastructure is largely privately
owned and operated; because of this, DOE works closely with
energy sector owners and operators to better detect risks and
mitigate against them. Specifically, CESER collaborates with
government and private sector partners to develop technologies,
tools, exercises, and other resources.
One example of DOE's efforts to strengthen public-private
partnerships is through it's Clear Path IV regional exercise.
In April 2016, DOE hosted the Clear Path IV energy-focused
disaster response exercise in my home State of Oregon. The
exercise scenario consisted of a magnitude 9.0 earthquake and
subsequent tsunami occurring along the 700-mile long Cascadia
Subduction Zone, causing catastrophic damage. This two-day
event in Portland and Washington, DC, included roughly 200
participants from Federal, State, and local governments as well
as electric sector and oil and gas industries participants.
This exercise provided valuable insights and recommendations
for the energy sector--on the government and industry sides--to
improve policies, plans, and procedures for energy emergencies.
Today's hearing is of the utmost importance because the
reliable and uninterrupted flow of energy impacts every aspect
of our daily lives. I look forward to hearing more about DOE's
new CESER office and its role in overseeing cybersecurity,
energy security and emergency response for the energy sector.
Mr. Upton. Thank you.
The Chair would recognize the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Upton.
I want to welcome Assistant Secretary Evans here today and
thank the chairman for holding this important hearing. As a
committee, we need a deeper analysis of cybersecurity issues at
the Department of Energy so members can truly understand the
challenges and threats facing our grid and the energy sector as
a whole.
I also continue to believe that the committee should hold a
closed-door hearing to look at the cybersecurity risks to our
electricity grid. There are classified aspects of this issue
that can't be discussed at a public hearing like this, and
members should have the opportunity to be briefed on this high-
level information in order to ensure we are adequately
protecting the grid from threats.
To date, the energy sector has done a good job of guarding
consumers against losses caused by a cyber or physical attack.
But make no mistake, the threats are out there.
In December 2015, Russian state hackers successfully
compromised Ukraine's electrical grid, shutting down multiple
distribution centers and leaving more than 200,000 residents
without power for their lights and heaters. It was a
sophisticated and synchronized attack, and it stands as the
only recognized cyber attack to successfully take down a power
grid. And we owe it to the American people to ask whether
anything about that attack could be replicated here, whether it
be the electric system, the gas system or dams, or the railways
that carry coal to power plants.
Russia hacked the 2016 election, as we know, and it is
clear that the Trump administration is not doing enough to
prevent Russia from a repeat performance on election day this
November.
So what are we doing to prevent them from attacking our
energy sector the way they did our electoral process just 2
years ago? What are we doing to stop Russia from hacking our
energy systems the way they hacked Ukraine's grid? And how can
we make our energy sector more secure and utility workers more
vigilant of cyber and physical security threats? And these are
important questions that this committee must ask.
So I am pleased we finally have an Assistant Secretary in
place at DOE to oversee cyber threats to our electricity grid,
but I am seriously concerned that the Trump administration does
not have a senior official in the White House taking the lead
on our Nation's cyber defense.
In May, President Trump eliminated the job of National
Cybersecurity Coordinator, and 4 months later, there is still
no senior official in the administration coordinating a
response to the Russian cyber attacks. While DOE's role in
cybersecurity is clearly important, a national response to
these coordinated attacks cannot be done agency by agency.
And the administration must not use cyber threats to our
Nation's grid as an excuse to abuse emergency authorities in
the name of justifying subsidies to favored industries or
companies. Too often, officials in this administration have
touted the notion that the natural gas system is somehow
unreliable or not able to fuel electricity production in as
secure a manner as coal. And all forms of electric generation
and their fuels are vulnerable to disruption, whether manmade
or due to extreme whether and other natural events. Coal piles
freeze, and trains derail. A dam with a line carrying power
from a nuclear plant can be every bit as vulnerable as a
natural gas pipeline or a wind turbine. And there are serious
threats we should be looking to guard against. But we shouldn't
be questioning the security of the system just to boost plants
that are not economic in the marketplace.
In early May, the committee passed four bipartisan bills to
enhance the Department of Energy's authorities with regard to
the cybersecurity of our Nation's energy infrastructure. This
includes H.R. 5174, the Energy Emergency Leadership Act,
sponsored by Ranking Member Rush and Representative Walberg.
And this bill would formally authorize a DOE Assistant
Secretary position with jurisdiction over all energy emergency
and security functions related to energy supply,
infrastructure, and cybersecurity.
Mr. Chairman, I am disappointed that these four bipartisan
bills have yet to receive consideration before the House, and I
would like to work with you to pass these proposals before the
end of the 115th Congress.
So, again, I look forward to the discussion today, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.
I want to welcome Assistant Secretary Evans here today and
thank the chairman for holding this important hearing.
As a committee, we need a deeper analysis of cybersecurity
issues at the Department of Energy so Members can truly
understand the challenges and threats facing our grid and the
energy sector as a whole. I also continue to believe that the
committee should hold a closed-door hearing to look at the
cybersecurity risks to our electricity grid. There are
classified aspects of this issue that cannot be discussed in a
public hearing like this, and Members deserve the opportunity
to be briefed on this high-level information in order to ensure
we are adequately protecting the grid from threats.
To date, the energy sector has done a good job of guarding
consumers against losses caused by a cyber or physical attack.
But make no mistake: The threats are out there.
In December 2015, Russian state hackers successfully
compromised Ukraine's electric grid, shutting down multiple
distribution centers and leaving more than 200,000 residents
without power for their lights and heaters. It was a
sophisticated and synchronized attack, and it stands as the
only recognized cyber attack to successfully take down a power
grid.
We owe it to the American people to ask whether anything
about that attack could be replicated here, whether it be the
electric system, the gas system, on dams, or on the railways
that carry coal to power plants. Russia hacked the 2016
election, and it's clear that the Trump administration is not
doing enough to prevent Russia from a repeat performance on
election day this November. So, what are we doing to prevent
them from attacking our energy sector the way they did our
electoral process 2 years ago? What are we doing today to stop
Russia from hacking our energy systems the way they hacked
Ukraine's grid? How can we make our energy sector more secure
and utility workers more vigilant of cyber and physical
security threats? These are important questions that this
committee must ask.
I'm pleased we finally have an Assistant Secretary in place
at DOE to oversee cyber threats to our electricity grid. But I
am seriously concerned that the Trump administration does not
have a senior official in the White House taking the lead on
our Nation's cyber defense. In May, President Trump eliminated
the job of national cybersecurity coordinator. Four months
later, there is still no senior official in the administration
coordinating a response to the Russian cyber attacks. While
DOE's role in cybersecurity is clearly important, a national
response to these coordinated attacks cannot be done agency by
agency.
And the administration must not use cyber threats to our
Nation's grid as an excuse to abuse emergency authorities in
the name of justifying subsidies to favored industries or
companies. Too often, officials in this administration have
touted the notion that the natural gas system is somehow
unreliable or not able to fuel electricity production in as
secure a manner as coal. All forms of electric generation and
their fuels are vulnerable to disruption, whether manmade or
due to extreme weather and other natural events. Coal piles
freeze, trains derail. A dam or the line carrying power from a
nuclear plant can be every bit as vulnerable as a natural gas
pipeline or a wind turbine. There are serious threats we should
be looking to guard against, but we shouldn't be questioning
the security of the system just to boost plants that are not
economic in the marketplace.
In early May, the committee passed four bipartisan bills to
enhance the Department of Energy's authorities with regard to
the cybersecurity of our Nation's energy infrastructure. This
includes H.R. 5174, the Energy Emergency Leadership Act,
sponsored by Ranking Member Rush and Representative Wahlberg.
This bill would formally authorize a DOE Assistant Secretary
position with jurisdiction over all energy emergency and
security functions related to energy supply, infrastructure,
and cybersecurity. Mr. Chairman, I am disappointed that these
four bipartisan bills have yet to receive consideration before
the House. I would like to work with you to pass these
proposals before the end of the 115th Congress.
Again, I look forward to the discussion today and yield
back.
Mr. Upton. Thank you.
The gentleman yields back.
At this point, we are going to hear from our witness.
We appreciate you sending your testimony up. It will be
made part of the record in its entirety. And we will let you
have 5 minutes to summarize it, at which point we will ask
questions. Thank you. Thanks for being here this morning.
STATEMENT OF KAREN EVANS, ASSISTANT SECRETARY, OFFICE OF
CYBERSECURITY, ENERGY SECURITY, AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE,
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
Ms. Evans. Thank you.
Chairman Upton, Ranking Member Rush, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the
continuing threats facing our national energy infrastructure.
Focusing on cybersecurity, energy security, and resilience
of the Nation's energy systems is one of the Secretary's top
priorities. By creating the Office of Cybersecurity, Energy
Security, and Emergency Response, also known as CESER, the
Secretary clearly demonstrated his priorities and his
commitment to achieving the administration's goal of energy
security and, more broadly, national security.
Our Nation's energy infrastructure has become a primary
target for hostile cyber actors, both state-sponsored and
private groups. The frequency, scale, and sophistication of
cyber threats have increased, and attacks can be much easier to
launch. Cyber incidents have the potential to interrupt energy
services, damage highly specialized equipment, and threaten
human health and safety.
The recent release of the President's National Cyber
Strategy reflects the administration's commitment to protecting
America from cyber threats. The Department of Energy plays a
vital role in supporting the security of our Nation's critical
energy infrastructure. As a result, energy cybersecurity and
resilience has emerged as one of the Nation's most important
security challenges, and fostering partnerships with public and
private stakeholders will be of the utmost importance for me as
the Assistant Secretary of CESER.
Recently, CESER demonstrated the emergency response
function through multiple weather events. The hurricanes
activated our emergency response plan, while we also addressed
the overpressurization of a Columbia Gas natural gas pipeline
with the Oil and Natural Gas Subsector Coordinating Council
that caused multiple explosions and fires at residential
locations in Massachusetts.
However, today, I would like to focus my testimony
primarily on the cybersecurity function of the office and how
CESER will meet the priorities of the administration and work
in conjunction with our Federal agencies, State, local, and
Tribal governments, our industry partners, and our National
Laboratories.
DOE's role in the energy-sector cybersecurity is
established in statute and executive action. In 2015, Congress
passed the Fixing America's Surface Transportation Act,
specifically naming DOE as the sector-specific agency for
cybersecurity for the energy sector.
The creation of CESER elevates the Department's focus on
the energy infrastructure protection and will enable a more
coordinated preparedness and response to cyber and physical
threats and natural disasters with the private sector as well
as Federal, State, and local government partners. This includes
electricity transmission and delivery, oil and natural gas
infrastructure, and all forms of generation.
The Secretary has conveyed that he has no higher priority
than to support the national security of our Nation's critical
energy infrastructure. The formation of the CESER office
enhances the Department's ability to dedicate and focus
attention on DOE's SSA responsibilities and will provide
greater visibility, accountability, and flexibility to better
protect our Nation's energy infrastructure and support asset
owners, as well as the overall critical infrastructure response
framework as overseen by the Department of Homeland Security.
The energy sector, the core of the critical infrastructure
partners, consists of the Energy Subsector Coordinating
Council, the Oil and Natural Gas Subsector Coordinating
Council, and the Energy Government Coordinating Council. The
ESCC and the ONG SCC represent the interests of their
respective industries. The EGCC is led by DOE and DHS and is
where the interagency partners, States, and international
partners come together to discuss important security and
resilience issues for the energy sector. This forum ensures
that we are working together in a whole-of-government response.
I appreciate the opportunity to appear before this
committee to discuss cybersecurity in the energy sector, and I
applaud your leadership. I look forward to working with you and
your respective staffs to continue to address cyber and
physical security challenges.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Evans follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Upton. Thank you so much. You are one of the first
witnesses that we have ever had that has yielded back some of
her time. So thank you. It is a good week.
So, as you know, pursuant to authorities that Congress
provided in the FAST Act back in 2015, DOE is, in fact, the
sector-specific agency for cyber for the energy sector. And as
such, you all are responsible for coordinating with multiple
Federal and State agencies and collaborating with critical
infrastructure owners and operators on activities associated
with identifying vulnerabilities and mitigating incidents that
may impact the energy sector.
And as I have listened to a number of different energy-
sector firms, they really do believe that there ought to be
just one lead cop on the beat. So that is one of the things
that we wanted to do when we, on a bipartisan basis, passed the
FAST Act.
Can you tell us some of the greatest challenges--as you all
are coordinating with other agencies--Homeland Security,
others--what difficulties have you had? Have you felt that it
has gone pretty well? Do we need to do more? This is something
that we want to make sure that you really are the cop on the
beat.
Ms. Evans. Thank you for the opportunity to answer that
question. I would say that, based on my tenure to date, which--
I am going to remind everybody this is, like, my fourth week.
Mr. Upton. Yes.
Ms. Evans. So I have had the opportunity to actually
experience this process firsthand, and I have really embraced
the priority of the Secretary and all my leadership in the SSA
role, which is providing that leadership and making sure that
we are the lead person, as you said, the one focal point where
the energy sector can come in.
And so I had the opportunity to do that with the hurricanes
that came through, and then at the same time we did have that
natural gas pipe explosion. So I got to see all of it and was
on the calls. And what has happened is, and the way that that
works is, we are the lead on those calls when we talk.
Now, it depends on which one we are talking about. So if we
are talking about the ones that are being led by the energy
sector, they lead that. And so the electricity subsector is led
by industry, and we provide information into that, and we
actively engage with them on that.
Our staffs all work together. And every night during that
hurricane response, we were on with the CEOs of the companies
and providing them, from the government standpoint--and DHS was
with us, and we had other partners in there as well, so that if
questions were asked, we led that response coming from us, and
DHS then had the opportunity to provide information from cross-
sector so that the energy sector could actually do what it
needed to do once we moved into a response mode.
So seeing it firsthand, seeing how it works, seeing that
they took the lessons learned from last year, and they applied
it to this year's response. There were specific things that
happened last year, because of the way that this natural event
went, the hurricane went, that it was a one-two type of punch--
the event would come and then the flooding--there was specific
planning that was done with the industry partners that
reflected those lessons learned. And we had the opportunity,
because of the way these calls were done, that we could cross-
pollinate across the energy sector.
So it worked well. Right now, I don't necessarily see any
gaps, but like I said, I am going to work through this. I am
excited to embrace this role. And should we see any gaps, I
know I would work with DHS and the other Federal agencies, and
we would come forward to our respective committees to ask for
that assistance.
Mr. Upton. So I know that, as we look at these disasters--
this committee sent a number of members on both sides of the
aisle down to look at Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands last
year after that. And we had members from--obviously, Mr.
Kennedy, who was here earlier, and I suspect he will come back,
with the natural gas incident that they had up in
Massachusetts. And we have members that, for sure, their
districts were impacted by Florence in the last 2 weeks. I
would imagine that Members reached out to you all. Certainly,
their industry partners did.
Any shortcomings that you see right away based on--had you
known something, perhaps would you all have acted any
differently?
Ms. Evans. On this go-around, from what has happened?
Mr. Upton. Yes, so far.
Ms. Evans. So far, I would say that I have a team that is
in place, that the Department has a team that is in place, and
I have the honor to actually manage them, that know what they
are doing in an emergency response situation. Their
responsibilities, our responsibilities as ES-12, when we
activate that response plan, they know exactly what they are
supposed to do. And when we identify issues that come in
through the industry--because they come in multiple ways. Just
like you said, they will come in multiple ways. Our leadership
would hear something. It comes in. There are multiple meetings
that happen.
But the way that the mechanism is set up right now, there
is the ability to catch it at multiple levels so that it does
not become an issue or that we at least have the appropriate
agency working on what those authorities are.
So, for example, in the recovery, one of the things that
were being discussed was the ability to use drones. So
everybody has them, but there are flight plans that have to be
filed, right? And so there was a working group immediately
established so our sector knew exactly what was going on in the
other sector based on the interaction that happens across with
the Emergency Response and the National Response Framework.
So there are multiple levels that happen. Do communications
break down? It probably will. And how we need to respond to
that and then take that back in to improve it, that is what we
are looking at.
And I know that the lessons learned were done from Puerto
Rico. And I have seen how they have actually applied those
lessons learned through this response and heard those lessons
actually being actually implemented by both industry and the
government as we were going through the response this go-
around.
Mr. Upton. Thank you.
I yield to Mr. Rush.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Assistant Secretary Evans, as I mentioned in my opening
statement, Mr. Walberg and I introduced H.R. 5174, the Energy
Emergency Leadership Act, earlier this spring. And our
objective was to codify most of the work that the agency is
currently undertaking and make sure that we have consistency
moving forward regardless of which administration is in office.
Are you familiar with the bill? And if so, do you have any
feedback regarding any of its provisions?
Ms. Evans. Yes, sir, I am familiar with the bill. And I
think the feedback and my presence and the establishment of my
office supports the idea of what is envisioned by congressional
intent. So whatever gets passed by Congress, obviously, I would
be responsible for implementing it.
And so, I, again, am supportive of the leadership this
committee shows and the support that this committee has and the
trust that you have in Department of Energy and the Secretary
to accomplish the mission for the energy sector.
Mr. Rush. I understand, Madam Secretary, that in your
previous position you worked as the director of the US Cyber
Challenge, an organization that is dedicated to building up the
cybersecurity workforce.
From that experience and that perspective, do you have any
concerns that you want to share with the committee regarding
the Nation's workforce preparedness when it comes to
cybersecurity or the threats to our electricity grid?
Are we doing all that we can to ensure that we have a
highly skilled, trained workforce, both presently and in the
future, to address cybersecurity issues? And if not, what are
some of the recommendations that you may want to share with us
to make sure that we have the capability to address these
important issues related to our Nation's security and that
centers on the area of workforce development?
Ms. Evans. I appreciate that question. It is a passion of
mine, and I appreciate being able to talk more about
cybersecurity workforce issues.
So, as the President released the National Strategy for
Cybersecurity, under pillar 2, it specifically talks about the
cybersecurity workforce for America as a whole. And as you
know, especially in DOE and its industry partners and in the--
all of this infrastructure is owned by private industry. So
when we start looking at the workforce, one of the biggest
things is making sure that the workforce has the basic skills
that it needs and then, in this particular sector, the
specialized skills as it relates to industrial control systems,
SCADA systems, and understanding those.
So there are a lot of initiatives that are under way that
are out in private industry that can be leveraged. There is
work that specifically DOE was doing, that we were watching
from the outside and attempting to leverage that in.
So there is a specific competition. I really believe that
you can demonstrate this through competitions. And Congress did
pass a workforce act that dealt with allowing to use
competitions for people to leverage what they know and to be
able to demonstrate it quickly. So CyberForce is a competition
that DOE runs with the National Labs, and it is specifically
focused on the industrial control systems and the SCADA
systems.
So I am really looking forward to really making that more
robust and being able to expand that out for all of us to do.
Right now, it is focused specifically on college students, but
it needs to expand out more than that, because there are a lot
of people that are in this workspace that need to have those
skills. They need to be able to demonstrate those, and
competitions are a way to be able to do that.
So when you ask me if there are areas where you can
improve, our education system and the STEM--and I know we are
investing a lot in that--it does one level of knowledge. And
what competitions do and what employers need to have and what
the Federal Government as a whole needs to have is that the
person, when they start on day one, have the ability to show
how they would apply that knowledge.
So if you think of it from a science degree, I go to
lecture, but then I go to lab. So the competitions allow for
that applied knowledge, so that if I am hiring somebody, I know
they have the basic set of skills that I need to have, and now
what I have to do is train them up for the delta in my industry
or in my specific company or, in the case of the Federal
Government or DOE, specifically in what we are doing as it
relates to cyber emergency response type of capabilities.
So there is a lot of promise, there is a lot of work that
is happening in the universities. And I really view my job as
not to duplicate that but to leverage a lot of the work that is
happening nationally and be able to bring it into the
Department of Energy as the sector-specific agency and be able
to shine a light on that so that the industry as a whole will
be able to take advantage of it.
Mr. Rush. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Mr. Latta?
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Assistant Secretary, thanks very much for being with
us today. Appreciate your testimony today.
You might be aware that I chair the Grid Innovation Caucus
with my good friend, Mr. McNerney. And we have worked on
several pieces of legislation together, and I would like to
highlight one in particular, which is the CyberSense Act. And
this legislation requires the Department of Energy to establish
a voluntary CyberSense program to identify and promote
cybersecure products intended in the bulk-power system. And the
bulk-power system includes facilities and control systems
necessary for operating an interconnected electric energy
transmission network.
Would you talk about the work you are already doing on this
front and how voluntary programs like this one can help open
lines of communications between the private sector and the DOE?
Ms. Evans. Thank you for the opportunity to talk about our
program, called CyTRICS. It is the Cyber Testing for Resilience
and Industrial Control Systems. And it is a pilot project to do
some of the work and what you intend in that area. And it is to
test component parts that go into operational technology that
is used throughout the energy sector. So we are now starting
the pilot.
There are a lot of challenges as we start going through
this that aren't necessarily the technical challenges but
making sure that we have the voluntary participation from our
industry partners as we go through this. We already have some
companies that have volunteered to have their products tested.
What we then have to say and how we have to work this out
would be: What do we do with those results of the testing? How
are we going to share that? How does that fit into an overall
risk management framework? How we would roll it up into what we
are doing with the C2M2 maturity model that we have so that
those results, along with a lot of the other pieces that we are
putting together, that a company will be able to look at that
and say, OK, here are the products, here are the risks, here is
what I have to do to mitigate that risk.
And then the information from these pilots will feed our
other research and development efforts so that we can then
refine them based on the results that we are getting.
So we really are looking forward and we really are excited
about this particular project that we are looking at, because
we know that there could be a lot of risks associated with all
these different products that are coming into the energy
sector, and so we have to make sure that we are aware of what
those risks are as we are implementing them.
Mr. Latta. Well, you talk about trying to get more
volunteers in there. How can we encourage more companies to
really want to volunteer to be part of that program then?
Ms. Evans. Well, so they could reach out to our office, in
particular, and I am happy--they can come through the sector
coordinating councils that they have, because most of them are
actively participating in that, and they can volunteer through
that as well.
And as we identify and work through the challenges that we
have, the idea is then to have a framework. The whole purpose
of my office is to take this research and then be able to
operationalize it and to be able to take it out into industry
so that they can actually use the results of the research and
be able to implement it.
And so the more that we can learn about what types of
anomalies there might be from different companies, the faster
we will be able to develop that framework, and then the faster
it will be able to be implemented and out in the
infrastructure.
Mr. Latta. OK.
Well, through this committee's efforts, DOE was established
in statute as the lead sector-specific agency for cybersecurity
for the energy sector. This new mandate was included in the
FAST Act of 2015.
While the lead sector-specific agency mandate is new, DOE
has been engaged in this work for many years. What makes DOE
equipped to serve as the lead agency?
Ms. Evans. Well, thank you for that question.
And I would like to say that it is the expertise of the
Department as a whole, as well as the ability to leverage the
knowledge that is out in the National Labs. And so those are
some of the smartest people in the world, and that they work on
multiple problem sets as it relates to the energy sector, they
are always thinking about what is over the horizon, what is
next, and also trying to fix what is actually happening today.
So I believe that the way that the Secretary's priorities
are set up, the experience that is there at DOE, and then
leveraging what is happening in the National Labs, that is why
you trust us to be the sector-specific agency in this area, and
that is why we are providing that leadership.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much.
And, Mr. Chairman, my time is about to expire, and I yield
back.
Mr. Olson [presiding]. Thank you.
The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from California, Mr.
McNerney, for 5 minutes, sir.
Mr. McNerney. I want to thank the chairman for that.
Mr. Olson. You are welcome. We will see if the Astros beat
the Dodgers again this year. So----
Mr. McNerney. We will see.
Ms. Evans, I thank you for testifying. And you have only
been there a month, so I understand that that presents
challenges.
And I want to follow up on my colleague Bob Latta's comment
about the Grid Innovation Caucus. And the purpose of that is
really to educate Members of Congress about the challenges and
opportunities in the grid, but also to put forth legislation.
Bob mentioned one. I am also going to mention H.R. 5240,
the Enhancing Grid Security Through Public-Private Partnerships
Act, that provides cybersecurity training to electric utilities
and promotes sharing best practices and data collection in the
electric sector.
Now, in conversations with utility executives, I have heard
that there is a big bottleneck in sharing information, security
information, with the utilities because their security people
don't have security clearances, and it is taking them a year,
year and a half, to get those clearances.
Do you have a plan to expedite the clearances of utility
executives and utility security people so that we can get
information to them on a timely basis?
Ms. Evans. Well, I appreciate that question on security
clearances. And I am going to answer it a little bit
differently versus saying that I am going to expedite out the
clearance process. Those of you that are involved in that know
that that can be quite the challenge, if I were to agree to try
to expedite that.
What I really am trying to do and what the vision of this
office is is to take information that is informed by
intelligence, threat intelligence types of things, things that
are classified, overlay it on what is here, and then take it so
that it can be actionable out by the utilities.
So you don't necessarily have to have the classified
background behind it. A lot of times, especially when you are
working out there--and I come from an ops background--you
really want to know what you are supposed to do; the why can
come a little later on. A lot of times, you have to respond
immediately in a situation. You want to know what the actions
are that you need to take. That doesn't necessarily have to be
classified.
And that is what I view my office as being able to reach
out, share that information with our partners, and be able to
give them the actions that they need to take that is informed
by the government-as-a-whole approach.
Mr. McNerney. OK. That sounds good. How far along are you
in that process?
Ms. Evans. I actually have some things I hope within the
next 120 days that I will be able to share with industry
directly that they can start taking some action. There are some
things I am doing that they should be implemented here shortly,
and I think that they will be surprised when they see it. And
there are some basic things that they can do now in basic
hygiene that, when they see the visualization of that, they are
going to be surprised.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I look forward to hearing from the
executives and utility people----
Ms. Evans. Yes. OK.
Mr. McNerney [continuing]. What they think of the plan, and
I will be glad to share that with you.
Ms. Evans. That would be awesome. I am looking forward to
working with you on that.
Mr. McNerney. Now, how does CESER monitor or plan to
monitor cyber attacks?
Ms. Evans. So there are several different things that are
already under way that CESER is looking at, as far as the
infrastructure. The vision that we have for this office,
several of the tools that are already in place, several of the
projects that they already have--which I am sure you are
familiar with CRISP. Also included in my testimony we talked
about CYOTE, that particular project.
The way that we look at how we are going to do this is, for
example, in the operational technology world, you know exactly
how things are supposed to respond. So the idea is to manage by
exception. So, as you pick up exceptions, then working and
putting together a model, you can put sensitivities to that,
and that would then show anomalous behavior.
Based on then feeding it with information that is coming
from multiple areas, especially intelligence, we will be able
to tell if that is something that is just--so we talked about
the supply chain and all these other types of equipment. We
will be able to tell by the data if something is actually
happening, if somebody is in the network or if it is an
equipment malfunction, or what is actually happening, by
overlaying this data.
Are we there now? No. We have several of these pieces in
place that are----
Mr. McNerney. So you are basically using big data and
algorithms, or will be. So that is----
Ms. Evans. We will be. That is why there are different
pieces----
Mr. McNerney. Again, I will look forward to hearing more
about that.
And I have time for one more question. You may not have
time to answer it. Do you feel confident that our utilities are
adequately prepared and protected from Russian and North Korean
cyber attacks to prevent massive blackouts or credible enough
threats of massive blackouts to make our Nation vulnerable to
cyber blackmail?
Ms. Evans. So, since you asked me do I feel confident, the
answer would be no.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from Secretary
Evans' home State of West Virginia, Mr. McKinley, 5 minutes,
sir.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I would be remiss if we didn't go back and remind the
chairman, when she was being introduced, that she is a good
West Virginia native and graduated WVU and is a staunch
Mountaineer fan.
Ms. Evans. Yes, I am.
Mr. McKinley. So thank you. Thank you for coming here to
this.
I am curious about a few things primarily dealing with the
reliability, because the question you just heard from
Congressman McNerney about the capability of meeting the
challenges we face. And the President has been wrestling with
202(c) or Defense Procurement Act as a way of addressing that.
Can you give me an update on maybe what is happening in
that arena, for everyone to understand that we may be having
quite a few power plants shut down prematurely without having
202(c) or the Defense Procurement. So if you could give me a
little update, if you could?
Ms. Evans. I actually can. Thank you for that question.
Secretary Perry was speaking yesterday about this exact issue.
And what he said was that he does not have anything new to
update at this time, that this is still a policy that is being
reviewed by the White House.
Mr. McKinley. OK. But building off that--and we talked
about the ISO New England, the problems they are having there
in getting power, not only the importing--as you are probably
familiar, that they are importing from Canada 73 gigawatts of
power into New England.
Do you dispute that number? Or do you think that number
is--that is the number that has been published, 73 gigawatts.
That is essentially--for people to understand what that means,
that is about 100 power plants that don't exist in New England,
as we rely on importing power from Canada.
Is that about correct, the 73 gigawatts?
Ms. Evans. I don't have the exact numbers in front of me. I
am happy to take that question back and----
Mr. McKinley. If you would, please.
Ms. Evans. Yes.
Mr. McKinley. Because, we are trying to be energy-
independent. And we have a section of the country that has some
issues about being able to meet the challenges, whether that is
from hacking or internally. So we are depending on now
importing.
So let me ask another question, then, with that
dependability. And McNerney was just talking about Russia.
Isn't it accurate that New England was getting its natural gas
this past winter from Russia? From an LNG tanker that was in
Boston Harbor?
Ms. Evans. I don't know the answer to that question, sir,
and I would be happy to take that back as well.
Mr. McKinley. Well, I have the answer.
Ms. Evans. OK. There you go.
Mr. McKinley. So, yes, the answer is yes----
Ms. Evans. OK.
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. It was.
And so it is a matter--if we are going to be energy-
independent and we are going to make sure that we have the
power necessary for that New England area, we have two issues:
Are we going to continue to import gas from Russia, and are we
going to import power from Canada?
So that is why I think it is so important that the White
House and others move on this 202(c) or Defense Procurement Act
to protect our grid system. Because I think we--reports we have
had from National Energy Technology Lab, NETL, have indicated
we are prematurely shutting down too many of our coal-fired
power plants, and we are headed into a blackout, possibly this
winter, as a result of it.
Do you have anything to update us on alternative measures
that might prevent that from happening?
Ms. Evans. No, sir, I don't. But I will take back your
concern and elevate it to my leadership so that they know
exactly what the issues are that you are bringing up so that I
can make sure I can feed into the policy process.
Mr. McKinley. If you would, please, pass that on----
Ms. Evans. Yes, sir.
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. To Secretary Perry, and tell him
where it is coming from.
Ms. Evans. Yes, sir, I will.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
The Chair wants to remind my dear friend from West
Virginia, our witness, Secretary Evans, this weekend the
Mountaineers are going to Lubbock, Texas, to play the Texas
Tech Red Raiders. And my warning is, they have got this symbol;
it is called ``guns up.'' They score a touchdown, they get
their guns up. You all are going to see a lot of guns up in 60
minutes in Lubbock, Texas.
The Chair now calls----
Ms. Evans. As you know, I am really constraining myself not
to respond to that, but that is OK.
Mr. Olson. It is football in Texas. Feel free to fire back.
Ms. Evans. No, that is OK. But we are Big 12. It is good.
It is all good. It is OK. We are doing well. Our team is doing
well.
Mr. McKinley. Where are they ranked? What, 25th?
Mr. Olson. Twenty-five versus 12. Get your guns up.
The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from South Carolina,
Mr. Duncan, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Duncan. Go, Tigers.
Secretary Evans, I first want to thank you for your
response to Hurricane Florence. I know there were over a
million power outages across the Carolinas, and you and your
team were extremely responsive both during the preparation and
restoration process. Duke Energy serves much of my district,
and I have heard from them many positive things about your
engagement. So I want to applaud you on that.
I also want to thank you, both you and Secretary Perry, for
your leadership in creating the new CESER program. Protecting
the grid against cyber and EMP attacks should be a priority.
Many Americans fear the potential of an attack given the
volatility of players such as Iran, Russia, and North Korea.
Over 5 years ago, the U.S. DOE and the industry, with
industry matching over 80 percent of the funds, established at
Clemson University perhaps the world's largest, most capable
electric grid emulator. This 20-megavolt-ampere facility,
called the Duke Energy eGRID, is providing a platform for
innovating and validating and testing multimegawatt electric
grid components in real grid conditions without the risk to the
grid.
This capability is needed to facilitate the rapid
introduction of new technologies into our Nation's electrical
infrastructure. It is also a prime example of public-private
partnership working to develop advanced technologies to protect
against evolving threats.
The folks at Clemson worked closely with the utilities.
Duke is a partner. They worked close with industry, National
Labs, and other universities and the DOE to accelerate the
marketing of new technologies.
Are you familiar with the eGRID down there in Charleston?
Ms. Evans. Yes.
Mr. Duncan. Have you visited that in North Charleston?
Ms. Evans. Not yet.
Mr. Duncan. OK. I want to invite you to do that. And I
invited Secretary Perry as well.
I am concerned with the grid being able to withstand
attacks such as an EMP or cyber attacks, supply-chain attacks.
And I realize you just started at the DOE, but I am interested
to know how the DOE plans to address these important critical
issues.
Ms. Evans. I appreciate the opportunity to answer that
question.
I am in the process of looking at many of the things that
are in place. This office was set up specifically to deal with
those concerns. And Congress has given us that authority, as
the sector-specific agency, to really embrace that and to go
full-force into that.
My office, in conjunction with other offices within DOE,
really are looking at how do we need to do that, what are the
right investments as we are going forward, what is the right
research and development as we are doing that. There are many
projects that are already in place with the National Labs. It
is my intention to leverage those results and implement them.
And so I am of the mindset that my office is about the
implementation and working with industry to get it implemented
and then distributed through industry so that they can benefit
from the results of all that research and make sure that it is
actionable so that it can go out there so that the grid and our
energy sector is resilient and then can withstand--the
Secretary has told me that his highest priority and his biggest
concern is that, when a natural disaster is happening, that we
would also have some type of disruption in the technology and
that we would be able to discern between the two if they are
related or if it is our adversaries taking advantage.
And that is what I really look at as the highest priority,
to be able to implement that technology and be able to provide
that information up through the appropriate mechanisms so that
the Secretary and DHS and the administration is properly
informed so that they can make those decisions.
Mr. Duncan. I used to serve on the Homeland Security
Committee, and since I have been in Congress, there have been
several attempted attacks on transfer stations, substations,
different things. We have gotten lucky, in that supposed
attackers didn't realize diesel fuel didn't explode, et cetera.
Those type of physical attacks on our electric grid are
very difficult to predict and protect against. We can't monitor
every substation and what not. What sort of work is DOE doing
in that regard?
And we know all about the cyber stuff, but these are
physical attacks. It would just take a simple explosive device
and--so have you all thought about that? And what, working with
Homeland Security, are you doing about it?
Ms. Evans. So the short answer is yes. And the ISER group
that is in my responsibility does exercises. And so we heard a
little bit about the Clear Path IV exercise. The idea is to
develop different scenarios around those so that, as it is
being executed, what are the responses, have we thought about
everything.
And so, when you do those exercises--and there are
exercises coming up, like Liberty Eclipse, and there are things
we are doing with NERC, as the GridEx. Those exercises, they
inform the ability to actually respond. So the idea is, OK, we
all have a plan, but you want to exercise the plan before you
actually have to do the plan and respond to the plan.
So that is what that group does. The idea is to expand out
those exercises. And as we hit the basics, then it is to
continue to expand those out so that those lessons learned are
there in the response plan and that we share that. That is
exactly why we do the exercises with State, local, and our
government partners, as well as industry.
And that was the uniqueness of that Clear Path IV, was that
industry was involved in that, and it was done out in
Washington State. Because it is one thing if you do it in DC;
it is another thing if you are doing it across the country and
involving all the State and local partners as well as the
industry. Because those lessons learned, the communications,
the issues that you brought up earlier, if we see gaps, we
don't want to be in the actual incident when we are identifying
gaps that we need your help with.
Mr. Duncan. All right.
Well, my time has expired, but I will remind the committee
that things that can affect our grid system can be both manmade
and natural, so hardening the grid is important.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And, Assistant Secretary Evans, congratulations on your
confirmation, and welcome to the committee, and thank you for
your testimony.
Obviously, we have not faced the full consequences of a
cyber attack on the grid yet, but we do continue to experience
major electricity outages and energy disruptions due to natural
disasters. I want to ask about what you see as the mission and
role of your office in the future.
There has been a lot of emphasis on cybersecurity today,
and rightfully so, but it is my understanding that the office
is also responsible for emergency response, including those
from natural disasters. Is that indeed correct?
Ms. Evans. Yes, sir.
Mr. Tonko. And earlier this Congress, Assistant Secretary
Walker of the Office of Electricity, testified about the work
being done by his office in the wake of Hurricane Maria in
Puerto Rico. Now, has CESER played a role in the Maria response
or preparation against future energy disruptions in Puerto Rico
over this past year?
Ms. Evans. Thank you for the question. And before the CESER
office actually was formed, a lot of the functions that we are
talking about as the exercise capability that we have as well
as the emergency response capability all belonged and were all
in one office, which was where Secretary Walker is, in the
Office of Electricity. When CESER was formed, those moved over.
So my office has cybersecurity, energy security, and emergency
response.
So in the case of Puerto Rico and Maria, my office is
responsible for the activities that happen when we activate our
emergency response, the RES-12 under the National Response
Framework. So, for example, this go-around with the hurricanes,
it is my office that goes and mans down in FEMA, that goes out
to the regions. We have very specific response capabilities,
incident response capabilities that we do in natural disasters.
When we move into the recovery phase, and that is what is
happening right now down in Puerto Rico, Assistant Secretary
Walker continues that effort. He was just down there for the
anniversary, was looking at everything that is there, and he is
involved in the recovery aspect.
So when you look at how our offices work together and where
that separation is, we do the emergency incident response type
of capability. We are down there. We are embedded with the
States. We work with FEMA. We are over at the national center
there, and all the information goes up. When it shifts, where
we are right now, that is when it then shifts back to Assistant
Secretary Walker's office.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Thank you.
And I know that earlier there were questions about
Hurricane Florence. So in this cross-pollination between the
two offices, have there been lessons learned or experiences
from Maria from the Puerto Rico experience that helped or
influenced your responses in some way with Florence?
Ms. Evans. I would say that based on the way that Assistant
Secretary Walker handled that, he has been instrumental in
bringing up the CESER office. And his interactions of what he
has done and how I have been able to be brought up to speed so
fast is based on those lessons learned of where they clearly
see the delineation between the two offices.
So, again, this is a secretarial priority. Assistant
Secretary Walker and I really have worked that out. We continue
to work it out. But his office is very strategic in looking at
how you are doing different things; and then my office, it
feeds directly into my office for lessons learned impact, and
then we implement from a tactical standpoint.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Robust cybersecurity requires significant financial
resources and new and advanced technologies. But we know there
are many small utilities with limited resources that might not
have the same technical capacity as their larger components.
Does DOE have a plan, a technical assistance program or funding
available to assist these smaller utilities such as a public
power authority, a small public power authority, or a rural
cooperative?
Ms. Evans. I would like to take that question for the
record because I am unaware of the specifics, but--and I would
like to get back to you on that specific question.
Mr. Tonko. If you would, please. That would be very
helpful, because they obviously could be impacted by some very
severe disasters, and that assistance would play a major role
in their responsiveness.
So thank you again for your response to the questions.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
The Chair now calls upon himself for 5 minutes.
And, again, welcome, Secretary Evans. I can assure you
there will be no talk about football, Texas Tech versus West
Virginia this Saturday. I won't talk much about cybersecurity.
That is important, but I do want to focus on natural disasters
and specifically hurricanes.
As you know, my home State of Texas is a cornerstone of
America's energy production and security. The Greater Houston
is a cornerstone of this cornerstone. We produce the bulk of
the oil that is refined and used here in America, and we also
have a launching port through the number one exporting port in
America, the Port of Houston, for this energy to head overseas
and change the world.
Hurricane Harvey hit us 13 months ago, hit us twice. It
wasn't a windstorm. It wasn't a storm surge. It was a rain
event, almost 4 feet over all of southeast Texas in less than 2
days.
I know your organization is new. You have been on the job
for 4 weeks, but could you talk about what you have all learned
with Harvey, Maria, Irma, and now Florence, what those lessons
are? And also, after a storm, do you all do some after-action
reporting and include all the players, the State, the
government there in the State, the counties, the cities, the
first responders, and private parties who are involved in the
recovery from these storms? What is your sort of plan there,
what you have learned so far?
Ms. Evans. Thank you for the question. It is my
understanding that after-action reports are done. After-action
reports were done after last year's Harvey, and I do know that
a lot of the lessons learned were specifically discussed on the
coordinating calls with our industry partners.
And it was highlighted very early on, specifically, about
that this was going to be a one-two punch very similar to
Harvey, and that they were more concerned about the flooding
and the aftereffects of the hurricane. And so the utilities as
they were on the calls, because of those lessons learned, did
preposition over 40,000 workers before the flooding happened
because they knew what would happen about the roads and how
things would be. And so that happened.
Additionally what happened because of things that happened
there that they applied this year is there were things that
dealt with, once the power company went in, they were looking
at one set of power lines, and the telecommunications companies
then would go in and they would cut lines because they weren't
sensitive.
So what happened this year in this particular case is that
information was conveyed. This was lessons learned. So the
utility companies told exactly the telecommunications companies
where they were going, what the plans were so the
telecommunications companies could follow right behind the
utility companies. So as the power came up, communications came
up. That was a direct lessons learned from Harvey last year.
Mr. Olson. Well, thanks, I have a question.
You also brought up drones in a hurricane, natural disaster
early in this hearing. Drones played a big role in Harvey as
the storm hit, quick recovery. For example, the mayor of
Missouri City wanted to fly a drone over--he had heard a levee
was having problems with a bubble in a big subdivision. It was
about to burst. There were rumors it didn't, but he was
concerned. He couldn't fly his drone because it was--airspace
was controlled by the Coast Guard. It took him 1 day with this
levee about to break maybe and flood all these homes to finally
be able to fly his drones.
So my question, I know it is not your jurisdiction per se,
what is your role in these drones over these disasters? What is
DOE's role here? Can they help out Missouri City and have them
fly those drones quickly to save people in need in a time of
crisis?
Ms. Evans. So as the sector-specific agency, when
especially that was discussed as another lessons learned that
happened from last year, that the drones would be critical, and
then there is a lot of information that we have from our own
modeling that we share with utilities companies.
But that issue was raised early, and because the
coordinating councils are cochaired with our industry partner--
our industry partners as well as our government partners, as
that issue is raised, we have a mechanism then to feed it back
in before it becomes a crisis. So the things that you are
talking about, there was a working group already established--
--
Mr. Olson. Great.
Ms. Evans [continuing]. Before the incident happened so
that they could get approval and be able to use the drones for
the recovery mechanism.
Mr. Olson. The final question is about reliability and
emerging threats. In Texas, we have had some blackouts in the
past. The big year was 2011. That February we had rolling
blackouts because of two power plants in Dallas area had some
water pipes frozen, had to have rolling blackouts. That same
August, this extreme heat wave, same thing happened across the
State.
As you know, when blackouts happen, even rolling blackouts
for a short amount of time, people are exposed to death
situations, mostly senior citizens and young kids who can't
handle extreme heat or extreme cold, and we have to take this
very seriously.
I know they are expecting a thing called the GridEx
exercise. Could you talk about your work with industry and NERC
on preparing for a grid emergency like we had in Texas in 2011?
Ms. Evans. I appreciate the question. I know that we have
the GridEx exercise. Again, that information feeds back into
what DOE does, what--any gaps that they would see in DOE's
ability as the sector-specific agency to be able to deal with
that. I am actually getting ready to go out to the NERC event
and what they are doing with GridEx again this year, so I will
be there. I will have firsthand out at that group.
Mr. Olson. Great.
Ms. Evans. But there are other things that DOE does that
feeds back into what NERC does too as the Electricity ISAC, and
so there are tools that we have, there is modeling that we do.
We have eagle eye that looks at everything. We also then have
the CRISP program that feeds that.
The idea in the long run is to be able to start putting
more of this data together so that it can go out through the
Energy ISAC that NERC does manage so that they can get that
information then down to the utilities. So as you are looking
at natural disasters or other types of things, again, I am
getting back to we have to give them actionable information
that they can share through their partners so that they can
take the appropriate actions.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. My time is expired. Enjoy your time
watching the football game from Lubbock, Texas.
Ms. Evans. Thank you.
Mr. Olson. The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from
Ohio, Mr. Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And, Assistant Secretary Evans, thanks for being with us
today. Let me try to dodge my colleague here to make eye
contact with you.
Decisions made by different agencies across the Federal
spectrum can impact our electric grid and specifically impact
how our grid operators, generators, and grid-related devices
effectively perform and communicate with one another. For
instance, the electric utility industry has added and is
continuing to add data and networks along its infrastructure to
bolster its reliability.
This continual addition of new technologies and
communications networks can fall into multiple agencies across
the Federal Government and commission jurisdictions, some of
which are not typically involved in the oversight of our
electric grid. So that is why I am interested in the Tri-Sector
Executive Working Group, which is meant to manage risk across
energy, telecommunication, and financial sectors. Can you tell
me a bit more about this work?
Ms. Evans. Yes, sir. I appreciate the question on the Tri-
Sector Working Group. We just held our first meeting all
together last week. And so the idea behind that, that was a
recommendation that came from the President's working group on
that on infrastructure and recognized the complexity of those
three and the interdependency.
So from a Federal Government standpoint, you have
Department of Transportation, Department of Energy, and
Department of Homeland Security representing that. And then we
have the utilities, which is also the same group that is
leading our Electric Subsector Coordinating Council; and then
you have the financial sector, which is also the ISAC for that,
which is then JPMorgan is the lead on that as well; and then
you have Telecom, which was AT&T.
So we were there. The idea is really to, OK, we need to
know what is critical in those areas for what is the basic
types of operations we are talking about, the modeling of what
it is going to take for the North American grid so that we can
deal with these issues and where are the interdependencies, and
then utilize that from the government approach back. And,
again, that gets back to our original question, if we see that
there are any gaps in those authorities, then we will raise
those through the appropriate policy mechanism and go to our
respective committees.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Do you believe further communication
between different facets of the Federal Government are needed
to ensure that our grid is secure, especially as utilities
increasingly look at their own communication networks to add
security and up to the second situation on awareness over their
infrastructure?
Ms. Evans. I appreciate that question. And as we continue
to do this work and as we continue to improve the modeling that
we are doing, I am sure we are going to show interdependencies.
I believe that the framework that is in place right now allows
us--especially with the President's release of the National
Cyber Strategy--allows us the mechanism if we were to identify
those as we do the work to bring those up accordingly through
the administration and be able to identify those policy gaps.
Mr. Johnson. OK. In December 2016, the Department of Energy
and the National Association of State Energy Officials
cosponsored Liberty Eclipse----
Ms. Evans. Yes.
Mr. Johnson [continuing]. A regional energy assurance
exercise to promote State and local level preparedness and
resilience for future energy emergencies stemming from a cyber
incident. So, Ms. Evans, why are exercises such as Liberty
Eclipse beneficial for coordination between Federal, State, and
local governments?
Ms. Evans. I find that the exercises are critical. As I
mentioned earlier, we believe, when we put together a plan,
that we have identified what all the contingencies are. But
when you put together a plan, you don't know what you don't
know until you actually exercise the plan. And the emergency
when it is happening is not the time to exercise the plan.
And so these exercises, Liberty Eclipse, which we are
getting ready to do another exercise on that, identify any gaps
that are the issues that you are raising right now, either
between the Federal Government going across or down with our
State and local partners or across with industry.
Mr. Johnson. Were there any lessons learned from that
exercise, and have any of them rendered any improvements?
Ms. Evans. There were lessons learned, and it is my
understanding that those lessons learned, the plans have been
updated, and they are now going to be exercised again in this
next exercise of Liberty Eclipse to see if they were adequately
addressed and if any new gaps or any other new lessons need to
be applied and updated as we go forward. So that is happening
in this next exercise that we are doing of Liberty Eclipse at
the end of October.
Mr. Johnson. Great. All right. Well, thank you.
Mr Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr.
Mullin, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mullin. The great State of Oklahoma. Great State.
Mr. Olson. A good State, not the greatest.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Ms. Evans, thank you so much for being here. It is
always impressive when you see individuals come in here well
informed and knowing the issues, so thank you for taking the
time to get here.
Recently, there was a tragic explosion in my district at a
drilling rig, and I am pretty sure you are aware of it. A
question that I have is--which I really don't like the acronym
CESER, but I guess that is how you pronounce it--what role does
CESER have in assisting the U.S. Chemical and Hazard
Investigation Board in their investigation and response?
Ms. Evans. So it is my understanding that as a sector-
specific agency and the way that we roll things down in an
emergency response, that we would provide information to the
appropriate agency and the appropriate board.
Mr. Mullin. What kind of information are you providing for
them?
Ms. Evans. What comes up through the channel, if there are
concerns that come directly from the industry, if there are
types of information. I do not have the specifics on that one,
but I do have the specifics, well, like, for example, when the
Massachusetts one came up. And that is it comes up through us,
but Department of Transportation is actually on the call. So
they then share the information of what they are working with
with their board, and they share it out with the other group,
this is the initial findings, this is what we have at this
point.
If there is anything that we need to do from an energy
sector role, then what we have to do is raise it back, and we
either share it with our sector or I have to raise it up to my
management if a policy decision needs to be made.
Mr. Mullin. Do you share that information with the public,
if there is reason to be sharing, or is that someone else is
sharing that information?
Ms. Evans. As a sector-specific agency, we share
information with our appropriate sector. Depending on how that
investigation is done, so like in the case of the Massachusetts
one, Transportation would then share that because they would be
the appropriate agency to share the information with the
public.
Mr. Mullin. So you are assisting the Transportation----
Ms. Evans. Yes. And so the other thing that I have learned
through this is is that the biggest thing that all of us have
done in this sector is making sure that the information is
shared so that there is unity of message so that we all have
the same information----
Mr. Mullin. Right.
Ms. Evans [continuing]. So that that way we are not saying
different things from a different vantage point but that the
information is consistent.
Mr. Mullin. So who is coordinating that response and that
information, the flow of information? Who is gathering it and
putting it in the right hands? Is Transportation leading that
too?
Ms. Evans. In the case of what happens here in the energy
sector, they have associations, and as it relates to what
happens and they send it out through industry, we share the
information with them and then their industry associations then
distribute it.
In the case of the Federal Government, if Transportation is
the lead, we would feed into the Transportation type of
information that would go up and then that secretary would be
the accountable person.
Mr. Mullin. Does that information flow freely or is that
only when they specifically ask for the information?
Ms. Evans. Based on my experience and based on the way that
I am going to work this office, the information will flow
freely.
Mr. Mullin. Freely. So you will have a point of contact?
Ms. Evans. Absolutely. I already have contacts now.
Mr. Mullin. OK. Great.
As far as the briefings, because we do understand between
cyber attacks and vulnerability of our electrical grid and just
the oil and gas industry in itself, how often do you brief
industry as far as security issues? Do you plan on briefing
them, and if so, traditionally how often does that briefing
take place?
Ms. Evans. It is my understanding the way that the
information flows specifically about what you are asking is is
that we as DOE provide information--and this is the question
that was asked earlier about our relationship with NERC. And so
NERC is directly tied into a lot of the tools in the modeling
and the CRISP project that we were talking about. That
information then informs the ISAC, and so they get that. They
are tied directly into that platform, and so we are providing
that information to them on a daily basis. Based on that
information, they then distribute it down to the energy sector
through the ISAC, and that is what the ISAC mechanism is set up
for.
Mr. Mullin. Are you doing specific classified briefings
with industry when it comes to this?
Ms. Evans. I would have to take that back for the record
and find out what is the history associated with what types of
briefings that we have done as a sector-specific agency with
them.
Mr. Mullin. Appreciate it. I am out of time. Thank you so
much for being here. Appreciate it.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from the great State
of Michigan, Mr. Walberg, for 5 minutes.
Oh, I am sorry. Mr. Kennedy slipped in behind me. I'm
sorry, Mr. Walberg.
The great State of Massachusetts, Mr. Kennedy, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you very much, Mr. Olson.
Madam Secretary, thanks for being here. I am going to build
a little bit off of my colleague Mr. Mullin's questions,
probably not surprisingly, with regards to emergency response.
I am from Massachusetts. There has been an awful lot going
on there in the past couple of weeks. I know you touched on it
briefly or it was touched on a little bit earlier in the
testimony, and I wanted to drill down on this a little bit.
So understanding that circumstances evolving and ongoing,
but we had an overpressurized pipe result in rupture over 80
explosions, people that are still displaced from their homes,
and gas that is apparently not going to get fully restored to
the area until potentially mid-November, trying to figure out
what happened. And it would be helpful for me to get a sense as
to what oversight role you play in this, what the status of the
investigation is, and what update you can give me to start.
Ms. Evans. Thank you for that question. And what did happen
with that and what is our role as a sector-specific agency, so
we share this, this is through the energy sector, the energy
government sector, so we are partners with the Department of
Transportation as well as the Department of Homeland Security
on this.
I can say, in that specific incident, because we have the
emergency response piece, my staff called me within an hour of
being notified of that. The Oil and Natural Gas Subsector
Coordinating Council was also scheduled.
So within an hour of that, Department of Transportation and
PHMSA in particular was also on the call because they are the
industry part, the government part. We were all on the call.
And they were sharing information as they were getting it with
the electric sector right afterward, because we had a call with
them also because they all wanted to know what was going on.
So as that investigation continues through this mechanism
is how the information is then shared out with the community.
But Department of Transportation is the lead in this particular
case.
Mr. Kennedy. And fair to say, ma'am, just so I understand
it, that your role in that is then focused on the emergency
response for the immediate triage?
Ms. Evans. Yes.
Mr. Kennedy. And so how is it, though, to the best that you
can explain, understanding that is not the focus of the hearing
but focus for me, how is it that this happens? How is it that
firefighters are responding to all these explosions? There is a
well-publicized case, one firefighter going out, putting out a
fire while his own home explodes.
How is it that--why does it take so long? I understand that
this had to be done manually from Columbia Gas, an alert that
had to take place to then have somebody actually dispatch a
human being down to try to alleviate the overpressurized pump.
Is that typical? Is that how this should operate? Are there
going to be regulations that come in? Would you suggest
additional regulations to make sure something like this--we can
up the preventive measures on this? How should we be thinking
about an appropriate response?
Ms. Evans. So what happens in this particular case--and I
appreciate the question because I--there are a lot of moving
parts to the question that you just asked. So the industry, the
company would have a response plan. That response plan is
also--then there is a local response plan as well as then a
State response plan. And I know this sounds like there are a
lot of layers, but the communications does flow up pretty fast.
And so my office, as an emergency response piece, is
directly tied into the State and local governments. And so we
do get notified. There is a notification that happens when
these things happen, and then people's response plans go into
play. And so everybody's response plan is then executed.
So I think that that is the focus of what everybody was
asking for, do we see gaps when they happen. And I think that
is what is still being investigated, and that is what you are
trying to understand right now is were those adequate plans,
and if not, are there gaps, and then they have to feed back
into the process that we have, because if you need a Federal
response, it has to come up so that we can be able to respond.
Mr. Kennedy. And I appreciate that. I am also wondering if
the scope of the regulation is such where an accident like this
can happen, right, and understanding the--we are still trying
to investigate exactly what happened and how, but that there
are going to be people that are without their homes in
Greater--or without heat and hot water in their homes in
Greater Boston through mid November if this is done on
schedule, should we allow that? Is that a permissible response
to say, it is OK for folks to be dislocated from their homes
for 6 to 8 weeks?
And if not, why--if the company was actually in compliance
with the regulatory environment that--the existing regulatory
environment, why is that part acceptable? Because I have got
two little kids under three. This doesn't affect me, but I
would imagine that for a family trying to heat their home with
space heaters, that some of these homes that is not even
adequate, for 2 months becomes a real challenge.
And Columbia might be doing the best they can to replace
hundreds of miles of pipeline, but something fell through the
cracks here in a pretty big way without yet a conversation as
to how do we make sure that such an incident like this, the
consequences are going to be mitigated in the future. And so
that is what I would love to get your insight to where we
should look and how we should focus.
Ms. Evans. So I would like to say that until the
investigation is completed, it is hard to address that
question. But you are asking some broader-based questions that
are about risk management and what is acceptable from a nation.
So I am going to turn back to the administration's national
strategy that they have dealing with critical infrastructure
and in some of the things that have already been released by
Department of Homeland Security, which is the risk management
center.
So a lot of the things that you are talking about fall
under risk management and is it acceptable. There are things
until this investigation--the results are actually out is that
it is possible that the level of risk associated with the
infrastructure there is not acceptable because of the
consequences that the American people are now experiencing
because of what happened there.
That data and then our analysis is going to have to feed up
through the policy process about what is the right risk
management, is it going to take a regulatory change, is it a
legislative change, is it an investment, and that is going to
be a policy decision, and that is the intent. And that is what
my office is focused on being able to do is provide that type
of information after this happens so that the right policy can
be made so we can answer that question for you.
Mr. Kennedy. Chairman, appreciate your patience.
Look forward to working with you on this issue, Madam
Secretary. Thank you.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. I remind my friend too to please talk
to FERC about pipelines as well because they are a big Federal
agency. DOE has got a role, but FERC is a big one for
pipelines.
Mr. Kennedy. I am aware.
Mr. Olson. Yes. I just want to make sure you talk to FERC.
The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from Michigan, the
great State of Michigan, Mr. Walberg, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Well, I thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to
the assistant secretary for being here.
Workforce development has become a focus here, I think, in
a very positive way in Congress, and having a well-trained,
certified cybersecurity workforce is a key component to our
overall cybersecurity strategy as a nation. However,
recruitment and retention of cyber workers is a well-documented
problem, challenge, frustration, especially in the public
sector.
What programs are in place that allow cyber workers in the
Department to have professional development opportunities as
well as enhanced skill sets, and what plans do you have to add
to that preparation?
Ms. Evans. I appreciate the question on workforce. This is
a passion of mine. So I am in the process now of looking at
what kind of training and what type of programs are actually
available for my own staff to be able to go forward.
I did mention the cyber force effort, that competition that
is run by the national labs. That has a lot of promise to be
expanded both internally as well as externally and continue to
grow beyond the initial view of that, because a lot of what
that is focused on is energy specific, and that is the baseline
of skills that my team will have to have in order to be able to
respond and be able to work with the industry.
So there are a lot of nuances when you go through this. And
when you use the term ``certified,'' that means a lot of
different things to a lot of different people. I would say
right now that what we are looking at within the Department of
Energy is the national initiative for cybersecurity education,
which is run by NIST, and making sure that our positions and
how we are using that framework really aligns.
And so I look at the structure of what we have. I am also
looking with the chief information officer and what they have
in place, because if they have training programs already in
place, the idea is to leverage those as well.
Mr. Walberg. Well, that is so important, and I appreciate
that in talking with the private sector and their challenges in
the energy industry with cyber. They have been appreciative of
the relationship that has developed because of what we have
done here of having public-private sharing back and forth
together. But to keep the good people that have been trained
and to stay in the public sector is so important as well, so I
would encourage you, and thanks for your commitment to that.
Ms. Evans, I would like to follow up on Mr. McNerney's
question earlier on. You said you were not confident that the
U.S. electric sector can prevent a state actor attack. Would
you please elaborate on this a little bit further?
Ms. Evans. For me to have a certain confidence level of
that, I want to make sure that I am providing all the
information that they need to have so that they can make sure
that they have the proper defenses in place. I know based on my
experience and the previous work that I have done and the
workforce issues that you have brought up, there are a lot of
opportunities for the utilities to improve.
And I think a lot of things that are going forward, there
are basic things that all of us have to do across multiple
sectors as it relates to hygiene. So the more we integrate
technology into what we are doing, the higher the risk it
becomes. And I think it really does become a risk management
type of approach, and the executives of those utilities as well
as the workers need to understand what are the risks that they
are bringing into their enterprise as they go forward.
I think right now that that is the dialogue that is
happening. I think DHS is showing the leadership with the risk
management center so that that information can then perpetuate
throughout the industry, and then what you are going to see is
those interdependencies. Right now, that whole holistic
approach is really not understood across the industry.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you.
When the Department of Energy was organized as a Cabinet
agency in 1977, the largest energy security concerns were fuel
supply disruptions, not electricity disruptions or
cybersecurity. As you would expect, the Department's
Organization Act reflected those concerns. Times have changed,
and we should be thinking differently about energy security and
emergency preparedness.
In my bill with Ranking Member Rush, H.R. 5174, we specify
functions to include emergency planning coordination and
response. Could you talk about your work to elevate these
functions in your new office?
Ms. Evans. I appreciate the opportunity. I am happy to talk
about that. I am currently, right now, looking at what we have
in place, and we have, as I talked about earlier, the emergency
response piece that we have, specifically associated with
hurricanes, natural disasters is really robust.
What I really want to look at is the exercises and then how
do you continuously improve that to bring in other threat
factors that we have been talking about, manmade disasters,
cyber disasters, so that same robustness and the same
responsibilities that we have as the sector-specific agency and
in the National Response Framework as ESF-12 are broadened
based on what you envision that this office and what the
Department is responsible to do.
So I am leaning forward into that. I am trying to redirect
some of the activities that we have right now. I am looking at
several of the investments that we have already made to make
sure that they capture these other pieces so that we can make
sure that we are operationalizing those for the Department.
Mr. Walberg. We wish you well on that and would appreciate
any involvement that we could have with you in identifying gaps
and assisting in finding solutions to meet those needs.
Ms. Evans. I would be happy to talk to your staff about
what we are doing as we continue.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
The Chair now calls upon the gentleman from the
Commonwealth of Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
for being here today.
As we change our mix in our grid, we are becoming more and
more reliant on natural gas, which means we have more and more
natural gas pipelines running across the country which are
subject to potential harm or attack. I do think that your
agency is the right one to do it. The chairman mentioned a few
minutes ago that people need to talk to FERC also, and we may
need legislation to make sure that we have coordination going
there.
I personally think we have given too much power to FERC as
a Congress, and we need to take some of that back anyway. But
along those lines, I find it interesting, because I think it
would be helpful in this if we looked at some of the new
technologies.
As a disclosure, I have a Corning facility in my district,
and they were showing me a number of their products. They did
not make this product in my district, but they have apparently
got a fiber that they can put on top of a pipeline that can
detect temperature change and vibrations that then shows you on
a computer if somebody is driving a truck up near the pipeline,
getting out of the truck, walking, starting to shovel. You can
tell all of that from the vibrations. And if there is any kind
of a leak, so you have got both the bad actor and then just the
bad pipe issue, they can also--because the temperature changes
and it can detect the temperature change, it can pick up a
pinprick leak.
And I am just wondering why we aren't asking at least on
the new pipelines that we are putting in for natural gas that
we don't have some kind of a technology like that so that we
can observe if somebody's trying to do something untoward or
observe if there is just an accident about to happen. I think
it would behoove us to do some of that.
Have you all looked at any of that or is that something you
would be open to?
Ms. Evans. I would be open to doing that. Based on my
previous experience, I was a partner in a venture capital firm
so I understand a lot of what you are talking about with the
new technologies. I would say that trying to be a little
disruptive that a lot of the models that are currently being
looked at right now are from the center going out, kind of the
command and control piece. And what you are really describing
is from the outside in.
Mr. Griffith. Yes.
Ms. Evans. And so that is going to change the architecture.
And I view that that is what my role is is to be able to say,
hey, if we agree on this, here is an architecture that we are
recommending so that we can then talk to industry about it.
Based on that, and we are looking at it from a national
security standpoint, it is my understanding the way this is
supposed to work--so you guys can correct me here--is is that
then that would feed into the FERC process, which then could
then do and address some of the things that you are talking
about, because we would show this is the modeling, this is how
it works, here is a voluntary way that you can do it and can
then be built into the standards process, which would then be
overseen by FERC.
Mr. Griffith. Well, and that may be, but I am not sure that
they are completely on board with all of this, and so I would
be more than happy to work with you all to see if we needed
legislation to just say this is where we are going to go. You
have to figure out first how you want to change that
architecture, but it does seem to me that that is probably a
better way to go instead of from the central office out, have
the information coming in and----
Ms. Evans. And I will be happy to brief you as we continue
to do this work.
Mr. Griffith. Yes, ma'am. And I appreciate that. I also
should probably note that while I have seen this one product by
one manufacturer, I am sure there are competing interests and I
don't care which one gets picked. I just want to make sure--
because I have a lot of constituents right now with two
pipelines coming through the area, one through my district, and
one through the neighboring districts.
There are a lot of people who were concerned about problems
like we heard about from the Senator from Massachusetts and
pumping stations, and they are worried about the safety of
their communities and their homes, and it just seems like we
probably could put their minds to ease.
I know when I have talked about this technology with those
folks, they said, if only they were doing that, I would feel a
lot better about it. They would still probably have some
reservations, but they would feel a lot better that 20 years
from now they weren't going to have a major problem. I thank
you.
And I yield back.
Mr. Olson. I thank the gentleman.
And seeing there are no further members wishing to ask
questions, I would like to thank Secretary Evans for joining us
today. And I just want to remind you, if you go out to Texas
Tech this Saturday or sometime in the future to watch a
football game between the Red Raiders and the Mountaineers,
enjoy Lubbock, Texas.
Two things you should do out there: first of all, The Shack
BBQ, The Shack BBQ, 2309 Frankford Avenue, Lubbock, Texas, the
best barbecue in the Panhandle of Texas, much better than--
sorry--West Virginia barbecue, Virginia barbecue, North
Carolina, Kansas City. We got the best.
Also, if you want to see a real tornado, Texas Tech has
this thing called the National Wind Institute. They have this
machine that generates small tornados just to study a tornado.
So it is kind of cool. Go see that tornado. Enjoy Lubbock,
Texas. You have to go out there.
Before we conclude, I would like to ask unanimous consent
to submit for the record the following documents: a report from
DOE's Office of Energy Delivery and Energy Reliability; number
two, a letter from the committee to send to Secretary Perry;
number three, response letter from DOE to the committee; number
four, a letter to Speaker Ryan from EEI/NRECA, and American
Public Power Association.
Without objection?
Mr. Rush. No objection.
Mr. Olson. No objection. So ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.
\1\]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The report has been retained in committee files and also is
available at https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=108725.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Olson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rush. I just want to say this to Secretary Evans. It
has really been refreshing to hear your testimony this morning.
You certainly have an understanding and broad knowledge of all
the areas, and you have taken the time to really answer in a
very effective way the questions that the Members have. And I
just wanted to ask you to don't get tainted by the politics. I
thought you were a very refreshing witness, and we look forward
to working with you.
Ms. Evans. Thank you, sir. I look forward to working with
you as well.
Mr. Rush. Thank you.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. Amen.
In pursuit to committee rules, I remind Members that they
have 10 business days to submit additional questions for the
record. I would ask the witness to submit her response within
10 business days upon receipt of those questions.
Without objection, this subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:59 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[Ms. Evans did not answer submitted questions by the
closing of the record.]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]