- THE REAUTHORIZATION OF THE TERRORISM RISK INSURANCE PROGRAM
[Senate Hearing 116-121]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-121
THE REAUTHORIZATION OF THE TERRORISM RISK INSURANCE PROGRAM
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON
BANKING,HOUSING,AND URBAN AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
ON
EXAMINING THE STRUCTURE AND OPERATION OF THE TERRORISM RISK INSURANCE
PROGRAM REAUTHORIZATION (TRIP), AND EXPLORING THE IMPACTS OF THE
LEGISLATIVE CHANGES INCLUDED IN THE 2015 TRIP REAUTHORIZATION AND
DEVELOPMENTS IN THE TERRORISM RISK INSURANCE MARKET
__________
JUNE 18, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available at: https: //www.govinfo.gov /
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-540 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON BANKING, HOUSING, AND URBAN AFFAIRS
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho, Chairman
RICHARD C. SHELBY, Alabama
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
PATRICK J. TOOMEY, Pennsylvania
JACK REED, Rhode Island
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
BEN SASSE, Nebraska
JON TESTER, Montana
TOM COTTON, Arkansas
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
THOM TILLIS, North Carolina
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
JOHN KENNEDY, Louisiana
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
DOUG JONES, Alabama
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
Gregg Richard, Staff Director
Joe Carapiet, Chief Counsel
Brandon Beall, Professional Staff Member
Laura Swanson, Democratic Staff Director
Corey Frayer, Democratic Professional Staff Member
Cameron Ricker, Chief Clerk
Shelvin Simmons, IT Director
Charles J. Moffat, Hearing Clerk
Jim Crowell, Editor
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
TUESDAY, JUNE 18, 2019
Page
Opening statement of Chairman Crapo..............................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
20
Opening statements, comments, or prepared statements of:
Senator Brown................................................
2
Prepared statement.......................................
21
WITNESSES
Tarique Nageer, Terrorism Placement and Advisory Leader, Marsh...
3
Prepared statement...........................................
22
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Menendez.........................................
96
Senator Warren...........................................
99
Senator Jones............................................
104
Senator Sinema...........................................
106
Howard Kunreuther, Ph.D., Professor of Decision Sciences and
Public Policy and Co-Director of the Wharton Risk Management
and Decision Processes Center, The Wharton School, University
of Pennsylvania................................................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
68
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Menendez.........................................
109
Senator Warren...........................................
109
Senator Jones............................................
111
Senator Sinema...........................................
112
Baird Webel, Specialist in Financial Economics, Congressional
Research Service...............................................
7
Prepared statement...........................................
79
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Menendez.........................................
113
Senator Warren...........................................
113
Senator Jones............................................
117
Senator Sinema...........................................
118
Additional Material Supplied for the Record
Letter submitted by the Mortgage Bankers Association.............
120
Prepared statement of the American Property Casualty Insurance
Association (APCIA)............................................
123
Letter submitted by the Coalition To Insure Against Terrorism
(CIAT).........................................................
131
Prepared statement of the National Association of Mutual
Insurance Companies (NAMIC)....................................
133
Prepared statement of the National Association of Professional
Insurance Agents...............................................
146
Prepared statement of the Reinsurance Association of America.....
148
Prepared statement of the Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers
of America.....................................................
150
Letter submitted by the Wholesale & Specialty Insurance
Association....................................................
153
(iii)
THE REAUTHORIZATION OF THE TERRORISM RISK INSURANCE PROGRAM
----------
TUESDAY, JUNE 18, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met at 10:39 a.m. in room SD-538, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Michael Crapo, Chairman of the
Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN MIKE CRAPO
Chairman Crapo. The hearing will come to order.
Today we are joined by three witnesses who have evaluated
and written extensively on the Terrorism Risk Insurance
Program, including Mr. Tarique Nageer, Terrorism Placement and
Advisory Leader with Marsh; Dr. Howard Kunreuther, the Co-
Director of the Wharton Risk Management and Decision Processes
Center; and Mr. Baird Webel, Specialist in Financial Economics
with the Congressional Research Service.
The terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, devastated
U.S. citizens, households, and businesses. In the wake of those
attacks, Congress passed and the President signed into law the
Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 to establish the Terrorism
Risk Insurance Program, or TRIP, and to stabilize the market
for terrorism risk insurance.
Since then, Congress has reauthorized the program three
different times in 2005, 2007, and 2015.
My goal in each reauthorization was to build on existing
data to find ways for the private insurance industry to absorb
and cover the losses for all but the largest acts of terror,
ones in which the Federal Government would likely be forced to
step in were the program not there.
Congress made several improvements to the program during
the 2015 reauthorization. First, it increased the program
trigger from $100 million to $200 million in increments of $20
million each year. Second, it increased aggregate retention
amount of $2 billion each year eventually to an amount that
will be based on average insurer deductibles; and third, it
decreased the coinsurance rate from 85 percent to 80 percent in
1 percent increments each year.
That bill garnered overwhelming bipartisan support in the
Senate with a vote of 93 to 4.
The Program is once again set to expire on December 31,
2020. Well ahead of that expiration date, the Banking Committee
has already started meeting with key stakeholders and is
exploring whether there are additional balanced reforms to
improve the program and reduce taxpayer exposure without having
a material negative effect on the cost and take-up rates for
terrorism coverage.
In 2018, the Treasury Department issued a report on the
program's effectiveness, which also discussed key developments
in the marketplace for terrorism risk insurance.
In addition to Treasury concluding in the report that the
program has accomplished its principle goals identified in
TRIA, Treasury also observed that private reinsurance of
terrorism risk has significantly increased under the program,
and there is now increased private reinsurance capacity for the
exposures that remain wholly with the private market under
TRIP.
Each of today's witnesses have written extensively on the
program's effectiveness, structure, and market developments.
In 2018, Dr. Kunreuther coauthored a report on the program,
which found that, overall, TRIA has worked well. It has
stabilized a very disrupted market in the aftermath of 2001,
making terrorism insurance widely available and affordable.
Take-up rates among enterprises, small and large, are rather
high, and premiums, a few percentage points of what firms pay
for their property insurance, even though cost and take-up
rates vary widely by size, industry, geography, and line of
business.
In its 2019 Terrorism Risk Insurance Report, Marsh
discussed take-up rates as well as cost, geographic, and
corporate trends in terrorism risk insurance in the United
States as well as globally.
Marsh emphasized in the report that the Federal backstop
created by TRIA and reauthorized as TRIPRA, along with similar
public-private mechanisms that exist in other countries,
remains crucial to the continued stability and health of the
property terrorism insurance market.
Finally, the Congressional Research Service has published
numerous reports, including one as recently as April 2019,
providing a comprehensive overview of the program, its history,
statutory changes in past reauthorizations, and key
considerations for this Congress.
During this hearing, I look forward to hearing more about
specific considerations in evaluating the program's
effectiveness, how the program has evolved over time, how the
marketplace has responded to changes to the program made by
Congress in previous reauthorizations, what additional room
exists to further reduce taxpayer exposure, and how market
participants may react to changes in different program levers.
Again, I thank each of the witnesses for joining us today
to share your perspectives and your research.
Senator Brown.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SHERROD BROWN
Senator Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding the
Committee's first hearing on the reauthorization of the
Terrorism Risk Insurance Program. It expires the end of next
year, after the lapse at the end of 2014. We all understand we
need to start early enough to make sure it does not happen
again.
TRIA is critical to keeping our economy healthy. It is not
just a program that helps in the event of a terrorist attack.
Businesses rely on this insurance in order to get access to
credit, even in healthy economic times. Without Government
assistance, the insurance market would be unable to provide
affordable insurance to these businesses, including small
businesses, across our country.
While TRIA was initially designed to be temporary after 9/
11, both parties have agreed several times since then that
there is value in keeping it. People may hear the word
``terrorism'' and think this does not apply to their community,
that only businesses in places like New York and Washington or
big national landmarks would need to worry about insuring
against terrorism.
But, unfortunately, terrorism is not confined to big
cities, and the groups perpetrating it do not only come from
abroad. Ohio communities that have faced threats from white
supremacist groups know all too well this is a risk we all
contend with.
That is why I am glad we have been able to work on it in a
bipartisan way. We agree there are some issues that the free
market just cannot solve on its own. This is one of them. It is
an example of the kind of successful Government intervention
that is only possible when we come together as a country.
Some in Congress would prefer the United States not make
these kind of guarantees, whether it is for worker pensions,
whether it is for Social Security, whether it is for mortgages
and affordable housing or for health care or food for low-
income families, or this issue for protections against economic
destruction after terrorist attacks. Some politicians just are
not interested in coming together on behalf of Americans that
live in Mansfield or Cleveland or Boise or Idaho Falls.
I disagree and think the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program
is emblematic of our ability to use Government to make the
economy work better for everybody, especially during difficult
times. As we look at other issues on this Committee, I hope we
will remember the success of this program and our capacity to
use Government to solve tough problems when we decide that is
what we want to do.
In the last bipartisan authorization of TRIA, we worked to
strike a balance, which seems to work well. By increasing the
program trigger to $200 million, by gradually reducing the
Government's share in the losses, we have made the program
efficient without decreasing access to coverage. We have an
opportunity to make the program even stronger by creating
certainty in the marketplace through a long-term extension of
the program, and I emphasize long term. I hope we can work
together to do that.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Senator Brown.
We will now proceed to our witnesses, and I will ask you to
please give your oral remarks in the order I introduced you and
again ask you to remember to watch that clock so that we can
stay to your 5 minutes allocated and get to the Senators'
questions.
With that, Mr. Nageer.
STATEMENT OF TARIQUE NAGEER, TERRORISM PLACEMENT AND ADVISORY
LEADER, MARSH
Mr. Nageer. Good morning, Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member
Brown, and Members of the Committee. My name is Tarique Nageer,
and I am the Terrorism Placement Leader at Marsh. I do
appreciate the opportunity to speak with you today about this
topic.
For our company, like many others, the impact of terrorism
is deeply personal. Marsh & McLennan lost 295 colleagues and
scores of business associates on 9/11.
As a leading risk advisor in the insurance market, Marsh &
McLennan has a unique perspective on the Terrorism Risk
Insurance Program.
Terrorism remains an evolving, expanding, and ever present
risk, which underlies the importance of this program and
ensuring the continued stability and health of the property and
casualty terrorism insurance market.
We have seen a decline in both the frequency and severity
of terrorist incidents in the United States over the last
several years, and there have been no certified terrorism
losses in the United States since TRIA was originally passed in
2002, but we cannot afford to be complacent. The Federal
backstop created by TRIA restored insurance capacity during the
critical post-9/11 period.
We at Marsh strongly support its reauthorization and
modernization, including enhancing the existing public-private
partnership.
Today my testimony will include four main areas. First,
findings from the Marsh's 2019 Terrorism Risk Ins Report once
again highlighted that terrorism risk is not only a big-
business or big-city issue. Education entities with the most
frequent buyers of terrorism insurance in 2018, while companies
in hospitality, gaming, health care, life sciences, and
nonprofits all landed in the top 10 of buyers. These
organizations can be found anywhere, from small college towns
to urban city centers.
The uptake for TRIA coverage and property policies averaged
62 percent in 2018. Clearly, a wide array of industries depend
on the program to thrive and protect their workforce as they
continue to purchase terrorism coverage at a high rate.
Second, I would like to provide an overview of the current
state of the terrorism insurance market. While there have been
no significant insured losses in recent years and the industry
is well capitalized, the access to terrorism insurance is still
dependent on insurer's preference, appetite, and aggregate
constraints. There is a strong possibility that if the Federal
backstop ceases to exist, we could see a dominant effect of
increased pricing across multiple insurance lines, not just
terrorism, with a likely result of a major marketplace
disruption.
Third, I will speak about how TRIA plays an integral role
in the availability and affordability of workers' compensation
insurance. The impact of TRIA on the workers' compensation
market makes clear that as long as the Federal backstop remains
in place, there should be adequate capacity for workers'
compensation terrorism coverage. Because of its State-regulated
nature, workers' compensation policies cannot limit or exclude
coverage for perils such as terrorism or nuclear, biological,
chemical, or radiological, commonly known as NBCR.
NBCR events can lead to very large human life and economic
losses, but coverage is not typically included in reinsurance
contracts.
In 2014, the uncertainty around TRIA led some insurers to
step back from insuring industries with high employee
concentrations in certain cities. As insurers began to review
policies extending beyond 2020, their willingness to insure
risks in high-profile areas will likely decrease again, thus,
leaving large populations of employees vulnerable.
Finally, we are already seeing an impact on policies that
extend beyond 2020, with some insurers either seemingly
unwilling to offer terrorism coverage beyond the expiration of
TRIPRA or increase in prices to cover the additional risks to
their portfolios.
Without a decision to reauthorize or extend, we expect to
see sunset provisions on policies and higher costs as we move
closer to December 31, 2020.
In Marsh's view, this legislation is a model public-private
partnership that is instrumental in maintaining a vibrant
marketplace by allowing insurers to provide adequate limits of
terrorism insurance to the business community at affordable
prices. A seamless
renewal process with a robust reauthorization will keep the
marketplace sustainable.
We encourage decisions to be made with a full understanding
of the shifts and the nature of terrorism and how they can
affect organizations and insureds alike.
Finally, thank you again to the Committee for holding this
hearing 18 months in advance of the program's scheduled
expiration. Time is of the essence, and I look forward to your
questions.
Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Dr. Kunreuther.
STATEMENT OF HOWARD KUNREUTHER, Ph.D., PROFESSOR OF DECISION
SCIENCES AND PUBLIC POLICY AND
CO-DIRECTOR OF THE WHARTON RISK MANAGEMENT AND DECISION
PROCESSES CENTER, THE WHARTON SCHOOL, UNIVERSITY OF
PENNSYLVANIA
Mr. Kunreuther. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and
Members of the Committee, I very much appreciate the
opportunity of testifying on the reauthorization of the
Terrorism Risk Insurance Program. My name is Howard Kunreuther.
I am the James G. Dinan Professor of Decision Sciences and
Public Policy at the Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania, and Co-Director of the Wharton Risk Management
and Decision Processes Center.
The Center was founded in 1985, with a mission to examine
alternative strategies for dealing with low-probability, high-
consequence events, based on an understanding of the decision
processes of individuals, firms, and public-sector agencies.
As Chairman Crapo pointed out, we have produced several
studies on the 2015 renewal of TRIA undertaken in consultation
with key interested parties from the public and private sectors
and other academic research institutions that are cited in my
written testimony.
Given the limited time that I have available and the
comments that Chairman Crapo has made and Representative Brown
as well as my colleague here, Mr. Nageer, I want to focus on
really a following question that was alluded to by Chairman
Crapo: What modifications to the current public-private
partnerships should be considered in the renewal of TRIA?
In developing these proposals, it is useful, in our
opinion--and I will speak for a number of us at the Wharton
Risk Center--to focus on the individual decision processes and
our systematic biases that have been well documented by
psychologists and behavioral economists, are discussed in our
book ``The Ostrich Paradox: Why We Underprepare for
Disasters,'' written with my Co-Director, Robert Meyer.
Let me highlight five of these biases and indicate where
they could be used and addressed with respect to the renewal of
TRIA: first, myopia, the tendency to focus on short-time
horizons when appraising immediate costs and the potential
benefits of protective investments; amnesia, the tendency to
forget too quickly the lessons of past disasters; optimism, the
tendency to underestimate the likelihood that losses will occur
from future hazards; simplification, the tendency to
selectively attend to only a subset of relevant facts when
making choices involving risk; and finally, herding, the
tendency to base our choices on the observed actions of others
who may not know a great deal more than we know ourselves in
dealing with these low-probability events.
I will focus on four areas very briefly in the remaining
time to highlight how they may play a role.
First, incentivizing cost-effective mitigation measures by
firms, something that TRIA does not do today. To overcome the
myopia bias, one could consider long-term mitigation loans, the
way FEMA has done with respect to the flood problem, and at the
same time have insurers offer premium discounts if the claims
are going to be lower by firms investing in these mitigation
measures.
Second, Federal protection against catastrophic losses.
Now, in our view, in my view, it is important that the Federal
Government cover NBCR, losses from future terrorist attacks,
given the potential catastrophic losses and recoup their
expenditures under TRIA. Currently, it is ambiguous as to
exactly what will happen, although they have the intent to do
that.
Now, the point I want to make here is Congress and the
stakeholders should not exhibit an optimism bias or an amnesia
bias by feeling it will not happen to the United States because
it has not occurred to day.
Third, behavior of insurers and Congress after a terrorist
attack. Will premiums significantly increase and future
coverage decrease by insurers who might exhibit the
simplification bias and focus on worst-case scenarios rather
than thinking about likelihood as well? What will Congress do
if insurers significantly raise their premium so that many
commercial firms feel they cannot afford to purchase insurance
protection?
On that basis, there is a suggestion that insurers consider
a multi-year policy, a 2- or 3-year policy, so they keep this
for more than just the 1 year and for that reason actually are
in a position to deal with this afterwards.
Finally, dealing with interdependencies. There are a lot of
events, like cyber, that are interdependent and have, can cause
potentially catastrophic losses. Treasury and the private
insurers should integrate and interact with each other on that
issue.
So, in conclusion, Congress and other key stakeholders
should examine how countries cope with terrorism risk to
determine whether these approaches merit consideration for the
United States.
And on that note, let me conclude my comments here and look
forward to a dialogue with you afterwards.
Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Mr. Webel.
STATEMENT OF BAIRD WEBEL, SPECIALIST IN FINANCIAL ECONOMICS,
CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE
Mr. Webel. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, Members of the Committee,
thank you for the opportunity to testify today. My name is
Baird Webel. I am a Specialist in Financial Economics at the
Congressional Research Service.
As a note for members of the audience who may not be
familiar with the CRS, we are a division of the Library of
Congress. Our role is to provide objective, nonpartisan
research and analysis. CRS takes no position on the
desirability of any specific policy nor advocates for any
specific policy outcome.
I have been at CRS at this role since 2003, so I have seen
the reauthorizations of TRIA since, and I would like to talk
about three broad things that Congress has faced as we have
done reauthorization in the past.
The first question that it faced is, basically, is a
Federal terrorism program needed? TRIA was passed a little more
than a year after the terrorist attacks in September 11, 2001.
It was passed as a specifically temporary 3-year program, and
by temporary, I do not mean that there was an expiration date,
just an expiration date of 2005. The statute itself in two
places says this is a temporary program.
As the end of previous reauthorizations have come up,
Congress has successively seen the need to reauthorize the
program to give the private market additional time to face the
threat of terrorism losses, and I think a significant point in
this is the difficulty in estimating terrorist events going
forward and the losses from these events. The industry has been
largely successful at rebuilding capital, but making estimates
of future terrorism losses remains exceedingly difficult.
What Congress has done in the TRIA reauthorizations is
basically affect the second aspect that I would talk about,
namely how private insurers should share in funding terrorism
risk with the Federal Government.
There are basically three different levers in the program
that have been used in this sense. There is a deductible, and
essentially, it is a two-stage deductible.
There is a program trigger, which is an aggregate amount of
losses that the entire industry will incur before Federal
funding occurs.
There is an individual insurer deductible which is set
essentially based on the written premium for each insurer, a
rough proximate size of its exposure to the terrorism market
that must be cleared before Federal funding occurs.
And then after this, after these deductibles, there is an
insured loss share compensation, and this is essentially a
copay. So that once you clear the deductibles, there is a
varying amount--there has been a varying amount of the share
that the Government will cover.
Finally, there are terrorism loss spreading premiums. These
are somewhat unusual in the insurance world in the sense that
when we all purchase homeowners insurance or auto insurance, we
pay our premiums upfront. In this case, the premiums are set to
be after the fact, and so that depending on the exact loss
levels, there will be a premium placed on insurance policies
going forward to recoup the amount for the Government.
All of these over the life of TRIA have been adjusted in
various ways to increase the private-sector exposure to
terrorism risk.
And the third broad aspect that I would talk about is, What
exactly should a Federal terrorism insurance program cover?
Right now, TRIA basically works through the private
insurance market. Private insurance policies that are covered
under the lines that are specified in TRIA--the private
insurers are required to make terrorism coverage available
under essentially the same terms and conditions for other types
of insurance. So if you are going to cover loss from a fire,
for example, from an accident, the insurer has to offer
coverage for a fire due to loss from terrorism, but the
insureds are not required to purchase this policy.
And the terms and conditions that apply to this are the
same--it is the same for an accidental cause as it is for a
terrorist cause, and this becomes particularly important in the
realm of nuclear, chemical, biological, radiological, because
most private insurance policies will exclude NCBR events,
regardless of the source. So if a policy excludes a chemical
spill from an accident from a train, it will exclude a chemical
spill caused by a terrorist attack, and I think this is
particularly significant because those are the terrorist
attacks that could cause the most damage. And I am not certain
that people realize to what degree these NCBR events would not
be covered.
So, with the end of the 5 minutes, I will be happy to take
any future questions.
Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Mr. Webel, and I appreciate each
of you. You all stayed within your 5 minutes. I appreciate
that.
Mr. Webel, I will start with you. It is very important to
me that the two major objectives will be achieved. One is that
TRIA continually benefit and stabilize the marketplace, and the
other is that we minimize taxpayer exposure.
What factors do you look at to indicate whether TRIA has
been effective and to measure its potential future success in
achieving these objectives?
Mr. Webel. I think that the take-up rate for terrorism
policies is really important because you can see, for example,
in the flood insurance program that you get flood disasters
where a lot of people have not purchased flood insurance
policies. And it is not going to help to have an insurance-
providing program if you do not have the people purchasing the
policies.
I think as well, any aspects that you can have of overall
private reinsurance capacity, the amount of private insurance
that it offered outside of TRIA is a really important marker of
how well the private market is responding and developing
capacity to deal with terrorism.
Chairman Crapo. All right. Thank you.
I am going to move to you--is it ``Nageer'' or ``Nagger''?
Mr. Nageer. Nageer.
Chairman Crapo. OK. Nageer.
In terms of the objective of assuring that we achieve the
best possible protection of hitting a taxpayer bailout or a
taxpayer cost here, we need to understand how changes that we
make to the program can have an impact on both small and large
participants, some insurers themselves.
So I guess the question I am asking is, Can you provide an
indication of how smaller and larger insurers may be affected
by changes in the coinsurance rate and the program trigger,
respectively, based on our historical evidence?
Mr. Nageer. Thank you for the question, Chairman Crapo.
As you know that in your original opening statement, there
have been a few levers that have been adjusted during the
course of the lifecycle of TRIPRA currently, and the insurers
with adequate notice have been able to adjust to these
incremental changes, either to the increased trigger levels or
the increased coinsurance between a loss being shared between
the Government as well as the private marketplace.
So in terms of having the ability and the capacity in the
marketplace to be able to respond and take up increases in
these different levers, the capacity does exist because there
is adequate capital within the insurance and reinsurance market
base for these types of incremental changes, but I stress the
word ``incremental,'' and I stress the word also with some good
notice as well. So you have got to give them some time to sort
of prep for these changes and make it incremental so they can
adjust their buying of reinsurance for example, or being able
to plan ahead and structure their--the book of business that
they underwrite properly.
In terms of policyholders and insurers, who could be
impacted by this, the very large insurers, one of the triggers
under TRIPRA is the 20 percent insurer deductible, and how that
works is 20 percent of the insurer's prior year's direct TRIPRA
premium is retained by them for any one loss, before the
Government co-shares the risk, the loss with them.
So for the very larger insurers, 20 percent is a big
number, but my colleagues at Guy Carpenter have measured the
policyholder surplus of insurers with less than $500 million of
policyholder surplus, which is basically reserves. And there
are about 662 insurers who fall within that category.
And a subset of that 662 is about 240 insurers who fall
between the $100 million and $500 million of policyholder
surplus, and those are the insurers who could be more directly
impacted negatively with abrupt increases in the trigger
levels. And the trigger in 2020 is going to be $200 million. So
if you increased that gradually over time, yes, they could
adjust for that, but that bucket of insurers within that $1 to
$500 million policyholder surplus range are the ones who will
be more impacted.
Chairman Crapo. All right. Thank you.
Dr. Kunreuther, you in your testimony, I think, endorsed a
notion of incentivizing mitigation, something which you
indicated is not currently in TRIA; is that correct?
Mr. Kunreuther. That is correct.
Chairman Crapo. Could you describe that in a little more
detail what you are talking about there?
Mr. Kunreuther. I would be happy to.
I think the reason that I think mitigation is not included,
number one, is it is always a challenge to get measures, but I
think there is work that has been done.
I will highlight just at least the fact that Pool Re in the
United Kingdom have actually had a number of ideas in terms and
thoughts that they are working closely with the U.K. government
to incentivize firms to actually invest in mitigation.
The basic idea in terms of what we are proposing here is
that if you can spread the cost of the mitigation measure over
time, you will have a much better chance of getting a
successful investment in these measures because of the fact
that people will not say--firms will not say or consumers will
not say, which is the case certainly in the flood area, that
``This is too costly for us. It is going to affect our bottom
line tomorrow.''
And when you have the opportunity of actually spreading
this with loans that could be made--and that has been done by
FEMA, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for flood--it could
be done by banks and financial institutions, but it could be
also done by Treasury or by a Government agency to encourage
those investments. You then have the opportunity of actually
making this attractive in the short run because insurers
hopefully would then--actually reduce their premiums because
the claims that they are going to have to face would be lower
than they would be before, and the actual premium reduction
would be greater than the cost of the loan each year. So it
would be viewed attractive financially for firms to want to do
that, and this has been shown with consumers in investing in
mitigation measures against natural hazards that they will want
to do that.
And that is the reason why we are suggesting it, to
overcome a myopia bias.
Chairman Crapo. All right. Well, thank you. That is very
interesting. I appreciate that.
Senator Brown.
Senator Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Webel, I would like to start with you. Since the last
reauthorization, there have been a number of tragic white
supremacist attacks on synagogues and other places of worship
in California, Florida, Minnesota, New York, Pennsylvania,
South Carolina, and Texas. No amount, of course, of insurance
money can make up for the lives lost and families torn apart.
Recently, the Jewish Federation of Cleveland has raised an
issue about protecting thousands of people whom they serve each
week. As religiously affiliated nonprofit organizations try to
take action to protect their communities, they often find that
insurance for these kinds of threats is hard to come by and
very, very expensive. TRIA was implemented to make sure this
kind of insurance was available.
My question is this: Do you think this situation, safety at
houses of worship and other religious institutions, which we
have been the target of threats and attacks, that that is the
kind of problem TRIA was designed to address?
Mr. Webel. TRIA is designed to address terrorism, and it is
a broad swath. It does not specify.
In one of the previous reauthorizations, they removed the
requirement for it to be a foreign act of terrorism. So it does
not make any distinction between the different types of
terrorism. It just is terrorism as certified by the Secretary
of the Treasury.
Senator Brown. If insurance is available but priced so high
that it is unaffordable, does that meet the spirit of Congress'
intent?
Mr. Webel. The law is basically silent on that. It has a
``make available'' provision, but it does not include
specifications on what that premium is supposed to cost.
Senator Brown. Is not it sort of intuitive that if you
cannot afford it, you really do not have access to it?
Mr. Webel. This is certainly an issue, and basically,
implicitly what the law provides is there are specifications in
State insurance law that premiums are not supposed to be
excessive and so essentially above the cost of the risk.
So the TRIA essentially defaults to the State regulation of
insurance. It does not do it directly from the Federal level.
Senator Brown. So if congressional intent is all terrorism,
as you suggest, and it is not affordable because State
regulators have not given the priority to make it accessible
and affordable, then perhaps it is our obligation on this
Committee and in the House and Senate to pressure our State
regulators to make it affordable?
Mr. Webel. That would be the lever that TRIA provides, yes,
essentially.
Senator Brown. Treasury used its discretion under the law
to issue guidance clarifying TRIA's applicability to cyber-
related risk. Do you think Treasury has the authority to make
sure religious-affiliated institutions have real access to the
Terrorism Risk Insurance Program?
Mr. Webel. I do not see under the statute, as currently
designed, where Treasury would have a direct lever to do that.
Senator Brown. Should it?
Mr. Webel. That is up to Congress.
Senator Brown. Mr. Nageer, let me go through. Do you want
to respond to that?
Mr. Nageer. If I could, if you do not mind. So, just to
add, the terrorism marketplace as we see it is quite
competitive. There are lots of insurers, both on the property
side, casualty side, and the terrorism side who have capacity
to offer terrorism insurance for all ranges of motives, be it
what you were just describing or what is conventionally known
as acts of terrorism. So there is enough capacity within the
marketplace, and I think to be able to--and TRIA served--in its
initial creation of TRIA served to help create that vibrant
marketplace.
Senator Brown. Well, there is competition in the healthcare
marketplace too, but to argue that it is always accessible----
Mr. Nageer. Right.
Senator Brown.----is another question. OK. Thank you for
that.
Let me ask the three of you and start with you, Mr. Nageer.
I have a couple questions. As we look to move on a
reauthorization bill, should we make the extension for a longer
period, and how long should it actually be, Mr. Nageer?
If each of you would give me a brief answer on that.
Mr. Nageer. The last reauthorization was for 5 years.
Before that, it was for 7 years. The 7 years worked quite well.
So I think anywhere between 7 to 10 years would be a good
outcome. It would allow the marketplace to adapt and grow,
build capital, and be able to take on more of a trigger or a
coinsurance mechanism, however you want to----
Senator Brown. I like the way you negotiate. You say the
last was 5, the one before was 7.
Mr. Nageer. Correct.
Senator Brown. So we should make it 7 to 10. I like that.
Yes, go ahead. Your answer too. Do you want to answer too?
Mr. Kunreuther. I would be happy to.
I think a longer period is always desirable, but I think
there are tradeoffs in doing that because when you have a
longer period, the question is, are there going to be changes
or things that would require one to review this and whatnot? So
to the extent that there are opportunities at least to have
studies done that would enable one to somehow say on the basis
of possible changes, one would want to deal with this in a
different way, I think cyber is a very good example of that, by
the way, because there are some real challenges as to how one
is going to deal with cyber. And that would not have been
necessarily true 5 or 10 years ago.
So I think I would favor, in general, a longer period of
time. How long, I think is something that Congress and the
stakeholders would have to discuss, because it gives people and
gives firms the opportunity to plan more extensively than
knowing that somehow things might be changed. And so I would
move in that direction.
There is a saying--and I think TRIA exhibits it in a very
good way--that nothing is more permanent than the temporary,
and so, in some sense, what was viewed as a temporary has
become more permanent for very good reason. So that is one of
the reasons why we support the renewal very strongly.
Senator Brown. Thank you, Mr. Kunreuther.
Mr. Webel?
Mr. Webel. We obviously do not have a position on the
length.
I do think purely from the private-sector perspective,
insurers certainly would be able to deal better with things the
longer that it is, but I do think there is a very legitimate
public policy perspective that Dr. Kunreuther said of taking a
look at things more often to make sure that it is working.
Senator Brown. Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Tillis.
Senator Tillis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you for being here.
Mr. Webel, I will not ask you this question because I know
the answer. It has to do with supporting the reauthorization.
Both of you all feel like we should reauthorize it, although,
Professor Kunreuther, you have made some comments that I wanted
to drill down on, and it really has to do--and I think, Mr.
Nageer, you commented that the losses have been relatively low.
So how instructive are the current incidences to any sort
of downward trend on risk premiums right now? I mean, are we
seeing a downward trend based on the losses, or how do they
project out actuarially and determine how much they actually
have to collect to provide insurance at a reasonable price?
Mr. Nageer. In terms of the marketplace, yes, it is a bit
of a downward trend for this because the insurers, like I said,
have all capitalized, and they have not had to pay major claims
recently, right?
Senator Tillis. Yeah.
Dr. Kunreuther, if we were going to look at--first, I do
not believe we should have a permanent reauthorization because
I do believe the world changes. The nature of the threats
change, and it is Congress' role to update and reauthorize
these programs.
I do think that we should have a discussion about what a
reasonable planning horizon is so that we can optimize the
products that the private sector can offer.
But if you take a look at the recoupment, the current
recoupment policies, really the pyramid of how this program
comes together, do you have any insights into specific areas
that we should look at for any sort of modernization or
reforms?
Mr. Kunreuther. Thank you for the question, Senator Tillis.
I think that one of the challenges with respect to
terrorism and events that are very, very hard to estimate the
risk is that when you have a recoupment, you are not pushing
for a premium to be set on these very catastrophic losses that
the Government would cover. And I think there are some real
advantages to that in the sense that you are then saying you
will have to pay it back with 140 percent in this particular
case. So I would favor that aspect of it.
I think a real interesting question that needs to be put on
the table as a part of the discussion is, What kind of risk
transfer mechanisms are available in the form of reinsurance
and catastrophe bonds, which are being used in other cases?
Senator Tillis. That was going to be my next question.
Mr. Kunreuther. Oh, OK.
Senator Tillis. No, that is a good one. Keep going.
Mr. Kunreuther. And how can that play an important role in
providing the kind of protection that firms would actually want
to have, that insurers would want to have in terms of knowing
that they can cover it, and the Government might want to have?
I think Pool Re, as I mentioned earlier, in the United
Kingdom has marketed a cat bond in order to be able to support
very unusual losses that they might suffer in the United
Kingdom, and that could be possibly considered by the Federal
Government as well. And I think on that level, you could have a
combination of the recoupment as well as these other forms of
risk transfer, including private reinsurance.
Senator Tillis. One of the questions, you brought up the
point of mitigation, which has really been a thorn in my side
on flood insurance program because we always talk about it, and
we never do anything about it----
Mr. Kunreuther. Challenge.
Senator Tillis.----in terms of investing and for a lot of
reasons, cost being one of them.
But when you take a look at the nature of the threat,
really the nature of the threat as it exists today versus 10
years ago, it would seem like there is only so much that we
could do with respect to mitigation. Can you enlighten me on
some of the concepts that are being discussed now?
Mr. Kunreuther. I think that is an excellent point in terms
of saying that this is a real challenge with terrorism and on a
couple of levels. That might not be the case with flood, where
you can mitigate. You can elevate a structure.
Senator Tillis. You know when the water is going to rise,
and you can model that.
Mr. Kunreuther. Right.
Senator Tillis. But you cannot necessarily model the next
attempt to take down a building.
Mr. Kunreuther. I am not an expert at the moment but want
to be more of an expert in the future. And I can comment that
in the context of the United Kingdom, there are some
suggestions for mitigation that they are now pursuing with the
government, concrete structures, other ways to actually make
these structures safer against terrorist attacks. And they are
going to be working with insurers as well as with the
government to try to deal with it.
I think one of the reasons that this is so important is
because we all want to reduce these losses, and to the extent
that you can do that, I think it might help.
Senator Tillis. Well, I think that the more we become
hardened, the fewer targets a terrorist would have. So I think
it has a public safety benefit as well. It maybe takes out an
entire tranche of either domestic or foreign terrorist. So, to
me, it is a very interesting discussion to have as we move
forward through the reauthorization to see if there is
something as a matter of public policy that we should incent
State, local, and private-sector entities to invest in, because
at the end of the day, I think it could also reduce the Federal
Government's downside risk.
Mr. Kunreuther. If I can make just one very quick point, it
does also address the affordability issue.
Senator Tillis. Yeah.
Mr. Kunreuther. If you then can have mitigation in place,
premiums could come down, and some of the comments that were
raised earlier could----
Senator Tillis. And ultimately the cost of the mitigation
itself----
Mr. Kunreuther. Yeah.
Senator Tillis.----when you have a higher demand for it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I look forward to us moving
forward and getting the plan maybe modernized, but certainly
reauthorized.
Mr. Nageer. Senator, if I could add something else to
Howard.
So, as we move from these hardened target, you get more
better protected against those targets. Softer targets appear,
and what we have been seeing is the act of terrorism impacts
not only major cities, but it is also spread across the rest of
the country, smaller cities, more softer targets, where a
perpetrator can actually get in and do some serious damage
because they cannot get into these hardened targets.
The interest of terrorism, we see it as being a nationwide
hard, soft, small-city, big-city issue well across the country.
Senator Tillis. Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Menendez.
Senator Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As a general matter, insurance markets in our country are
private, and it is unusual to have any kind of Federal
backstop, unless we have a public interest or a breakdown in
the private market where a Government role is needed to restore
functionality.
In the case of Terrorism Risk Insurance, in my view, we
have both. If terrorists attack our Country, the United States
has a national interest in minimizing the economic harm they
inflict, and in terms of market functionality, private actors
are inherently limited in the things they can do to evaluate
and reduce their risk in this regard.
Insurance companies, for example, should not start their
own intelligence agencies to improve their predictive models,
and commercial real estate owners should not conduct
counterterrorism operations to lower their premiums.
So I would like to ask our witnesses, if you can, to
elaborate on what makes terrorism different from other risks
and why a Federal backstop is, in fact, needed.
Mr. Kunreuther. I will be happy to start, and my colleagues
will chime in.
I think one of the real challenges with terrorism is that
it is so very difficult to estimate what the likelihood of a
terrorist attack will be in the future. We have been very
fortunate not to have had anything since 9/11, but the fact of
the matter is that prior to 9/11, the insurers were not worried
about this, and after 9/11, they became very worried, as we all
know. And that is one of the reasons why TRIA got passed, and I
think it was very important that it did get passed for the
reasons you were mentioning, Representative Menendez. So I
appreciate your question.
I think the fact that catastrophic losses and the potential
for catastrophic losses will discover any private insurer from
actually offering coverage, and TRIA does precisely that. It
has the backstop of actually providing the protection, with a
recoupment that I think is appropriate afterwards, for dealing
with these large losses.
And then the insurers have now found, as Tarique has
indicated with respect to his comments on the Marsh report,
that there are really a number of firms that are now willing to
buy coverage and all insurers are forced to offer it.
So I think this kind of partnership is the appropriate way.
There are changes that we can discuss.
Senator Menendez. The one thing about terrorism, as someone
who offered all of the 9/11 Commission's recommendations into
law when I was in the House of Representatives, is that we do
not know what the next form of terrorism is going to be or its
magnitude.
We never thought that an airplane, something used for
civilian travel, would become a weapon of mass destruction.
We never thought that maybe cargo coming into a port could
ultimately have a dirty bomb.
We never thought that an envelope laced with anthrax could
be a deadly weapon.
So the iterations of what this is is always beyond even as
we think ahead and try to prevent. It is a challenge. So I
think it is a very unique one.
I mean, in order to obtain a real estate or commercial
loan, banks often generally require clients to obtain terrorism
coverage. Without terrorism risk insurance, businesses lose out
on essential financing options, and I think allowing TRIA to
lapse or injecting uncertainty in the process can have serious
economic consequences.
Mr. Nageer, what happened to the commercial lending in real
estate markets in 2014 when Congress allowed TRIA to expire for
12 days?
Mr. Nageer. Thank you for the question, Senator Menendez.
So before I answer that question, I just want to add one
thing to the modeling, your question before that.
TRIA--an act of terrorism is not like an act of nature,
right? Someone actually has to decide, ``I am going to
perpetrate this act of terrorism.'' So that is very difficult
for insurers to model, that uncertainty, that human element of
it, and that is one of the issues.
Obviously, we have got a ton of data points on the
reinsurance side for natural disasters. For catastrophic
terrorism events, 9/11 is the key data point on the model, and
it does not help. You cannot be predictable with that. You can
determine the impact of these events, but you cannot predict
them. So this is why it is very difficult for insurers to model
it.
In terms of what happened in 2014, the uncertainty, it was
very hectic. I was in the insurance market at that time, and
insurers on property policies as well as workers' compensation
policies, when they were considering policies which were going
to go past December 31, 2014, started putting sunset provisions
on policies, and a sunset clause is essentially a clause which
says we elect--we reserve the right to change policies in terms
of the limits, the coverages, and the prices for what we are
offering you for terrorism insurance.
So once you got into the window of the TRIPRA potentially
not renewing at the end of 2014, we saw a preponderance of
these sunset classes on clients buying insurance, starting in
January 1st of 2013.
As you go into the next renewal of 2020, any policy which
renews comes into force on January 1, 2020, will expire January
1, 2021, and those policies have a high possibility of having
these sunset clauses being put on it.
Senator Menendez. Mr. Chairman, a final note.
I assume that if you are having a financial instrument, a
loan, a mortgage, whatever, that has multiple years and your
insurance is sunsetting within the context of that time period,
that is going to make the lending institution far less desirous
of making that a reality.
Mr. Nageer. Absolutely.
And the lender requirements on construction deals, long-
term construction deals, or clients with these lender
requirements make it quote onerous because that client then has
to go purchase insurance in an alternative market, which is
going to be added cost to their construction project or
whatever it may be. And that market is available, but maybe not
to the extent to replace the limit the clients would have
gotten on TRIA.
Senator Menendez. Maybe so.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Reed.
Senator Reed. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, gentlemen.
Mr. Webel, could you please briefly describe how nuclear,
biological, chemical, radiological terrorism events are treated
under TRIA?
Mr. Webel. Sure. Thank you for the question.
NBCR is treated essentially like any other mode of attack.
That is to say, it all works through the private insurance
policies.
What is particular about NBCR is most private insurance
policies would exclude this damage, regardless of whether it
was an accidental event or whether it was a terrorist event,
and if the private insurance policies exclude it, it is
effectively excluded under TRIA.
So, for example, Senator Menendez just mentioned a dirty
bomb or an anthrax attack. In reality, if a catastrophic attack
occurred along those lines, it is entirely possible, if not
likely, that TRIA coverage would not actually kick in because
the private insurance policies that essentially underlie the
TRIA coverage would not cover it.
Senator Reed. In that context, as we reauthorize TRIA, do
you have any suggested changes with respect to these NBCR
policies?
Mr. Webel. It is difficult because the TRIA mechanism has
worked really well through the private market and allowing the
State regulators to do the things that they do, allowing the
private insurance companies to do the things that they do.
It would certainly be possible from a generic perspective
to put aspects of TRIA directly affecting those. In the
original TRIA, there were terrorism exclusions that were
nullified. So it is certainly within Congress' authority to do
something like that with regard to NBCR.
It would also be possible to put more incentives,
essentially, into it. There have been proposals in the past to
lower the deductibles, lower the trigger, lower the co-shares
for an NBCR event, essentially incentivizing insurers to make
the coverage or perhaps a mixture of the two approaches.
Mr. Kunreuther. Could I just make one comment following up
on Mr. Webel's point?
I think that TRIA always had the intent that if the private
insurers were not covering NBCR, then there would be some
coverage by the Federal Government, if there was an NBCR loss,
but it was sort of ambiguous in the sense that it was not
really explicitly stated.
But after the passage of TRIPRA in 2015, there was a
comment by Treasury that they would be doing that.
I think if one explicitly had that in the legislation that
the Federal Government would cover that, it would avoid any of
the uncertainty as to what might happen if there was an NBCR
attack.
Senator Reed. Thank you.
Mr. Webel. But I think the question is what the mechanism
would be because the mechanism for covering losses all works
through the private insurance policies. It is a reimbursement
to private insurance companies that have sustained losses. If
they are not effectively sustaining losses because of the
exclusion, how that mechanism would work is very unclear.
Mr. Kunreuther. And the only suggestion that I would make
on that is that there would be a recoupment----
Mr. Webel. Yes.
Mr. Kunreuther.----afterwards with respect to that, and
that would be explicitly stated.
Senator Reed. The environment has obviously changed since
we first passed the TRIA Act, Mr. Webel. What things should we
do for this changing environment?
I know, again, my colleague, Senator Menendez, was talking
about who would have thought of an envelope with anthrax, et
cetera. Certainly, in the realm of cyber, who would have
thought that and name the possible catastrophes? Is there any
advice about changes?
Mr. Webel. I think that cyber is the thing that people are
looking at as the new threat, and Treasury specifically came
out in 2016 and said the newly created cyber liability line of
insurance would be covered under TRIA.
So to the extent the private policies are covering cyber,
again, it would do so, but I think that there is certainly the
possibility of using the TRIA model or incentivizing or
encouraging the market for cyber by explicitly including it in
TRIA in some way because I think it is also a little unclear in
terms of the damages that are being incurred in a cyber attack
and whether that would meet triggers, whether that would meet
deductibles and the like. And that is, I think, a real issue.
Senator Reed. Well, thank you all, gentlemen, for your
testimony. I appreciate it very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Senator Reed.
And that concludes the questioning for today's hearing.
For Senators who wish to submit questions for the record,
those questions are due by Tuesday, June 25th.
To our witnesses, I suspect you may get a fair number of
those because, as you can see, there were a number of other
hearings and other interruptions today that caused us to not
even be able to get a quorum for our Executive Session. So I
think a lot of the Senators are probably going to submit some
questions to you. We ask that as you receive those questions
that you respond as promptly as you can.
Again, we want to thank you for your expertise and for
sharing your wisdom as well as your research with us today, and
this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:33 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[Prepared statements, responses to written questions, and
additional material supplied for the record follow:]
PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN MIKE CRAPO
Today, we are joined by three witnesses who have evaluated and
written extensively on the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program, including
Mr. Tarique Nageer, Terrorism Placement and Advisory Leader with Marsh;
Dr. Howard Kunreuther, Co-Director of the Wharton Risk Management and
Decision Processes Center; and Mr. Baird Webel, Specialist in Financial
Economics with the Congressional Research Service.
The terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, devastated U.S.
citizens, households and businesses.
In the wake of those attacks, Congress passed and the President
signed into law the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 to establish
the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program, or TRIP, and to stabilize the
market for terrorism risk insurance.
Since then, Congress has reauthorized the Program three different
times in 2005, 2007, and 2015.
My goal in each reauthorization was to build on existing data to
find ways for the private insurance industry to absorb and cover the
losses for all but the largest acts of terror, ones in which the
Federal Government would likely be forced to step in were the program
not there.
Congress made several improvements to the Program during the 2015
reauthorization. It increased the program trigger from $100 million to
$200 million in increments of $20 million each year; increased the
level below which insurers are subject to mandatory recoupment $2
billion each year to what is now a floating amount based on insurers'
deductibles; and decreased the coinsurance rate from 85 percent to 80
percent in 1 percent increments each year.
That bill garnered overwhelming bipartisan support in the Senate
with a vote of 93 to 4.
The Program is once again set to expire on December 31, 2020.
Well ahead of that expiration date, the Banking Committee has
already started meeting with key stakeholders and is exploring whether
there are additional balanced reforms to improve the Program and reduce
taxpayer exposure without having a material negative effect on the cost
and take-up rates for terrorism coverage.
In 2018, the Treasury Department issued a report on the Program's
effectiveness, which also discussed key developments in the marketplace
for terrorism risk insurance.
In addition to Treasury concluding in the report that ``The Program
has accomplished its principle goals identified in TRIA,'' Treasury
also observed that ``Private reinsurance of terrorism risk has
significantly increased under the Program, and there is now increased
private reinsurance capacity for the exposures that remain wholly with
the private market under TRIP.''
Each of today's witnesses has written extensively on the Program's
effectiveness, structure and market developments.
In 2018, Dr. Kunreuther co-authored a report on the Program, which
found that ``Overall, TRIA has worked well. It has stabilized a very
disrupted market in the aftermath of 2001, making terrorism insurance
widely available and affordable. Take-up rates among enterprises small
and large are rather high and premiums a few percentage points of what
firms pay for their property insurance, even though cost and take-up
rates vary widely by size, industry, geography, and line of business.''
In its 2019 Terrorism Risk Insurance Report, Marsh discussed take-
up rates, as well as cost, geographic and corporate trends in terrorism
risk insurance in the United States, as well as globally.
Marsh emphasized in the report that `` . . . the Federal backstop
created by TRIA and reauthorized as TRIPRA--along with similar public-
private mechanisms that exist in other countries--remains crucial to
the continued stability and health of the property terrorism insurance
market.''
Finally, the Congressional Research Service has published numerous
reports, including one as recently as April 2019, providing a
comprehensive overview of the Program, its history, statutory changes
in past reauthorizations and key considerations for this Congress.
During this hearing, I look forward to hearing more about: specific
considerations in evaluating the Program's effectiveness; how the
Program has evolved over time; how the marketplace has responded to
changes to the Program made by Congress in previous reauthorizations;
what additional room exists to further reduce taxpayer exposure; and
how different market participants may react to changes in different
Program levers.
Thank you all for joining us today to share your perspectives and
research.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR SHERROD BROWN
Thank you Senator Crapo for holding the Committee's first hearing
on the reauthorization of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program. While
the Program expires at the end of next year, after the lapse at the end
of 2014 we all understand that we need to start early to make sure that
does not happen again.
The Terrorism Risk Insurance Program is critical to keeping our
economy healthy. TRIA isn't just a program that helps in the event of a
terrorist attack. Many businesses rely on this insurance in order to
get access to credit, even in healthy economic times. Without
Government assistance, the insurance market would be unable to provide
affordable insurance to these businesses, including small businesses,
across the country.
While TRIA was initially designed to be temporary after 9-11,
Republicans and Democrats have agreed several times since then that
there is value in keeping it. People may hear the word ``terrorism''
and think this doesn't apply to their community, that only businesses
in places like New York and Washington or big national landmarks would
need to worry about insuring against terrorism.
But unfortunately, terrorism isn't confined to big cities and the
groups perpetrating it don't only come from abroad. Ohio communities
that have faced threats from white supremacists groups know all too
well that this is a risk we all have to contend with.
That's why I'm glad we've been able to work on it in a bipartisan
way. We all agree there are some issues that the free market just can't
solve on its own. This is one of them, and it's an example of the kind
of successful Government intervention that is only possible when we
come together as a country.
There are some in Congress who would prefer the United States not
make these kinds of guarantees--whether it's for workers' pensions and
Social Security, for mortgages and affordable housing, for healthcare
and food for low-income families, or for protections against economic
destruction after terrorist attacks. Some politicians just aren't
interested in coming together on behalf of Americans that live in
Mansfield or Cleveland or Chillicothe in Ohio, or in Boise or Idaho
Falls from the Chairman's State.
I disagree, and I think the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program is
emblematic of our ability to use Government to make the economy work
better for everybody, especially during the most difficult of times. As
we look at other issues on this Committee, I hope we will remember the
success of this program, and our capacity to use Government to solve
tough problems when we work together.
In the last bipartisan authorization of the Program, we worked to
strike a balance, which seems to work well. By increasing the program
trigger to $200 million and gradually reducing the Government's share
in the losses, we've made the program efficient without decreasing
access to coverage. We have an opportunity to make the program even
stronger by creating certainty in the marketplace through a long-term
extension of the program. I hope we can work together to do that.
I look forward to hearing the witnesses' testimony today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR MENENDEZ FROM TARIQUE
NAGEER
Q.1. TRIA reauthorization is particularly important to my home
State of New Jersey, where there is a high population density,
important cultural centers and landmarks, and major
infrastructure, including ports, rail, and highways.
What are the consequences of letting TRIA expire for high
target States like New Jersey?
A.1. If TRIA is allowed to expire or is substantially changed,
and the mandatory make-available provision is removed, insurers
would not be obliged to offer terrorism coverage. Additionally,
the TRIA premium charged by insurers without the backstop in
place is likely to be considerably higher. The United States is
the world's largest buyer of terrorism insurance, and U.S.-
based organizations continue to purchase coverage at a high
rate. In 2018, the take-up rate for TRIPRA coverage embedded in
U.S. property policies was 62 percent (see Figure 4). Take-up
rates have remained close to 60 percent over the last several
years.
Potentially, property reinsurance capacity and competition
could positively influence the supply of terrorism capacity;
however, available coverage and limits would not be as readily
available in certain cities. In particular, this may impact
companies that have substantial property exposures in central
business districts and where reinsurance capacity would be
diminished and insufficient to meet insurers' demands.
Additionally, some industries are susceptible to certain
insurance requirements, such as mortgage lender requirements
with real estate companies. Within TRIA's current structure,
the limits available for terrorism insurance are typically
sufficient for real estate companies to meet their risk
transfer and lender requirement needs. A change in the Act's
structure could potentially cause a gap in demand and
availability. This susceptibility is not limited to ``central
business districts'' or major cities.
The main alternative for a property terrorism risk transfer
mechanism if TRIA is not reauthorized would be the standalone
terrorism insurance market. As standalone capacity is finite,
the cost of this capacity likely would be considerably higher
in areas or cities where demand is high, such as major
metropolitan areas, central business districts, iconic
buildings, ports/airports and even ``soft targets'' such as
shopping malls.
This market dynamic varies considerably by location. In
certain high-risk cities--such as New York, San Francisco,
Chicago, Houston, Atlanta or Washington, D.C.--the cost of
standalone terrorism insurance capacity can be multiples of the
current pricing for TRIA embedded as part of property programs.
Organizations that employ captives also are likely to be
affected in the event TRIA is allowed to expire or is
significantly changed. Captives are widely used to supplement
what is available in the commercial market, and, in some cases
captive insurers are the only available option for certain
layers and/or perils. This is most common in areas of higher
perceived risk, such as for property or employee-related
coverages in major cities. Generally speaking, since captives
are best suited to primary operating layers, or as a mechanism
for accessing risk transfer solutions, it is very likely that,
absent TRIA, captive utilization for terrorism coverage would
change significantly.
In addition to property insurance, other coverage lines
likely will be impacted if TRIA expires or is significantly
changed, particularly workers' compensation insurance, as
workers' compensation insurers are not permitted to exclude
terrorism from their policies. Insurers are concerned about
potential aggregation of risk, which may impact the
availability of workers' compensation insurance should TRIA
materially change or expire. Where these insurers are also
offering other lines of insurance, such as property, the
combined aggregate exposure likely will further limit their
ability or willingness to offer substantial property limits.
Likely impacts that the absence of or a serious
modification of TRIA could have on the workers' compensation
market are in the areas of pricing and capacity. It is expected
that the reinsurance market would likely increase pricing
because of the increased potential exposure. This would, in
turn, have a trickle-down effect on the primary workers'
compensation marketplace. Further, the ability of insurers to
use reinsurance capacity to manage their maximum tolerable
losses could prove more difficult, especially for the terrorism
perils of NBCR events. This could significantly alter carriers'
risk appetites and their willingness to offer coverage to
employers with large employee accumulations.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Q.2. What are consequences of letting TRIA expire for
communities around the country that are home to critical
infrastructure such as rail lines, power plants, highways,
airports, or pipelines? If these investments become more
costly, doesn't that have a nationally adverse impact?
A.2. There is insufficient standalone terrorism capacity to
cost effectively replace TRIA. This will result in increased
terrorism insurance costs and insurance market dislocation for
risks in the commercial real estate sector. This could result
in negative economic impact for industries affected by this
dislocation.
The main alternative for a property terrorism risk transfer
mechanism if TRIA is not reauthorized would be the standalone
terrorism insurance market. Since standalone capacity is
finite, the cost of this capacity likely would be considerably
higher in areas or cities where demand is high, such as major
metropolitan areas, central business districts, iconic
buildings, ports/airports for example.
The percentage of companies that purchased terrorism
insurance--and the amount they spent on terrorism insurance as
a portion of their overall premiums--varied significantly by
industry in 2018. Education institutions, media organizations,
financial institutions, and real estate companies were the most
frequent buyers while transportation and hospitality and gaming
companies spent the most on terrorism as a percentage of their
total premium spend due to their perceived vulnerability (see
Figure 5).
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Global dedicated reinsurance capital is estimated to be
$440 billion; dedicated reinsurance capital in North America is
estimated to be between $120 billion and $140 billion.
Reinsurance capacity for terrorism, however, is dependent on a
reinsurer's preference, appetite, expertise and aggregate
constraints.
It is not unforeseeable that changes to the backstop could
result in a withdrawal of smaller carriers away from the
terrorism segment, while larger carriers may or may not
continue to write--and absorb more--risk throughout the cycle
of market dislocation. This would have an impact on the
marketplace with fewer options available for small businesses,
potentially higher insurance expenses and less available for
growth and investments.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR WARREN FROM TARIQUE
NAGEER
Q.1. Certain mass shootings, such as those that occurred in Las
Vegas, NV, Sutherland Springs, TX, and Newtown, CT, have not
been certified by the Treasury Secretary as acts of terrorism.
Therefore, these incidents have not been regarded as qualifying
events for terrorism risk insurance, in part, because those
attacks did not meet current law's requirement of being ``part
of an effort to coerce the civilian population of the United
States or to influence the policy or affect the conduct of the
United States Government by coercion.'' Given the high
frequency of mass shootings in the United States, is there a
public policy interest in certifying certain mass shootings
committed by individuals as qualifying events for terrorism
risk insurance purposes, even if they are not demonstrably
intended to coerce Americans or influence U.S. Government
policy? Please explain why or why not.
A.1. Unfortunately, mass shootings are an important topic and,
as such, there are policy initiatives underway to address them.
The private insurance market has developed forms of coverage to
respond to active assailant threats--helping organizations and
individuals victimized by such attacks to recover and mitigate
their future risk. This insurance, active assailant coverage,
complements the general liability and property coverage that
most businesses already purchase, offering another layer of
protection against the threat of assailants. Various active
assailant insurance products available via commercial insurers
typically offer affirmative coverage that is triggered by
premediated malicious physical attacks by active assailants who
are physically present and armed. These policies can typically
offer:
A.
Property damage, business interruption, and extra expense
coverage;
B.
Legal liability coverage;
C.
Nonphysical damage coverage;
D.
Loss of revenue and denial of access coverage;
E.
Reimbursement for costs for public relations consulting,
crisis management, medical services, counseling and/or
psychiatric care, hiring of additional staff and added
security.
Beyond purchasing insurance coverage, it's vital that
businesses carefully consider their potential risk and actively
engage in
prevention and response preparedness activities to help reduce
the
potential loss of life, injuries, and damage to their and
others'
property. The Department of Homeland Security offers various
active shooter preparation guidance on its website: https://
www.dhs.gov/cisa/active-shooter-preparedness.
Please see Addendum 1 for additional information on
dedicated coverage for active assailant events.
Q.2. According to Congressional Research Service (CRS)
specialist Baird Webel's written testimony, the current
terrorism risk insurance program ``protect[s] consumers--by
requiring insurers that offer [Terrorism Risk Insurance Act]-
covered lines of insurance to make terrorism insurance
available prospectively to their commercial policyholders.''
Are there other actions that Congress or Federal agencies could
take that would enhance protections for consumers in the
terrorism risk insurance market?
A.2. Terrorism insurance pools should continue to evolve their
scope and scale to provide the requisite response and stability
for companies to operate securely.
Certain market segments are required to provide coverage
(e.g., workers' compensation, unlimited, and for all terror
perils) versus having greater flexibility (e.g., property
terrorism, particularly nuclear, biological, chemical and
radiological terrorism coverage, where it can be excluded if
the insured does not elect to purchase the coverage).
It would be beneficial to investigate requiring elements of
nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological terrorism
coverage that would allow the Federal Government to reduce its
exposure to uninsured losses resulting from a NBCR loss
scenario and further develop the private market appetite.
Any actions should be reviewed with due consideration to
avoid insurers pulling out of specific coverage lines, which
would thus have a negative effect on policyholders due to
reduced availability.
Q.3. According to CRS specialist Baird Webel's written
testimony, ``Federal law does not limit what insurers can
charge for terrorism risk insurance, although State regulators
typically have the authority under State law to modify
excessive, inadequate, or unfairly discriminatory rates.''
While one of the original goals of the Terrorism Risk Insurance
Program is to preserve State regulation of insurance, is there
a public policy interest in developing a Federal limit on what
insurers can charge for terrorism risk insurance, or is the
current State-centric framework sufficient to prevent abusive
practices in the market?
A.3. In the current marketplace, terrorism price competition
among insurers is driven in part by modeling the exposure and
reviewing correlated risks across multiple terrorism exposed
lines of business (e.g., those insuring both property and
workers' compensation for the same risk(s)).
Insurers measure their accumulations of risk and price
their business based on the physical address level of data and
differentiates those insured(s) with different risk profiles
within each covered line of business.
The action to minimize the negative market impact arising
from the uncertainty around TRIA's future and serve the
marketplace well would be to provide clear guidance on how a
reauthorization might look, as soon as possible. Subject
policies with effective dates on (and after) January 1, 2020,
that are issued with annual terms, are creating a potential
(and unknown) increased net exposure to insurers post the
scheduled December 31, 2020, expiration of TRIA.
The uncertainty with TRIA will cause insurance carriers to
consider issuing unilateral policy endorsement provisions that
will allow them to increase the price for terrorism coverage
mid-term once it is known how TRIA will look going forward
(either materially changed or nonrenewed) post its expiration.
This effectively pushes the uncertainty in the market to the
commercial insurance buyers and employers of all sizes.
Further, it leaves open for interpretation the definition of
``materially changed'' and eliminates the ability for the
insurance buyer to maintain coverage and cost certainty.
Q.4. On December 27, 2016, the Treasury Department issued
``guidance regarding how insurance recently classified as
`Cyber Liability' for purposes of reporting premiums and losses
to State insurance regulators will be treated under TRIA and
Treasury's regulations for the Program (Program regulations).''
That guidance ``confirms that stand-alone cyber insurance
policies reported under the `Cyber Liability' line are included
in the definition of `property and casualty insurance' under
TRIA and are thus subject to the disclosure requirements and
other requirements in TRIA and the Program regulations[.]
Furthermore, that guidance noted, ``Cyber risk insurance
remains an evolving insurance market, both in terms of product
development and regulatory oversight.'' Similarly, cyberspace
remains a consistently evolving threat environment. At this
time, would you recommend any updates to the Treasury
Department's guidance on cyber insurance policies? Please
explain why or why not.
A.4. TRIA serves an essential role to the insurance market by
injecting stability into several terrorism-related lines of
insurance. With regard to cybersecurity, terrorism remains a
present and growing threat vector. That risk is typically
covered under cyber insurance policies, but may also impact
other lines of coverage, including property or workers'
compensation.
One hurdle for using TRIA to address acts of cyberterrorism
could be the challenge of attribution. ``Attribution of attacks
can be difficult. This is usually dependent on technical means
of attribution. In malicious cyber actions, spoofing or
obfuscation of an identity most often occurs. It is not easy to
know who conducts malicious cyber activity.''\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``Strategies for Resolving the Cyber Attribution Challenge,''
U.S. Air Force Research Institute (accessed at https://
media.defense.gov/2017/May/11/2001745613/-1/-1/0/CPP_0001_yanna
kogeorgos_cyber_ttribution_challenge.pdf).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress should consider whether the Secretary of the
Treasury can declare a certified act of terrorism without
certain attribution. Potentially, the Secretary could have the
flexibility to certify an act of terrorism based on factors
such as the objective of the attack and the impact of the
attack.
Guidance on the Secretary's flexibility could potential be
addressed in the report language that accompanies the passage
of a reauthorization of TRIPRA.
Addendum 1
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR JONES FROM TARIQUE
NAGEER
Q.1. Cyber attacks are gaining traction as a preferred method
to terrorize individuals and organizations. In 2016, the
Treasury Department issued guidance that clarified
cyberterrorism is included in TRIA.
Some believe that Russia interference in the 2016
Presidential election by manipulating voters with fake
social media accounts is considered cyberterrorism.
This type of cyber-
terrorism has immeasurable consequences and affects
Americans that would not even participate in TRIA.
Additionally, the Port of Mobile keeps track of
containers that are to be shipped across the country.
The Port of Mobile is an important part of Alabama's
economy. If an organization decided to pressure Alabama
into particular policy positions by attacking their
computer system it would have dramatic effects on
business owners dependent on the Port to ship their
merchandise.
What cyberterrorism looks like and the effects on
people is very different from physical terrorist
attacks. How should TRIA adapt to the growing
prevalence of cyber attacks that gives private
insurance a backstop but also provides policy holders
with protection?
A.1. In 2016, the U.S. Department of the Treasury responded to
the growing risk of cyberterrorism by clarifying that losses
incurred under cyber insurance policies would be eligible under
TRIA.
Accordingly, TRIA may already serve as a backstop for cyber
insurance carriers in the event of a certified act of
cyberterrorism. Moreover, acts of terrorism, including acts of
cyberterrorism, may not qualify for TRIA because the impacts of
those attacks fail to meet the statutory loss thresholds.
At this time, there is no basis to believe that TRIA should
be altered to provide further support to the cyber insurance
industry, or to support other covered lines of insurance for
cyber perils. However, Congress may consider how systemic risks
may arise from cyber attacks that do not qualify as acts of
cyberterrorism, and how well the Nation is prepared to respond
to such systemic attacks.
Q.2. Often TRIA is discussed with large cities in mind, but
many smaller communities can be targets of terrorist
activities. This is shown with the Charleston, South Carolina,
church shooting when a white supremacist murdered nine people.
Small communities like this are likely to receive insurance
from local agents.
Also, Alabama is home to two extremely popular
football teams, University of Alabama and Auburn
University. The Iron Bowl is an annual game between
Alabama and Auburn and draws large crowds from each
school. This could easily be a target for terrorist
organizations.
How would reforms to TRIA affect smaller
communities, particularly their premiums and the extent
of their coverage?
A.2. A change in the $200m industry loss may have an outsized
impact on small carriers if:
A.
A loss occurs in a region/facility with few other insured
structures or employees in close proximity;
B.
The carrier in question is liable for the majority
insured loss, i.e., this is not a subscription risk and
is placed almost entirely with one market;
C.
In a year with a ``swarm'' of small attacks, the insurer
in question takes a loss from one or two small-to-
moderate size losses, but the total damage to the U.S.
property/casualty industry is not significant and fails
to qualify for certification.
Small carriers could surmount this challenge by managing
deployed limits and diversifying their footprints away from
regions/locations of peak exposures. This could come at the
cost of competitiveness or availability of capacity for
policyholders and have a negative short-term impact on the
carrier.
One way to mitigate the impact of these changes would be to
phase in the aggregate increase over a defined period of time,
e.g., $25m increase per year for a decade. This would allow for
more manageable budgeting and business planning, and mitigate
market disruption.
Changing the company deductible, however, would likely have
an even more pronounced impact, especially on the small
insurers. For example, if the company deductible were to
increase by 10 points to 30 percent, a majority of small-to-
medium sized carriers who rely more on TRIA's existence, and
whose program deductible represents the largest percentage of
policyholder surplus, will have to re-strategize regarding the
company's:
A.
Defined per occurrence risk tolerance;
B.
Reinsurance buying strategy;
C.
Aggregate amount of limit deployed in the marketplace;
D.
Pricing for terrorism risk;
E.
Ratings agency scrutiny.
Ratings agency scrutiny is particularly important for small
and mutual carriers. Carriers must submit annual assessments of
their net-of-TRIPRA and reinsurance accumulations. An increase
in the deductible mid-term could potentially lead to a gap in
terrorism reinsurance coverage, and consequently, could lead to
a failed stress test. If this were to occur, it may damage the
firm's financial strength rating, and impede its ability to
secure new business.
In 2017, nearly 800 U.S.-based carriers wrote $215 billion
in TRIPRA-eligible premium, with a combined policyholder
surplus (PHS) of $733 billion.
Considering the current 20 percent deductible requirement
and PHS as a filter, Guy Carpenter's analysis concludes that
small- to mid-size insurers could be substantially more
vulnerable to the annual increases in the TRIPRA industry
trigger and their overall net retentions as a percentage of PHS
(see Table 1).
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Insurers with $1 billion in surplus and relatively larger
TRIPRA deductibles (over $200 million) tend to manage their
conventional terrorism exposures and accumulations rather than
be dependent on TRIPRA recoveries.
Insurers with less than $500 million in surplus and
relatively more exposure to terrorism losses are more likely to
fall under the widening ``TRIPRA coverage gap'' that exposes
them to a loss scenario where TRIPRA may not be industry
triggered, leaving private reinsurance as their only source of
surplus protection.
It is not unforeseeable that changes to the backstop could
result in a withdrawal of smaller carriers away from the
terrorism segment, while larger carriers may or may not
continue to write--and absorb more--risk throughout the cycle
of market dislocation. This would have an impact on the
marketplace with fewer options available for small businesses,
potentially higher insurance expenses and less capital
available for growth and investments.
If changes are considered, we would recommend gradually
phasing in any increases in the deductible over a planned time
horizon. This would mitigate short-term market disruptions and
allow smaller companies time to adequately capitalize
themselves to take on an increased share within the private
market.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR SINEMA FROM TARIQUE
NAGEER
Q.1. What types of uncertainty will the insurance market and
insured entities experience if Congress waits too long to
consider reauthorization of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act
(TRIA)? How will that timing affect entities seeking coverage
or renewal of coverage?
A.1. The uncertainty around the future of the Terrorism Risk
Insurance Program Reauthorization Act (TRIPRA)--scheduled to
expire on December 31, 2020--can significantly affect the
property/casualty insurance industry.
If TRIPRA is not renewed by Congress, the property
insurance industry will be left with no Federal backstop for
losses from certified acts of terrorism. As policies with
effective dates after December 31, 2019, may extend beyond the
expiration date of the legislation, insurers must determine in
advance how to deal with their terrorism exposures as of that
date.
Property insurers may either accept the terrorism liability
on all in-force policies on a fully net basis or place sunset
clauses on policies written after December 31, 2020. Such a
clause would cancel the terrorism coverage effective December
31, 2020, if legislation extending TRIPRA is not passed by
Congress and signed by the President.
In addition to property insurance, other coverage lines
likely will be impacted if TRIA expires or is significantly
changed, particularly workers' compensation insurance, as
workers' compensation insurers are not permitted to exclude
terrorism from their policies. Insurers are concerned about
potential aggregation of risk, which may impact the
availability of workers' compensation insurance should TRIA
materially change or expire. Where these insurers are also
offering other lines of insurance, such as property, the
combined aggregate exposure likely will further limit their
ability or willingness to offer substantial property limits.
Likely impacts that the absence of or a serious
modification of TRIA could have on the workers' compensation
market are in the areas of pricing and capacity. It is expected
that the reinsurance market would likely increase pricing
because of the increased potential exposure. This would, in
turn, have a trickle-down effect on the primary workers'
compensation marketplace. Further, the ability of insurers to
use reinsurance capacity to manage their maximum tolerable
losses could prove more difficult, especially for the terrorism
perils of NBCR events. This could significantly alter carriers'
risk appetites and their willingness to offer coverage to
employers with large employee accumulations.
Q.2. Should a lapse in terrorism coverage provided by TRIA
occur, what effects do you foresee on the availability and
pricing of said coverage?
A.2. If Congress does not extend or renew TRIPRA, the market
dynamics for terrorism insurance will be further disrupted and
may result in increased pricing as capacity shrinks.
In the absence of a federally mandated offer of TRIA
terrorism coverage, there remains the strong likelihood that
insurance and capital markets will choose not to offer
terrorism coverage--using the premise that there is a higher
certainty of returns elsewhere.
TRIA's expiration or substantial modification at extension
will
almost certainly affect embedded TRIA coverage, standalone
terrorism pricing/demand for capacity and TRIA captive
programs. Terrorism insurance capacity may be difficult to
acquire at reasonable cost for insureds with significant
exposures in a central business district of a major (Tier 1)
city, or if the properties are
perceived as potential targets for terrorism attacks, and/or
where there have been instances of foiled plots.
The main alternative for a property terrorism risk transfer
mechanism if TRIA is not reauthorized would be the standalone
terrorism insurance market. As standalone capacity is finite,
the cost of this capacity likely would be considerably higher
in areas or cities where demand is high, such as major
metropolitan areas,
central business districts, iconic buildings, ports/airports,
and even ``soft targets'' such as shopping malls.
This market dynamic varies considerably by location. In
certain high-risk cities--such as New York, San Francisco,
Chicago, Houston, Atlanta or Washington, D.C.--the cost of
standalone terrorism insurance capacity can be multiples of the
current pricing for TRIA embedded as part of property programs.
Organizations that employ captives also are likely to be
affected in the event TRIA is allowed to expire or is
significantly changed. Captives are widely used to supplement
what is available in the commercial market, and, in some cases
captive insurers are the only available option for certain
layers and/or perils. This is most common in areas of higher
perceived risk, such as for property or employee-related
coverages in major cities. Generally speaking, since captives
are best suited to primary operating layers, or as a mechanism
for accessing risk transfer solutions, it is very likely that,
absent TRIA, captive utilization for terrorism coverage would
change significantly.
Q.3. In December 2016, the Department of the Treasury issued
guidance which clarified that losses from cyber-terrorist
attacks were to be treated the same as commercial property and
casualty losses. Do you think this guidance sufficiently covers
all forms of cyber attacks?
A.3. The December 2016 guidance from the U.S. Department of the
Treasury addressed a unique issue related to TRIA's coverage of
cyber perils.
A core insuring agreement for cyber insurance is data asset
restoration. When malware encrypts, corrupts or destroys data,
a cyber insurance policy can reimburse the cost to restore or
recreate that data. This coverage may also include
reimbursement for the cost of replacing servers, devices or
other components that have been corrupted beyond repair, often
referred to as ``bricking.'' In addition to this coverage being
available in the cyber insurance market, some property carriers
may also offer this coverage. Other carriers, however, may
exclude this coverage because the loss does not result from a
physical event, such as fire or explosion.
Prior to December 2016, Treasury was silent on whether
cyber insurance should be included or excluded from TRIA. As a
result, if a quickly replicating, data destroying malware
created a widespread data corruption event and corresponding
loss of revenue from business interruption, such as NotPetya,
TRIA may have responded differently to losses under property
insurance policies and cyber insurance policies, even though
they responded to the same losses from the same peril.
Accordingly, Treasury's guidance clarified that losses from
cyber-terrorist attacks that were subject to the coverage of
cyber insurance policies were to be treated the same as
commercial property and casualty losses.
Q.4. How do insurers effectively measure and quantify loss from
cyber attacks?
A.4. One of Marsh's services as a trusted cyber-risk adviser is
to help quantify the potential impact of a cyber attack and to
help clients establish controls for ongoing assessment of cyber
risk. In some instances, such as data breaches, this can be
based on modeling from prior claims activity. In other
instances, such as losses from loss of revenues and extra
expense from malware events, the lack of claims history may
require alternative means of quantification that involves
assessment of clients' cyber assets, review of the client's
process and procedures for protecting assets and proposing
scenarios that could lead to large loss. With collaborative
engagements by Marsh brokers and consultants, Marsh offers
clients the opportunity to dispel the uncertainty of their
cyber exposures and devote adequate resources with optimal
results.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR MENENDEZ FROM HOWARD
KUNREUTHER
Q.1. TRIA reauthorization is particularly important to my home
State of New Jersey, where there is a high population density,
important cultural centers and landmarks, and major
infrastructure, including ports, rail, and highways.
What are the consequences of letting TRIA expire for high
target States like New Jersey?
A.1. The consequences of letting TRIA expire for high target
States like New Jersey could be highly significant because many
private insurers will likely refuse to offer coverage against
terrorism losses to commercial firms because of a concern with
the consequences of a catastrophic loss to their operations.
Those insurers considering offering coverage will very likely
charge much higher premiums than if they are protected by TRIA.
The likelihood of a cyber-terrorist attack and its consequences
are highly ambiguous so they will focus on worst case scenarios
in specifying the price of terrorism coverage.
Q.2. What are consequences of letting TRIA expire for
communities around the country that are home to critical
infrastructure such as rail lines, power plants, highways,
airports, or pipelines? If these investments become more
costly, doesn't that have a nationally adverse impact?
A.2. If TRIA expires and critical infrastructure is uninsured
and suffers a severe loss from a terrorist attack, this would
have a
nationally adverse impact. The President might issue a disaster
declaration so that Federal assistance could be provided.
Including infrastructure losses as part of TRIA could encourage
investments now in mitigating future losses through long-term
loans and premium reductions, as noted in my testimony.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR WARREN FROM HOWARD
KUNREUTHER
Q.1. Certain mass shootings, such as those that occurred in Las
Vegas, NV, Sutherland Springs, TX, and Newtown, CT, have not
been certified by the Treasury Secretary as acts of terrorism.
Therefore, these incidents have not been regarded as qualifying
events for terrorism risk insurance, in part, because those
attacks did not meet current law's requirement of being ``part
of an effort to coerce the civilian population of the United
States or to influence the policy or affect the conduct of the
United States Government by coercion.'' Given the high
frequency of mass shootings in the United States, is there a
public policy interest in certifying certain mass shootings
committed by individuals as qualifying events for terrorism
risk insurance purposes, even if they are not demonstrably
intended to coerce Americans or influence U.S. Government
policy? Please explain why or why not.
A.1. To address this important issue, the Department of the
Treasury needs to interact with private insurers to determine
whether insurers now provide protection against mass shootings
that may not be caused by terrorists. If there is sufficient
private insurance coverage then it may not be necessary to
include these events under TRIA. If there is limited coverage
against mass shootings, then it will be important to determine
who pays for the losses from these events and whether a case
can be made to consider including these events under TRIA when
it is considered for renewal in 2020.
Q.2. According to Congressional Research Service (CRS)
specialist Baird Webel's written testimony, the current
terrorism risk insurance program ``protect[s] consumers--by
requiring insurers that offer [Terrorism Risk Insurance Act]-
covered lines of insurance to make terrorism insurance
available prospectively to their commercial policyholders.''
Are there other actions that Congress or Federal agencies could
take that would enhance protections for consumers in the
terrorism risk insurance market?
A.2. No response provided.
Q.3. According to CRS specialist Baird Webel's written
testimony, ``Federal law does not limit what insurers can
charge for terrorism risk insurance, although State regulators
typically have the authority under State law to modify
excessive, inadequate, or unfairly discriminatory rates.''
While one of the original goals of the Terrorism Risk Insurance
Program is to preserve State regulation of insurance, is there
a public policy interest in developing a Federal limit on what
insurers can charge for terrorism risk insurance, or is the
current State-centric framework sufficient to prevent abusive
practices in the market?
A.3. I feel that insurers should be able to charge premiums
that reflect their risks, so State regulators should not
restrict the premiums insurers can charge. It will be important
for State regulators to make sure that the premiums are high
enough so that the insurers has a low chance of insolvency if
it suffers a catastrophic loss. One of the important reasons
for renewing TRIA is to provide a Federal backstop if insurers'
total losses exceed a certain amount. In my testimony I
indicated that the Wharton Risk Center's study revealed that
total insured losses from a terrorist attack would have to
exceed $60 billion before the Federal Government would be
responsible for covering any insured losses.
Q.4. On December 27, 2016, the Treasury Department issued
``guidance regarding how insurance recently classified as
`Cyber Liability' for purposes of reporting premiums and losses
to State insurance regulators will be treated under TRIA and
Treasury's regulations for the Program (Program regulations).''
That guidance ``confirms that stand-alone cyber insurance
policies reported under the `Cyber Liability' line are included
in the definition of `property and casualty insurance' under
TRIA and are thus subject to the disclosure requirements and
other requirements in TRIA and the Program regulations[.]
Furthermore, that guidance noted, ``Cyber risk insurance
remains an evolving insurance market, both in terms of product
development and regulatory oversight.'' Similarly, cyberspace
remains a consistently evolving threat environment. At this
time, would you recommend any updates to the Treasury
Department's guidance on cyber insurance policies? Please
explain why or why not.
A.4. In my testimony I noted that cyberterrorism is an
interdependent risk where compromising one computer network can
cause losses to many others in the interconnected system. The
existence of such interdependencies provides challenges to
insurers in determining whether to offer protection against
this risk in their terrorism coverage and if so what premium to
charge. For this reason I feel that it is important that the
Department of the Treasury interact with private insurers to
determine whether cyberterrorism should be included under the
TRIA backstop. By including it in TRIA both private insurers
and the Federal Government would form a private-public
partnership to deal with a risk where the likelihood of a
cyber-terrorist attack and its consequences are highly
ambiguous. With a backstop from the Federal Government if the
losses from a cyber terrorist were extremely large, insurers
would feel more comfortable insuring this risk and would
consider charging a lower premium than if they were fully
responsible for a catastrophic loss.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR JONES FROM HOWARD
KUNREUTHER
Q.1. Cyber attacks are gaining traction as a preferred method
to terrorize individuals and organizations. In 2016, the
Treasury Department issued guidance that clarified
cyberterrorism is included in TRIA.
Some believe that Russia interference in the 2016
Presidential election by manipulating voters with fake social
media accounts is considered cyberterrorism. This type of
cyberterrorism has immeasurable consequences and effects
Americans that would not even participate in TRIA.
Additionally, the Port of Mobile keeps track of containers
that are to be shipped across the country. The Port of Mobile
is an important part of Alabama's economy. If an organization
decided to pressure Alabama into particular policy positions by
attacking their computer system it would have dramatic effects
on business owners dependent on the Port to ship their
merchandise.
What cyberterrorism looks like and the effects on people is
very different from physical terrorist attacks. How should TRIA
adapt to the growing prevalence of cyber attacks that gives
private insurance a backstop but also provides policy holders
with protection?
A.1. In my testimony I noted that cyberterrorism is an
interdependent risk, where compromising one computer network
can cause losses to many others in the interconnected system.
The existence of such interdependencies provides challenges to
insurers in determining whether to offer protection against
this risk in their terrorism coverage and, if so, what premium
to charge. For this reason I feel that it is important that the
Department of the
Treasury interact with private insurers to determine whether
cyberterrorism should be included under the TRIA backstop. By
including it in TRIA, both private insurers and the Federal
Government would form a private-public partnership to deal with
a risk where the likelihood of a cyber-terrorist attack and its
consequences are highly ambiguous. With a backstop from the
Federal Government, if the losses from a cyber terrorist were
extremely large, insurers would feel more comfortable insuring
this risk and would consider charging a lower premium than if
they were fully responsible for a catastrophic loss.
Q.2. Often TRIA is discussed with large cities in mind, but
many smaller communities can be targets of terrorist
activities. This is shown with the Charleston, South Carolina,
church shooting when a white supremacist murdered nine people.
Small communities like this are likely to receive insurance
from local agents.
Also, Alabama is home to two extremely popular football
teams, University of Alabama and Auburn University. The Iron
Bowl is an annual game between Alabama and Auburn and draws
large crowds from each school. This could easily be a target
for terrorist organizations.
How would reforms to TRIA affect smaller communities,
particularly their premiums and the extent of their coverage?
A.2. In setting premiums for terrorist coverage, insurers are
concerned with the size of the program trigger for TRIA. In
2020 if a terrorist attack creates insured losses less than
$200 million, then TRIA will not be triggered. In this case
there will be no Federal backstop. If insurers are concerned
with having to be responsible for the total losses from mass
shootings or a terrorist attack in a small community, they are
likely to charge higher premiums and reduce their coverage.
Some insurers may decide not to provide protection against mass
shootings or to firms in smaller communities from losses from a
terrorist attack. In considering the
renewal of TRIA, consideration should be given to the size of
the program trigger and whether losses from mass shootings from
terrorists should be covered by TRIA even if the total insured
losses were lower than the TRIA program trigger. If losses from
mass shootings would be covered by TRIA, insurers are likely to
charge lower premiums and provide more coverage against these
terrorist-related disasters.
------
RESPONSE TO WRITTEN QUESTION OF SENATOR SINEMA FROM HOWARD
KUNREUTHER
Q.1. In December 2016, the Department of the Treasury issued
guidance which clarified that losses from cyber-terrorist
attacks were to be treated the same as commercial property and
casualty losses. Do you think this guidance sufficiently covers
all forms of cyber attacks? How do insurers effectively measure
and quantify loss from cyber attacks?
A.1. In my testimony I noted that cyberterrorism is an
interdependent risk where compromising one computer network can
cause losses to many others in the interconnected system. The
existence of such interdependencies provides challenges to
insurers in determining whether to offer protection against
this risk in their terrorism coverage and if so what premium to
charge. For this
reason I feel that it is important that the Department of the
Treasury interact with private insurers to determine whether
cyberterrorism should be included under the TRIA backstop. By
including it in TRIA both private insurers and the Federal
Government would form a private-public partnership to deal with
a risk where the likelihood of a cyber-terrorist attack and its
consequences are highly ambiguous. With a backstop from the
Federal Government if the losses from a cyber terrorist were
extremely large, insurers would feel more comfortable insuring
this risk and would consider charging a lower premium than if
they were fully responsible for a catastrophic loss.
------
RESPONSE TO WRITTEN QUESTION OF SENATOR MENENDEZ FROM BAIRD
WEBEL
Q.1. TRIA reauthorization is particularly important to my home
State of New Jersey, where there is a high population density,
important cultural centers and landmarks, and major
infrastructure, including ports, rail, and highways.
What are the consequences of letting TRIA expire for high
target States like New Jersey?
What are consequences of letting TRIA expire for
communities around the country that are home to critical
infrastructure such as rail lines, power plants, highways,
airports, or pipelines? If these investments become more
costly, doesn't that have a nationally adverse impact?
A.1. TRIA acts to lower the cost of terrorism insurance in two
primary ways. (1) It directly subsidizes terrorism insurance by
providing reinsurance coverage for no upfront premiums; and (2)
it expands the supply of terrorism insurance through the
requirement that companies offer terrorism insurance to
commercial policyholders. TRIA expiration would remove both the
direct subsidy and the extra supply from the market and thus
would likely raise the cost of terrorism insurance. The impact
of this would be felt to the greatest extent in high target
States as insurers would likely seek to reduce their overall
exposure to such States. In addition, it would be in such
States that lenders would be most likely to require terrorism
coverage before providing loans for large commercial real
estate projects. A similar dynamic would also come into play
with critical infrastructure, thus raising costs for such
projects and potentially having a nationally adverse impact as
critical infrastructure is necessary for the economy
nationwide. If TRIA were to expire, however, Congress might
also consider redirecting the resources that are devoted to
TRIA to some other use that could support critical
infrastructure.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR WARREN FROM BAIRD
WEBEL
Q.1. Certain mass shootings, such as those that occurred in Las
Vegas, NV, Sutherland Springs, TX, and Newtown, CT, have not
been certified by the Treasury Secretary as acts of terrorism.
Therefore, these incidents have not been regarded as qualifying
events for terrorism risk insurance, in part, because those
attacks did not meet current law's requirement of being ``part
of an effort to coerce the civilian population of the United
States or to influence the policy or affect the conduct of the
U.S. Government by coercion.'' Given the high frequency of mass
shootings in the United States, is there a public policy
interest in certifying certain mass shootings committed by
individuals as qualifying events for terrorism risk insurance
purposes, even if they are not demonstrably intended to coerce
Americans or influence U.S. Government policy? Please explain
why or why not.
A.1. TRIA requires the following for certification of a
terrorist attack under the statute. An act must:
(i)
to be an act of terrorism;
(ii)
to be a violent act or an act that is dangerous to----
(I)
human life;
(II)
property; or
(III)
infrastructure;
(iii)
to have resulted in damage within the United States,
or outside of the United States in the case of----
(I)
an air carrier or vessel described in paragraph
(5)(B); or
(II)
the premises of a United States mission; and
(iv)
to have been committed by an individual or individuals,
as part of an effort to coerce the civilian population
of the United States or to influence the policy or
affect the conduct of the U.S. Government by coercion.
In addition, the statute requires that the act of terrorism
cause more than $5 million in aggregate property casualty
insurance losses in order to be certified. Losses incurred for
in health or life insurance are not covered under TRIA.
The certification of an event as an act of terrorism under
TRIA serves a relatively narrow statutory purpose. It solely
relates to potential sharing of insured losses by the Federal
Government and is not referenced in other national security or
judicial statutes. In past experience, particularly following
the 2013 Boston Marathon bombing, the President in a statement
identified an attack as an act of terror, but the relatively
low level of insured property casualty losses meant that, under
the TRIA criteria, it could not be certified regardless of the
motives involved. Due to the precise nature of terrorism
exclusions in insurance policies covering some of the Boston
businesses who suffered losses due to the bombing, TRIA
certification in that case would likely have resulted in
coverage gaps and less payments to insureds.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See, for example, ``Mass. Regulator on Boston Bombing Claims,
TRIA Reauthorization Effort,'' Insurance Journal, April 23, 2014, at
https://www.insurancejournal.com/news/east/2014/04/23/327033.htm; and
``Insurance Payout May Depend on Whether Boston Bombing Was `Terrorist
Act,' '' ABC News, at https://abcnews.go.com/Business/boston-firms-
wait-terrorism-certification-insurance-payout/story?id=19043385.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Many mass shooting events may fall into a similar category
as the Marathon bombing. While they may inflict a tragic toll
on the life and health of those involved, mass shootings may
not cause losses in commercial property casualty insurance
sufficient to meet the TRIA criteria for certification. In such
cases, only addressing the TRIA criteria with regard to motives
may have relatively little effect on potential certification of
mass shootings as terrorist events under TRIA. In addition,
certification is only the first threshold that must be crossed
before the Government would share losses under TRIA. The
combination of the program trigger and the insurer deductible
make it unlikely that the certification of most mass shootings
as eligible for coverage under TRIA would result in any actual
loss sharing.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ For example, recent press reports suggest approximately $750
million in insured damages for the Las Vegas shooting (``MGM Sees $800
Million Las Vegas Shooting Settlement; $751 Million Covered by
Insurance,'' Insurance Journal, May 20, 2019). The primary insurer
reported was Zurich American Insurance (``MGM Resorts Sues Zurich
American Insurance for Las Vegas Shooting Defense Costs,'' Insurance
Journal, June 24, 2019). According to data supplied to CRS by the
Treasury Department, Zurich's TRIA insurer deductible would be
approximately $1.4 billion. Thus, if the press reports are accurate,
even if the Las Vegas shooting were certified, no Federal loss sharing
would occur.
Q.2. According to Congressional Research Service (CRS)
specialist Baird Webel's written testimony, the current
terrorism risk insurance program ``protect[s] consumers--by
requiring insurers that offer [Terrorism Risk Insurance Act]-
covered lines of insurance to make terrorism insurance
available prospectively to their commercial policyholders.''
Are there other actions that Congress or Federal agencies could
take that would enhance protections for consumers in the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
terrorism risk insurance market?
A.2. Beyond the ``make available'' provisions TRIA effectively
leaves terrorism insurance consumer protection issues (such as
affordability of terrorism insurance or the precise details of
terrorism insurance policies) to the State insurance regulators
as is the case in commercial insurance generally. This primacy
of State insurance regulation is codified in the 1945 McCarran-
Ferguson Act.\3\ It is possible for Congress to revisit this
aspect of McCarran-Ferguson with regard to terrorism insurance,
as was done to a degree in the original 2002 TRIA, which also
nullified terrorism exclusions that previously had been
approved by State insurance regulators at the time. Such
increased Federal oversight of terrorism insurance, however,
would require specific statutory change as the Federal agencies
who might provide such oversight, including the Department of
the Treasury, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, and the
Federal Trade Commission, currently have little or no authority
to oversee insurance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Codified at 15 U.S.C. Sec. Sec.
1011-1015.
Q.3. According to CRS specialist Baird Webel's written
testimony, ``Federal law does not limit what insurers can
charge for terrorism risk insurance, although State regulators
typically have the authority under State law to modify
excessive, inadequate, or unfairly discriminatory rates.''
While one of the original goals of the Terrorism Risk Insurance
Program is to preserve State regulation of insurance, is there
a public policy interest in developing a Federal limit on what
insurers can charge for terrorism risk insurance, or is the
current State-centric framework sufficient to prevent abusive
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
practices in the market?
A.3. The State regulatory system generally treats commercial
insurance lines, such as those covered under TRIA, to less
direct oversight on consumer protection grounds than personal
lines, such as homeowners insurance or automobile insurance.
This is typically justified on the grounds that the businesses
purchasing commercial lines are seen as sophisticated consumers
who are better able to understand insurance contracts and seek
out the best prices.\4\ Thus, for example, there is little
direct rate regulation in commercial insurance compared to
personal insurance where some States require prior approval of
rate changes, or have after-the-fact approval processes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Similar theories are present in financial regulation under
Federal law, such as the concept of an ``accredited investor'' used by
the Securities and Exchange Commission. See CRS Report IF11278,
``Accredited Investor Definition and Private Securities Markets,'' by
Eva Su.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recent Treasury and private data on terrorism insurance
pricing has generally been interpreted as signaling no
significant problems in the market; and CRS is unaware of any
State departments of insurance taking public action against
insurers for excessive rates on terrorism insurance. Overall
average rates can, however, mask individual markets that may be
facing difficulties. It is within Congress' purview to
investigate complaints of excessive rates and enact changes
addressing any issues found. Since Congress has found the
availability of terrorism insurance important enough on public
policy grounds to create and extend the TRIA program, this
might also be sufficient grounds to justify additional Federal
attention to the affordability of terrorism insurance.
Q.4. On December 27, 2016, the Treasury Department issued
``guidance regarding how insurance recently classified as
`Cyber Liability' for purposes of reporting premiums and losses
to State insurance regulators will be treated under TRIA and
Treasury's regulations for the Program (Program regulations).''
That guidance ``confirms that stand-alone cyber insurance
policies reported under the `Cyber Liability' line are included
in the definition of `property and casualty insurance' under
TRIA and are thus subject to the disclosure requirements and
other requirements in TRIA and the Program regulations[.]
Furthermore, that guidance noted, ``Cyber risk insurance
remains an evolving insurance market, both in terms of product
development and regulatory oversight.'' Similarly, cyberspace
remains a consistently evolving threat environment. At this
time, would you recommend any updates to the Treasury
Department's guidance on cyber insurance policies? Please
explain why or why not.
A.4. The years since the Treasury guidance have not
substantially altered the evolving and uncertain nature of
cyber insurance. The combined public-private nature of TRIA,
however, provides significant space for private insurers to
innovate in the coverages offered for cyber risk while still
remaining under the reinsurance backstop provided by TRIA.
Treasury's guidance seems clear that policies in the new cyber
liability line of insurance are eligible for TRIA coverage.
This does not mean, however, that there might not be future
issues relating to TRIA coverage in the case of a cyber-
terrorist attack. For example, if the exact perpetrators are
unknown, it may be difficult for Treasury to certify the attack
under the criteria contained in the TRIA statute. It is also
possible that a substantial attack might occur but be under the
various thresholds in the law that limit Federal sharing of
terrorism losses. Addressing such issues, however, would be
beyond Treasury's authority to address in guidance and would
instead require amendments by Congress to the underlying
statute.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR JONES FROM BAIRD
WEBEL
Q.1. Cyber attacks are gaining traction as a preferred method
to terrorize individuals and organizations. In 2016, the
Treasury Department issued guidance that clarified
cyberterrorism is included in TRIA.
Some believe that Russia interference in the 2016
Presidential election by manipulating voters with fake social
media accounts is considered cyberterrorism. This type of
cyberterrorism has immeasurable consequences and effects
Americans that would not even participate in TRIA.
Additionally, the Port of Mobile keeps track of containers
that are to be shipped across the country. The Port of Mobile
is an important part of Alabama's economy. If an organization
decided to pressure Alabama into particular policy positions by
attacking their computer system it would have dramatic effects
on business owners dependent on the Port to ship their
merchandise.
What cyberterrorism looks like and the effects on people is
very different from physical terrorist attacks. How should TRIA
adapt to the growing prevalence of cyber attacks that gives
private insurance a backstop but also provides policy holders
with protection?
A.1. While TRIA does not directly address cyberterrorism, the
flexibility inherent in the combined public/private nature of
the program has allowed cyberterrorism to be covered by TRIA
without specific statutory changes. As long as private
insurance policies are covering cyberterrorism, TRIA will as
well even if the effects of a cyber-terrorist attack may be
substantially different than other forms of terrorism. The
purchase of cyber insurance by businesses is growing, however
it may not be reaching coverage levels that would be considered
optimal from a public policy perspective. For example, higher
coverage levels could be desired since insurance often serves
to mitigate damage through mechanisms like information sharing
on best practices.
There are some aspects of the TRIA design that may not be
optimal if the desire is to promote the purchase of cyber
insurance and ensure that TRIA provides coverage for a
terrorist attack via cyberspace. For example, the program
trigger, currently at $180 million and set to go to $200
million, and the 20 percent insurer deductible are high enough
that the insured loss levels from many cyber attacks may not
cross the thresholds and result in TRIA loss sharing. In
addition, the definition of an act of terrorism in the statute
requires than an act be ``committed by an individual or
individuals, as part of an effort to coerce the civilian
population of the United States or to influence the policy or
affect the conduct of the U.S. Government by coercion.'' In the
case of a cyber attack, however, it may be difficult to even
identify perpetrators, let alone define what their intent might
be.
Q.2. Often TRIA is discussed with large cities in mind, but
many smaller communities can be targets of terrorist
activities. This is shown with the Charleston, South Carolina,
church shooting when a white supremacist murdered nine people.
Small communities like this are likely to receive insurance
from local agents.
Also, Alabama is home to two extremely popular football
teams, University of Alabama and Auburn University. The Iron
Bowl is an annual game between Alabama and Auburn and draws
large crowds from each school. This could easily be a target
for terrorist organizations.
How would reforms to TRIA affect smaller communities,
particularly their premiums and the extent of their coverage?
A.2. The TRIA program does not contain differential application
processes or metrics for different-sized communities. However,
the thresholds in the Act (i.e., the program trigger, the
insurer deductible, and the $5 million loss threshold for
certification) may have a differential effect simply due to the
cost differences between larger and smaller cities. For
example, an identical building is much more expensive to build
in Manhattan than Mobile, thus, an otherwise identical
terrorist attack will likely cause lower insured damages and be
less likely to clear the thresholds for TRIA coverage. Thus, if
the TRIA dollar thresholds are raised, this would have in
relative terms, a larger effect on these less expensive
communities as TRIA coverage would be less likely to be
triggered. In practical terms, however, the impact on premiums
will be somewhat reduced as the overall cost of insurance in
such communities is lower and the risk of a terrorist attack,
and thus the premiums for terrorism insurance, is seen as
lower.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR SINEMA FROM BAIRD
WEBEL
Q.1. In December 2016, the Department of the Treasury issued
guidance which clarified that losses from cyber-terrorist
attacks were to be treated the same as commercial property and
casualty losses. Do you think this guidance sufficiently covers
all forms of cyber attacks?
A.1. The Treasury guidance does not overrule the statutory
language that is in place, particularly the exemption of
specific lines of insurance from the TRIA program. In 2016, the
State insurance regulators introduced a new cyber liability
line of insurance for regulatory purposes. Prior to this,
policies covering cyber risk were reported in different lines
of insurance, including in some cases lines of insurance that
were specifically exempted from TRIA. This new cyber liability
line of insurance largely prompted the Treasury guidance. It is
not clear whether some of the coverage for cyber risk is still
being covered under an exempted line, but to the extent that
damage from a cyber attack still is covered under these
exempted lines, TRIA would not cover such an attack. This may
very well have less of an impact over time as more future cyber
coverage likely will be provided under the cyber-specific line
of insurance that is being covered under TRIA.
The guidance also does not affect all of the other
statutory aspects of the program, such as the certification
requirements and the various monetary thresholds. To the extent
that a cyber-terrorist attack might interact differently with
these statutory requirements compared to a noncyber attack,\1\
Treasury would be limited in its ability to provide coverage
under TRIA for such an attack as any guidance cannot contradict
the statute upon which it is based.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ For example, it seems more likely that a cyber attack might be
carried out without immediate attribution to the perpetrating party,
thus making it difficult to discern the motive that is necessary for
certification.
Q.2. How do insurers effectively measure and quantify loss from
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
cyber attacks?
A.2. Measuring and quantifying loss from cyber attacks is
difficult and the insurance coverage for such attacks is still
immature compared to more established lines of insurance where
the industry might have decades, or even centuries, of data to
draw upon. The insurance rating agency AM Best describes the
situation as follows:
Cyber risk modeling is still in its infancy, as events
and threat vectors are still evolving. To simulate the
event sets and fit them into traditional statistical
distribution forms is the first challenge. Cataloging
the exposure in an insurer's portfolio to these events
and how the losses vary depending on the severity of
the attack and estimating the financial damage are all
complicated problems that cyber modeling firms are
tackling. These models are improving and may provide
directional input into relative rankings of risk but
need to be complimented with stress testing and
analytical, experience-based judgment for pricing,
capital consumption, and allocation.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ AM Best, ``Cyber Insurers Are Profitable Today, but Wary of
Tomorrow's Risks,'' June 17, 2019, p. 11.
A frequent insurer response to the uncertainty reportedly has
been to use certain policy provisions, such as exclusions and
limits as well as reinsurance purchases to reduce exposure to
large losses.\3\ Policy provisions such as exclusions and
limits tend to reduce the utility of cyber insurance to
consumers and may lead to consumer confusion.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See ``Data Deficit Remains Key Challenge for Cyber Insurance
Underwriters,'' Insurance Journal, June 18, 2019, at https://
www.insurancejournal.com/news/national/2019/06/18/529663.htm.
\4\ See ``Businesses Believe Cyber Insurance Covers More Than It
Does: Survey,'' Insurance Journal, July 31, 2019, at https://
www.insurancejournal.com/news/national/2019/07/31/534394.htm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additional Material Supplied for the Record
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]