- REINFORCING THE U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONSHIP
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
REINFORCING THE U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONSHIP
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ASIA AND THE PACIFIC
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
APRIL 17, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-147
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
or http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
29-813PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas
KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama
AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
TED S. YOHO, Florida
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
NORMA J. TORRES, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
Wisconsin
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
Amy Porter, Chief of Staff
Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director
Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------
Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific
TED S. YOHO, Florida, Chairman
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
AMI BERA, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
DINA TITUS, Nevada
MO BROOKS, Alabama
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
WITNESSES
Mr. Mark Stokes, executive director, The Project 2049 Institute..
8
Mr. Julian Ku, Maurice A. Deane Distinguished Professor of
Constitutional Law, Maurice A. Deane School of Law, Hofstra
University.....................................................
22
Ms. Tiffany Ma, senior director, BowerGroupAsia..................
35
LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING
The Honorable Ted S. Yoho, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Florida, and chairman, Subcommittee on Asia and the
Pacific: Prepared statement....................................
3
Mr. Mark Stokes: Prepared statement..............................
11
Mr. Julian Ku: Prepared statement................................
24
Ms. Tiffany Ma: Prepared statement...............................
37
APPENDIX
Hearing notice...................................................
60
Hearing minutes..................................................
61
The Honorable Ted S. Yoho: Statement by Shirley Kan, retired
Specialist in Asian Security Affairs...........................
62
The Honorable Ann Wagner, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Missouri:
Written responses from Mr. Julian Ku to questions submitted for
the record...................................................
66
Written responses from Ms. Tiffany Ma to questions submitted
for the record...............................................
67
Questions submitted for the record to Mr. Mark Stokes..........
69
Written responses from Ms. Tiffany Ma to questions submitted for
the record by the Honorable Dina Titus, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Nevada..............................
70
REINFORCING THE U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONSHIP
----------
TUESDAY, APRIL 17, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 o'clock
p.m., in room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ted Yoho
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Yoho. The hearing will come to order and good afternoon
and thank you for being here today. It is a great pleasure to
convene the subcommittee to discuss U.S.-Taiwan relations, a
partnership that enjoys broad bipartisan support. As the State
Department has said, Taiwan is a force for good in the world, a
beacon of democracy. Indeed, Taiwan is a critical security
partner and an exemplar of democracy and human rights in a
region short on both. It is the United States' tenth largest
trading partner, and I might add it is our sixth largest
agricultural export market. And it is so vital to the trade
that we have in this country.
Taiwan's success is a potent rebuttal to authoritarian,
revisionist powers that are attempting to undermine the primacy
of democracy and upend the global order that has given us peace
and prosperity since the days of World War II. Taiwan's example
is all the more important as China recommits to one
totalitarianism under Xi Jinping.
In recent months, Xi has justified taking lifelong power by
arguing that he is the only figure who can accomplish China's
so-called rejuvenation. Reunifying Taiwan peacefully or
otherwise would be a key part of this accomplishment and it
seems likely Xi will force this issue within his lifetime. In
the South China Sea last week he conducted the largest show of
maritime force in China's history and this week he will double
down on his intimidation with live-fire exercises in the Taiwan
Strait. Xi Jinping wants Taiwan to be subjugated under his rule
and is making concerted efforts to accomplish this result. As
he pressures the U.S.-Taiwan partnership, we will have to
reinforce our ties. Congress has always led on Taiwan affairs
and it will be incumbent on Congress to continue our
leadership.
Chairman Chabot's Taiwan Travel Act, who incidentally used
to chair this committee, became law last month and is a shining
example of how Congress can do this. This bill helps break down
self-imposed restrictions on contact with Taiwan that are not
required by our policy and have hindered our bilateral
relations. The House has also passed my own legislation, H.R.
3320, to promote Taiwan's participation at the WHA or the World
Health Assembly.
Taiwan's exclusion from the summit despite being a model
contributor to world health shows that Beijing is willing to
put the world at risk to satisfy its own pettiness and
insecurities. I hope the Senate will act on this legislation
quickly as the World Health Assembly will meet again next
month. Taiwan has made major contributions in the field of
global health including making significant breakthroughs during
the SARS epidemic and providing critical support during the
2014 Ebola crisis.
In this Congress, I have also introduced measures to
support a U.S.-Taiwan Free Trade Agreement and support the
normalization of arms sales to Taiwan, but there is still much
more work to do. Congressman Chabot's Travel Act touches on a
creeping problem within U.S.-Taiwan policies. In many areas
beyond travel and diplomatic contact, the United States
observes self-imposed restrictions on our conduct, self-censor,
or allows the ambiguities of U.S.- Taiwan policies to constrain
our relationships instead of expanding it. This rot has set in
over decades since the foundations of the One-China Policy when
they were laid down.
I am concerned that over the years the executive branch has
institutionalized a norm of avoiding displeasing Beijing and
that our diplomats make decisions about Taiwan that are based
on fear instead of the merits of the U.S.-Taiwan relationship
itself. It is seen clearly when the State Department delays
arms sales to avoid angering Beijing or removes the Taiwan's
flag from its Web site after the PRC diplomats complained.
I believe that Congress can help to stop this rot and
reinforce the United States' relationship with Taiwan and I am
grateful that we have such an expert panel with us today to
make recommendations on how to accomplish this.
Ultimately, the U.S. policy on Taiwan is transitory.
Taiwan's status has been left undefined and must come to a
resolution eventually. In the Shanghai Communique, the United
States simply acknowledged that all Chinese on either side of
the Taiwan Strait maintain there is but one China and that
Taiwan is part of China. I doubt that such agreement exists
today. Xi Jinping has his answer. He wants Taiwan to be a
province of the PRC and is working to make that happen. The
United States must find its own answer and I look forward to
searching for it today and get clarification.
And with that, members present will be permitted to submit
written statements to be included in the official hearing
record and, without objection, the hearing record will remain
open for 5 calendar days to allow statements, questions, and
extraneous material subject to the rule length. And the
witnesses' written statements will be entered into the hearing
record. I thank the witnesses for being here today and I turn
to the ranking member for any remarks he may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Yoho follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding these
hearings during my now almost 22 years in Congress. I have been
a strong supporter of the Taiwan-U.S. relationship. I have
introduced legislation to supply naval frigates to Taiwan, to
support Taiwan's entry into the International Police
Organization, and I joined with Congressman Chabot and our
chairman Mr. Royce and others in introducing the Taiwan Travel
Act that is now law.
Taiwan has 23 million people and $80 billion of trade with
the United States; the Taiwan Travel Act would encourage
diplomatic exchanges at the highest levels consistent with this
Act. We should no longer hesitate to send our Secretary of
Defense, or Secretary of State, or National Security Advisor to
Taiwan for better communications in our bilateral relationship.
And Congress should welcome Taiwan's President or Foreign
Minister in delivering an address particularly at the
Presidential level to a joint session of Congress.
I should point out that that comment relates to the
President of Taiwan, not the President for life of Taiwan.
Taiwan does not have a President for life. That is the
situation in another nearby country. I should also point out
that I am probably the only Member of Congress that benefits
from the current craziness that the President of Taiwan visits
the United States on a refueling stop on the way to a state
visit to Central America.
The reason for that is that traditionally the President of
Taiwan stops for refueling in Los Angeles and comes to the
Sheraton Universal Hotel in my district, thereby allowing me to
welcome the President of Taiwan to my district on more
occasions than would be likely the case under any other
circumstances. That being said, the Taiwan Travel Act is
perhaps the only piece of legislation disadvantageous to the
30th congressional district that I am proud to say is law.
I am very concerned that China has tried to keep Taiwan out
of international organizations. We should be helping Taiwan
gain membership to the World Health Organization, the
International Civil Aviation Organization, the U.N. Climate
Change Convention, and INTERPOL. Taiwan's vital contributions
to the work of these organizations would make the world a
healthier and safer place.
In support of such efforts, I joined as an original co-
sponsor to the chairman's bill seeking to give Taiwan observer
status to the World Health Assembly. Criminals and diseases
benefit by excluding Taiwan from organizations designed to
combat crime and disease. And it is hard to think that Beijing
would work tirelessly to try to support disease and crime, yet
that is what they are doing by preventing Taiwan from being an
efficient member of these international organizations.
I support the Global Cooperation and Training Initiative
through which Taiwanese expertise helps developing countries in
areas such as health, the digital divide, gender development
and humanitarian assistance. As to defense and economics, in
accordance with the Taiwan Relations Act and the Six Assurances
we should maintain our arms sales that support Taiwan's
legitimate defense needs. Such sales also do create jobs here
in the United States and help maintain our defense industry.
And we need to seek an increase in Taiwanese investment of the
United States and U.S. exports to Taiwan of goods and services.
Currently, we export $26 billion in goods and $12 billion in
services.
What is at stake here is our dedication to democracy.
Taiwan tied several other Asian countries for the highest
democracy score in an international rating from Freedom House
and I would say Taiwan does pose a threat to China. That threat
is one of example. When the people of mainland China see that a
country sharing the same language can benefit from democracy,
can benefit from the rule of law and a truly free and vibrant
economy, then that is a threat not only to China but to all of
the oppressive regimes around the world.
So I look forward to deepening our relationship with Taiwan
and dismissing the silliness that prevents Taiwan from
participating with the United States and with the rest of the
world. I yield back.
Mr. Yoho. I appreciate your comments.
Next, we will go to Mr. Dana Rohrabacher from California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Let me
just note that countries, major countries, smaller countries,
only have one legitimate government. And there is only one
legitimate government in terms of the Chinese people and it is
the government in Taiwan.
The fact is, the government by American standards is only a
legitimate government if it operates with the consent of the
governed.
Mainland China is run by a clique of gangsters who make no
pretense about democratic rule and permitting opposition
parties or stamping out anybody who provides any type of
disagreement with the policy being advocated and performed by
the clique that runs that country.
So, yes. If we are looking at what countries have a
legitimate government, Taiwan is a legitimate government and it
is occupied, yes, by many Chinese people. But let us note that
there are Taiwanese people there and that now you have Chinese
and Taiwanese people on that island of Taiwan operating in
democratic government.
So if the United States has to side with anybody, if there
is a conflict between the gangsters and the clique that are
pretending to be a government and the real government that
exists on Taiwan, let us note that that didn't always happen.
President Lee was a great reformer in Taiwan and he brought
what was just an anti-Communist group in Taiwan that were
allied with us in the Cold War, he brought the reforms that
have made the Government of Taiwan legitimate in our eyes.
Now as we move in with President Trump's fair trade, that
is an issue that we have to work with the Taiwanese on and I
hope that we will be doing that with the spirit of goodwill.
And while we are doing that let's recognize that the Chinese
clique in Beijing is engaged in policies and actual practices
that threaten the peace of the world especially in terms of
their expansionist policies in building those islands that
threaten commerce in the Pacific region.
So with that said, thank you for the hearing, Mr. Chairman,
I will be looking forward to hearing from the witnesses.
Mr. Yoho. No, and I really appreciate your comments. And
before we go to the next statement I want to remind people that
we are up against a competing committee hearing on Syria and I
know members will be leaving. I want to let you guys know I am
going to continue. I am not going to that. I am staying here.
And feel free to come back or feel free to stay.
Next, we will go to Mr. Gerry Connolly from Virginia.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I also thank you
for this hearing.
I am proud to serve as one of the co-chairs of the Taiwan
Caucus. I have gone to Taiwan almost two dozen times in my
lifetime, starting as an Eisenhower Fellow back in 1988. Three
points I would make, one, no one should mistake congressional
interest in protecting and fostering relations with Taiwan. It
stems from the Taiwan Relations Act which was a congressional
foreign policy initiative that came from the legislative branch
in response to an executive branch action with respect to
normalization with the mainland. So from day one, Congress had
a particularized interest in Taiwan.
Secondly, the Chinese Government in the mainland has often
talked about One China, Two Systems when it came to Hong Kong.
We now see how hollow some of those promises prove out to be.
And so if Beijing thinks that sending a signal of confidence--
you can trust in us; see, it works--the opposite is happening.
And it is having an effect not only in Taiwan with a democratic
elected government, but also here in the United States. So
erosion of confidence and assurances with respect to two
systems, we will respect the democratic one.
And, finally, the whole issue of the United States
relations with China, we don't want to go to war with China. We
don't want to have a hostile relationship with China. We want
to have a good workman-like relationship. We are competitors,
but it ought to be within the, you know, normal bounds. Having
said that, Taiwan could change that and it is very important
Beijing not miscalculate United States interest and intents
because that is how trouble starts. That is how conflict
happens.
The United States certainly through the expression of its
legislative branch is not going to be intimidated or threatened
or manipulated into a relationship or non-relationship with
Taiwan that is not in our interest. We are going to foster that
relationship. We are going to grow it. We are going to protect
it. And I do often fear, Mr. Chairman, that other powers in the
region could maybe misunderstand that and as a result
miscalculate. I think both on the Republican and Democratic
side we wish to reaffirm our strong support for both the
relationship with Beijing, but also our special relationship
with Taiwan as codified in the Taiwan Relations Act. I yield
back.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for your comments.
Next, we will go to Ms. Ann Wagner from Missouri.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for organizing this
hearing.
Taiwan, once an authoritarian country is now one of Asia's
freest and most democratic, yet Chinese leadership on the
mainland is keen to demonstrate its power over Taiwan. We have
seen this time and time again. Tomorrow, the People's
Liberation Army will conduct the first live-fire drills in the
Taiwan Strait since 2015. Without active resistance and
response from Taiwan, the U.S., and allies of democracy across
the world, China will continue to aggressively undermine
Taiwan's sovereignty.
China's behavior toward Taiwan threatens regional stability
and global democratic values, and I appreciate this committee's
attention to the challenges that Taiwan faces. Mr. Chairman, I
have a number of excellent questions that I hope to be able to
return to ask after the Syria discussion. If not, I shall
submit them to the record. So I thank you very, very much for
being here and for your time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for your comments.
Next, we will go to Mr. Scott Perry from Pennsylvania.
Mr. Perry. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I don't often make or
usually make these opening statements because I like to hear
from you folks, but some of the things that were said I feel
like they deserve a response and a clarification.
Nobody on this dais and nobody in this country that I know
of wants to be in a world with China, but if it means that we
must then kowtow and continue to kowtow to China to support a
free and democratic Taiwan, then we have to do, we are going to
have to change course somewhere. We can't just simply do what
China says for fear of some kind of aggressive action. They are
aggressive. They are a strategic adversary. They are not
allies. We can do business with them, but let's be really clear
here, folks.
China, and the government in China, they are not the
friends of the United States of America, and in many respects,
in this man's opinion, they are not the friends of Taiwan. We
should be supporting those who are most like us, those who are
more supportive of us, and that is Taiwan. It is not China.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for your comments.
Next, we will go to our panelists. We are thankful to be
joined today by Mr. Mark Stokes who is executive director at
the Project 2049 Institute and 20-year United States Air Force
veteran. We thank you for your service.
Next, Mr. Julian Ku who is the Senior Associate Dean for
the Academic Affairs, Faculty Director of International
Programs, and the Maurice A. Deane Distinguished Professor of
Constitutional Law at the Maurice A. Deane School of Law at
Hofstra University; and, Ms. Tiffany Ma who is the Senior
Director at BowerGroupAsia and a Nonresident Fellow at the
National Bureau of Asia Research.
I think you all have been here before, you know how it
works. There is a button here that says talk. I just hit mine.
That was a demonstration. And the light will turn green, then
it will go down to, when you have 1 minute, yellow, and then
red, and we try to ask you to stay within 5 minutes so that we
can get on, okay, with the questions.
Mr. Stokes, if you would start, thank you.
STATEMENT OF MR. MARK STOKES, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, THE PROJECT
2049 INSTITUTE
Mr. Stokes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Esteemed members of
the subcommittee, it is an honor and pleasure to be here to
testify before you today alongside my distinguished colleagues.
I will keep my remarks brief. I would like to start off
with a statement and that statement is, Taiwan, under its
current Republic of China Constitution, exists as an
independent and sovereign state. This is objective reality. It
is controversial, this language, but this is objective reality
and complicated for more than one reason. Simply the use of
that term, Republic of China, ROC in short, is controversial
not just here in Washington, but certainly in Beijing and
certainly in some parts, significant parts of Taiwan.
Just one last point on this. The real dilemma, this
objective reality is different from our policy. It is a
separate issue than recognition. Objective reality in the
existence of a state is separate from the recognition issue.
And it is a complex policy challenge for the United States to
somehow bring our policy in line with this objective reality in
a way that is incremental and preferably does not get anybody
killed in the process.
In my written testimony I outline four schools of thought
that have informed U.S. Cross-Strait policy over the decades
and presumably could inform U.S. policy going forward; I also
outline three rationales for why a fundamental examination of
U.S. policy is warranted; and, finally, outline five sets of
recommendations.
In terms of four schools of thought, the first school of
thought is a combination. This has become more prominent over
the last decade or so, but accommodation effectively calls for
bringing U.S. policy in line with Beijing's One-China
principle, basically that there is one China. There is one
China, Taiwan is part of China, and the PRC, People's Republic
of China, is the sole representative of China in the
international community. And there are different forms as
accommodation. In its purest form there are calls, or have been
in the calls, particularly in the 2009 time frame, to at least
amend the Taiwan Relations Act, specifically the security-
related portions of that and there appeared to be a concerted
effort to do that.
The second school of thought is status quo. The status quo
has guided U.S. policy. It has been by far the dominant school
of thought since the Taiwan Relations Act. It emphasizes the
value of the Taiwan Relations Act. It has maintained peace and
stability in the Asia-Pacific region and has been quite useful
in serving as the legal basis for U.S. policy. Beijing is not
happy with the status quo.
The third school of thought is normalization. The
normalization school of thought has been around a long time and
that has been able to separate ourselves from our One-China
Policy and move toward full normalization of relationship with
Taiwan. It is straightforward.
And the fourth school of thought is probably the least
well-developed, but has a long history particularly in the
1960s and 1970s, in the early '70s in the context of dual
representation within the United Nations. And that concept
roughly is in a non-defined U.S. One-China Policy there is
nothing that would contradict having normal relations with both
sides as governments. And that has been, in the past that has
been--bear in mind that we had normal relations, relatively
normal relations with both sides of the Taiwan Strait between
1972 and 1979.
So those are four schools of thoughts. In terms of some
broad outlines of recommendations, of sets of recommendations,
I outline five. The first is that there needs to be a very
fundamental policy review and an interagency working group set
up to ask the very, very tough questions. That question should
be not if, but how the United States can align its policy with
objective reality. To me that is a critical question, how can
you best achieve a stable, normal, and constructive
relationship. And whatever substantive changes are developed, I
would recommend that they be incremental, coordinated with
senior government officials on Taiwan, and scrupulously avoid
getting entangled with domestic politics on Taiwan.
The second set of recommendations had to do with the legal
foundations of the Taiwan Travel Act and the Taiwan Relations
Act and that is that senior-level officials should be
encouraged to regularly meet with counterparts from the
Republic of China Government or Taiwan Government on an
institutionalized basis. And there are all kinds of ways one
can finesse this issue, other structural issues like, for
example, considering taking the Office of Taiwan Coordination
within the State Department and perhaps considering moving that
to a different part, maybe it is a direct reporting agency
under the Assistant Secretary of State.
And then there are others, people to people exchanges,
formalized, using the one we have with Beijing and using that
as an example at a very senior level to be able to
institutionalize a full range of ongoing educational and
cultural exchanges that we have. Things like supply chain
security, I think, are worthwhile considering. And then in
terms on the defense side there is a whole range of things, but
one of them could be and I think is worthy of considering is a
public statement that reasserts the Taiwan Strait as
international waters. Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stokes follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Yoho. Thank you. And before we go to you, Mr. Ku, we
have had the distinct honor of being joined by the committee
chairman of the full committee, Mr. Ed Royce, who has done so
much for foreign policy for this country for around the world
and especially the Asia-Pacific region. So we have been joined,
and he has an opening statement.
Mr. Royce. Well, thank you very much, Chairman, and I
appreciate again your engagement. I appreciate all these
members' engagement in Asia and this important hearing on
Taiwan.
Over the last several months we have seen a number of
positive developments in Taiwan in terms of the relationship.
The Taiwan Travel Act, for which I was the original co-sponsor,
was signed into law by the President. As we all know, that was
deeply appreciated by the Taiwanese people. It was a message
that I heard a number of times when I was in Taipei over the
Easter recess for meetings with President Tsai and other
members of her cabinet. I believe that by encouraging more
frequent visits between our two governments including at the
highest levels, we will further strengthen the rather critical
relationship that we have and that is why I make a point as
chairman to visit Taiwan each year.
I have also been a champion for strengthening Taiwan's
economic and people-to-people links from the grassroots level
on up to the high-level policymaking in Washington. And last
month, I took the inaugural China Airlines daily, non-stop
flight from Ontario, California to Taoyuan Airport in Taiwan.
This was built upon the years of work in supporting linkages
between the U.S. and Taiwan through the Visa Waiver and Global
Entry Program in 2012 and in 2017. These programs have
translated into new growth with travel volume between the U.S.
and Taiwan increasing with these business visits and people
visiting families by about 50 percent.
Most pressing, I think, today in terms of what can be done
is inclusion at the World Health Assembly meeting next month.
Over the years, Taiwan has contributed to international efforts
to improve global health with financial and technical
assistance. Any of us who have ever been to any one of these
disaster sites know that Taiwanese physicians are usually the
first there. We have seen the assistance that comes in and the
capability, the knowledge. However, it was excluded from the
meeting last year after 8 consecutive years of being able to
observe the meetings. Keeping Taiwan out can only hurt global
health and there should be no question about Taiwan's
participation this year.
And over the weekend, the last point I would make is that
the New York Times ran an article that named Taiwan as the new
bastion of free speech in Asia. I have seen this with my own
eyes, the U.S. and Taiwan's shared commitment to principles
such as human rights, freedom of speech, democratic norms,
certainly rule of law; all of that serves as a bedrock of this
partnership that we have.
So I am glad we are here today to discuss how we can
reinforce that important relationship. And I thank, again,
Chairman Yoho and the other members of this committee and I
look forward to the witnesses' testimony.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for those comments and thank you for
attending.
Mr. Ku, we will go to you next for your testimony. Thank
you.
STATEMENT OF MR. JULIAN KU, MAURICE A. DEANE DISTINGUISHED
PROFESSOR OF CONSTITUTIONAL LAW, MAURICE A. DEANE SCHOOL OF
LAW, HOFSTRA UNIVERSITY
Mr. Ku. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to
the members of the subcommittee for inviting me to participate
in today's hearing. In the interest of time I will just focus
on two of the three issues I address in my written testimony.
I want to concentrate first on the legally binding effect
of congressional declarations of policy in laws like the Taiwan
Relations Act and the Taiwan Travel Act. And second, I want to
address how Congress can use its powers to declare policy that
can help clarify the U.S. One-China Policy. I will leave the
third issue to my written testimony.
So just from a lawyer's point of view, the Taiwan Relations
Act is a law that has guided U.S. policy toward Taiwan for
nearly 40 years. And in addition to providing legal mechanisms
allowing the U.S. and Taiwan to maintain unofficial relations,
it also sets forth the goals of U.S.-Taiwan policy with
admirable clarity.
And I want to emphasize to the subcommittee and the Members
of Congress here that the declarations of policy in the Taiwan
Relations Act are not merely non-binding statements without any
legal force. Unlike concurrent resolutions that are never
presented to the President for his signature, the Taiwan
Relations Act was passed by both Houses of Congress and signed
by the President. As such, it is the supreme law of the land
under Article VI of the U.S. Constitution. This is true of the
Taiwan Relations Act and as I have written recently this is
also true of the recently enacted Taiwan Travel Act.
Congressional declarations of policy, even ones phrased in
non-mandatory language such as ``should'' are not mere window
dressing. Rather, unless those statements of policy are deemed
to impermissibly interfere with the President's constitutional
authority over international affairs, such policy declarations
must be taken seriously as legal obligations by the executive
branch of the United States Government. This is true even if
the only enforcement mechanism for such obligations are
congressional hearings such as this one and other forms of
congressional oversight. Congress should not allow the
Department of State to simply dismiss laws like the Taiwan
Travel Act or the earlier Taiwan Relations Act as merely
legally non-binding.
Secondly, I would like to address the overarching issue
that Chairman Yoho addressed in his opening remarks and others
have alluded to, the big question in U.S.-Taiwan relations. Now
according to China, as members of this committee will know,
according to China's point of view the United States agreed in
1972 when it signed the Joint Communique to a One-China
principle that encompasses a recognition of Chinese sovereignty
over Taiwan. Now this is China's point of view, but the U.S.
did not specifically commit to recognizing Chinese sovereignty
over Taiwan in that document. Instead, the U.S. position on
Taiwan is better understood as one of neutrality.
The United States takes no legal view on whether Taiwan is
part of China, rather, the U.S. goal which is stated in the
Taiwan Relations Act is to ensure that any final resolution on
the status of Taiwan is made through peaceful means, free of
coercion of any kind. And as I have argued in prior writings,
the statements of prior U.S. administrations that have opposed
Taiwanese independence when combined with the ambiguous
language of the Joint Communique could undermine the legal
basis for a U.S. military defense of Taiwan in a future
conflict.
Congress can help to avoid such implications and clarify
the U.S. position by statute. Such a congressional declaration
can coordinate policy across the U.S. executive branch's
bureaucracy and it can guide U.S. policy across different
Presidential administrations of both parties. I think we have
seen here today that there is both bipartisan interest and
support for Taiwan in the United States Congress. A
congressional declaration of policy on the U.S. position on the
status of Taiwan should guide any revision to internal U.S.
Government approaches such as the guidelines on Taiwan set
forth by the State Department on U.S.-Taiwan relations.
So in closing, as Congressman Connolly mentioned in his
remarks, I believe the U.S. Congress has a central role to play
in shaping and overseeing U.S. policy toward Taiwan. I
earnestly hope that the members of this committee and their
fellow members of the House and Senate will continue the proud
tradition of Congress leading on developing U.S.-Taiwan policy
and reinforcing the U.S.-Taiwan relationship. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ku follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for your statement.
Ms. Tiffany Ma, next.
STATEMENT OF MS. TIFFANY MA, SENIOR DIRECTOR, BOWERGROUPASIA
Ms. Ma. Chairman Yoho, Ranking Member Sherman, and members
of the committee, I wanted to thank you for the opportunity to
be here today to discuss the importance of reinforcing the
U.S.-Taiwan relationship.
To begin, the U.S. vision for the Indo-Pacific region
underscores the importance of Taiwan to the United States. This
administration has advocated a Free and Open Indo-Pacific
Strategy which emphasizes freedom from external coercion as
well as openness in terms of trade, investment, infrastructure,
and maritime movement. And this really does read like a
strategy that is tailor-made for advancing U.S.-Taiwan
relations.
Moreover, we should consider that Taiwan's positive
contributions to regional stability serve as a force multiplier
toward U.S. strategic objectives. For example, Taiwan is a
member of the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS. It is actively
complying with U.N. sanctions on North Korea and it is
deepening regional cooperation through its New Southbound
Policy as well as with the United States through the Global
Cooperation and Training Framework. It is important to note
here that the U.S.-Taiwan relationship also intersects with
other key U.S. priorities in terms of trade and security in the
region.
On trade, as the chairman mentioned, Taiwan is the United
States' tenth largest trading partner by goods and the sixth
largest market for U.S. food and agriculture products. Taiwan
also sends one of the largest delegations to the SelectUSA
Investment Summit. And Foxcom, a Taiwanese company, its new
investment in a facility in Wisconsin could employ up to 13,000
people. On the security front, I want to emphasize that U.S.-
Taiwan cooperation is critical to Taiwan's defense and
deterrents against China's increasing military threat.
Overall, the U.S.-Taiwan relationship is robust and this is
marked by several of the events that we have just discussed
including the passage of the Taiwan Travel Act, the recent very
well received visit of Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Alex
Wong to Taipei, and of course the opening of a new American
Institute in Taiwan complex later this year which is going to
be marked with the anticipation of high-level U.S.
representation present.
But despite these very positive measures, there are of
course increasing challenges to the U.S.-Taiwan relationship.
Although President Tsai has committed to maintaining the status
quo since taking office, it is increasingly clear that China is
effectively rewriting, not just changing, the Cross-Strait
status quo through coercion and sharp power tactics in an
attempt to push the people of Taiwan toward unification which
is Beijing's ultimate goal. And these developments are indeed
extremely concerning and cause for us to reinforce the U.S.-
Taiwan relationship, and to this end I recommend the following
measures: First, we need to maintain a consistent and coherent
approach toward Taiwan and here Congress's oversight role is
indispensable. Congress can also play a role in helping to
dispel notions about using Taiwan as a bargaining chip by
reaffirming U.S. commitments to Taiwan.
Second, we need to work toward integrating Taiwan into the
Free and Open Indo-Pacific Strategy and one of the ways that we
can do this is to harness the natural convergences between
Taiwan's New Southbound Policy and in terms of areas of
infrastructure and innovation promotion.
Third, we need to make serious efforts to address economic
and trade issues in Taiwan. The immediate priority, in my view,
should be ensuring that Taiwan receives an exemption from the
steel and aluminum tariffs. Imposing tariffs on Taiwan sends
the wrong message about U.S. treatment of such an important
partner as Taiwan and serves as an impediment and a distraction
from moving forward on other forms of economic cooperation.
There is also, in my view, significant potential for building
on U.S.-Taiwan cooperation in the field of intellectual
property protection and trade secrets.
Fourth, it is imperative that we deepen and broaden our
security relationship with Taiwan. One way to start, would be
regularized arms sales and treating Taiwan like a normal
security partner. The primary consideration ought to be what we
deem to be in Taiwan's self-defense interest rather than what
is the least objectionable to China because they are certain to
object, irrespective.
We can also expand defense cooperation with Taiwan
including on things that have already been discussed such as
potential Taiwan participation in RIMPAC, port calls, and
building on areas of cooperation, in particular cybersecurity.
And last, in support of the previous recommendation we ought to
commence meaningful and regular high-level exchanges that can
move the needle on these critical trade and security issues.
In conclusion, there is significant potential in
strengthening U.S.-Taiwan relations and in doing so we will
only reinforce the long-term U.S. security goals in the Indo-
Pacific. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and the committee, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ma follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Mr. Yoho. I appreciate everybody's testimony. I look
forward to getting some good questions. As I said, we are under
time constraints with the competing hearing on Syria, but we
have been fortunate to be joined by Mr. Steve Chabot of Ohio
who used to chair this committee and is responsible for that
great legislation that we talked about today.
And I want to turn it over to you. And, Steve, if you want
to go an opening statement and go right into questions I will
defer to you because I know you have another hearing to go to.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will be brief
for a couple of reasons. One thing, we have a briefing on Syria
that I think we are all anxious to get to. I also have a
committee meeting going on as we speak in Judiciary and I
wanted to come to this one because this one is particularly
close to my heart, Taiwan, one of our strongest allies.
As one of the founding Members of the Congressional Taiwan
Caucus, I think it is the goal of many of us on both sides of
the aisle to strengthen an already strong relationship between
Taiwan and the United States and, I think, the Taiwan Travel
Act, which many of us fought for a long time. And I want to
thank my colleague on the other side of the aisle, Brad
Sherman, and also our full chairman, Ed Royce, and many other
members again on both sides for their hard work on this, and
the people of Taiwan in working with us for such a long time to
attain this. It will make a difference.
I think the ability of the top officials here in the United
States and the top officials in Taiwan--the President, the Vice
President, the Defense Minister, the Foreign Minister--to
actually be able to meet face-to-face either in Taiwan or here
in the United States, I think it is hard to overestimate the
value of that. That being said, it should only be considered a
step, a very important step, but a step toward improving even
more the relationship, the alliance between Taiwan and the
United States.
It is a country, and I don't say that word by accident. It
is a country that is a strong ally of the United States. It is
in our best interest to make sure that Taiwan remains free. The
people of Taiwan, they ought to be and are, I think, in many
ways, a role model for other nations who face hostile entities
very close to home. And the future of the people of Taiwan, the
future of the nation itself should be and I think will be, I
know will be determined by the people of Taiwan.
Not by bullies in the PRC, not by the United States. It is
not our intention to tell Taiwan what it ought to do. But we
know because Taiwan has been for decades now an inspiration in
that it is a democratic nation, one that freely elects its own
leaders, sometimes somewhat tumultuous. There is no question
about that. You know, relatively new democracies also
experience that. Even ones that have been around for a couple
centuries have our own challenges now and then. All you have to
do is watch the news to see that that is true.
But in all seriousness, having been here 22 years now I am
so glad that this is one of the issues that I have devoted a
fair amount of time on because it has been worth it to see
Taiwan continue to grow, continue to be a democracy that other
nations can look to see how it is done. That doesn't mean that
there isn't a lot of work that still needs to move forward and
I think a lot of us on both sides of the aisle, I want to
emphasize that both Republicans and Democrats working together
will be there with Taiwan, both now and into the future.
I think, rather than go into questions, Mr. Chairman, I
think I will yield back at this point to make sure that we can
get to those other important engagements that many of us have.
So I will yield back.
Mr. Yoho. I appreciate that and I appreciate your work and
you showing up on your busy schedule. But I think the Taiwan
Travel Act is a historic piece of legislation that sets a tone
for a new era in our relationship with Taiwan and around the
world.
Mr. Stokes, you were talking about a fundamental policy
review that should be addressed. And, you know, you have heard
it twice here, a country, Taiwan is a country, and when I was
over there we were talking about that. You know, what do you
call an entity that has a flag and their own military if not a
country and a democracy. And I know that is taboo to say that
or take a phone call from President Tsai congratulating our
President. If we can't say those things in the open, I think we
are in a very dangerous situation in the world.
And I think it is time to revisit this. If we look at
Taiwan, it was recognized as such, a country from 1949 to '71,
and '71 to '72 there was this cloud of vagueness, what are we?
We are going to recognize you as such, but we are not going to
call you that. We are going to recognize you as part of this
other entity over here, China, and we are where we are at
today.
And as I shared with you earlier, in Robert Gates' book,
Duty, back in the mid-2000s, probably 2012, 2013, we had the
arms sales going back and forth with China, or with Taiwan for
all those years, 1979, I believe it was, and nobody complained
overtly. But as China was getting stronger they raised a lot of
angst and didn't like our arms sales to Taiwan. And our
negotiator said, well, what is your problem? We have been doing
this for a long time. And the Chinese admiral says yes, I know,
but back then we were weak. We are strong now. And I think that
is a very clear message of the intention and especially if we
move forward.
And the Chinese Communist Party and Mr. Xi have an
insatiable thirst for power and domination and, as we know,
history has shown from time and time again, this is to be a
very dangerous situation when people have that hunger for
domination and for power. And what I see is China is threatened
by the success of Taiwan's democracy. They are insecure and
they are frightened that their Communist ideologies cannot
compete with freedom and that is what we have that they so much
don't like because it threatens their form of government.
What I have come to see is people and businesses do
business with those that they know, like, and trust. And if
China doesn't honor its word and agreements as in the transfer
of Hong Kong in 1996 from Great Britain to China, where China
agreed not to interfere in the governing of Hong Kong for 50
years, yet it has, or China ignoring the court arbitration in
The Hague stating that they, The Hague, they stated that China
has no claim on the East Sea, and then, finally, Xi Jinping
blatantly lied to President Obama stating that they would never
weaponize the reclaimed islands of Spratly and Paracel Islands
in the East Sea, yet they have; so then my question that comes
up and other people I have talked to, then why would anyone do
business in the business world with a company, or in this
situation with a country, that lies, or they don't like a
country? They either lie or their government doesn't honor
their word or the word of international law.
And I think that is where we are at today and so the stage
is set. As we have talked about earlier in the opening
statement, we have had a stable system since World War II that
have allowed democracies to flow, that have allowed people to
have freedom of expression. And the expansion of that I think a
great example of that is Taiwan and what they have been able to
accomplish, a tiny island nation that has been able to
accomplish that and the very many contributions that they have
come up with.
And the beauty of being the chairman of a committee,
sometimes it is lonely but I get to ask all my questions.
Question number 1, and you guys weigh into this as you want to,
is Taiwan's democratic success story all the more important as
Xi and the CCP seek to export China's governance model to the
developing world?
What is your thoughts on that? We will start with you, Mr.
Stokes.
Mr. Stokes. Thank you very much for that question, sir. I
would posit it in this way. If one views our One-China Policy
in a zero sum framework in the sense of we can only have normal
relations with one side of the Taiwan Strait or the other,
since 1979 we have extended legitimacy to the Chinese Communist
Party and withheld legitimacy from a government that has
transitioned from an authoritarian style of rule toward a
vibrant democracy.
So today's challenge is that we, in a sense we extend
legitimacy to an autocratic government and withhold legitimacy
from a democracy. And I would ask what kind of signal does that
send to the rest of the world? It should not be a surprise that
Freedom House has come out with statistics that talks about the
decline of democracy around the world.
So this is, some would call extension of legitimacy to
Taiwan, some would call that so, for example, symbols of
sovereignty. There are guidelines. After 1979 there have been
guidelines that have been directed from the White House level
that have outlined how we define what is official and what is
unofficial. And even use of the term ``government'' with regard
to Taiwan as far as I know or at least to be forbidden, you
couldn't use the word ``government.''
Mr. Yoho. Yes.
Mr. Stokes. You can't use the word ``Republic of China.''
You cannot use the word ``ROC.'' There are issues like this
that sort of purposely withhold legitimacy. And I would argue
that once you distinguish between legitimacy and sovereignty, I
think as Julian mentioned, I think the issue of sovereignty we
have traditionally not, we have taken an agnostic position at
best on the ultimate status of Taiwan. But sovereignty is not
necessarily legitimacy and in my view that should be
distinguished.
Mr. Yoho. No, I think that is true. And that is why I asked
you about, you know, maybe it is time to revisit these
fundamental policies and draw some new definitions for the 21st
century. That we have been intimidated maybe or, you know, our
State Department taking down the Taiwan flag on the logos, I
don't still understand why that was done. I have my theories on
that but I think it is something that needs to be put back
there.
Let's see. Going on, you know, we know that Taiwan was
removed from the WHA, the World Health Assembly, and they can't
participate in WHO or INTERPOL or some of the other
international events. How and why is China able to subvert a
technical organization like the WHO for its own political
goals? What is your thoughts on that Mr. Ku?
Mr. Ku. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me the
opportunity to talk about that, yes, which I addressed in my
written testimony. I think I was struck by what is amazing is
that the decisions to invite or not invite Taiwan are not a
vote of all the membership of those organizations. So it is not
as if they survey all the countries and they vote on whether to
accept Taiwan or not. What is interesting about extending an
invitation to an observer to World Health Assembly is actually
a decision, as I understand it, of the director general of the
organization.
So it is kind of a bureaucratic decision and so thereby
there is no open vote on where people have to take sides on
whether to extend the observer status. And it is remarkable to
me that the U.S. cannot exercise more leverage in such
organizations given that we contribute three to four times or
five times more financially to each of these organizations. And
it is not a political fight where we have to go out and gather
votes from other countries, it is just about trying to
influence the bureaucracy at the World Health Organization or
INTERPOL or such.
And I do, without criticizing too much the State
Department, I am struck by the ineffectual efforts of our
diplomats compared to China's diplomats.
Mr. Yoho. I agree with that. And as you pointed out, you
know, we contribute three times more than China. We put in $59
million versus 19, but yet it seems like the WHO bowed to them.
And they should be apolitical and they should look at the
contributions that a country makes. You know, you look back at
what Taiwan did with the SARS epidemic. They are the ones that
discovered the virus that was causing that and did the
preliminary work on that to save countless numbers of lives.
And so how do we put pressure on the WHO? Do we just say we are
not going to participate anymore or we are not going to fund
you, and get them to come to the table? I don't understand how
they were able to be swayed by China other than by a heavy
hand, coercion, or intimidation.
Mr. Ku. Just to follow up on that. Yes, and I agree. I
think that so the operative word here is coercion. So the
strategy for China is by denying even observer status that what
they are trying to do is make it harder for people on Taiwan to
gain access to the technical, you know, benefits of joining
these organizations. So it is not about One China or not. It is
just about making it harder on the lives of people in Taiwan.
And I think that is something that shows China's ill intent in
the organizations. I think, frankly, to be honest this is my
guess as to what is going on, China cares a lot--China's
diplomats' one goal in WHO is to keep out Taiwan. U.S.
diplomats have 50 goals at WHO, Taiwan is 50th on the list. And
so I think what really needs to happen is we need to raise that
priority somehow for the U.S. executive branch and that is
where I think Congress can make a difference in trying to raise
Taiwan so that the U.S. Government puts a little bit more
effort in protecting Taiwan in these organizations.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you.
Ms. Ma, do you have anything you want to weigh in on any of
those?
Ms. Ma. Sure. I will weigh in on the first question about
Taiwan's democracy. I think preserving and supporting Taiwan's
democracy is even more important now in the context of the
backslide in democracy and civil rights and human rights in the
region. We contrast Taiwan's very vibrant democracy with
China's authoritarian system, Taiwan is a partner that
reinforces the regional order. President Tsai has reaffirmed
that Taiwan stands willing and ready to defend the common goal
of freedom and openness and go all out in the protection of the
fundamental international order and this stands in clear
contrast to Beijing's tendency toward revisionism, as this
administration is increasingly recognizing.
You know, it is difficult to really envision how China's
future for Taiwan and in the Taiwan Strait would serve U.S.
interests and, therefore, I think it is even more critical that
we think about how we want to integrate Taiwan into the Free
and Open Indo-Pacific Strategy. Thank you.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you. In the third Joint Communique in 1982,
President Reagan said that the United States has no intention
of infringing on China's sovereignty and territorial integrity
or interfering in China's internal affairs or pursuing a policy
of two China's or one China, one Taiwan. And so that was back
in 1982, yet we have moved to where we are today and we see an
aggressive China. And if you look at, I think it was in your
statement, Mr. Ku, where you were talking about the TRA
declares that it is U.S. policy to provide Taiwan with arms of
a defensive nature or character and maintain the capacity of
the United States to resist any resort to force or coercion.
What is your thoughts on that from 1982 with President
Reagan and the TRA that we have today?
Mr. Ku. Yes, I mean the TRA responded, I think, and tries
to deal with--and I am sorry, the Six Assurances responded to
the 1982 Joint Communique, but I think it reflects some of the
instability in our U.S. policy toward Taiwan. I think in
pursuing better relations with China, I think Taiwan always
sort of is an obstacle to that so when we want better relations
with China, we give up more on Taiwan.
I think the TRA is a reminder that we have a governmental
commitment to allow the people of Taiwan to have a free choice
as to what they want to do with their future and what they have
chosen so far is to move toward a democratic future. And that
is something that the U.S., I think, strongly supports across
all parties. I think our policy can continue along the same
lines.
If the people of Taiwan have the freedom to choose what
they want, then the people in China have to make a choice as to
how they are going to convince the people in Taiwan that if
they want to reunify that they offer a deal that the people in
Taiwan can accept. As you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, China is not
offering any deal and it is hard to imagine that deal happening
any time in the future. In 1982 we could have imagined that
deal. Times have changed and so we need to make sure the
Taiwanese people can still make a choice.
Mr. Yoho. I think that is very well put. And, you know,
like I said, in that book we were weak then; we are strong now.
So Mr. Stokes, moving forward, if we don't get a good
definition and clarification of the status of China, Taiwan,
the rest of the world, in 3 to 5 years what do you foresee, if
you could predict in the future of we don't get some
clarification of where we are going, the status of Taiwan in
the future?
Mr. Stokes. To answer your question, sir, I would go back
to the original statement of objective reality that Taiwan
under its current Republic of China Constitution exists as an
independent, sovereign state. That, in my view, is the starting
point for everything.
Mr. Yoho. Well, let me interrupt you right there.
Mr. Stokes. Yes, sir.
Mr. Yoho. Nobody is recognizing that today other than maybe
Taiwan and, you know, the United States. I think we have
capitulated a lot especially over the last 8 to 10 years of not
really holding people's feet to the fire and allowing Taiwan to
be marginalized, you know, with China going to Panama and
getting rid of their diplomatic status and as they have done
with some of those countries off of Africa.
And then our own State Department blatantly removing the
Taiwan flag symbol, again I have my theories of why that
happened, but if we don't do it now and start recognizing that
is it going to be easier or harder 3 to 5 years from now?
Mr. Stokes. Sir, it will be harder if we go about, if we
adopt a satisficing approach regarding Taiwan. You are right on
the recognition issue, but Beijing has its One China Principle
and that is with a capital P. And gradually there is a
concerted effort to try to shape perceptions here in the United
States and around the world regarding perceptions of and to
manipulate their definition of a One China principle and that
is and they are implementing their One Country, Two Systems
formula for unification internationally in a concerted way.
That is, there is one China, Taiwan is part of China and the
PRC; it is all representative of China in the international
community. This is not correct. Our One-China Policy can be
anything we say it is.
Mr. Yoho. Right. No, I agree with that.
Mr. Ku, or anybody that wants to weigh in this, you know,
when we have surveyed people of Taiwan and we have read those
surveys, what percent would you say view themselves as
Taiwanese versus Chinese, and what percent believe in
unification or going back to China versus staying an
independent nation as their Constitution says?
Mr. Ku. And I will start first. I don't have the numbers at
hand. I know that strong majorities are, now the majority of
people do see themselves as Taiwanese rather than Chinese
although it is not overwhelming. Where it is overwhelming, as I
understand it, is among people under the age of 30, which is
obviously the future.
And I had the experience of teaching law students in Taiwan
just last year among the elite law schools and the future of
elite lawyers in Taiwan are all pretty strongly Taiwanese and
not Chinese in their sense of self-identity, at least my
impression was. And more tourists in China has only made that
identity stronger rather than weaker. So I think if the people
of Taiwan had a free choice, I think we could probably guess
where they are heading.
Mr. Yoho. Ms. Ma?
Ms. Ma. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To add to Mr. Ku's point,
the polls on sentiments on political unification identification
is overwhelmingly demonstrating that most Taiwanese, especially
the younger generation, identify themselves as only Taiwanese
or both Taiwanese and Chinese, but then there is a very small
minority only that identifies as Chinese.
Another interesting poll I would like to raise is done by
the Taiwan Foundation for Democracy which asks the participants
whether they would fight in a war against China. And when asked
if the conditions of war was due to Chinese pressures and
coercion and attack against Taiwan, this response
overwhelmingly jumps up to affirmative that yes, they will
stand and fight for Taiwan. So given this, as Mark says,
objective reality of where the situation is really that the
Taiwan population, the sentiment is that they would not like to
unify with China.
This calls into question the sustainability of the U.S.
policy position where under the Six Assurances especially the
U.S. emphasizes a process that the U.S. would not play a
mediation role. It would not push Taiwan to negotiate with
China. And as Julian mentioned, the U.S. takes a position of
neutrality and that is increasingly difficult to sustain when
the objective reality is that if the people of Taiwan were free
to choose they would choose not to unify with the mainland
China.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you.
Next, we will go to Mr. Connolly from Virginia.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Ma, picking up on that last point, but isn't it true
that in polling overwhelming majority of people in Taiwan want
to continue the status quo indefinitely? They neither support
reunification nor outright independence. Is that not correct?
Ms. Ma. Yes, Congressman Connolly. That is correct. There
is an overwhelming preference for the status quo.
Mr. Connolly. And why do you think that is?
Ms. Ma. I think it is because in part of Taiwan's really
remarkable democratic transition. I think the people of Taiwan
enjoy the lifestyle that is afforded by the political freedoms
that they enjoy. The vibrant economy, democracy has given rise
to an economy, a system of government that is, it is a strong
rule of law. So I think these personal freedoms are very
important to the people on Taiwan.
Mr. Connolly. Of course, presumably another part of that is
concern that not unduly provoking the neighbor, right, because
if we want to preserve our way of life, our democracy, our
quality of life, an island of 25, 30 million people with 1.5
billion people staring them across the Strait, you don't
needlessly provoke them. And my sense is the common sense of
the Taiwan people tells them that irrespective of what
politicians in Washington or even Taipei may want to do.
You talked about reinforcing U.S.-Taiwan relationship and
you talked about maintaining a constant and coherent position
on Taiwan. I am looking on the Trump administration, the call
with President Tsai, reconsideration of the One-China Policy
before reaffirming that policy. Now we have a new third
National Security Advisor talking about playing the Taiwan card
as if Taiwan were some kind of game.
Do you think we have maintained in this new administration,
well, Trump administration, a constant and coherent position on
Taiwan?
Ms. Ma. My view on that is that the Trump administration is
still formulating its broader policy toward the Asia-Pacific. I
do think, however, it is important to maintain a consistent and
coherent position on Taiwan and I think Congress plays an
important role as a bulwark against the fluctuating priorities
that might happen in the executive branch when it comes to
pursuing particular policy agenda, vis-a-vis China.
With respect to maintaining a consistent position, I think
part of maintaining a consistent position is very much how
Congress can help respond to the Chinese retaliation, and in
that vein things like the Taiwan Travel Act, the additional
language in the NDAA play an extremely important role in
response to that.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Mr. Ku, did you want to comment on that?
You need to turn your button on. That is all. Thank you.
Mr. Ku. So I guess just on the broader question of the
status quo, China has this law called the Anti-Secession Law
which allegedly requires it to use force if there is any action
taken toward separatism in Taiwan and that law was reaffirmed
by President Xi in recent statements. I think the message from
China is pretty clear to the people of Taiwan that an open move
toward independence would be met with military force, at least
a threat of that. And I think reasonable people would say,
well, why do that? Why start a fight? The status quo is pretty
good for us.
I think the interesting question for people though, here,
and for Members of Congress and leadership in Washington is to
think about how long can this situation continue in this sort
of status quo standoff. And I think it is hard to predict the
future, but it is something that it does worry me a lot that we
can't maintain that sort of tension much longer as we see the
trends in Taiwan, the young people moving away at least in
self-identification from China.
And yet on the flip side, the Chinese Government has become
even more bellicose in its rhetoric not less so, and that is
not a good sort of situation, I think, in terms of trying to
maintain the status quo.
Mr. Connolly. And if I could follow up on that there have
been recent articles about the brain drain from Taiwan and lots
of young people seeking their fortunes on the mainland. There
was a, you know, they profiled one young woman who was a
designer and she wanted to go to the glitter and lights of
Shanghai. I am old enough to remember nobody would talk about
glitter and lights in Shanghai, but now--so how much of a
threat is that long term that maybe the mainland is playing the
game of we will just squeeze the lifeblood out of them instead
of a military action and the talent and the, you know, brain
creativity will be drained out of the island and we will win
that way?
Mr. Ku. So just on that one point I have a lot of
confidence that that won't happen because I do believe Taiwan
will remain a really different place, offer a lot more in the
long run to people like that and then China will display the
obvious economic benefits. People talk about the brain drain
from Taiwan to the United States. People talk with me and they
think Taiwan has been able to sustain itself and I think a lot
of those people come back in the long run.
Mr. Connolly. I don't know if the chairman wants to allow
Mr. Stokes to also comment? I thank the chair.
Mr. Stokes. Certainly, if I can offer some brief responses,
first, on the status quo. That is a term used both on Taiwan
and here in the U.S. without a lot of definition put to it. I
would argue that on Taiwan I think there is a rough consensus
that the status quo, again going back to the mantra I mentioned
before is that some people can use different formulations, some
people just prefer to use Taiwan exists in a sovereign state,
some would say that Taiwan known formally by ROC, and then the
one that I mentioned.
But my perception when that term ``status quo'' is used,
Taiwan already exists as a country; when the term ``Taiwan
independence,'' in my view, generally is going to mean taking
steps to revise the Constitution, taking steps to revoke the
law of governing relations between the Taiwan area and the main
area, things like this. But, and there certainly is a
substantial part of the population who believes that Taiwan
should be a normal country.
Here in the U.S. you will see the mantra, there should be
no unilateral change in the status quo as we define it, but we
don't define it. In my view, the status quo in the Taiwan
Strait is the existence of two legitimate governments.
Actually, I take, I represent Rohrabacher's comment that the
Chinese Communist Party does not represent a legitimate
government, but.
Mr. Connolly. I thought he was actually talking about
Russia.
Mr. Stokes. Maybe, but I will leave it at that, sir.
Mr. Connolly. Just a final point, and thank you, Mr.
Sherman. But obviously it is a balance and I take all three of
your points of view. But I mean unnecessarily provoking the
mainland, Beijing, is not in anyone's interest. On the other
hand, simply abrogating our own responsibilities and our own
control of the bilateral relationship with Taiwan is not in our
interest or Taiwan's, and I would argue, long term, not in
China's either.
So it is a balance. But we can't simply cede the control
and the rules of the game in the relationship to Beijing. And
as I said in my opening remarks, I certainly hope Beijing does
not misunderstand that because that miscalculation could be
very costly to them as well as us.
I thank the chair.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for your comments.
We will next go to the ranking member, Mr. Brad Sherman,
California.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. I would like to say having visited
Taiwan, not as often as the gentleman from Virginia, that there
is so much vibrancy there, so much lifeblood that even if 100
talented people a year go to the mainland, even if thousands
come to the United States every year, there is not a shortage
of vibrancy, intelligence, capacity, and entrepreneurship. And
that is why I welcome some of the most entrepreneurial
Taiwanese to my state knowing that there is plenty left back in
Taiwan.
The status quo is acceptable. It has worked. The status quo
plus this or that change works better. And there will come a
time when Beijing either tires of trying to cross the Straits
or finds itself in tough straits and focused on something else
and that could be a time when Taiwan crosses the line to
independence.
Taiwan wants the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter. This clearly
seems like a defensive weapon in the sense that Mr.
Rohrabacher's comments aside none of us imagine the Government
of the Republic of China taking aggressive action and landing
its forces on the mainland. So it would be a plane that would
be used to defend Taiwan from invasion fully consistent with
our legal stance. Should we sell the F-35 to Taiwan? I will go
through the--Mr. Stokes?
Mr. Stokes. Sir, I would like to start off by a comment
that whether or not a system is defensive or offensive depends
upon what side of the gun you are standing on.
Mr. Sherman. No. There are----
Mr. Stokes. Yes, sir.
Mr. Sherman. All of us can imagine the mainland invading
Taiwan. That is a nightmare. But with the exception of one
gentleman who is no longer on this dais, none of us imagine
Taiwan landing its troops on the mainland. The days of Chiang
Kai-shek's return died with Chiang Kai-shek and long before. Go
ahead.
Mr. Stokes. Yes, sir, exactly. Taiwan's strategy is
inherently defensive. As you mentioned, they gave up this
notion of recovering the mainland many years ago.
Mr. Sherman. So should we sell the F-35?
Mr. Stokes. If Taiwan requests the F-35 based upon a
consensus within Taipei, I think we should.
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Ku?
Mr. Ku. Yes. I mean I don't have expertise on weapon
technology, but I do think that the overall policy if it is
defensive and it is consistent with our own interests in terms
of how we hand out technology.
Mr. Sherman. And Ms. Ma?
Ms. Ma. I think Taiwan is in the best place of determining
its defense interest. I think we should consider focusing on
what is going to be the cost efficient, the most flexible, the
most agile, the most resilient for the Taiwanese defense budget
and----
Mr. Sherman. Okay. Taiwan deals with major American
allies--South Korea, Japan, Australia--that are in its region.
To what extent are those countries yielding to pressure from
Beijing and to what extent are those countries maintaining a
good relationship with Taiwan?
Ms. Ma?
Ms. Ma. Thank you. I would like to point out in particular
the relationship between Taiwan and Japan which has undergone
some symbolic upgrade in terms of elevating the names of the
representative office, and I think that is a relationship with
significant potential as Japan very clearly faces similar
concerns with Taiwan vis-a-vis China. Thank you.
Mr. Sherman. And does Japan do business with Taiwan in a
robust way?
Ms. Ma. I think they do and I think they will. I think
there is significant potential for that. Japan is of course a
critical U.S. ally in the region and a host to a very
significant U.S. military presence. So I think Japan's role in
a Taiwan contingency alone should drive the Japan-Taiwan
relationship forward.
Mr. Sherman. We have got a $9 billion trade deficit with
Taiwan. Now that is just a small percentage of the total trade.
It is not a lopsided relationship like we have with Beijing and
of course it is smaller. Taiwan is smaller than China. But what
can we do to increase American exports to Taiwan? Does anyone
have a guess, an answer? And you can't just say sell the F-35s.
Ms. Ma. Taiwan is taking measures to address the trade
deficit, for example, it is starting to purchase U.S. LNG. But
looking at the largest categories of U.S.-Taiwan trade, which
is in machinery and also agriculture, I would identify those
two as major areas for deepening cooperation. And then I also
want to point to Taiwan's sort of innovation moves. You know,
it is trying to become Asia's Silicon Valley and there is a lot
of prospects in cooperation on AI and in the ICT sectors as
well that could help address the trade balance.
Mr. Sherman. I am told there are soybeans ready to export
across the Pacific that may not be purchased in another country
on that side of the Pacific that may be available. It would be
asking too much to ask the people of Taiwan to eat as much as
the people of China, total, but every bit helps.
Finally, there is the issue of whether this Congress should
invite the President of Taiwan to come and address us. Normally
you only invite in conjunction with the State Department. We
departed from that with the Netanyahu invitation. That didn't
work out in the sense that it didn't achieve its legislative
purpose, vis-a-vis the congressional vote on the Iran deal, but
I don't think the President of Taiwan would come with a
particular bill that they were trying to deal with. Should
Congress just say what the heck and invite the President of
Taiwan to address us and could you imagine the administration
denying a visa to someone who is coming here at the request of
the United States Congress or the House of Representatives
particularly?
Mr. Stokes?
Mr. Stokes. So I would in terms of responding to the
question whether or not Congress should invite President Tsai,
I would argue that after consultation if the two sides think
that would be a good thing to do.
Mr. Sherman. Or the two sides, because we get along fine
with Taiwan. It is the executive branch that over the last 22
years has not been as supportive.
Mr. Stokes. Well, I mean just there is not a unilateral
announcement that we are going to invite President Tsai over. I
would say I think that warrants positive consideration to be
able to invite, for Congress to invite the President of the
Republic of China, President Tsai, to Congress to be able to
address Congress after consultation between Congress and her.
Mr. Sherman. Between Congress and Taipei and maybe we will
leave the White House out of it.
Mr. Ku?
Mr. Ku. Yes, I mean this is a difficult decision because I
think it would spark a tremendous firestorm in China. So I
think we would have--that is why it is important to consult----
Mr. Sherman. Yes. I think one could take a much smaller
action and invite the Foreign Minister to brief this committee
which would be a step in that direction and would have the
additional advantage that we would not only gain from these
three witnesses but from the Foreign Minister.
Ms. Ma?
Ms. Ma. I agree with the caution that Mr. Stokes and Mr. Ku
offered. I will say that if through consultation it was
determined that this was the best course of action, I think it
would be a tremendous step forward in the U.S.-Taiwan
relationship. I think President Tsai is probably best
positioned to articulate Taiwan's needs and predicament and,
you know, she is somebody who knows the United States very
well. She spent time here at Cornell. She visited Washington,
DC, frequently as the opposition leader, and I think she will
come to Washington, DC, and be welcomed by many friends.
Mr. Sherman. Maybe we start with the Taiwanese
``Ambassador'' to Washington and then move up to the Foreign
Minister and put the head of state visit off for a little
while. I yield back.
Mr. Yoho. No, that is fine and I appreciate you coming
back. And I have to give a plug. President Tsai also taught at
the University of Florida Law School for 6 weeks. So go Gators.
You guys bring up some very interesting and challenging
topics. What do we do, and I think most important is, what does
Taiwan want to do? I think you have heard it said here that we
would like to be facilitators. We have an agreement.
Mr. Ku, as you have pointed out the different things that
we have and that we have in like Section 4 declares that the
U.S. policy will consider any effort to determine the future of
Taiwan by other than peaceful means including boycotts or
embargos or force of threat to the peace and security of the
Western Pacific and/or grave concern to the United States. And
that sentiment is reiterated over and over again in that
agreement.
Mr. Connolly I want to challenge a little bit even though
he is not here. He was talking about maintaining the status quo
and the majority of the Taiwanese people prefer the status quo.
However, the status quo has changed. We don't live in a static
world. It is dynamic. There is flux. It is always changing and
it is changing more than it has probably in the last 25 years.
I was at a meeting with a bunch of the generals and they were
saying we are going through a tectonic shift in world powers we
haven't seen since World War II.
And so how does this change the calculus? Since the status
quo is changing, how does this change the calculus of
maintaining the status quo? Do you want to weigh in on that?
Mr. Ku go first, you had your hand up first.
Mr. Ku. Sorry, thank you. I think this is a very important
question. I think one way to think about this is a thought
experiment. If this were any other country in the world that
was not located 100 miles from China and they had a free and
fair vote on their future, we would in the United States laud
their decisionmaking in many cases and be likely to support it.
I think the difficulty here is all geopolitical rather than
our values. Our values, I think, lead us naturally to support
the type of free and fair democracy that Taiwan has and the
freedom of the people there to choose. The question for the
United States is strategic. Does that fit with the strategic
interests of the United States, and that is a difficult
decision.
Mr. Yoho. Mr. Stokes?
Mr. Stokes. I would come at it from a slightly different
angle, sir. And that is that again going back if the status quo
in the Taiwan Strait is the existence of two legitimate
governments, and one could argue that another way to approach
it is that the United States policy should move toward a more
accurate representation of that status quo.
Mr. Yoho. Ms. Ma, do you want to weigh in on that?
Ms. Ma. Sure. I think echoing what Mark said, you know, I
think it goes back to the question about how sustainable is our
emphasis on process? Can we remain agnostic as to what is going
on, but rather advocate that future determination status quo is
left to the people involved on the ground? So I think that is
the question that U.S. policymakers have to determine going
forward. Thank you.
Mr. Yoho. Okay. And I wrote here, for 22 years, 1949 to
1979, Taiwan was viewed as a sovereign nation pretty much
around the world. From '72 to 2018, that is 36 years, we have
had the status quo. Taiwan didn't change other than being a
successful democracy moving from an authoritarian to an
economic powerhouse. The United States didn't change, you know,
we worked on trade, economics.
So who changed? What we have seen is a rising China that
feels threatened, and I go back to the statement I made about
the Chinese Communist Party and President Xi Jinping or
whatever he is now have an insatiable thirst for power and
domination. History again has shown us time and time again when
you have this combination it is dangerous for the rest of the
world.
Again, China, I feel, is threatened by Taiwan's democracy.
You don't hear of a brain drain coming out of China. You hear
it coming from other countries into China, because where people
are free and they have liberties they develop their innate
abilities for freedom and liberties and they develop those
things that other countries want.
And the United States, I am thankful to be born here in a
country that allows us to express our opinions, our freedoms,
or anything we want to, but it also gives us the creativity
quotient that is missing in parts of the world where there is
suppression like a North Korea or a China. And if you look at
some of the great developments in the last 500 years, how many
have come out of a country that has been run by an
authoritarian state? Not many, because they don't know how to
dream. They don't know how to think about that.
And so my caution would be that we move slowly with the
Taiwanese people to find out a solution that provides them with
the security that they deserve that they have earned and that
they continue a vibrant democracy in an economic powerhouse
that has contributed so much to the world, whether it is
medicine, biotech, electronics, or other.
And I think China should take this as maybe a wake-up call.
Not as a threat, we don't want to threaten anybody, but as a
wake-up call of how we can solve this problem without the
detriment of Taiwan or relationships in the Asia-Pacific
theater and how can we get along and build on the success of
that country that they benefit from also and that the rest of
the world benefits from too. Because nobody is trying to take
over China or Taiwan from the rest of the world and I would
think that we could work this out to where it is a win-win
situation where people save face and that we develop a new
status quo that allows an independent nation to continue to do
what they do and work with the people of Taiwan to find out
what their new status quo wants to be that we can facilitate
with, with other regional partners.
And I will give you guys--Mr. Sherman, do you have any last
comments?
Mr. Sherman. I went long enough last time. Thank you very
much.
Mr. Yoho. Do you guys have any last comments? We will just
go down the line.
Mr. Stokes. Oh. Sir, I would offer that in terms of your
statement before, Mr. Chairman, the most fundamental change
that we have seen at least since 1972 or perhaps it is 1979, is
not necessarily with the Chinese Communist Party. In a
fundamental sense it remains somewhat similar to what it was
before with some changes on the edges.
The most fundamental change that we have seen has been the
transformation of Taiwan or the Republic of China into a
democratic country. Well, it has always been a country, but
into a democracy. The most fundamental change has been the
establishment and consolidation of popular sovereignty. This
change is fundamental. Our current policies that were
developed, whether it was 1972, 1979, '82, were in a different
era and our policies you have to catch up with this fundamental
change on Taiwan.
Mr. Yoho. Mr. Ku?
Mr. Ku. Just building on that I think it would be, because
of Taiwan's democratization it would be a strategic
catastrophe. Not just a values problem, but a catastrophe for
United States foreign policy if an aggressive, authoritarian
Communist regime conquered a liberal democratic government.
That would be a strategic catastrophe putting apart the affront
to U.S. values.
So that actually does change the calculus and probably does
cause us and probably should cause us to rethink that. And I
would reiterate that Congress can play a huge role in shaping
that rethinking and getting that rethinking process going in
the United States.
Mr. Yoho. No, I think that is a very valid point because if
they do that to Taiwan, who is next? Who are they going to look
at next and say we are going to change this country? You know,
we don't have claim to them, but they didn't have claim to the
South China Sea or the East Sea, but they claimed it. And so
that is what I worry about.
Ms. Ma?
Ms. Ma. Thank you. And building on that last point, I want
to reiterate that developments in the Taiwan Strait are very
closely watched by U.S. allies and friends in other parts of
the world. So in my view, anything that is short of
demonstrating U.S. resolve in the face of Chinese coercion and
sharp power, and that includes failing to uphold U.S.
commitments to Taiwan, or China, you play the Taiwan card,
doing so would set very dangerous precedents that undermine
long-term U.S. interests in the region.
But on the other hand, if we reinforce the U.S.-Taiwan
relationship, I think that could very possibly reinforce U.S.
long-term interests in the Indo-Pacific.
Mr. Yoho. I think that is well said and I think it is
timely. If not now, when? As we have talked about, it is not
going to get easier 5 years from now.
And so, I want to tell you how much I appreciate your
input. It was successful because members kept coming in and out
and you didn't have to listen to me the whole time. So this
subcommittee hearing on Asia-Pacific has adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:24 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]