- JOINT HEARING TO RECEIVE LEGISLATIVE PRESENTATIONS FROM NASDVA, FRA, GSW, BVA, JWV, MOPH, AND MOAA
[Joint House and Senate Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-400
JOINT HEARING TO RECEIVE LEGISLATIVE PRESENTATIONS FROM NASDVA, FRA,
GSW, BVA, JWV, MOPH, AND MOAA
=======================================================================
JOINT HEARING
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
BEFORE THE
U.S. SENATE
AND THE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
MARCH 12, 2019
__________
Formatted for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
42-953 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2021
SENATE COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
Johnny Isakson, Georgia, Chairman
Jerry Moran, Kansas
Jon Tester, Montana, Ranking
John Boozman, Arkansas
Member
Bill Cassidy, Louisiana
Patty Murray, Washington
Mike Rounds, South Dakota
Bernard Sanders, (I) Vermont
Thom Tillis, North Carolina
Sherrod Brown, Ohio
Dan Sullivan, Alaska
Richard Blumenthal, Connecticut
Marsha Blackburn, Tennessee
Mazie K. Hirono, Hawaii
Kevin Cramer, North Dakota
Joe Manchin III, West Virginia
Kyrsten Sinema, Arizona
Adam Reece, Staff Director
Tony McClain, Democratic Staff Director
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
Mark Takano, California, Chairman
Julia Brownley, California
Dr. Phil Roe, Tennessee, Ranking
Kathleen Rice, New York
Member
Conor Lamb, Pennsylvania
Gus M. Bilirakis, Florida
Mike Levin, California
Amata C. Radewagen, American Samoa
Anthony Brindisi, New York
Mike Bost, Illinois
Max Rose, New York
Dr. Neal Dunn, Florida
Chris Pappas, New Hampshire
Jack Bergman, Michigan
Elaine Luria, Virginia
Jim Banks, Indiana
Susie Lee, Nevada
Andy Barr, Kentucky
Joe Cunningham, South Carolina
Dan Meuser, Pennsylvania
Gil Cisneros, California
Steve Watkins, Kansas
Collin Peterson, Minnesota
Chip Roy, Texas
Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Greg Steube, Florida
Northern Mariana Islands
Colin Allred, Texas
Lauren Underwood, Illinois
Ray Kelley, Staff Director
Jon Towers, Republican Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
March 12, 2019
SENATORS
Page
Isakson, Hon. Johnny, Chairman, U.S. Senator from Georgia........
1
Tester, Hon. John, Ranking Member, U.S. Senator from Montana.....
18
Blumenthal, Hon. Richard, U.S. Senator from Connecticut..........
24
REPRESENTATIVES
Roe, Hon. Phil, Ranking Member, U.S. Representative from
Tennessee......................................................
3
Takano, Hon. Mark, Chairman, U.S. Representative from Montana....
17
Sablan, Hon. Gregorio Kilili Camacho, U.S. Representative from
Northern Mariana Islands.......................................
19
Bost, Hon. Mike, U.S. Representative from Illinois...............
23
Cunningham, Hon. Joe, U.S. Representative from South Carolina....
27
WITNESSES
Ms. Alfie Alvarado-Ramos, Director, National Association of State
Directors of Veterans Affairs..................................
5
Mr. Robert Washington, Sr., National President, Fleet Reserve
Association....................................................
6
Mrs. Crystal Lynn Wenum, National President, Gold Star Wives of
America........................................................
8
Dr. Thomas Zampieri, National President, Blinded Veterans
Association....................................................
10
Dr. Barry J. Schneider, National Commander, Jewish War Veterans..
12
Mr. Douglas J. Greenlaw, National Commander, Military Order of
the Purple Heart...............................................
13
Ms. Rene A. Campos, Senior Director of Government Relations for
Veterans-Wounded Warrior Care, Military Officers Association of
America........................................................
15
APPENDIX
National Association of State Directors of Veterans Affairs,
Prepared Statements............................................
32
Fleet Reserve Association, Prepared Statements...................
50
Gold Star Wives of America, Prepared Statements..................
65
Blinded Veterans Association, Prepared Statements................
78
Jewish War Veterans, Prepared Statements.........................
98
Military Order of the Purple Heart, Prepared Statements..........
112
Military Officers Association of America, Prepared Statements....
123
American Defenders of Bataan and Corregidor Memorial Society
(ADBCMS), Prepared Statement...................................
143
Air Force Seargeants Association (AFSA), Prepared Statement......
151
Association of the United States Navy AUSN), Prepared Statement..
164
Non Commissioned Officers Association of the United States of
America (NCOA), Prepared Statement.............................
177
National Guard Association of the United States (NGAUS)),
Prepared Statement.............................................
189
The Retired Enlisted Association (TREA), Prepared Statement......
199
JOINT HEARING TO RECEIVE LEGISLATIVE PRESENTATIONS FROM NASDVA, FRA,
GSW, BVA, JWV, MOPH, AND MOAA
----------
TUESDAY, MARCH 12, 2019
United States Senate,
and House of Representatives,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committees met, pursuant to notice, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room SD-G50, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Johnny
Isakson and Hon. Mark Takano, Chairmen of the Committees,
presiding.
Senators Present: Senators Isakson, Boozman, Rounds,
Sullivan, Blackburn, Tester, Brown, Blumenthal, and Sinema.
Representatives Present: Representatives Takano, Lamb,
Rose, Brindisi, Cisneros, Lee, Underwood, Cunningham, Pappas,
Allred, Sablan, Roe, and Bost.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN ISAKSON
Chairman Isakson. I call the Veterans' Affairs Committee to
order.
It looks like a lot of us are not here, and that is the way
you should judge it. But we are coming fast, so just hang on.
You are not going to be stuck with me for the whole day. We
will get some others here in a few minutes. There is some on
the way.
Chairman Roe--or last year's chairman, Chairman Roe, from
the House is on the way. Mr. Tester from Montana will be here
shortly, and Mr. Takano from the House, the Chairman, will be
here as well.
So I will start out, and when they come in, we will
continue. And we start to ask members as we speak, which is
great. Welcome. Glad to have you.
Let me thank all of you for being here today. This is the
fifth, I believe--is that right, Adam?--hearing. It is our
fifth hearing. We have heard from a lot of vets. We had not
heard from you. There is an old saying if everybody has heard
everything that had to be said, everybody has not said it, but
I am sure we are going to learn some things new here from you
today. And we appreciate your being here.
For the benefit of the audience that is here, as well as
each of the representatives that are here, we sent a letter to
every VSO explaining that if we had a hearing for each
individual VSO, we would be meeting into the month of April.
And it would be impossible to do our work. So we consolidated a
couple of them, and yours is one of them.
But everybody was asked to submit their testimony in
writing, and that is being included for the record as well. So
anybody who is interested in the positions of your
representation and your group will be able to get it from the
offices, from our Committee office and from the Senate.
You are very important, each one of you, to us. The United
States of America is a great country for a lot of reasons but
none greater than its veterans, those who volunteered, risk
their lives for the people of the United States of America and
for all of us here.
We know on this Committee, House and Senate. We are a
bipartisan committee, and I can speak for the House because I
know the exact numbers. We passed everything last year almost
unanimously, with one dissenting vote, on the MISSION Act. That
was pretty good for a committee almost equally divided with
Republicans and Democrats, but we do not think there were any
Republicans on the battlefield or Democrats of the battlefield.
They were Americans on the battlefield. So we do not
discriminate based on what you joined and what uniform you
wore, how old you were, the color of your skin or anything
else. We pay honor to those who risked their lives for the
United States of America and the people.
And one thing I want to make sure we do is that the
benefits that you are entitled to when you enlisted, that you
get those benefits in as least cumbersome way as possible and
as timely a way as possible.
We all know that the MISSION Act, which we passed this past
year, was primarily focused on getting our problems with the
Choice in the VA out, getting Choice meaningful for private or
VA providers, making it work in a seamless fashion for each of
you.
I want to underscore you--and every chairman has said this
in every meeting. So I am speaking for all four of us, the
``four corners,'' as we call it. We have no interest in
privatizing the VA; we have every interest in making the VA the
best health care it can possibly be.
[Applause.]
Chairman Isakson. He always comes in when the clapping
starts.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Isakson. Those people from Tennessee, I will tell
you.
But, anyway, we have all stated that when it has been our
turn to testify in every one of these hearings, but we also
know that there is no way you can have good quality health care
available to every single veteran without using the empowerment
of the private sector, and that is what Choice does. If you
cannot get to a caregiver or if there is a specialty you cannot
get to reasonably accessible, you pick one that is.
And we are getting those access standards being done now.
In fact, the access standards to private care was just released
by the VA a couple days ago for talking points, which we will
be testifying on shortly, and they are aimed to make it easier,
faster, and more efficient for you to do that. And we are aimed
at seeing to it that providers do the same, and TriWest is
going to be doing our placement on that too as well. And we
have told them in no uncertain terms that speed and efficiency
and good care are the absolute requirements of everything.
We want to measure the VA's health care based on quantity
and quality, not just quantity, but quantity and quality. We
want to make sure you get the best care, make sure it is
readily available so you do not have to wait on it.
You have all risked your life for us or put your life on
the line for us. There is nothing we can do but see to it you
get all the benefits that are there to do so.
So I am pleased to welcome all of you here today to
Washington. I appreciate you coming and sharing your time.
The way we will operate is I am going to introduce the
other members of the four corners of the Chairs and Ranking
Members to make an opening statement, and then we will go to
the members for questions after the opening remarks are going
to be made.
The opening remarks are going to be made by--I guess each
one of you are going to make remarks about your particular
group. Is that right? Is that what we are going to do? Yeah. So
each one of you will be prepared. Those remarks will be limited
to a maximum of 5 minutes.
I can tell you, the Veterans of Foreign Wars, I did not
pull the rug on him. I told him he had 5 minutes; he took 12.
But he was a little guy that looked mean, so I did not want to
have a mad veteran.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Isakson. But there are too many of you all to do
that. So you all are going to have to adhere to our 5-minute
rule, or I am going to have to rap the gavel, not because I
want to be rude but because we have got a lot to do, and we
want everybody to get their fair time.
So, with that said, let me go to the Ranking Member of the
Veterans Affairs' Committee in the United States House, the
gentleman from Tennessee, Dr. Roe.
OPENING STATEMENT OF DR. ROE
Dr. Roe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be brief.
There are some special guests here. Any Tennesseans in the
room? Anybody here make it from Tennessee?
[No response.]
There are some special guests. Our TAPS kids are here, and
I want them to stand up: Lizzy Yeagy [phonetic], Chris Friarson
[phonetic], and Jonathan Langford [phonetic]. If you guys would
stand up in the back. Let us give them a hand.
[Applause.]
Dr. Roe. Thank you all for being here.
In the last Congress--and I want to go very quickly over
what we did in the last Congress and really turn the floor over
to you all--as the Chairman had said, it was really a historic
Congress as far as the VA was concerned.
We passed the Accountability and whistleblower protection
bill. We passed the Forever GI bill. And I think one of the
things that we all--I do not care whether you are a Senator or
a Congressman--appeals reform was incredibly needed because we
all saw appeals that went out for disabilities for years, and
many veterans died waiting on those appeals to get adjudicated.
About 3 weeks ago, we have gone live with the new appeals
program. We hope that that stops that.
As the Chairman said, we passed a really transformative
bill in the VA MISSION Act, and the Chairman is absolutely
right. What this Congress wants is the veteran to get top-
quality care wherever they receive it.
I just saw the President's ask in the budget, which is a
7.5 percent increase per year for the VA, which is really
remarkable.
From the time I got here in 2009, the VA through its three
components--the cemeteries, disability, and health care--it was
$97.5 billion. That number the President asked for this year
was $220 billion. So he has really kept his word to look after
America's heroes.
The one last thing I want to say, a bill very near and dear
to my heart, which we really have been working on for 10 years
is the Blue Water Navy bill. We need to get that across the
finish line.
The House passed it 382 to zero. The Chairman and Ranking
Member on the Senate side worked very hard to get that bill
done. I want to thank them for their help. We are going to
bring it back again, and we are going to pass it in the House
again. And I feel sure this time that the Senate will get that
passed.
I appreciate all of you all, who you represent. I
appreciate you being here, and I yield back my time.
Chairman Isakson. Thank you very much, Dr. Roe.
Until the other two members of the four corners, Mr. Takano
and Mr. Tester, come, we will introduce them later on in the
program because I want to go right to you all. You all are on
time and ready, so we are going to go to you. That is the way
the military does everything. There, the NCO there, this
officers group, you and I are the NCOs, so we will get things
done around here. That is the way it works in the military; it
is the way it is going to work on this Committee.
Thank you all for being here, and we have for the audience
knowledge--wait. I want to introduce Mr. Alvarado-Ramos.
Is that correct? Did I do that right? I mean madam. Madam
Ramos. I am sorry if I said--
Mr. Washington from the Fleet Reserve Association.
Ms. Wenum, President of the Gold Star Wives of America.
God bless you, darling. You look great in that gold.
Dr. Zampieri, National President of the Blinded Veterans
Association, and I met you earlier. Thank you for being here
today, and the information you gave me, I appreciate it very
much.
Dr. Schneider, Commander of the Jewish War Veterans.
Mr. Greenlaw, Commander of the Military Order of the Purple
Heart. Thank you, sir. It is an honor to be with you.
And Ms. Campos, Senior Director of the Military Officers
Association of America. Thank you, ma'am, for being here.
So I am going to go directly to each one of you to make
your statement, and then we will do questions. Keep it strictly
to 5 minutes, please, because time is of the essence in this.
We will start with Ms. Alvarado-Ramos.
STATEMENT OF ALFIE ALVARADO-RAMOS
Ms. Alvarado-Ramos. Chairman Isakson, members of the Joint
Committee, my name is Lourdes, or Alfie, Alvarado-Ramos,
president of the National Association of State Directors of
Veterans Affairs, NASDVA. I am also the director of the
Washington State Department of Veterans Affairs.
NASDVA is comprised of the Veterans Affairs' chief
executives in all 50 States, the District of Columbia, America
Samoa, Guam, Mariana Islands, Virgin Islands, and the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
We are the single organization outside of VA that
represents the Nation's 19 million veterans, contributing more
than $10 billion annually in services to veterans and their
families.
VA Secretary Wilkie and I signed a memorandum of agreement
on behalf of both organizations last month. It outlines our
partnership in direct services to our veterans and their
families. We fully intend to exercise that agreement in order
to address many of the recommendations made in our written
testimony.
I would like to highlight a few of those. NASDVA fully
supports efforts to increase veterans' access to health care
under the MISSION Act. We do not support wholesale
privatization.
Also, to meet the demands of the 21st century veteran, we
are prepared to assist the VA with the electronic health record
modernization. Failure is not an option for this multibillion
project. The States are positioned to educate, promote, and
provide VA with timely feedback for the success of this
mission.
We recommend and will be working with VA on the following.
First, for suicide prevention and awareness, we want to create
outreach block grants to States to address shortfalls and
improvements on suicide prevention outreach. States are in a
better position and closer to the vulnerable veterans who need
help.
Second, to properly serve the growing population of women
veterans, the planning, renovating, and staffing of women
veterans' clinics needs to be consistent across the country,
which right now it is not.
Third, for Veteran Treatment Courts, we recommend increased
multiyear funding grants to aid judicial districts in the
establishment and sustainment of this life-changing program.
Fourth, following catastrophic events such as the
hurricanes in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, VA needs to
establish provisions to care for all veterans in VA facilities,
regardless of service connection.
Fifth, we along with the National Association of State
Veterans Homes recommend two critical additions to the VA
Veterans Home Per Diem Grant program. First, VA needs to
evaluate the implementation of a new assisted living level of
care to serve veterans unable to thrive at home, and second, to
operate critically needed psychiatric beds, we recommend an
increase in the per diem reimbursement that reflects the
intensity of the staffing that they require.
Six, for the 2020 budget, we recommend the following levels
of funding for the two large grants programs that impact the
States--Veterans Home Construction Grant from $90 million--that
is the recommended--to $250 million and the Cemetery
Construction Grant from 45- to $50 million.
Other areas of consideration are increasing outreach to
rural Native American and Alaska Native veterans. Next,
revisiting the State approving authority agencies total
requirement allocation model to ensure States have the
resources to adequately apply auditing standards, and this is
for GI Bill implementation. Resolving the Department of Labor's
resistance to governors appointing their agency of choice to
administer the Department of Labor Vets Grant program, and
also, we urge Congress to intervene with the Department of
Commerce to obtain veteran information the 2020 Census short
form.
Finally, the emotional, physical, economic wellness of the
families is paramount to veterans' quality of life. NASDVA
recognizes the critical role families play in the veteran life
cycle. We have spent billions of dollars to provide care to our
veterans, but if the family is not well, then the veteran
reaching his or her maximum potential will be compromised,
resulting in the waste of precious resources.
We not only support but are in a great position to work
with Congress, VA, other Federal and State agencies to ensure
that veterans' families receive counseling, employment
opportunities, and other safety nets.
Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, thank you for
your work on behalf of our Nation's veterans and their families
and for including the National Association of State Directors
of Veterans Affairs in this hearing.
Chairman Isakson. Very well. I paid close attention. She
only went 7 seconds over. She deserves a round of applause.
[Applause.]
Chairman Isakson. Anybody that exceeds that is going to
have to sit in this penalty box somewhere later in the morning.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Isakson. Great job, Ms. Alvarado-Ramos. We
appreciate it very much.
Ms. Alvarado-Ramos. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Isakson. Mr. Robert Washington, national
president, Fleet Reserve Association.
STATEMENT OF ROBERT WASHINGTON SR.
Mr. Washington. Chairman Takano, Chairman Isakson, Ranking
Members, and members of the Committee, good morning. My name is
Robert Washington. I am national president for the Fleet
Reserve Association and the first African American to hold this
position.
Behind me is Donna Jansky, a Navy veteran also, and she is
the first woman national vice president of the association.
I am a retired Navy senior chief, having served for over 26
years in Naval service. I am honored to represent the concerns
of the oldest sea service association that has been around for
over 94 years.
Today, many issues are at hand. I will address our top five
in the time allotted and their relevance to the FRA. They are
Blue Water Navy, VA claims filing and backlog, Choice program,
veterans suicide, and women veterans' health.
We, like you, are deeply troubled by the continued lack of
passage of the Blue Water Navy Vietnam Veterans Act of 2017.
We sincerely thank Representative Phil Roe and Mark Takano
for their tenacity and leadership in last year's House vote of
382 to zero. However, sadly, the Senate did not.
FRA deeply appreciates the House Chairmen and Ranking
Members' quick reintroduction of the same bill in the 116th
Congress.
Past VA policies permitted servicemembers to file claims if
awarded the Vietnam Service Medal or the Vietnam Campaign
Medal. However, in 2001, the VA implemented a boots-on-the-
ground determination, which continues to limit the Agent Orange
presumption allowance for the veterans who serve on ships off
the coastal waters of Vietnam. It is still unclear from recent
court litigation where the next step will be for Blue Water
Navy veterans.
A recent modification introduced by Chairman Takano is a
positive motion forward on behalf of these veterans. These
initiatives strengthen continued awareness for eligibility
status for the service-related VA medical and disability
benefits.
Mr. Chairman, the VA Secretary, under his authority, has
always had the authority to make this happen; however, still
has not elected to do so.
Today, many of these veterans are senior citizens and can
continue to hope for the earned benefit from those presumptive
measures. Sadly, many will never have the choice to claim
because they have already passed away or choose suicide as a
result to ease their pain.
FRA concurs with the President's recently announced
initiative on this epidemic. FRA appreciates the efforts of
both Committees to meet the challenges of the VA Choice
program. The Choice program is the capstone model for our
veterans health care. Agreeably, it will require measurable
oversight to accomplish the desired effectiveness.
FRA is especially thankful to the Congress for expanding
the VA caregiver program to include all catastrophically
disabled veterans.
FRA continues to be deeply agitated over our veterans'
suicide rate. Recent suspended spending measures taken on by
the VA clearly demonstrates a lack of comfort in decreasing
these destructive behaviors.
FRA applauds Chairman Mark Takano's aggressive action of a
new but a well overdue congressional task force in addressing
women and veterans' health care.
The association greatly supports the needed gender-
specific medical and mental health access that will also
require--is also unique to the needs of women servicemembers
and transitioning veterans.
Many women feel challenged going into a VA facility because
of a climate of vulnerability that could enhance already
associated anxieties, physical and emotional traumas from
military, sexual trauma, and PTSD.
FRA looks forward to working with the Committee and the
task force to help women veterans, especially with our growing
female membership and future leaders.
On a positive note, the VA is making progress in the
disability claims backlog but has a long way to go. The backlog
may be down; however, appeals have spoked. FRA supports the
Express Appeals Act passed in 2017 to speed up the appeals
process that remains way too long. We hope bill passage will
reduce the waiting times. Someone once said justice delayed is
justice denied. That also holds true for disability claims.
In closing, Chairmen Takano and Isakson, Ranking Members,
and Committee members, all of these concerns should not add to
the frustration of veterans. We thank you again for your
leadership and direction on behalf of veterans and await your
questions and comments.
Chairman Isakson. Well, thank you very much, and before we
go to the next speaker, just so everybody else knows this, on
the Blue Water Navy question, Chairman Roe and Chairman Takano
did a fantastic job in the House, did a fantastic job.
The Senate, in the end, rallied. We got within two votes of
getting it out of the Senate. We only had two objections, but
we did have two objections. I think those objections are
working their way off. The decision by the courts was 9 to 2.
Whether or not the VA appeals that decision is yet to be known,
and I am told--this is no authoritative statement whatsoever.
Nobody can write or quote me on this, this thing is going to
happen, but it is very difficult to see that being overturned,
a 9-to-2 margin being that strong.
That being the case, I think the Blue Water Navy will in
fact get done this year. I do not see a major obstacle in terms
of members of the Senate to cause something to happen. It could
turn. Something could change, but the way we finished last
year, I think that is the way it will be.
And I appreciate you bringing that up, and I want to let
everybody know the same thing so we do not have to waste some
of your time on redoing another subject one more time. With
that said, Crystal Lynn Wenum, welcome.
STATEMENT OF CRYSTAL LYNN WENUM
Ms. Wenum. Chairman Isakson, Chairman Takano, Ranking
Member Tester, Ranking Member Roe, and distinguished members of
both the Senate and House Committees on Veterans' Affairs, I am
pleased to be here today to testify on behalf of the Gold Star
Wives of America to share our legislative priorities.
My name is Crystal Wenum, and I am the widow of Staff
Sergeant James O. Wenum, a Vietnam veteran who served during
the Tet Offensive. He died on May 8, 1982, leaving me to raise
5- and 3-year-old children. His death was determined to be
service-related 2 years later, and I joined Gold Star Wives
that year.
But in addition to being a Gold Star Wife, I am also a Gold
Star Daughter. My father was killed in action at the Chosin
Reservoir in Korea on November 29, 1950. My mother was 6 months
pregnant with me and had a 1-year old son at the time. My
mother joined Gold Star Wives in 1951, and I have literally
grown up with this wonderful organization. I have remained
active with Gold Star Wives, and I am proud to now be its
national president.
Gold Star Wives is grateful for all the public laws that
have been passed in the years since 1946. These laws provide
much needed benefits for surviving spouses and children of our
military service members.
My testimony today will be addressing some of the
inequities and concerns that currently exist.
Dependency and indemnity compensation. ``To care for him
who have borne the battle and for his widow and orphan.'' These
words from Abraham Lincoln's Second Inaugural Address in 1865
succinctly state the sacred promise our country has made to our
veterans and survivors.
The VA stated in September 2018 that there are 394,028
surviving spouses who receive DIC. The flat monthly rate has
not been increased except for cost-of-living adjustments, since
1993. When DIC is comparted to payments to surviving spouses of
other Federal employees, DIC lags behind 12 percent. The other
Federal survivor benefit plans pay a surviving spouse 55
percent of the spouse's salary.
We are looking forward to the introduction of bills in the
Senate and House to increase the DIC from 43 percent to 55
percent, which would bring parity with other parity with other
Federal survivor programs.
Survivor Benefit Plan/Dependency Indemnity Compensation
offset. In 1972, Congress created the Survivor Benefit Plan for
retiring servicemembers who may select up to 55 percent of
their retirement pay towards SBP.
The average monthly DIC offset to SBP is $915. The spouses
subject to the SBP/DIC offset only receive the portion of the
SBP that exceeds the DIC offset.
A bill, H.R.553, Military Surviving Spouses Equity Act, was
introduced in the House by Representative Wilson and
Representative Yarmuth. There is a companion bill, Senate 622,
Military Widow's Tax Elimination Act of 2019, of 2019 in the
Senate. This one was introduced in a bipartisan effort by
Senator Jones, Senator Collins, Senator Tester, and Senator
Crapo. Both bills will repeal the SBP/DIC offset and eliminate
the inequity.
Eliminate the Remarriage Penalty for Young Surviving
Spouses. GSW would like your assistance in changing current law
that binds young surviving spouses to widowhood. Under current
law, if the surviving spouse remarries before the age of 57,
he/she forfeits lifesaving benefits afforded to them. GSW has
realized age 57 is an arbitrary age that penalizes young
surviving spouses.
H.R.95 and Senate 91, the Homeless Veterans' Children Acts,
would allow per diem payments to be extended to homeless
veterans' children under comprehensive service programs. GSW
supports these bills and hopes that Congress will pass them in
a timely manner so that homeless veterans' children can be
taken care of in the same manner as the veteran.
Being intimately familiar with the devastating of death,
GSW is extremely concerned with the overwhelming number of
veterans and active-duty servicemembers who die by suicide
every day. GSW supports any effort to reduce the rate of
service-connected deaths by suicide.
In conclusion, Gold Star Wives of America is appreciative
for existing laws that provide vital benefits and support for
surviving spouses and children of our military members who gave
their lives for our country.
President John F. Kennedy said, ``A nation reveals itself
not only by the citizens it produces, but also by the citizens
it honors, the citizens that remember.''
Again, thank you for the opportunity to testify on behalf
of Gold Star Wives of America. I am available for any
questions.
Chairman Isakson. Well, Crystal Lynn, before I turn it over
to the next speaker, let me just say this. I love Senator
Kennedy's quote, but we also as a country are distinguished by
the wives and spouses of those soldiers who go to battle, those
who make home for them, those who when they come home love
them, and when they do not come home, honor them and cherish
them like you have.
Your double sacrifice is recognized, and we are all very
sorry for it. But we are very proud of your service, the
service you render on behalf of Gold Star Wives and Gold Star
Mothers all over the country.
We thank you for being here today, and we thank you for
your sacrifice for your country.
Ms. Wenum. Thank you.
[Applause.]
Chairman Isakson. Dr. Thomas Zampieri. ``Zampieri,'' is
that right?
Mr. Zampieri. Yes, sir.
Chairman Isakson. Close enough, anyway.
Mr. Zampieri. Close enough.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Isakson. Welcome, sir.
STATEMENT OF THOMAS ZAMPIERI
Mr. Zampieri. On behalf of the Blinded Veterans
Association, we appreciate the invitation to speak today before
Chairman Isakson and Chairman Takano, Ranking Members Tester
and Roe. Some of you are old friends, and we always enjoy our
engagement with the members. And I welcome the new members
here.
We have been the Blinded Veterans Association 74 years come
March 28th, and we are very proud of our tradition of working
with the VA and with Members of Congress.
Some five issues that I wanted to cover in the time that I
have, one is that--and we appreciate that when you passed the
MISSION Act, you included caregivers for the pre-9/11 veterans,
and we are frustrated, though, because of the fact that as they
work out the details for the caregivers support program for
previous generations of our war-blinded veterans, first of all,
the length of time, that we are told that it could take another
year, we have got our immediate past president, who is a
Vietnam veteran, who is blind, and he is on home dialysis. And
his wife has health problems, and she is literally trying to
take care of him.
It is so frustrating. He has not just waited a year for
implementation of this. I say he has waited 45 years for
caregiver support.
So, as you hold hearings and do oversight with the VA with
the caregivers program, I certainly hope that you will ask
witnesses questions about their timeline and then are they
going to include catastrophically disabled veterans in their
benefits.
The other thing is we have worked with the VA consistently
on trying to get them to make the IT systems accessible,
Sections 508 and 504. Many of the members of the Committee are
familiar with this.
We are especially concerned that as they roll out with this
new Cerner contract and the electronic health records, that is
another chance that they will implement, yet again, another new
program with their IT system that will not be accessible for
blind veterans.
So, as you have different witnesses coming over from that
VA, I appreciate Chairman Roe--Ranking Member Roe and his
persistence with the VA about making sure that things are
accessible.
Both the Veterans Benefits Administration and VHA, they
really have to fix a lot of the stuff that they have had
problems with in the past.
Touching on a little bit of a different topic, which is
Vision Research Program within the Department of Defense, for
the House Members here, I know Friday is the deadline for your
views and estimates. We are asking all the members of the House
and Senate to request that the Appropriations Committees
include $20 million for a vision trauma research program within
the Department of Defense. It is the only place in the entire
country where there is money for battlefield eye-trauma
research.
NIH does not do it. The VA does not do eye-trauma research.
The only funding comes through DoD, and so when the Boston
Marathon blast occurred or when the blast occurred up in
Manchester, England, you go around the globe nowadays, and
there is eye trauma from blasts. It is the research that DoD is
doing that is helping our civilian trauma hospitals also and
how they deal with these horrific eye injuries.
The other thing is we have been working with the VA on
trying to get them to include local transportation for blind
veterans. It is a temporary program. Congress has to
reauthorize it every year.
Special mode transportation. The VA has sort of struggled
with that. Different departments have said that you have to be
wheelchair-bound before they will send a van out to pick you
up. Special mode transportation, I would argue should be for
any catastrophically disabled veteran that needs transportation
to get to their medical appointments.
We would like you to make the transportation program
permanent, but also to ensure that the VA's policies include
that blinded veterans be eligible.
The Special Adaptive Housing grant, unfortunately, my
friend, Senator Boozman left, but he and I worked when I was
director of Government Relations on legislation for this
adaptive housing grant program. That needs to be fixed because
it currently requires you go have no vision in order to be
eligible for the SAH.
Those are the five things I wanted to cover. I appreciate
your time and look forward to any questions you have.
Chairman Isakson. Thank you for your testimony, your
service, and your sacrifice. We appreciate it very, very much.
Dr. Schneider.
STATEMENT OF BARRY J . SCHNEIDER
Mr. Schneider. Good morning, Chairman Takano, Chairman
Isakson, honorable members of the Committee. My name is Dr.
Barry Schneider. I am an Air Force career officer and the
national commander of the Jewish War Veterans of the United
States. Jewish War Veterans will celebrate its 123rd
anniversary this coming Friday.
The Jewish War Veterans of the USA acknowledge and
appreciates the effort taken to reduce and prevent the current
reported rate of 20 veteran suicides per day. Veterans are one
and a half times more likely to commit suicide than
nonveterans. More than 6,000 veterans take their lives each
year.
I hope the new Cabinet-level task force initiated by
President Trump last week to prevent veteran suicides will be
successful.
Suicides, as a public health issue, affects everyone--
families, friends, and community. With the resources of this
Committee, the VA, and Congress, a plan can be, and should be,
devised to address this crisis in a meaningful and successful
manner.
More must be done. JWV urges the full mental health
screening using all available assessment tools and full access
to veteran facilities for all individuals exiting the military.
As a lifelong educator and student, the issue of student
veterans resonates with me in a very personal way. I have
earned two master's degrees with significant assistance from
Federal and DoD programs. I am pleased that the post-9/11 GI
bill provides significant benefits and provides a positive path
for returning veterans to reenter society as productive
citizens.
On behalf of JWV, we thank you for recognizing the
importance of this bill and ensuring its continued funding.
However, since the post-9/11 bill became law, many for- profit
predatory colleges have sprung up, and they view our veterans
as nothing more than dollar signs.
There are many reports of aggressive and deceptive
targeting of veteran servicemembers and their families. They
engage in misleading recruiting practices on military
installations and often fail to disclose meaningful information
enabling potential students to determine if a college has a
good record of graduating and positioning students for success
in the workforce.
As I have traveled around the country and visited many
colleges and universities, I have found great differences among
the various institutions. The schools which have excelled have
one thing in common. They provide one-stop shopping for our
veterans and their families.
For example, the University of Colorado Boulder has
established an office of Veteran and Military Affairs, VMA.
This office is staffed by veterans for veterans. They operate
from their own building and provide transitional support to
higher education and civilian life.
The unique circumstances of veteran students moving from
the military environment to academia requires special support.
The University of Colorado's VMA office provides this in an
exemplary way. This includes a Bridge Summer program and their
Veterans Ambassador program, which helps new students connect
with other veterans prior to the beginning of the school year.
The VMA office provides both academic and life counseling,
tutoring, hands-on assistance, and applying for various VA
benefits and financial supports.
To ensure that all of our veterans receive this level of
support, JWV asked the Department of Veterans Affairs and
Congress to establish a rating system ensuring that all
educational institutions that receive Government funding meet
at least minimum requirements and standards of accountability
to ensure that our veterans can select with confidence a
program which will meet their needs.
From my perspective, accountability must include single
point of contract, proper accreditation, staffing by veterans,
readily available access to counselors for academic and
financial advice, and a sense of community where veterans can
meet with other veterans to openly discuss problems and issues
that they face during their transition.
Further, a list of acceptable institutions must be made
available on the VA website.
Predatory institutions which take advantage of our veterans
and their families must be stopped. The post-9/11 GI bill is a
great benefit, and Congress must ensure its proper
administration.
These simple actions will ensure that our veterans have the
greatest chance of success and that the Government receives the
best return on their investment.
I thank you for your time and attention.
Chairman Isakson. Thank you, Dr. Schneider. We appreciate
it very much.
Mr. Greenlaw, the Military Order of the Purple Heart
National Commander, we welcome you.
STATEMENT OF DOUGLAS J. GREENLAW
Mr. Greenlaw. Thank you, sir.
Douglas J. Greenlaw, former First Lieutenant, 05332162,
U.S. Army.
You are part of the leadership of our Country, and I stand
before you as a very proud individual. Thank you for all that
you do.
Earlier, I placed my formal words into the permanent record
as National Commander of the Military Order of the Purple
Heart. I would like to dedicate my precious time today by
speaking directly to you up close and personal about our
Country's combat-wounded veterans.
I speak in behalf of the 500,000 Purple Heart recipients in
America that were wounded in protecting our beautiful country
in combat, and of course, we respect those that died in the
form of their duty as well. We give them special recognition of
their sacrifices.
But, today, I would like to call about the combat- wounded
vets, the survivors, those that have been spared death but have
had the unfortunate case of being wounded, some gravely
wounded. They live with the physical and the mental trauma that
affects not only the body but the mind, sometimes even the
soul.
As a recipient of two Purple Hearts in Vietnam, I was
wounded gravely the second time, but I consider myself
fortunate because my scars lie beneath my clothing. Not all
were so lucky.
I know a patriot who woke up in a zipped-up body bag in the
cooler, and that is only half the story. As he struggled in
that bag, he had a religious experience. God visited him in
that bag as he struggled, and to this day, he feels that he was
told by God that Jesus never died. Jesus woke up in that tomb,
just like he did, and he busted his way out. He showed his
wounds to his friends, and he married Mary Magdalene, had a
wife, children, lived a life.
My pastor told me that that is a common theory called the
``swoon theory.'' Well, it is no theory to the man in the bag.
You will never convince him of otherwise.
Charles Eggleston, a good friend of mine, was gravely
wounded in an IED explosion and following mortar attack behind
him. He suffered massive wounds. He was in the hospital for 3
and-a-half years--3 and-a-half years.
The surgeons were taking bones out of his back from the men
blown up behind him. To this day, he has shards of bones in his
body that he carries on a daily basis. Try living with that. It
is called PTSD.
Bob Bostwick, another friend, was wounded and captured, POW
in the Korean War. As the Chinese who captured him dragged him
overland to their hidden camp, they beat him focusing on his
wounds, telling him they were going to torture, interrogate,
and kill him. He thought, well, if they are going to kill me,
they are going to kill me escaping. In the dark of the night
that night, wounded and weak--he was a pretty strong guy--he
overpowered--he killed his guards, two guards. He escaped
somehow, weakened, finally found himself to find his way back
to his unit in South Korea.
Now, here is my point. Do you know how old this gentleman
was when he experienced this? He was 18 years old--18, right
out of high school.
We are not fighting wars with 40-year-old Harvard MBAs.
These are our young warriors that are out there, 18, 19 years
old. I was the old man. I was the old man at 23 as an infantry
company commander in Vietnam, fighting and leading 158 men in
the swamps and valleys and rivers and mountains of Vietnam.
May I please say just a couple of words about our young
military today, the millennials. They are a find generation of
Americans. Every military generation is better than the one
before. Today, they are bigger. They are stronger. They are
better equipped. They have the same patriotism than the
veterans that fought before them. So if you see one, he is 18
years old, treat him like an adult or her like an adult because
that is what they are.
I could go on and on with stories, but I know my time is
limited.
When legislation crosses your desk, please remember us, the
combat wounded, the Purple Heart recipients.
The laws on paper represent real men and real women from
all wars, and your support is so important. If you remember
anything I say today, please remember this. Our bodies heal,
but our scars remain, and our wars never end.
Thank you.
Chairman Isakson. Mr. Greenlaw, thank you very much.
And let me just comment, if I might, for 1 minute. Your
testimony is very compelling. We are all aware of the sacrifice
but sometimes not as aware of the depth of the sacrifice of an
individual as you point in the stories that you told.
We know what the Purple Heart means. It means you were
wounded in battle. I did not know until you told me there were
500,000 Purple Heart recipients. Is that the right number?
Mr. Greenlaw. There is no exact number, but that is the
estimate.
Chairman Isakson. That is how many people took a bullet for
us, basically to say.
One other thing I want to underline is that the injuries of
the wars of the 21st century are different from the injuries of
any other war we have ever had, and so many of them are soft-
tissue injuries of the brain of the psyche, and of the soul. It
is very important that you point that out. We should never
forget anyone, and we should always remember there is a tragic
story behind every veteran. Sometimes they hide it all their
life from us, but they go through it every day because they
were the ones that experienced it.
Thank you for your testimony today. We appreciate it. Ms.
Campos.
STATEMENT OF RENE A. CAMPOS
Ms. Campos. Chairman Isakson, Ranking Members Tester and
Roe, and members of the Committees, I would like to take this
opportunity to ask our MOAA members in the audience to stand
and give our appreciation and round of applause for making the
115th Congress one of the most successful in recent years and
for this opportunity to testify.
[Applause.]
Ms. Campos. I will start by leaving you with three
important messages. First, there is no higher priority for
veterans than to ensure the Secretary and his staff have the
tools and the time they need to succeed.
We must also keep our eyes on the impact of these reforms
on veterans. One MOAA female veteran from Montana questions the
new VA legislation and will it leads to real improvement. She
says, ``I have been in the VA since 1994 with great success
until recently. In the past 2 years, I have been assigned five
different medical providers because the VA cannot keep the
doctors. I am a cancer survivor who is not considered cured. I
have had three different tests to keep everything in check.
None of these tests have been reviewed with me.''
Second, there needs to be more collaboration between the VA
and the DoD to include hearings--between the Veterans and the
Armed Services Committees on important issues such as toxic
exposure, women veterans, the electronic health record, and
mental health and suicide prevention, shifting more responsible
back to DoD as an employer for addressing outcomes for
transitioning servicemembers to veterans status.
I will touch on three priorities from our statements. The
first one is CHAMPVA. When ACA became law, it required health
insurance plans to provide dependent coverage of children,
including coverage for an adult child to age 26. Private-sector
and DoD health care plans confirm to the law. MOAA urges the
Congress to expand this care to CHAMPVA.
Then, finally, in the area of behavioral health and well-
being, there is no doubt VA has made great strides in expanding
its health care services to help veterans suffering from pain,
traumatic injuries, and mental health. VA cannot let up its
efforts because the need is so great.
MOAA recommends investing in VA and DoD collaboration and
services and investing in ways we can identify at-risk
populations.
Then in the area of women veterans, VA continues to
struggle to adapt to meet the rising demand in delivering
needed health care and disability benefits to the women
veterans. For nearly 4 years, MOAA has partnered with the
United Health Foundation, studying how the unique demands of
military service affect the long-term health.
We have produced three reports--two on a broad group of
those who have served and a narrow report on women veterans.
Last year's Health of Those Who Have Served Report revealed
those who served are more likely to describe their health
better than their civilian counterparts, but they are also more
likely to suffer from a litany of chronic diseases and to
engage in unhealthy behaviors.
The study also showed some troubling trends, particularly
among women veterans whose rates of suicide thoughts more than
tripled between 2011 and 2016.
MOAA is grateful to the Committees for your commitment to
ensuring women veterans have equal access to medical and other
benefits. The important work you did in the last Congress
combined with Chairman Takano's and Representative Brownley's
efforts in establishing a women's task force provide the needed
momentum to make significant progress this year on these
issues.
In closing, I would like to share a story of an active-duty
Army servicemember and his father's care in the VA and how it
formed his perception of the VA.
Just before retirement, his father received a letter from
VA notifying him of the abnormally high rate of veterans in
Desert Storm and Desert Shield in his unit with brain-related
issues. VA later denied his father's claim because he could not
prove service connection. He died at age 56 of brain cancer.
Before his father's death, his son was told VA had no
hospice program for veterans under 65. It took the director of
the Indianapolis VA to finally authorize hospice care.
This servicemember's takeaway, while the VA providers, the
staff, and the health care were awesome, the lag time between
discharge from service and VA care and the bureaucracy
continues.
This story speaks to the generational consequences of how
we treat and care for our veterans. I know I want my son, who
is in the military now, to be able to have the same trust and
confidence in his VA when he leaves service as I have
experience from my service.
MOAA is committed to working with the Committees and the
Department to help build a VA all veterans can be proud to call
their own.
Thank you again, and I look forward to your questions.
Chairman Isakson. Thank you, Ms. Campos, and I am now going
to turn the gavel over to Mr. Takano, the House Chairman, to
complete the hearing this morning.
I want to thank all of you for your participation and all
the members for being here.
Mr. Takano, I will turn it over to you. Thank you, sir.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN TAKANO
Chairman Takano. Yes. Thank you, Chairman Isakson. It is
always an honor to join you and Ranking Members Tester and Roe
and all members of the House and Senate Committees on Veterans'
Affairs to hear directly from the organizations that represent
millions of veterans and their families who are impacted by our
decisions. Like the rest of the members sitting at the dais, I
take this responsibility very seriously.
First, I want to welcome our partners from the National
Association of State Directors of Veterans Affairs, the Fleet
Reserve Association, Gold Star Wives of America, Blinded
Veterans Association, Jewish War Veterans, Military Order of
the Purple Heart, and Military Officers Association of America.
I would also like to specifically recognize members from my
home State of California. If there are any Californians here,
just kind of wave.
[No response.]
I do not see anybody waving. That is kind of surprising.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Takano. But welcome, wherever you are from.
Mr. Roe. It is a small State.
Chairman Takano. That is right. Dr. Roe says it is a very
small State.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Takano. I am thankful for the opportunity to hear
from our VSO partners, many of whom are veterans themselves.
Each of you represent a unique group of veterans and surviving
spouses, and because of that, each of you possesses a unique
set of concerns.
The joint hearings provide us with a unique opportunity to
hear the focused messages from so many of our VSO partners who
do the work every day to help our Nation's heroes. Congress
simply could not deliver on our promises without the dedication
and firsthand understanding of the issues that affect our
servicemembers, veterans, and their families. So thank you all
for what you all do.
With your help, we have identified many problems and fixes
to those problems, but the work is far from over. Your
continued input as we move through the 116th Congress is not
only needed, it is truly appreciated. I ask that you continue
to hold the administration and Congress accountable and ensure
both fulfill our Nation's promise to care for our veterans. If
we can afford to send our people to war to protect our country,
then this country can and must afford to take care of our
wounded when they return.
Reading through your testimony, your concerns, I want to
just say this. Your concerns are my concerns and the concerns
of the House Veterans' Affairs Committee. The message from you
and your VSO cohorts is clear. Congress must keep a vigilant
eye on the VA and pass legislation to care for our veterans.
Mental health, eliminating veteran suicide, ensuring equal
access to quality medical care for all veterans, regardless of
gender or disability, and to ensure that access to crucial VA
services be available to veterans of all eras should be our
priorities.
Outreach and care for women and minority veterans must also
be addressed in this Congress, and I am pleased that attention
for these veterans' groups continues to rise.
And I am glad that the testimony of the National
Association of State Directors of Veterans Affairs highlights
aspects of access hurdles our Native American veterans face.
I want to make it clear to you today that I directed my
staff in January of this year to better understand the hurdles
that Native American veterans face in attaining earned VA
disability benefits, and I plan to identify and implement
solutions that will improve the lives of our Native veterans
and all underrepresented veterans in my time as Chairman of the
House Veterans' Affairs Committee.
While I just touch on a few issue areas important to you
and your membership, know that I am committed to helping
advance your priorities in the coming year.
I look forward to hearing your testimony today and thank
you again for your tireless advocacy on behalf of our veteran
community.
So I am going to yield back to myself the remainder of the
time.
With that, I think we just move on to the------
Senator Tester. I have an opening statement.
Chairman Takano. Oh, you have an opening statement.
I now want to recognize Senator Tester, the Ranking Member
of the Senate Veterans' Affairs Committee, for his opening
statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR TESTER
Senator Tester. Thank you, Chairman Takano, and I will be
very brief.
First of all, thank you all for your testimony. I very much
appreciate the input that all of you have given us. As I have
said before, we take our cues from the veterans service
organizations and the veterans that are on the ground when it
comes to making policy and hold the people accountable that
that policy be carried out in an appropriate way.
I do want to respond very quickly to Mr. Campos' comments
about a woman veteran from Montana that has since 1996 seen
five providers in the last few years. This is a problem. It is
a huge problem in Montana where we went through, I think, eight
directors in the last 12 years, and we cannot keep employees.
Somebody is trying to privatize Montana's VA.
It has gotten to the point now where when veterans call in,
they immediately put them into the private sector, at least in
some cases, without even offering them VA health care. That, in
my opinion, is ridiculous. We have got to find out what is
going on.
And, as we move forward and as we do things like pass the
MISSION Act and pass the Accountability Act and pass the
appeals backlog and the Forever GI bill that we did last
Congress, we have got to make sure things are improving and not
going the other direction.
There are some who want to privatize the VA. Hopefully,
none of them are on this rostrum. They have said time and time
again, they are not, but the bottom line is if you do not have
docs--and that is what we are seeing in Montana--you have
privatized the VA.
So thank you all very much for your input. We look forward
to our questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Takano. Thank you, Senator.
Now we will move on to 5-minute questioning. Are we doing 5
minutes or 3 minutes? We are doing 5 minutes.
I would like to first recognize Representative Sablan from
the Northern Mariana Islands for 5 minutes.
REPRESENTATIVE GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN
Mr. Sablan. Good morning, everyone, and to our witnesses
and to everyone in the room, thank you very much for joining us
today.
My favorite part of being in this Committee is to have
conversations and listen to both veterans but particularly the
veterans service organizations. Thank you very much for all
that you do for our veterans.
I come from a place where the only place in the United
States that does not even have a CBOC. We have one of the
highest enlistment rates in the uniformed services per capita
in the Nation, and yet our veterans come back and do not have
the services that they need.
But let that go for a while. I would like to ask the
witnesses at least to please raise your right hand if you
support the privatization of the Veterans Administration.
[No response.]
Anyone who supports the privatization of VA?
[No response.]
Thank you, because neither do I.
I think VA provides some of the best service for our
veterans. We only need to continue working to improve those
services.
And, Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I yield back my time.
Chairman Takano. The gentleman yields back.
I call upon Dr. Roe for 5 minutes.
Dr. Roe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank all
the members for being here and your incredibly compelling
testimony.
Dr. Schneider, you do not look 123. I am going to say that
for you.
Mr. Schneider. I am pushing it.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Roe. Tom, thank you for your comments.
Certainly, I think the vision research that you pointed
out, the $20 million, we have got to dig down and make sure
that is there. If that is the only place that is occurring,
that has to stay there. I totally agree with that.
The transportation, I took several notes on what you would
like to see done. Those are all, I think, incredibly reasonable
things to do.
Mr. Washington, I want to thank you for your eloquent
comments about the Blue Water Navy. We have to get this right,
this Congress. For 10 years, we have been working on this, and
you have been working on it probably for 30. And I thank you
for that and your support.
All the VSOs have been incredibly supportive of this, and
we plan, I know with the Chairman's help, to get this through.
Ms. Campos, you mentioned something that is very near and
dear to my heart. You cannot have continuity of care if you see
five different doctors all the time, and I would respectfully
disagree with my good friend, Senator Tester.
The problem we are having in this country, we do not have
enough providers. Getting those providers to go in rural areas
is a challenge.
I know I saw when the VA at home did not have an OB--I am
an OB/GYN specialist. When they did not have that, I saw that
as their extender. I was their OB/GYN department, our group
was.
So I think what we have to do--and we are getting market
assessments across the country to find out what resources are
available in each community in the country, and then that is
when the Choice program is set up where it is. If the VA cannot
provide that service, then it is provided outside the VA.
I have said this a thousand times. If we have gone in my 10
years here, we have over doubled the VA budget, that is not
privatization. I think everybody up here believes that.
I think we have got a huge challenge about how to get
providers, and this current budget the President asked for was
to increase the number of employees to 392,000. That is larger
than the U.S. Navy. So we are doing I think what is right for
our veterans.
Implementation, as everybody has said, is absolute key, and
certainly implementation of the MISSION Act, which is the most
transformative bill I think we have passed in VA since I have
been here.
What hurdles do you all see in the VA MISSION Act? It goes
live the 6th of June. Anyone can take that question. Biggest
hurdle for the MISSION Act.
Ms. Campos. I will take that question, sir.
I think the biggest question is how will it be implemented
across the system in a uniform consistent way, in a way that it
can be explained to veterans, VA employees, that they will
understand and be able to know if they are eligible right up
front.
So I think that there is a lot of challenges about we can
look at quality. We can look at the access standards. Those are
arbitrary.
I think that we are still going to have problems as this is
rolled out. There has not been a lot of communication.
I know we have asked, with our other VSO colleagues, for
more information from VA to get out to veterans, so they can
understand what this means.
I went to a Tallahassee VA not too long ago, and they are
getting confused between the Choice program. Some people think
that the MISSION Act and the Community Care has already been
rolled out. So there is a lot of confusion out there, and I
think that if we do not get ahead of the communication on this
in the front end with the employees to be able to talk to
veterans about those and to the providers, that those veterans
are going to be talking to, as I said, across from their
provider trying to decide where is the best place to get their
care.
Dr. Roe. I think several of us are having--I think it is in
the morning. We are having breakfast with the Secretary. We
will absolutely pass that along because I think the VA needs to
include you guys, all the veterans service organizations, so
you can educate your membership. I think that is a huge
benefit.
Before I yield back, Captain Greenlaw, I want to thank you
for your incredible service to this great country. I salute
you, sir.
I yield back.
Chairman Takano. Thank you, Dr. Roe.
I recognize Senator Tester for 5 minutes.
Senator Tester. Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just for the record, 12 year ago, we had one of the best
VAs in Montana in the country. We had doctors. We have had a
doctor shortage for some time. I have not had a doctor in my
hometown in 30 years.
What has happened in Montana is there has not been
appreciation for the doctors that have done the work, and they
have been run out. They are waiting in the private sector to
come back, but they have got to have a VA that wants them back.
And we do not have that in Montana. I do not know if they have
that in Tennessee or not, but they do not have it in Montana.
Quite frankly, it is a problem, and it is a big, big
problem because our veterans deserve better than that. As the
fellow from the Northern Mariana Islands asked, nobody wants to
privatize the VA, and I certainly think the veterans prefer the
VA over the private sector.
But I want to talk about mental health for a second because
I think just about every one of you talked about mental health
in some form or another.
It is a big problem. Tomorrow, I am going to introduce
legislation that is going to do a couple things. It is going to
strengthen support services for VA members who are
transitioning from DoD to VA health care, that transition time.
It is going to invest in innovative treatments for mental
health conditions, different kind of treatments than we
normally think about, somebody laying on a couch.
Well, there are other methods too--yoga, music, animal
therapy, meditation, acupuncture. It is going to cut red tape
for VA and vet centers to hire more mental health
professionals. It is going to increase rural veterans' access
to telehealth, which as we know oftentimes can be better than
eyeball to eyeball if we utilize it. So not only does it work
in rural areas, it works in urban areas too. And it is also
going to increase accountability of the VA's mental health
outreach and suicide prevention efforts.
Once again, we are going to work. We are going to work in a
bipartisan way to get this bill passed. It has got to be
implemented correctly if it is going to do what we want, but we
all understand that mental health, which has been the signature
injury coming out of the war for the last 20 years, is a big,
big issue.
For anyone on the panel, in terms of the VA's current
mental health and suicide prevention efforts, can you tell me
where the VA is making the grade and where it is missing the
mark? Is there anything that the VA is doing that is working?
Yes, go ahead, Mr. Greenlaw.
Mr. Greenlaw. In South Carolina, I am from the Greenville
area, up in the northern part of the State. We have one of the
finest VA clinics, probably in the country. It is only a few
years old, 78,000 square feet. It runs like a clock. They
handle about 850, 900 vets a day, and they do a fantastic job.
Senator Tester. Marvelous. Good.
Mr. Greenlaw. So I think these clinics are the unsung
heroes.
Senator Tester. Yeah. Good.
Anybody else?
Ms. Alvarado-Ramos. Yes, Senator Tester.
Senator Tester. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Alvarado-Ramos. From the National Association of State
Directors of Veterans Affairs, in Washington State
particularly, we have significant collaboration from the State
with a program that does behavioral health and the Federal VA.
The area where we have some challenges is with the vet
centers----
Senator Tester. Yes.
Ms. Alvarado-Ramos. ----and the staffing.
Senator Tester. Staffing of the vet centers?
Ms. Alvarado-Ramos. Exactly.
The vet center is such a hybridized system, such an amazing
system to veterans and families that VA needs to fully staff
those, and I think they are having some of the same issues
regarding staffing----
Senator Tester. Yes.
Ms. Alvarado-Ramos. ----and them working for the Federal
VA. But this is an area that when it comes to behavioral health
and emotional wellness, there are critical services for our
veterans and their families.
Senator Tester. That is good input too.
Dr. Zampieri.
Mr. Zampieri. Yes. I was just going to say the same thing
about the vet centers.
Senator Tester. Yes.
Mr. Zampieri. Being a Vietnam-era veteran, the vet centers
have been amazing, but telehealth, mental telehealth clinics,
whether you are in a big city or a rural area, it is another
way to make access ability easier for those veterans.
The crisis center, I applaud the VA for the work that they
have done with the crisis center.
Ironically, though, by the way, the website was not
accessible for blind veterans.
Senator Tester. Yes.
Mr. Zampieri. Yeah. That is one of those things that you
just say to yourself, ``How could that happen?''
But the last thing--and you have touched no it, and we have
talked before--is the length of time it takes to hire someone
in the VA, whether it is a physician assistant, a psychiatrist,
a psychologist, a counselor. It takes--and I know. My wife
works in the VA system. That will get her in trouble, but it
takes months and months.
So you have a provider who comes and interviews.
Senator Tester. Yes.
Mr. Zampieri. They want the position, and 5 months later,
they have not been brought in.
Senator Tester. Bingo. Somebody else will hire them by
then.
Mr. Zampieri. Yeah.
Senator Tester. Yes.
And, by the way, we have worked to try to cut that down,
but that is something we need to also keep paying attention to,
to cut that timeline down. There is not a doc out there worth
his salt that is going to stick around past 2 months. Fact. It
is a fact.
Thank you all for your input. Thank you all for your
testimony. God bless you all.
Chairman Takano. I now call on Representative Bost of
Illinois for 5 minutes.
REPRESENTATIVE MIKE BOST
Mr. Bost. Thank you, Chairman, and I want to thank all of
you for your service. I want to thank you as veterans for your
service and all of those that are out there that maybe are not
veterans but are serving our veterans. I thank you so much for
that.
Let me also say this last year, we--and in your input, each
group and organization, that when we put in the Appeals
Improvement and Modernization Act. Let me tell you that that is
an issue that we have worked on, and without your help and
input on that, we could not actually get it going.
But right now, the Secretary is getting ready to certify
it. As your input helped that off the start to make sure we
were taking care of our veterans and getting their appeals
process speeded up, one of the main concerns I had was a legacy
appeals.
I am just asking the whole panel, anyone that could have
input on this, what do you see where they are at right now? Can
you give me feedback on what the veterans are feeling right
now, those that are sitting in a legacy appeals process? Are
they feeling like they are speeding up? Is it still just laying
out there?
Ms. Campos. I will take that question. I think when we
think of the legacy systems, we tend to think more on the
Department of Defense side where people have been injured, and
they have been put in temporary, limited duty status or--excuse
me--in a retirement status, temporary retirement status.
Three years later, they come back. They may have gone
through the joint disability evaluation system and were put
into that retirement status, but then they have to come back
and be reevaluated, and then they go through the legacy system
on the DoD side. Then it is kind of viewed as they are going to
be--their benefits are going to be decreased.
We believe that if they have already been in the integrated
disability evaluation system, they should be able to go back
through that process again before they are reviewed for final
retirement status.
Mr. Bost. Many of these legacy appeals, we were afraid were
going to linger out there. We were going to be able to hit the
new appeals very quickly with the new system, but those that
were old, that they could not get the reaction in time that the
newer appeals processes were getting. And I do not know whether
anybody is noticing that or not.
Ms. Alvarado-Ramos. I will say something about that. I was
in an Honor Flight last October and having a conversation
around the table with some of our veterans, the people that we
were guardians for. The conversation was, at that time, not
around how long it took for their appeal to take place but
comparing notes of how short a time it was taking. So I think
there is progress being made by VA----
Mr. Bost. Okay.
Ms. Alvarado-Ramos. --when it comes to being able to
expedite.
And I just wanted to say just one quick thing when it comes
to the States because one of the things that the States can
provide is extensions to the VA to be able to work on the
claims backlogs and to be able to get more veterans connected
to those appeals and to the new system, but part of that is on-
the-ground services and States being able to get the ability
through potential funding to expedited and be able to connect
more veterans into the new systems.
Mr. Bost. Well, the concerns I had--and I am very short on
time. You see, I myself, as a Marine veteran, whenever I left,
I had lost my high-frequency hearing. My wife believes that it
is just a selective hearing that I have.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bost. But we did have that tested.
But it was at a time, at that time in the Marine Corps and
the military--you are 23 years old and you want to go home.
They ask you to sign a waiver, and then you do not have to be
held there for an extra 6 months. Those do not hold up,
supposedly, but at least I went through the process.
I myself did not get the disability appeal. I did not. I
got to the point in life that it really did not matter, but I
kind of took the stand whenever I got here to speed up the
process because I know how long it can be and how hurtful it
can be, and finally, most of them give up rather than get what
is owed to them. And it is my job, I feel like to continue to
fight for that.
So, if you see those come up, please let us know. We will
continue to work hard for you, and thank you for being here.
Chairman Takano. The gentleman yields back.
I recognize Senator Blumenthal for 5 minutes.
SENATOR RICHARD BLUMENTHAL
Senator Blumenthal. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here today, and thank you for your service to our Nation.
I am sure there may be veterans here or are listening from
Connecticut, and I want to thank them as well.
Many of you have spoken about the priorities that I share
and that I have worked on during my time in the United States
Senate--veterans suicide is one of them, access to health care
services for women veterans, and support for veteran caregivers
of all generations, just to name a few.
The President's budget for the coming fiscal year increased
the overall appropriation request for the Department of
Veterans Affairs, but I am very concerned that this proposal
still fails to provide adequate resource for maintaining and
improving VA facilities.
The modernization of these facilities, particularly in the
health care area, is critical to preventing a path to
privatization. I believe privatization is anathema. Most of the
Connecticut veterans, at least the ones I have spoken to, agree
that privatization is to be avoided.
So investments in major and minor conversation in addition
to funding for nonrecurring maintenance is absolutely
necessary.
I will give you one example. The VA in West Haven, the
hospital there, has antiquated infrastructure in its operating
rooms, so that they are functioning right now at about 30
percent of capacity. They were completely incapacitated for 3
months because of flooding. They are now operating at 30
percent of capacity because they lack the equipment necessary
to sterilize the tools and equipment used in surgery.
Think of it for a moment. As many as two out of there
veterans needing surgery are either delayed or sent elsewhere
because the VA hospital in West Haven cannot clean the tools
and equipment they need for surgery. They are going to lose
their certification. They are going to lose docs who want to
work there. The strength of veterans' health care is the docs
and staff and administrative personnel, the talent, that it can
attract. If they cannot sterilize tools and equipment, what can
they do?
Well, what is the solution? A new facility. That is 5 years
away, according to the VA most optimistic projection, 5 years
away for a permanent new facility to sterilize tools and
equipment at this major hospital.
So, in the meantime, they have said, ``Let us get a
trailer. Let us get a mobile facility, stop gap, temporary.''
How long will that take? A year. A year. Can you believe it?
I do not know how common this problem is around the
country, but in my view, the President's Budget Request has to
address it more effectively because right now we are taking too
long to provide the first-rate, world-class medicine that our
veterans deserve in West Haven.
I know my colleagues, many of them, have shared with me
their frustrations with similar kinds of capital needs; that
is, the need to rebuild and renovation, the capital equipment,
the infrastructure.
So I invite your comments. I am sorry that I have taken
longer than I thought I would to talk about this issue.
Yes, sir.
Mr. Zampieri. Yes, sir. You have hit it perfect. In fact,
West Haven, Connecticut, in addition to those surgical
problems, the Blind Center in West Haven, which is one of the
original ones from 1950s, they had flood damage due to broken
pipes, and we have been waiting 3 years for them to fix it.
So the bed inpatient count for blind rehabilitation at that
facility has been reduced to like 40 percent. That Blind Center
serves all of New England, blind veterans from Maine,
Massachusetts, Rhode Island. That is where they are supposed to
go, and the waiting times--it is because of the construction
problems, and I think most of the bipartisan comments would be
that, yeah, the VA does not do a good job at construction. But
it still drags on and on.
Senator Blumenthal. I just want to finish, and I apologize
for taking a little more time.
That comment is really so important and compelling, and I
thank you for it.
I also want to make clear that what I have said here is in
no way a criticism of the dedicated doctors, physicians,
surgeons, nurses, administrative staff at the West Haven
Hospital. They are working with one hand tied behind their
backs, no fault of theirs.
The VA here in our Nation's Capital is hamstringing them
because of the construction delays and impediments that it has
created.
So I have written to the Secretary asking him personally to
expedite this situation.
But as much as I hope that he will personally intervene,
that is no solution nationwide, and your presence here today, I
hope will provide a powerful impetus for us to unite on a
bipartisan basis and demand better of the VA when it comes to
these kinds of capital investments in our veterans care.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Takano. Thank you, Senator Blumenthal.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
With all due respect to my Ranking Member, it is true that
VA investments have increased, but that does not necessarily
gainsay that there is a privatization agenda afoot by some.
We have a former Secretary of the Veterans Affairs
Department in this administration, the first one that has
claimed that a privatization agenda was what in part forced him
out.
I am alarmed by the percentage increase in spending on care
in the community. It is a tremendous percentage increase, and
while it is less than the absolute spending on medical care, if
it continues to increase at that rate, it is going to put
pressure on the internal capacity of the VA.
Even as we have spent this money, increased amount of
money, we still have 45,000 positions that remain unfilled,
mainly at the Veterans Health Administration, and this is very
concerning.
The Secretary and everybody on both sides of the aisle
pretty much has said, on both the House and Senate Committees,
have enunciated an opposition to privatization of VA, and we
are talking in particular about health services. But, in fact,
careful manipulation of formulas, access standards, the way
those access standards are implemented could definitely put us
on a glide path very quickly toward an evisceration of the
internal capacity of the VA, and what that would mean, frankly,
community care is going to be more costly. And it is going to
put pressure on future veteran use in terms of increased out-
of-pocket cost to that veteran.
It is not going to be a better deal for the relationship,
and it will not be a better deal for the veteran. And that is
why I think so many veterans service organizations are
concerned about what may be going on.
So, as Chairman of the Veterans' Affairs Committee on the
House side, I am interested in keeping the proper proportion,
the proper balance.
There has always been--always been a use of outside private
contractors where the VA could not provide those medical
services in-house, and there is not a medical network, a
private medical network in this country, which does not
coordinate the care in some way in a way that the VA
coordinates the care and builds its own physician provider
base.
So that being said, I want to ask a question of Ms. Ramos--
Ms. Alvarado-Ramos. Bienvenido.
As you may know, the total population of women veterans is
expected to increase over the next decade, and women make up
the fastest-growing cohort of veterans.
Knowing this, our Committee has stood up a women's health
task force led by my colleague, Congresswoman Brownley.
What are some of the most critical needs of women veterans,
and what policy recommendations can we enact to address those
needs?
Ms. Alvarado-Ramos. Probably the highest need is on the
issue of emotional wellness or behavioral health because
women--because of having been a minority--and I came in 1971
into military service when we were 2 percent of the military
force. The issues, saw military sexual trauma, issues of being
able to manage their families alone, you know, sometimes being
dual service families. There is a lot of pressure on women
veterans having served in which they emotional wellness issues
surface, and behavioral health and emotional wellness if the
root cause of a lot of the issues that we are dealing with in
the States and the Federal VA-- homelessness, unemployment,
child abuse, in many cases subject abuse.
And, therefore, if we are able to upstream, be able to deal
while they are still no active due in ensuring that they are
well as they leave the military, then that is going to
transpose into the community, but if they need the services, if
we need the services, it is important that the network has the
capacity and also the gender-sensitive care that is needed for
women to be able to get the care that they need.
Chairman Takano. Thank you for your response.
My time is up, and I want to now recognize the gentleman
from South Carolina, Mr. Cunningham, for 5 minutes.
REPRESENTATIVE JOE CUNNINGHAM
Mr. Cunningham. Good morning. I want to thank each and
every one of you all for being here this morning and sharing
your time with us. That is your most valuable resource, and it
means a lot that you are here.
I represent the First Congressional District of South
Carolina, which goes from Charleston all the way down to Hilton
Head. Out of all South Carolina districts, it has the highest
population of veterans in the entire State, and I can tell you
how proud I am to be able to claim that piece.
Mr. Washington, this question was for you. As we all have
family members or friends who have cared for others, we often
realize it is the caregiver who suffers a lot as well. And
sometimes attention is not placed enough on them.
As you know, the VA MISSION Act improves caregiver programs
by providing relatives or friends who care for eligible
veterans, a stipend, training, and access to health insurance
and counseling.
While I believe we all agree our next steps should be to
expand caregiver services to veterans of all--but beyond that,
what else can we be doing to not only support the veterans but
to support those who also support veterans, to support the
caregivers and make sure they have everything that they need to
care for our veterans?
Mr. Washington. Thank you, sir, for the question. I just
want to let you know that I am also from Charleston, South
Carolina, so thank you.
And that I think what we need to do is probably look at
some kind of community-based sharing of mental health issues so
that our veterans will have someone to turn to and also to make
sure that the caregivers is implemented with a good oversight
program to kind of keep watch on what is going on with the
caregivers.
Again, I would like to thank the Congress. This has been an
initiative that has been going back for a very long time of
providing for caregivers because it takes a lot away from them
to have to--a change of life for them as well, too, to help
that particular veteran get all the needs and care that they
possibly can.
So I would just think a little bit more transparency on
community-based health that can help these veterans out when
they can.
Mr. Cunningham. Thank you, Mr. Washington. I hope to see
you back home here soon.
I reserve the rest of my time and yield back.
Chairman Takano. You wish to yield back?
Mr. Cunningham. I yield back.
Chairman Takano. Is Senator Sinema--she left. She comes and
goes.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Takano. I was like I looked. She was here a moment
ago.
That looks like it concludes all of our questions, and I
will ask Dr. Roe if he has a concluding statement.
Dr. Roe. Just very briefly.
One of the things that passed under the radar screen last
March were the inclusion of all the State veteran homes that
were on the backlog. That is a huge deal. I think those are
tremendous. Everywhere I visited a State veteran home, those
have been really well received and well done, and the veterans
are well served there. So I think that got passed over very
quickly.
Last week, I guess it was, the Chairman held a roundtable,
which was the second one we have had in the last few months, on
veteran suicide and what we can do to help lower that rate.
I got very frustrated with that. When I look back at 2003
and we as a Nation were spending about $2 billion a year, now
we are spending $8 billion a year, and the needle has not
moved. I thought if we are continuing to do that, let us do
something different.
So if you have ideas out there, please bring them to us,
and we will be glad to listen to them because that is a
tragedy. When you think if it is 20 people a day, that is a
huge number of people in a year's time.
The other good news--and there is a lot of good news--I
just saw where the veteran unemployment is 2.7 percent. That is
remarkable to have an unemployment rate that low.
I will say this and with some levity, but Presidents'
budgets make good doorstops. I have seen that over the years.
The House and Senate appropriate the money, and we will decide
how it is divided out and so forth. I think we can do that. We
have been doing it for 200-plus years.
One of the things that has been brought up--and I think
Senator Blumenthal did--which was extremely important, a third
part of that VA MISSION Act was the AIR Act, and that is how
our VA is going to look. And I applaud the Chairman for doing a
2030 view of what the VA will look like, and we even talked
about what is the VA going to look like in 25 years.
I am amazed at how fast 25 years goes by, and we should be
thinking about that now because the current VA cannot look like
it does now 25 years from now because the demographics of the
country are changing. People are moving from the Northeast to
the South and West.
In 2045, there are going to be 12.5 million veterans
because of an all-volunteer Army as opposed to ours which was a
drafted Army. So we have got to look different, and we have got
to provide the services closer to where the veterans life.
Instead of having the veteran travel long distances in to see
the VA, put the VA out where the veterans are.
I agree with you, Tom, that the vet centers are great. The
ones I have been in are incredibly impressive places to be.
I will finish by--oh, the last thing--and I 100 percent
agree with this. Our practice could hire a doctor before the VA
could get the paperwork signed in, and the HR Director for the
VA is going to come see me this week. We are going to start
working on that. They have got to speed that up. I cannot tell
you how many of my colleagues have said, ``Look, Phil, I want
to go to work at the VA, but I have got to pay my bills,'' and
so this is nurses, doctors, PAs, other people that make the VA
function as it should be. I hear you loud and clear.
Again, thank you all for being here.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for allowing me to say a few
closing words.
I just appreciate what each and all of you do every day for
our Nation's veterans.
I yield back.
Chairman Takano. Thank you, Dr. Roe, and I am very happy to
hear you are going to see the HR Director. I hope you will pass
on to me whatever you learn about what seems to be the
impediments in the hiring process. I hear anecdotal stories all
the time about people applying, doctors, specialists that are
applying for jobs at the VA that are posted, and they do not
hear back.
As you know, a specialist, they are highly sought after.
There are shortages in private-sector medicine, and as I have
said many times before, in my part of California, Inland
California, we have a shortage of both family physicians and
specialists as well as medical professionals of all different
stripes.
In the context of that shortage, of course, it is going to
be difficult for the VA to fill its vacancies in areas such as
mine, and increased choice, an emphasis on choice, does not
solve the problem because veterans are going to face long wait
times and access issues, even if they are referred out into the
community.
Even with the full employment we have, we have a skills
gap, a credentialing gap, a professionalization gap, and we
have an opportunity to upgrade our workforce, especially our
medical workforce. And I think we need to--and this is
something you and I have discussed many times--is our mutual
interest in a graduate medical school education, and I would
take it further. We need to provide opportunities, affordable
opportunities for more Americans to work in these health
professions, to serve our veterans, but to serve our Nation,
frankly. We have communities all over this country that are
facing these challenges.
With that, I will conclude my remarks.
Thank you all for the work you do on behalf of our
veterans, and what I love about my work is that the solutions
we find are for homeless veterans, for women veterans, for
Native American veterans, for homeless veterans. There are
templates for solving those issues with the public at large.
So thank you for the work you do, and with that, these
proceedings are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:35 A.M., the Committee was adjourned.]
APPENDIX
----------
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]