- ADMINISTRATION REORGANIZATION AND MODERNIZATION PROPOSALS RELATED TO THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY AND THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
[Senate Hearing 115-524]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-524
ADMINISTRATION REORGANIZATION AND
MODERNIZATION PROPOSALS RELATED TO
THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY AND
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JULY 19, 2018
__________
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-984
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska, Chairman
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
RON WYDEN, Oregon
MIKE LEE, Utah
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
STEVE DAINES, Montana
JOE MANCHIN III, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
Brian Hughes, Staff Director
Patrick J. McCormick III, Chief Counsel
Michelle Lane, Professional Staff Member
Benjamin Reinke, Professional Staff Member
Chester Carson, Professional Staff Member
Mary Louise Wagner, Democratic Staff Director
Sam E. Fowler, Democratic Chief Counsel
John Richards, Democratic General Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa, Chairman and a U.S. Senator from Alaska....
1
Cantwell, Hon. Maria, Ranking Member and a U.S. Senator from
Washington.....................................................
3
WITNESSES
McNamee II, Bernard L., Executive Director, Office of Policy,
U.S. Department of Energy......................................
4
Combs, Susan, Senior Advisor to the Secretary, U.S. Department of
the Interior...................................................
10
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
Cantwell, Hon. Maria:
Opening Statement............................................
3
Combs, Susan:
Opening Statement............................................
10
Written Testimony............................................
12
Map entitled ``12 Unified Regions Based on Watersheds''......
35
Map entitled ``DOI Bureaus--Current Region Boundaries''......
36
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
192
Defenders of Wildlife:
Letter for the Record........................................
209
Heinrich, Hon. Martin:
List of Trade Associations and Business Groups...............
27
McNamee II, Bernard L.:
Opening Statement............................................
4
Written Testimony............................................
7
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
41
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa:
Opening Statement............................................
1
ADMINISTRATION REORGANIZATION AND
MODERNIZATION PROPOSALS RELATED TO
THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY AND
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
----------
THURSDAY, JULY 19, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m. in
Room SD-366, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lisa
Murkowski, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LISA MURKOWSKI,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA
The Chairman. Good morning, everyone. The Committee will
come to order.
We are here today to examine the Administration's efforts
to reorganize and modernize the Department of Energy (DOE) and
the Department of the Interior (DOI).
As a point of reference, in March 2017, President Trump
issued an Executive Order directing all agencies across the
Federal Government to examine their structures and find ways to
be less wasteful, reduce inefficiency, and improve
accountability. Since then, both Departments under our
Committee's jurisdiction have taken steps to help meet that
directive.
Mr. McNamee, thank you for joining us on behalf of the
Department of Energy. I appreciate your Department's efforts to
remove institutional barriers that would hamper our efforts to
achieve a cleaner, cheaper, more diverse, and more secure
energy future.
I think it is smart to crosscut agency work as we seek to
address these issues--whether it is microgrids, or mineral
security, exascale computing, quantum, advanced nuclear, energy
storage, and the other challenges that we face. I think it also
makes sense to create public-private partnerships that leverage
our national labs, our universities, and our industries.
I look forward to hearing how this important work can be
better facilitated by the structural changes that DOE has made
to realign certain offices beneath the Under Secretaries. I
also look forward to learning a little bit more about the
integration of DOE's new Office of Cybersecurity, Energy
Security, and Emergency Response (CESER). We have had several
who have come before this Committee to talk about this newly
established CESER, including the Secretary himself, so hearing
your comments this morning will be appreciated.
Sharing best practices and breaking down silos at DOE just
seems logical. While I have concerns about several aspects of
OMB's recent blueprint to reorganize the Federal Government, I
do appreciate the Secretary's support of highly effective
programs such as ARPA-E. I am a big supporter of that. I wish
that the Secretary's support was reflected in the President's
budget request. As you know, we are going to continue
supporting it through not only this Committee here but through
Appropriations.
Turning to the Department of the Interior. Ms. Combs, thank
you for being here today. I appreciate the conversation we had
just a little over a week ago. In my view, as I mentioned, you
should have been confirmed as Assistant Secretary some months
ago, but you are waiting and waiting and waiting.
While you have been waiting I know you have been working
with the Secretary to develop, as he puts it, a Department that
will work for the American people for the next 100 years.
I often say in this Committee and out in public that the
Department of the Interior is effectively Alaska's landlord.
With the control that the Federal Government, specifically
Interior, has over 223 million acres of land in our state, it
has a significant impact on our state's economy.
So if the Department is reorganizing in a manner that
allows it to improve mission delivery and focus finances, or
focus resources in the field, I think that Alaskans can get
behind that and ultimately benefit from it.
I do support Interior's goal of aligning geographic areas
to enhance coordination of resource and policy decisions as
well as the establishment of common regions that will better
streamline operations to better serve Americans.
I welcome the idea of sending more employees from
headquarters to the field, closer to the people and to the
places that their decisions affect. I also believe there are a
number of agencies within other Departments that would perhaps
be a better fit at Interior.
This morning we look forward to both of you walking us
through the proposed changes happening at DOE and DOI, which I
think will help us understand the thinking behind them and how
they are going to work in practice. It is one thing to have
them down on paper, looks like a good idea, but how does the
implementation work?
I know this entails a lot of work, obviously a great deal
more to come. Senators have clearly legitimate questions that
will relate to this and how these efforts will unfold. I
certainly do. But certainly, we cannot deny that it is a worthy
endeavor to look at the structures of our departments to
determine how operationally they are working.
I think that is our responsibility, again, looking at the
structures of government to determine whether they are as
efficient and effective as we expect. Putting ideas on the
table for improvements is a good thing and something that we
should encourage. And from there on, it is on all of us to
consider those ideas, consider them thoughtfully, help refine
them if they are good ideas and then move forward on those that
best serve the American people.
So I look forward to the discussion this morning, and I
welcome both of you.
With that, I turn to Senator Cantwell.
STATEMENT OF HON. MARIA CANTWELL,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WASHINGTON
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Chairman Murkowski.
Certainly efficiencies in government should be strived for,
but I find many of the proposals that are on the table in this
hearing today very troubling. Both the Energy and Interior
Departments seem intent on fixing problems that don't exist
instead of solving the ones that do. Some of what the President
and his Administration have proposed is downright dangerous.
At the top of the list is the idea to sell off transmission
from the Bonneville Power Administration (BPA) and its sister
agency, the Tennessee Valley Authority. These regional entities
serve consumers in 33 states, including rural Americans who
would otherwise be left behind and have built with cost-based
power tremendous economies that we do not want to disrupt.
For those of us in the Pacific Northwest--and I know my
other colleagues from the Northwest who are not here today will
chime in when they do come and I am sure my colleague from
Tennessee will chime in as well--these are important issues
that right next to the dictionary should be with OMB. This is a
non-starter. We have stopped every Administration from doing
this, but never have we had somebody come and propose by the
agencies, acting as if they agree with OMB.
Selling off BPA wires and abandoning cost-based rates would
raise electricity rates and throttle the Northwest economy. The
Northwest Power and Conservation Council compared this proposal
to Enron's market manipulation of the market and that crisis in
2000 cost the Northwest $10 billion when retail prices rose 36
percent. The Council estimates the President's current proposal
could have a similar effect, raising electricity rates between
20 and 40 percent on hardworking families. I will be working
with my colleagues to stop this horrible idea in its tracks.
I am concerned that the proposed reorganization does not
meaningfully address the threat of cyberattacks. Make no
mistake, the grid and other systems are under constant
cyberattack. I have worked with the Chair on our legislation
and again, we passed two years ago, to try to give DOE more
authority to help in this effort.
I understand that DOE is standing up a new office, but it
has to be more than slapping a name on a door, called CESER. It
has to be about making sure there are adequate funds and a real
threat assessment. DOE's own budget justification already tells
a different story. The marginal 13 percent increase in funding
for cybersecurity comes at expense of a dramatic 64 percent cut
to Transmission Reliability and Resilience, and an even deeper
80 percent cut to the Resilient Distribution Systems. The grid
will be security job number one as it relates to cybersecurity.
This issue is not going away. We all need to wake up.
We live in an information age and that information age
means that more products, more services, and more threats are
going to be attached to the grid. So you cannot say you are for
cybersecurity while you cut the programs that are about
resiliency.
We need to double cybersecurity funding not play on the
margins, and we need to make sure that we are doing everything
we can to make sure that foreign governments, including the
Russians, are not hacking our grid capability. How can we
protect and defend our nation when we haven't made the right
investments or even understand the threat assessment that they
pose to us?
When it comes to the Department of the Interior's
reorganization, Senator Zinke and the Administration have
failed to offer other sufficient explanations of why they want
to make major changes.
Moving NOAA fisheries from Commerce to the Department of
the Interior ignores the agency's responsibility of managing
multibillion dollar commercial fisheries. Creating arbitrary
new regional offices could relocate or lead to layoffs of
thousands of career professionals and more bureaucratic
mismanagement of this issue. What we need on fisheries is
science and funding. I think people on this Committee would
agree. If you have fisheries, every time we have had to make
tough decisions about fisheries, it is good science that has
guided us on that information.
So I hope that this particular proposal will not move
forward and people will understand that what we need is stock
assessment, good management, and the great things that we've
done in the Northwest Pacific Council on fisheries management.
The Park Service has already realigned its regions to be more
efficient. How will doubling the number of regions result in
additional savings? I have a question about that.
We also have no understanding how Interior's proposal could
impact tribal nations. It seems to me the Secretary should have
completed tribal consultation before rather than after putting
this plan together.
Given all the Department's other actions to give away
public lands and to not implement important rules to protect
the taxpayers, I have great concerns about these reorganization
strategies.
So I look forward, Madam Chair, to asking questions this
morning.
I know we do have a vote in Finance that I am going to have
to excuse myself for at some point, but just mark me down as
very concerned about the proposals on the table today.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cantwell.
Let us go to our witnesses from the agencies.
Again, welcome to Mr. Bernard McNamee with the Department
of Energy. We will ask for your comments, if you can try to
keep them within the five-minute limit. Your full statements
will be included as part of the record. Once you are finished,
Mr. McNamee, we will turn to Ms. Combs for her comments.
So again, welcome.
STATEMENT OF BERNARD L. McNAMEE II, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, OFFICE
OF POLICY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
Mr. McNamee. Thank you, Chairman Murkowski and Ranking
Member Cantwell and all the members of the Committee. It's an
honor to be here today before you on behalf of the
Administration and the Department of Energy to discuss the
Administration's reorganization and modernization efforts and
its vision for the Department.
The Department is grateful for the support that this
Committee has provided to DOE over the past year and a half.
Most recently, and in particular, I want to thank Chairman
Murkowski and Ranking Member Cantwell for your support and help
in addressing the challenges related to Section 3111 of the
NDAA. It's very much appreciated.
In mid-December 2017, the Secretary of Energy announced his
intention to realign and modernize the Department. The goal was
to realign the program offices under efficient reporting
frameworks that would advance the Administration's policy
priorities, address the nation's present and future energy
challenges, and refocus the Department on its core missions.
Those core missions include promoting America's energy
security, spurring science and energy innovation, reducing
regulatory burdens, restoring the nuclear enterprise, enhancing
national security to the military application of nuclear
science, and addressing the obligation of legacy management and
nuclear waste.
The December 2017 modernization and realignment included
creating separate offices for the Under Secretary of Energy and
for the Under Secretary for Science and then realigning the
offices under that to make sure that the missions were
structured in accordance with the leadership. And then we also
stood up the Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and
Emergency Response, also referred to as CESER.
Of course, some of the offices are still awaiting Senate
confirmation of their leadership, such as the Director of the
Office of Science, the Assistant Secretary for CESER, Assistant
Secretary for Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, and the
Inspector General, but we are grateful to this Committee for
exercising its constitutional role in this process.
Now last month, as the Chairman mentioned, the
Administration released a government reform proposal that
included the Department of Energy. The reorganization efforts
outlined within that proposal would help the Department achieve
its goals in advancing the Administration's energy policy
priorities, as well as enhance efficiency at DOE in focusing on
its core missions.
The Administration's proposal includes several important
components, some of which have been mentioned already. First,
divesting the federal transmission assets, which include those
owned by the Power Marketing Administrations within DOE;
second, consolidating DOE's Applied Energy Offices in Fossil
Energy, Nuclear Energy, and EERE into a new Office of
Innovation; next, eliminating ARPA-E, while integrating some
elements into the Office of Energy Innovation; and finally,
establishing the Office of Energy Resources and Economic
Strategy.
The Administration's plan includes other DOE-specific
proposals. These include streamlining Environmental Management
headquarters organizations, consolidating the various
international affairs staffs into the existing Office of
International Affairs, merging Human Resource service centers,
and restructuring the Office of Science to improve efficiency
and reduce costs.
I would also like to give some perspective on this.
First, it should be noted that a vast majority of the
nation's energy infrastructure and electricity infrastructure
is owned and operated by the private sector and the
Administration views that the ownership of the transmission
assets is best carried out by the private sector as well.
Eliminating or reducing the Federal Government's role in owning
and operating the transmission assets and increasing private
sector's role would, in the Administration's view, encourage a
more efficient allocation of economic resources and mitigate
unnecessary risk to taxpayers. Of course, the divestiture
requires action by Congress, and the Secretary has already
acknowledged in his FY2019 that we will follow the direction of
Congress on this issue.
As to the elimination of ARPA-E, this proposal was made in
the President's Fiscal Year '18 and '19 budget proposals and
likewise, Congress has continued to fund the program. As with
all programs, DOE will also follow the direction of Congress on
these issues.
In terms of the creation of the Office of Energy Innovation
through the consolidation of applied energy offices, we hope to
streamline R&D efforts across the Department so as to allow us
to better leverage the Department's resources and funding and
that would enable us to create and adapt more quickly the
changing energy landscape.
In conclusion, Chairman Murkowski and all the members of
the Committee, I want to thank you once again for inviting me
to be here today and to share the Administration's view of the
Department. The Department appreciates the Committee's interest
in its realignment and priorities, and we look forward to
working with you on these matters and discussing them and
looking at the opportunities so that we can promote energy
dominance for the benefit of the American people.
So thank you once again, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McNamee follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Combs, welcome.
STATEMENT OF SUSAN COMBS, SENIOR ADVISOR TO THE SECRETARY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
Ms. Combs. Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Cantwell and
members of the Committee, thank you for holding this hearing on
the Administration's efforts to streamline and modernize
operations at the Department of the Interior.
I'm Susan Combs, Senior Advisor to Secretary Zinke.
The Secretary has asked me to assist him with these
efforts. As Controller over the State of Texas, I learned
valuable lessons in how to increase the efficient operation of
programs and to analyze, understand and consider how to achieve
such improvements in an efficient, open and transparent manner.
I'm honored to assist Secretary Zinke.
Today's Federal Government operates with outdated and
inflexible infrastructure and stove-piped processes. It often
cannot provide the level of service and flexibility that the
American people expect and they are rightly frustrated with
this lack of efficiency, effectiveness and responsiveness.
To address these inadequacies, in March 2017 the
Administration launched its government-wide effort to reform
and reorganize the Executive Branch. OMB was directed to
propose a plan informed by agencies, the public and
stakeholders for a path forward to better organize Executive
Branch functions. During this review Department leadership
gathered information from career employees, members of
Congress, governors, tribes and stakeholders and worked with
OMB to refine ideas and assess recommendations. This
government-wide effort culminated in the reform plan and
reorganization recommendations released in June which outlines
the Administration's analysis and recommendations for
structural realignment of the Executive Branch.
Relevant to the Department, it contains several
recommendations to merge responsibilities of other agencies and
the Department, including returning the National Marine Fishery
Service in the Department of Commerce into the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service.
Moving certain functions of the Corps of Engineers to the
Department and integrating portions of the CERCLA-related
cleanup program at the Department into EPA's Superfund program.
These proposals align with Secretary Zinke's vision to take
a more integrated approach to natural resource management,
reduce administrative redundancy and jurisdictional and
organizational barriers and facilitate joint problem solving
that is important and necessary to bring the Department into
the 21st century.
Dovetailing with this government-wide review and plan,
Secretary Zinke also laid out his vision for a reorganized and
modernized department capable of providing conservation
stewardship and service for the next 100 years.
The Department's current organization includes ten bureaus
with wide ranging missions and each with its own distinct
regional structure. The result totals 61 regions across the
Department creating confusion among stakeholders, decreasing
consistency and slowing coordination efforts.
The Secretary's vision is to establish science-based,
unified regional boundaries where priority decision-making is
made at the local level with informed centralized coordination.
These boundaries were developed by looking at watersheds,
wildlife corridors and ecosystems and taking into account the
need for workable, regional boundary lines. A modernized
approach based on this vision is important for an agency
focused on resource, land, and water management issues.
Development of these boundaries and maps has been an
intentional and iterative process. We've shared proposed maps
with the public and have sought feedback from the public
stakeholders, members of Congress, state and local governments,
tribes and our employees.
We are carrying out a pilot project in the State of Alaska.
An additional pilot is proposed for the region that includes
the Upper Colorado Basin, Wyoming, Utah, Colorado and New
Mexico. These pilots will focus on the use of shared services
and inter-bureau coordination and will help ensure that the
eventual nationwide implementation of these regions will have
fully considered the complexity of the Department's operations
in a way that is sensitive to regional differences.
The Department is also sensitive of the need to consult
with Indian Country on this effort, and we are engaged in such
a process with sessions scheduled at various locations
throughout the summer.
Our goal is to make the government more responsive and
accountable through these thoughtful and ambitious proposals
and to bring government organization into the 21st century.
Close coordination and transparency are important as we
move forward. We will continue to gather information and seek
input from members of Congress, the public, states, local
governments, tribes and our stakeholders as we proceed. Our
hope is that the Administration's plan serves as a foundation
for constructive dialogue.
Thank you, and I'm happy to answer any questions you may
have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Combs follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Combs.
I think that hearings like this are the way for a process
to have some constructive dialogue.
I know I have been visited by both Secretary Perry and
Secretary Zinke as they have walked through some of this, and I
am certain that many of my colleagues have as well. But when we
are talking about changes as are proposed, I think it is
important that there be good, fulsome discussion and an
opportunity to put some things out on the record.
Mr. McNamee, you have indicated that specifically when it
comes to, for instance, ARPA-E, that we certainly intend to
follow the authority and the appropriating laws of Congress on
that. I guess I just want to send a very clear message that as
the Chairman of not only the authorizing side but also the
appropriating side, I want you to hear a very clear message
from me that I think ARPA-E is important.
It is not only important to this country, but I think it is
important to the world as we look to how our technologies and
the advancements that we are able to make through R&D are able
to really make a difference at a host of different levels. So I
certainly hope you carry that message back.
I want to bring up the issue that you raised very briefly
in your initial comments and this is in reference to Section
3111 of the Senate-passed NDAA bill which would strip the
Secretary of his authority over the National Nuclear Security
Administration (NNSA).
As you know, Senator Cantwell and I filed an amendment
along with Senator Cruz to strike this out. There was a
statement of administration policy that came out denouncing
that. So I appreciate your comment here this morning. Can you
just share, very briefly, what it would mean for the Department
if that section were to be adopted if we are not successful in
getting that stricken?
Mr. McNamee. Yes, and thank you for the question.
Once again, I want to reiterate at how appreciative we are
to both of you and Ranking Member Cantwell for taking
leadership on this.
As you know, the Section 3111 would strip the ability of
the Secretary of Energy, who has the ultimate responsibility
for helping manage the nuclear enterprise, the nuclear weapon
enterprise of this country, from actually having the control
over certain aspects of its management. And that is something
that he would still continue to have the obligation, the
responsibility for it, but not the controls for it.
I think that there's general agreement that in our
structure of government ensuring that something as important as
our nuclear capabilities that somebody at a Cabinet level
should be accountable to the American people, to the President
and to you and the members of Congress in making decisions
about how to manage that enterprise.
So without elaborating too much farther, I think that it is
important for our structure of government for that sort of
accountability to remain and that's why we believe that the
Section 3111 should be removed.
The Chairman. I appreciate that, and we will keep working
with you on it.
Ms. Combs, you had mentioned the listening sessions, the
consultation with tribes as this process moves forward, and I
know that you have listening sessions coming up in Alaska and I
know that many are looking forward to being part of that.
I have been visited in the past couple weeks from
representatives from many tribes that have expressed concern
because they just do not know what this may or may not mean for
them. In the conversation that we have had with the Secretary,
he has made it clear that this will be determined by the tribes
as to how they want to participate. When I mentioned that to
those who come to visit me, they say, well, what exactly does
that mean?
I know that there is much to be flushed out with this and
with the consultation. We will perhaps learn a little bit more,
but can you speak to what exactly is going on with the level of
consultation with the tribes and perhaps define a little bit
more what implementation this opting in may look like?
Ms. Combs. Yes, thank you, Chairman Murkowski.
The Secretary is very mindful of the sovereignty of the
tribes and very mindful that this is a government-to-government
relationship. And so, the initial phase of consultation is
underway.
And there have been four already held, three more scheduled
and three additional ones will be scheduled which will mean
that there will have been in every region that the tribes are
in there will be a consultation.
The Chairman. Which is very important.
I have heard that, that some are saying we have not seen it
in our region yet, so ensuring that that is in place is
important.
Ms. Combs. And those will all be completed by the end of
August. That is basically stage one of the consultation
process. After the input from the consultation is received
there will be an analysis of whether the tribes, the consensus
is achieved to opt in or whether they would like not to
participate. Then a second round of consultations.
The Chairman. Will a consensus be required of all tribes?
Ms. Combs. No, a consensus, a consensus is more or less.
And so, what I have been told is that then if the tribes
decide too they would like to opt in, there will be a second
round of consultation with BIA.
What does that mean? What exactly would it mean? How would
you like to work with the other bureaus? If the decision is the
reverse that they would like not to participate, then BIA will
hold additional consultations to decide how best BIA can
represent the tribes with their other bureaus in the process as
we go forward.
The Chairman. My time is expired, but we will have another
round here.
Senator Cantwell.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. McNamee, I do appreciate you being here. I think you
have been given a very tough task this morning.
In part of your comments you said the Administration wants
market-based solutions on electricity. Do you consider the
President's constant insistence that FERC adopt and mandate
coal as the only reliable source of electricity as a market-
based solution?
Mr. McNamee. The issue of establishing market-based
solutions for the entire electric sector is very important in
making sure that it functions.
The market has been something that has helped us grow as a
nation and helped our electricity system work.
In terms of the markets that have been addressed by the
President in his concern and also the Secretary's concern is
that a lot of the organized markets that have distortions in
them that aren't representative of an actual free serving
market. And so, the thought is, in that sense, is that you need
to make--remove some of those distortions and then get some
more parity.
But I think that also goes into something that you also
mentioned as a great concern is about the cybersecurity issue.
I know that it's very important to you and as it is important
to the Secretary and to the President to address the
cybersecurity threats to the grid.
Senator Cantwell. It is important to the nation. It is
important to the nation.
Mr. McNamee. Yes, ma'am. That's correct. You're absolutely
correct. It's important to the nation and it's something that
we need to address.
Senator Cantwell. Okay. So, his proposal, the President, I
do not get it.
The President is illogical as it relates to electricity. He
is just trying to make it more expensive. You cannot mandate
coal and say that you are for market-based solutions. You just
can't. We have thwarted that, at least at FERC, but now he is
trying to use the National Defense Act as a way to say you have
to have coal on the grid. There is nothing market-based about
that.
Natural gas has pushed coal off of many things because we
want consumers to have cheaper electricity. The notion about
the Pacific Northwest is a decision we made a long time ago and
most administrations come to their senses and adhere to the
fact that we made a decision to have cost-based power, and I
would say the private sector even supports the cost-based power
because it is a mix of what helps them continue to deliver
great economies and the taxpayers paying that back for that
investment. The notion that the President just wants to make
electricity more expensive for many, many, many parts of
America is just crazy. It doesn't need to be that way.
To come here with a reorganization plan that is about
efficiency but the bottom line is raising electricity rates 30
to 40 percent on big swaths of the economy is just, like you
said, it is a bad, bad, bad idea and something we do not need.
One of the best things that DOE could do is realize this and
tell the President. So, if you would take this message back.
The future is coming whether he wants it to or not. The
question is whether our Department of Energy is going to help
in that transformation and help drive down costs to consumers
and businesses.
We think the investments in ARPA-E and smart grid
technology and things that get whatever the existing source of
power is, more efficient cost of electricity into the system is
what is going to make the United States more competitive in a
global economy.
So, as I said, I find these very, very frustrating. I get
that you are just the guy here to deliver this and you
basically say that the Secretary believes that whatever
Congress decides will actually rule, basically come about as it
relates to the electricity rules, but it is very, very
disturbing that the Secretary of Energy would go as far as sign
off on these reorganization ideas when they are the antithesis
of where we need to go with cybersecurity and electricity.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cantwell.
Senator Smith is leaving.
[Laughter.]
Just giving you an opportunity.
[Laughter.]
You can go quickly.
Senator Smith. I thought that one of my ranking members was
going to pull rank but apparently not.
But thank you very much, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Early bird rules.
Senator Smith. Yes, that is right.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair and Ranking Member
Cantwell. I appreciate this hearing very much.
I have a couple of questions that I would like to address
to Mr. McNamee.
I want to start out by going back to this issue that
Ranking Member Cantwell raised around the Western Area Power
Administration, WAPA, which provides power to 48
municipalities, 15 co-ops and three Native American tribes in
Minnesota, kind of, along our Western area.
As Senator Cantwell has pointed out, this is a really
important supply of cheap, reliable energy and I want to go on
record as saying that I really oppose plans by the Trump
Administration to privatize these WAPA assets, but I just don't
understand why we think that this one time, you know, cash flow
into the Treasury is, you know, would justify this kind of a
step. And as I understand it, though I am only here for six
months, that this is a step that Congress has already rejected
a couple of times. So can you just help me understand why the
Administration thinks that this is a good idea?
Mr. McNamee. Yes, as you know, as you know this has, and as
you mention, previous administrations have proposed the selling
of the PMA assets and this Administration has also proposed it
both for a cost saving aspect but also as is our discussion
about the markets a few moments ago, that markets may be the
best way to most efficiently use those assets and for those
assets to develop and to be used for the benefit of its
ultimate customers.
And so, there is a thought that by privatizing these
assets, they were created at a time it was needed that when
power could not be provided to people that was needed, that
they've matured and now's the time to let them function on
their own and be able to compete on their own and to provide
innovative solutions as they want to see fit.
Senator Smith. Yes, well, I just want to reiterate that I
just do not agree with that. I think that this is a strategy
that has been able to, you know, I am for cheap. I am for
reliable, affordable, and clean energy.
I think that this is one of the strategies that we have
that is able to provide that kind of energy, especially to
Minnesota co-ops in the Western part of the state. So if you
could carry that message back, I would appreciate it.
I also wanted to touch on an issue that Chair Murkowski
raised about ARPA-E. ARPA-E funds cutting-edge research in
Minnesota, especially around projects that we have going right
now around bio fuels and optimizing the efficiency of delivery
vehicles and also designing the grid of the future.
ARPA-E is a way of funding high risk, high reward research
and not only research, but research and development. Those two
things have to go hand-in-hand, it seems to me. And the Trump
Administration has sought to eliminate ARPA-E and as I
understand it, this Committee and the Senate has rejected
previous proposals to do this.
I strongly support ARPA-E and I think as Ranking Member
Cantwell said, we need to be, you know, the future is going to
come and we need to build our competitive advantage, not
detract from it.
So could you just help me understand why does the
Administration want to back away? I mean, is there evidence
from your perspective that this is not working or it is not
accomplishing what we think it ought to be accomplishing?
Mr. McNamee. As described in the reorganization that we're
proposing currently to collapse that various R&D programs from
the various fossil energy and nuclear energy and EERE and
taking some aspects of ARPA-E and bringing them all together,
we think we can get more efficiency and have more
transformative research done in order to solve the energy
issues facing the American people.
So ARPA-E standalone, the concern has been is that it is
taking taxpayer money and putting it at extreme risk for maybe
a high reward, but also a high risk of not working out.
And so, the thought is, is that you eliminate ARPA-E and
let the private sector take those sort of risks and instead
collapse through this continued reorganization and have all the
R&D efforts working together to try to not solve individual
silo issues, but instead try and figure out what are the energy
issues that need to be solved for the American people. And
let's not work in silos but what's the best solution. So,
that's, kind of, the nuance that comes with this reorganization
that touches on ARPA-E.
Senator Smith. Well, you know, I am always interested and
willing to look at ways that we can make our strategies work
more efficiently, work better together, but I have to say, I
just cannot agree with the strategy of moving away from the
kind of research and development that we can do together in
order to put this country on the, you know, put us and keep us
on the cutting edge of what the energy future looks like. So if
you can carry that message back as well, I would appreciate it.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Smith.
Senator King.
Senator King. For both witnesses, I am a visual learner. I
would appreciate it for the record if you could supply before
and after organizational charts so I can see the boxes. What is
in what box now? What will be in the new boxes? What will be
left out? I think that would be very helpful in analyzing these
proposals. It is hard to visualize them from simply the
narrative.
I think my second question is a broader one. I guess I will
go to you, Mr. McNamee. What problem is being addressed here? A
Supreme Court Justice used to start their oral argument by
saying why are you here? And the question is, this strikes me
as a solution in search of a problem. Another way to put this
is, I presume you are talking about efficiencies. Have you put
any numbers on it? Are we talking about billions of dollars of
savings in efficiencies or are we just moving things around?
Why are we doing this?
Mr. McNamee. I think in relation to the Department of
Energy, this second piece of the reorganization is actually
much more minor than the initial one which we all discussed and
that you all were involved in, in December 2017 which was the
real restructuring. So that was the first step that really
tried to create more rational lines in how we can implement,
kind of, diverse policies and admissions for the Department of
Energy.
This is a second piece of that. I don't have any numbers to
provide you about how that would create efficiencies but it is
trying to take the first step and getting the discussion with
you all here on the Committee to say, maybe it makes sense
instead of having R&D done by silo and by fuel type, basically,
to say, you know what, if there's a limited amount of dollars
overall, is there a way that we should be thinking about
solving energy problems?
Senator King. For the record I wish you would supply an
analysis of what the savings will be from these various changes
so that we can decide if they make sense and if they're going
to result in some positive result.
By the way, I really take issue with your statement about
ARPA-E and energy research. The whole idea is that the private
sector will not do this kind of deep research, basic research,
that will provide the insights and the breakthroughs that will
make so much difference to us.
I would point out that the biggest thing that has happened
in American energy, probably in the last 25 years, is the
development of hydro fracking which was developed using
Department of Energy research funds.
Take that away and we are in a total different energy
situation in this country right now. The same thing goes with
the development of solar and wind technologies which have
fallen dramatically in price. I believe research, basic
research, is a fundamental purpose of the Department of Energy,
not a peripheral purpose, not an add-on, not of something to be
reorganized and minimized. So I really disagree with you on
that.
I do not want to be entirely negative, I think the creation
of the Cyber Office is a positive one. I think that is an
important area, a critically important area. Putting it all in
one place, I think, makes sense.
How it is executed, however, will make all the difference.
Just moving the boxes around won't change if it is not given
the proper authority, the proper funding, and the proper focus.
But that is one of the most important things that you can do.
And I think that change is a positive one but shuffling the
research around, moving them around, abolishing ARPA-E, I think
you are going to have a hard time with this Committee on that.
Final question to Interior. I think I would ask you the
same question. I would like to see the changes. I have seen the
map of the changes of the regions, but the other changes--I am
interested in the idea of bringing NMFS into U.S. Fish and
Wildlife. I do not really have a reaction to that, but I would
like some greater detail. That is a significant change.
I would like some additional narrative for the record about
why that change is necessary, what it would do in terms of
would we leave expertise behind in the Department of Commerce
and how would that actually take place? What does the
Department of Commerce think about it? What do the people that
have spent their lives working in this area think about this
proposed change?
Again, I express no, perhaps, skepticism. That is okay. Not
opposition, but I do want to understand it better and what the
implications are because that is a very significant change.
I also would like the Department of Defense's view on
picking up the Corps of Engineers and dropping it in various
parts of the United States Government. I think Secretary
Mattis' comments on that would be informative.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator King. I think it is
important that we do get that level of detail for the Committee
and for the record.
I share the same concerns, I think, about NMFS. Obviously,
pretty important in a state like ours where our fisheries are
so important.
Senator King. His, not so much.
The Chairman. He needs our fish.
Senator King. Yes.
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. And we want to make sure that we are doing
good stock----
Senator Heinrich. I have not had any good Alaska halibut in
a while. Well, the season is coming on. We will have to arrange
something.
The Chairman. But I appreciate that request.
Let's go to Senator Gardner.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you to the witnesses for being here today.
While I have you both, I just wanted to ask you about a
concern that I have about the possibility that the Department
of Energy, through the Western Area Power Administration, may
not fund its portion of the Upper Colorado and San Juan Fish
Recovery Program and Glen Canyon Dam Adaptive Management
Program. These programs keep about 2,500 water and hydro
facilities and the major economies that rely on them in
compliance with the Endangered Species Act. The fact that WAPA
may put this at risk by deciding not to fund these programs is
a huge mistake, a huge mistake.
I have a bill to authorize, reauthorize, the Upper Colorado
program that the Administration has generally supported, but I
am certainly happy to work with you moving forward if there is
another way to get reliable funding for these programs. In the
meantime, it is absolutely critical that both agencies use the
authorities you do have to fund them in 2019 as we have those
discussions. Again, it would be a huge, huge mistake and
detrimental to these communities to lose that funding. I can
repeat that if I was not clear enough there, alright? Thank
you.
Mr. McNamee, just a quick question for you. I have been
reading through some of the Secretary's modernization
realignment actions. Pieces of the recent Administration
proposal contain measures that require Congressional authority,
including privatization of PMAs, that would take Congressional
authority to do that.
WAPA plays a key role in administering federal hydropower
resources to stakeholders in the West, including rural co-ops,
public power entities and federal agencies providing for our
national defense.
Dr. Walker at DOE, Office of Electricity, testified
recently before this Committee about WAPA's key role in
identifying defense-critical energy infrastructure and its
territory in its efforts to safeguard those assets. Are you
concerned that privatizing WAPA would jeopardize working
relationships like this?
Mr. McNamee. I don't believe that there's a concern about
the working relationships with the PMAs because just like the
Department and the Federal Government, itself, DHS works with
all the electric utilities, the transmission providers, the
generators. It's something that happens both in the private
sector and in the PMA category.
So, I don't think there's a concern about the
communications or that everybody needs to take the issues very
seriously, particularly cybersecurity.
Senator Gardner. Well perhaps we can have further
conversations about that. I would like to understand a little
bit further how that could possibly be the case.
The Secretary's reorganization already co-located the
Applied Energy offices under the Under Secretary of Energy.
Funding is currently appropriated to each of those four
offices. Currently, the appropriations to the energy offices
are prohibited from being repurposed or reprogrammed between
fossil, nuclear and EERE. Are there other benefits this could
have or is this just another way to, perhaps, cut funding for
EERE?
Mr. McNamee. The goal here is not to cut funding. From my
understanding the goal is to really make sure that there's
cross communication and that the focus is not just on a
particular energy source, but rather to focus on the energy
problem itself and determining what's the best source.
And then there's also crosscutting aspects. You know, if
you think about water, water is important and issues related to
EERE currently related to hydropower. It's important to nuclear
energy. It's important to fossil energy, whether it's fracking
or boilers.
And so, trying to make sure as innovation ideas are
developed, that research dollars are done. You know, maybe
there's a great idea that EERE is having that ought to be
looked at in the fossil area and to make sure that those
dollars in that sense are maximized most. But my understanding
is that this is not a cost cutting effort, per se, in terms of
trying to reduce the funding in each of those silos.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Mr. McNamee.
Ms. Combs, thank you very much.
Your testimony talks about abandoned mines, the cleanup of
4,000 AML sites that may require CERCLA level cleanup. There's
about 75,000 AML sites that do not rise to the level of needing
CERCLA level cleanup but could possibly still use some cleanup
help, as you know.
What is the Department's view of a good Samaritan bill/
program that would allow federal agencies to partner with non-
profits, industry, others who want to volunteer their time,
their own resources, to clean up some of these sites and help
better the environment? And would this type of a program, the
good Samaritan legislation, help further resources at the
Department when it comes to environmental cleanup?
Ms. Combs. Yes, Senator, thank you for your question.
We very much support public-private partnerships. It
certainly enables us to stretch our workforce farther and we
support those and that would be ideal area for that to work.
Senator Gardner. Thank you.
In the coming weeks I plan to introduce a bill that would
create a good Samaritan pilot project to show that this concept
can work and will work at the federal level, as well as it
already works at the state level in many places across the
country. I look forward to working with the Department of the
Interior on it.
Finally, I would like to know what is the Department's
timeline in its evaluation of potential relocation of
destinations for the Bureau of Land Management Headquarters?
Ms. Combs. Thank you, Senator, for that question.
What we're doing right now is trying to get the regions set
and so that's why I have two maps here to talk about.
The Secretary has made it clear that he does want to move
BLM's headquarters West and no location has been picked, but
that is something that we would expect to really take a look at
the next six months or so, eight months; but we will do that
very carefully, very thoughtfully because of the fact that you
don't just pick a spot, you have to do the analysis, what's its
flight back and forth, what's the cost of living, what's it
like to live there because you want people to go where they're
going to be happy.
Senator Gardner. But the bottom line is the Secretary does
intend to relocate and move out of Washington, DC, to the West
the Bureau of Land Management.
Ms. Combs. Absolutely.
Senator Gardner. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Gardner.
Senator Heinrich.
Senator Heinrich. Mr. McNamee, welcome back.
First, I think, I want to just say, I could not say it any
better than the Chair. ARPA-E, first rule of government, when
something works really well, don't mess with it. This is a
great program. You have heard tons of support from this panel
on it. It works. Let's not break it.
Last time you were here I asked about Secretary Perry's
ill-advised FERC NOPR, and today I would like to ask you about
the use of Section 202(c) of the Federal Power Act (FPA) to
subsidize uneconomic power sources.
Last month I asked all five of the FERC commissioners about
this. I asked whether there was an actual national security
emergency that would trigger emergency authority to subsidize
uneconomic power generation, and none of them were willing to
answer yes.
I want to include in the record today, and I would ask
unanimous consent to include a list I have here of, quite a
broad list, of trade associations and business groups: American
Petroleum Institute, the Natural Gas Supply Association, the
Electric Power Supply Association, the Electricity Consumers
Resources Council, the American Wind Energy Association. It
just goes on and on. Groups that oppose any effort by the
Administration to use the Federal Power Act or the Defense
Production Act to subsidize uneconomic sources of energy.
[List of Trade Associations and Business groups follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Heinrich. So I went to your website, to the DOE's
website, this morning to really get at the base of this and I
pulled up your page on Energy.gov with regard to using Section
202, the FPA. The preface of using that authority is in the
very first line. It says under FPA, Section 202, ``During the
continuance of a war.'' What war are we using to justify this
unprecedented action to distort the markets?
Mr. McNamee. Senator, if you look at the further language
in 202(c), war is one condition and then that's another
condition if there's other emergencies and lists other causes.
And 202(c) has been used in a variety of contexts. I know that
currently there's a 202(c) for a power generation plant in
Yorktown, Virginia, that's being used to support power.
It's been used, it was used during the California energy
crisis----
Senator Heinrich. Which we all remember that California
energy crisis because people's lights weren't on. What is the
emergency today?
Mr. McNamee. Well, in terms of an emergency----
Senator Heinrich. What is the specific legal authority that
ties to that emergency?
Mr. McNamee. Well, no emergency and no 202(c) has been
issued though the Secretary is always aware and always looking
at the issues affecting the grid. So, you know that the
President has directed the Secretary, especially considering
the national security implications of various attacks on the
grid to look at various options and the Secretary looks at
options, but no 202(c) has been issued.
Senator Heinrich. Given the incredible impact that this
would have on electricity consumers, I would just urge
incredible caution for above-market pricing in the bulk power
system.
Ms. Combs, I want to ask you a couple questions. I do not
have a lot of time.
I first want to thank the Secretary for not breaking New
Mexico into three different regions. I think that would have
been difficult to manage at best. I appreciate listening to the
Western Governors' Association that also expressed some of the
same concerns that I expressed directly to the Secretary.
I guess my question for you is about one of the tribes and
how this is going to work whether they are in and whether they
are out, if they are able to opt out. How does that work where
you may have the Northern Pueblos Agency, for example, that
includes a number of tribes in Northern New Mexico where you
may have one sovereign government opt into one program and then
another tribe opt out and then the agency that was created to
serve them has a mixed constituency? I am just not quite
understanding how the rubber hits the road at the tribal level.
Ms. Combs. Thank you, Senator.
As I stated earlier, the Bureau of Indian Affairs has
completed four of the consultation meetings. Three more are on
the schedule and three more will be scheduled for the month of
August. And the point is to visit with the tribes in those
individual consultations and talk to them and see----
Senator Heinrich. You came out to Albuquerque, right?
Ms. Combs. Yes, I did.
Senator Heinrich. Yes, that was not an individual
consultation, right?
Ms. Combs. No, that wasn't.
Senator Heinrich. That was a come to us and tell us your
thoughts.
Have you gone to the tribes to sit down directly with
tribal governments and ask them their thoughts?
Ms. Combs. John Tahsuda, who is a Principle Deputy, is
doing all of those and I believe that the new Assistant
Secretary, Tara Sweeney, will be on board in about 10 days. BIA
is conducting those consultations. Mr. Tahsuda told me this
morning that they are, of course, preparing a second round of
consultations to walk through the specifics, depending on which
way the consensus of the tribes is reached. If they want to opt
in, how. And so, they will be deciding what it is they wish to
do in further consultations. If they don't want to participate
they will have consultations about how they would like BIA to
go ahead and manage with their fellow bureaus. We will be
working with them and talking with them and finding out how we
can best craft the solution that they want.
Senator Heinrich. I apologize for being over my time.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Hirono.
Senator Hirono. Thank you.
Ms. Combs, in February 2013 the Government Accountability
Office published a report on the ``Potential Benefits and
Drawbacks of Merging the National Marine Fisheries Service into
the Fish and Wildlife Service,'' something that the current
Administration is proposing to do. Importantly, this GAO report
concluded that overall, officials and stakeholders who they
consulted with--and I have a question as to who you all
consulted with before you came up with these proposals--anyway,
they said that the drawbacks of reorganizing the agencies
outweigh the benefits. Can you discuss the circumstances that
have changed since the 2013 report to justify this particular
proposal?
Ms. Combs. Thank you, Senator.
I'm not aware of any particular circumstances that have
changed, but I would point out that I believe that the
fisheries was moved by President Nixon in 1970 and then the
Marine Mammal Protection Act, I believe, was passed in 1972 and
then the ESA in '73.
What you have now from the Administration's perspective is
you have the Marine Mammal Protection Act and the Endangered
Species Act, both administered by separate agencies, the
Department of the Interior and the Department of Commerce. I
have not been involved in this work. I've been involved in
other work on reorganization. I'm aware that this is underway
and been proposed and we will work with everyone in Congress to
see what it is you ultimately decide to do.
Senator Hirono. So, in other words, you cannot provide me
the real justification for what might have changed because we
actually have an official report that said this particular
reorganization has more drawbacks to it than the benefits. So,
you know, one wonders. I wonder why this is happening.
Mr. McNamee, when I look at this proposal from the
President I see it is as part of, basically, a radical effort,
a desired goal, to shrink the Federal Government and limit its
ability to help people solve the problems that face us all. And
when it comes to the Department of Energy, I do not see a lot
of detail in this proposal.
How will this reorganization help my constituents in
Hawaii? Hawaii is in the middle of a transition to 100 percent
renewable power by 2045. It is a very ambitious goal, in fact,
the most ambitious goal of any state, as far as I know. And,
you know, the people of Hawaii can show the rest of the country
how to make that transition a reality, but it depends on
demonstrating new technologies. This proposal will consolidate
all applied energy programs into one office. Given the 66
percent cuts to renewable energy programs in the President's
budget, how will the new Applied Energy Office help speed the
transition to renewable energy?
Mr. McNamee. Senator, the proposal is to, by bringing the
various offices together for research and development is in
order to stop looking at energy problems as by the silos of the
energy resource and to focus on how do we solve the actual
energy problem. And so, if renewable energy is the best
solution to the problem, it ought to be used. If a fossil fuel
is the best solution, it ought to be used. If nuclear is the
best solution, it ought to be used.
And that is, you know, going with Senator King I may have
misspoke, the point was, truly, that the office should be
engaged in basic research and we need to continue to do
research in other areas related to fuel.
The issue with ARPA-E was whether or not we ought to be
doing what ARPA-E focuses on which is that transition from the
basic research or just beyond the basic research to try to get
it to commercialization.
But in terms of how we can help states like Hawaii achieve
their goals, the goal of the Department of Energy on the energy
side of it, is to find energy solutions. And right now, the
belief is we're doing a good job of it, but we can do better.
And perhaps one of the ways to do that is to stop looking at
fuel resources in their silos and start focusing on the end
solution.
Senator Hirono. Well, I am all for non-silo thinking, but
that is really, I believe, the goal of this Administration
because they are making 66 percent cuts to renewable energy
programs.
If you look at renewable energy programs and the research
and development that goes there versus this Administration's
huge commitment to fossil fuel continuation, one wonders, you
know? You can consolidate everything all you want, but if the
basic orientation is support of fossil fuels and not renewable
energy, I really wonder how a state like Hawaii that wants to
get away from dependence on fossil fuels will be particularly
helped, especially with the huge cuts.
I am almost out of time, so I will submit other questions
to the panel.
Hawaii relies on the state energy program to support
building code updates and technical assistance to help people
and the businesses and local governments save money on their
energy bills. Hawaii benefits from the Weatherization
Assistance Program which helps low income people lower their
energy bills by increasing the energy efficiency of their
homes, and the President's budget would eliminate funding for
both programs. Where do the state energy programs and the
Weatherization Assistance Program fit in your proposal?
Mr. McNamee. Senator, I don't have the answer to that
question, but I'll get back to you with it.
Senator Hirono. When would you get back to me?
Mr. McNamee. I will get back when I finish here, and I'll
try to get back to you as soon as I can find answers.
Senator Hirono. In a timely manner, right?
Mr. McNamee. Yes, yes, Senator.
Senator Hirono. Which I would consider to be within a
couple of weeks. You should be able to get this answer to me
very quickly. Thank you very much.
Mr. McNamee. Yes, Senator.
Senator Hirono. Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Hirono.
Ms. Combs, back to you.
You had mentioned that Interior is looking to Alaska as,
kind of, a testing ground, somewhat natural. We are, at least
now, we are all one time zone. We used to be five, but now we
are one.
We have, as you know, a significant Department presence
there and we have consolidated regional office locations. That
is a good place to start.
Can you share with me and with the Committee, kind of,
where we are with what we are learning from Alaska as, kind of,
the test case here or the pilot? How what you are learning in
Alaska can then be translated outside to other regions? And
then also, how the piece of the tribal consultation fits in
with Alaska? As you know, we have half of the tribes in the
country that are in Alaska. You are going to have the
consultation process going on, but you are also working on
Alaska as, kind of, your test case here. Can you speak to the
integration of all of this?
Ms. Combs. Yes, thank you, Senator.
What is going on in Alaska is actually very, very
interesting and this is what I would call a bottoms-up effort.
The head of the Fish and Wildlife Service and the head of
the BOEM are, together, the architects of what is going on in
Alaska. And because they're doing it themselves, they're
creating this themselves. They're looking at several issues.
One is office location, one is aviation services such as flight
following versus dispatch, and another one is HR staffing.
They're looking at IT. We've already sent somebody up to
Alaska. They spent a week there, a gentleman named Bruce Downs,
and they had very successful conversation.
What we're asking the folks to do in Alaska, which they're
picking up and doing, is what you all decide what works for you
for your region and then come and tell us what you think the
cost benefit is and tell us what you think the efficiencies
are.
So, for example, Fish and Wildlife Service is proposing to
relinquish some space which they say will save them between
$900,000 and $1 million a year which is, you know, $9 to $10
million over 10 years. And if they move BOEM and BSEE in, they
will save approximately $160,000 per year which over 10 years
is $1.6 million. All of these numbers have been hardened by the
General Services Administration so we're going to people to
say, does this work, is there a cost benefit? And then you add
to that there is an additional benefit of co-locating. You walk
down the hall, take an elevator, climb the stairs, go see
somebody that you might not otherwise see.
That's been something that was brought home to me in
looking at ANILCA and what you all have done there is to have
the state departments of Alaska working with all of the federal
land partners. Well, that is, Forest Service, BLM, Fish, et
cetera, and that has worked out very, very well. It works well
to collaborate, and I can't say that often. It works very well
to collaborate.
Well, one other kind of collaborating is, obviously, co-
locating where it makes sense but you look at how much time is
left on your lease. GSA told us that most of the leases there
had about a four-month extension, which makes it relatively
easy to decide, but you leave it to the folks in the region to
decide what they want to do.
So, from that, we take the fact that where I would like to
go to, what I would call region seven, and I'd like to put up
the maps, is region seven is an incredibly important area. It
is where the West begins.
[The information referred to follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Ms. Combs. It is New Mexico and Colorado and Wyoming and
Utah. That is what we're finding out in Alaska is if the people
at the table, the design table, the drafting table, for the
plan get excited about it then that carries over and then they
get the great feedback from all of the internal and external
stakeholders. In that perspective they're talking to the BIA
folks. BIA folks, in fact, have already approached them. They
want them to take on some of their HR functions.
That's really, kind of, a local menu design with the Alaska
natives is what would you like to do? Well, we'd really like to
pick one from, you know, option A on the menu, one from B. No,
we don't like this one. We'll pick it. And so, that's what
they're already doing. It's bubbling up from the bottom, and I
think that's not only healthy, I think it's really smart.
The Chairman. Well, I think it is also very foreign in the
sense that more often than not we are basically told what will
be coming to us or what will happen to us or what the structure
will look like. Every now and again you get somebody who will
say, oh, we will give you a little bit of flexibility here to
design it yourself, but it is more on paper than actuality.
I know that Alaskans are very interested in this. We like
the idea of efficiencies, co-location can be a very good thing,
but we also recognize that it takes more than just putting
people in the same building. It is how are you working
together, across agencies. And more often than not, that is
where we have the impasse.
But I guess a first step is getting people at least to be
talking with one another. If ultimately what happens is that
there is greater authority for some of the more local and
parochial decisions to be made, rather than Washington, DC, or
the region director who may be located somewhere else in the
Pacific Northwest, then we really have that flexibility. I
think that that is something that most of us are looking at
with keen interest in understanding more. Thank you for
outlining that.
Senator Heinrich.
Senator Heinrich. Thank you.
Mr. McNamee, you said there is currently no 202(c) finding.
Are you or is DOE working on a 202(c) finding?
Mr. McNamee. As you may be aware, the President, I guess it
was at the very beginning of June, directed the Secretary to
look at options to address what he perceived as the crisis on
the grid. There's an interagency activity that's looking at
various options to address----
Senator Heinrich. Including 202(c)?
Mr. McNamee. I believe all the different authorities that
the Secretary or the rest of the Federal Government are being
looked at.
Senator Heinrich. And what was the crisis that prompted
this again?
Mr. McNamee. Well, there's a combination of issues that the
electric grid has been and continues to be under constant,
particularly, cyberattacks. The Director of National
Intelligence, the other just, I think, last Friday, made the
comment that the lights are blinking red again. And I think
there's been numerous reports in public arenas----
Senator Heinrich. Yes.
Mr. McNamee. ----about the different utilities.
Senator Heinrich. As you may know, I also sit on the
Intelligence Committee, and I am very aware of the threats to
utilities. I think we need to take those very seriously. They
tend to be exacerbated actually by the overreliance on
centralized generation which is exactly what would be
subsidized under 202(c). A more distributed grid is a more
resilient grid and much harder to attack through cyber means
because it requires attacking many, many, many points instead
of a few points. So I hope the Administration would consider
that in their deliberations.
I would also urge that the Administration look closely at
the legislative history of that legislation. It rests heavily
on the idea of an emergency shortage and how to solve that. It
is worth going back and looking at that plain language and
making sure that this conforms to free market conditions as
well. I know that is a radical idea from a Democrat, but let's
use the free market. It is working pretty well.
Ms. Combs, I wanted to ask you about the BLM. I know there
has been back and forth about whether the BLM state offices are
going to remain as they are currently configured or not, and I
guess there was some back and forth between the Western
Governors' Association and the Secretary as well as many of the
rest of us. Can you just tell us, is the BLM, are the state
offices exempted from this reorganization or are they included?
Ms. Combs. The BLM state offices will remain exactly as
they are.
Senator Heinrich. Okay.
And one last question on the tribal side of things. I
mentioned the complexity of dealing with the Northern Pueblos
and the Southern Pueblos. We also have the Navajo Nation which
has its own region right now. They have a regional office in
Gallup, New Mexico. What would happen to that office in that
region?
Ms. Combs. That would stay where it is.
Senator Heinrich. Okay, so it would be an island with the
state regions around it, right?
Ms. Combs. Yes.
Senator Heinrich. Thank you very much. I think that is a
smart move, and I appreciate it.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Heinrich.
I thank you both for being here this morning, for walking
us through some of the concerns that have been raised by
members.
I am sure you can anticipate other questions, other issues,
that will be presented to you, so an opportunity to either get
back within timeframes, as Senator Hirono has requested or
others, would be appreciated.
But also, know that the outreach that is made from the
Departments to members individually is good. I think it is
helpful and we know that there is more that is going on within
the Administration, outside of just these two departments, but
there is some intersect that has been raised. You know, where
is Commerce on, for instance, the NMFS? Where is DOD on some of
the core issues?
So, allowing us to better understand how this whole thing
knits together or perhaps how it unravels, I am not quite sure,
but I think that would be helpful for all of us. The more that
you can continue, not only the engagement with us as members
but also with our constituents, these consultations are very
much appreciated.
I know that we gained a lot on the DOI side from the
consultation with the governors. Good input was received there.
I think that actually helped you in New Mexico. I appreciate
the extent to which you are engaging and would just encourage
that.
Thank you for being with us this morning.
The Committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:15 a.m. the hearing was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]