- HELPING SMALL BUSINESSES COMPETE: CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES IN THE FEDERAL PROCUREMENT MARKETPLACE
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
HELPING SMALL BUSINESSES COMPETE:
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES IN THE
FEDERAL PROCUREMENT MARKETPLACE
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CONTRACTING AND INFRASTRUCTURE
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD
JULY 16, 2019
__________
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Small Business Committee Document Number 116-034
Available via the GPO Website: www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
37-029
WASHINGTON : 2019
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Chairwoman
ABBY FINKENAUER, Iowa
JARED GOLDEN, Maine
ANDY KIM, New Jersey
JASON CROW, Colorado
SHARICE DAVIDS, Kansas
JUDY CHU, California
MARC VEASEY, Texas
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANTONIO DELGADO, New York
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Ranking Member
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa, Vice Ranking Member
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio
KEVIN HERN, Oklahoma
JIM HAGEDORN, Minnesota
PETE STAUBER, Minnesota
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
ROSS SPANO, Florida
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania
Adam Minehardt, Majority Staff Director
Melissa Jung, Majority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Hon. Jared Golden................................................
1
Hon. Pete Stauber................................................
2
WITNESSES
Ms. Belinda Guadarrama, Founder & CEO, GC Micro, Petaluma, CA,
testifying on behalf of GovEvolve..............................
5
Mr. Bruce Lansdowne, President & CEO, Trinity Technology
Partners, Greenbelt, MD, testifying on behalf of the Montgomery
County Chamber of Commerce.....................................
7
Mr. Thomas J. DePace, CTS, C.O.O. & Sr. Engineering Manager,
Advance Sound Company, Farmingdale, NY, testifying on behalf of
NECA...........................................................
8
Ms. Dorothy Ann Callahan, Principal, D. Callahan, LLC, Olney, MD.
10
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Ms. Belinda Guadarrama, Founder & CEO, GC Micro, Petaluma,
CA, testifying on behalf of GovEvolve......................
21
Mr. Bruce Lansdowne, President & CEO, Trinity Technology
Partners, Greenbelt, MD, testifying on behalf of the
Montgomery County Chamber of Commerce......................
31
Mr. Thomas J. DePace, CTS, C.O.O. & Sr. Engineering Manager,
Advance Sound Company, Farmingdale, NY, testifying on
behalf of NECA.............................................
40
Ms. Dorothy Ann Callahan, Principal, D. Callahan, LLC, Olney,
MD.........................................................
46
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
EA Engineering, Science, and Technology, Inc., PBC...........
51
ECR - Employee-owned Contractor Roundable....................
54
HUBZone Contractors National Council.........................
59
WIPP--Women Impacting Public Policy..........................
74
HELPING SMALL BUSINESSES COMPETE: CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES IN THE
FEDERAL PROCUREMENT MARKETPLACE
----------
TUESDAY, JULY 16, 2019
House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Contracting and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Jared Golden
[chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Golden, Veasey, Chu, Balderson,
Hagedorn, and Stauber.
Chairman GOLDEN. Good morning, folks. The Committee will
come to order.
I am going to start right off this morning by saying that I
woke up bright and early this morning and hopped on some radio
shows back home, and Ranking Member Pete Stauber came up as an
example and someone said, sheesh, you know, do you enjoy
working with any of your Republican colleagues? I said, well,
sure, this is an easy one. Pete Stauber from Minnesota is a
great guy. But the last time I was late to Committee he text me
and said that I owed him a beer for like every minute I was
late. So I would say we are even now. Oh, boy.
So I want to thank everyone for joining us this morning,
and I especially thank the witnesses for being here and thank
you for your patience.
Supporting small businesses can take on many forms form
making sure they have affordable access to capital, something
we talk about a lot here, to making sure our Nation has an up-
to-date infrastructure, to meeting the technology and
transportation needs of small businesses. Another way that we
support small businesses is to simplify and expand
opportunities to do business with the United States Government.
The Federal Government is the largest procurer of goods and
services in the world, spending nearly $442 billion in fiscal
year 2017, for example.
Over the years, Congress has recognized the positive impact
that Federal contracting has on increasing small business
development and growth when it established a minimum for a
Federal contract set-aside of 23 percent. As a subset of this
overall goal, agencies aim to maximize participation of small
businesses in the Federal marketplace for certain deserving
demographics.
The Small Business Act sets the goal of awarding 5 percent
of all eligible prime contracting and subcontracting dollars to
small, disadvantaged businesses and women-owned businesses, and
3 percent for HUBZone and service-disabled veteran-owned
businesses.
Last year, the Federal Government awarded $120 billion.
That is about 25 percent of all eligible prime contracting
dollars to small businesses and met goals for the small
disadvantaged businesses, small disabled, veteran-owned
businesses, respectively, as well. And this is certainly a move
in the right direction. The prime contracting goals for
HUBZone, small businesses, and women-owned small businesses,
however, were not met.
While it is true that small businesses received more
dollars this year than in years past, dollars to large
businesses are actually increasing at a faster pace and the
disparity is quite large. And unfortunately, a closer look at
the numbers reveals that most of the eligible contracting
dollars were given to just a few very large companies in the
country, which is not an acceptable outcome. I think that this
point is important because we all know that everywhere we go in
the country, small businesses are the largest job creators and
providers out there. And that is particularly true in districts
like the Ranking Member and my own, which are very, very rural.
So I think it is important that we stay focused on using
taxpayer dollars, Federal contracting opportunities to the
benefit of small businesses.
As the Chair of the Subcommittee on Contracting and
Infrastructure, I am committed to furthering small business
interests and improving our small businesses contracting
framework to ensure that small businesses around the country
can compete and thrive, and that is precisely the purpose of
our hearing today, to listen to some of the challenges that
small businesses face in the Federal marketplace and potential
solutions we can look to as policymakers to address them.
As part of today's hearing, we will hear directly from
small contractors about how certain section 809 proposals that
use words like ``streamline'' and ``efficiency'' can sometimes
be code words that could potentially eliminate most small
business set-asides for Defense Department acquisitions. These
recommendations would replace the longstanding 23 percent set
aside with a miniscule 5 percent small business preference.
The Subcommittee also wants to hear how we can improve the
Small Business Act to remove barriers for entry, increase the
use of subcontractors, and make sure that small firms are paid
in a timely manner when providing quality goods and services to
Federal Government. That is something I hear about repeatedly
back home from people contracting with the government is
timeliness of payment is a barrier to participation.
With that, I want to thank all the witnesses for their
attendance, and I look forward to your testimony. I would now
like to yield to the Ranking Member, Mr. Stauber, for an
opening statement.
Mr. STAUBER. Thank you, Chairman Golden.
You know, the Federal Government has long stood by the
policy that government should aid, counsel, assist, and protect
the interests of small businesses' concerns in order to
maintain the strength and overall economy of our Nation. One of
the primary tenets of the Small Business Act is in recognizing
the use of small business contractors as in the interest of
maintaining or mobilizing the Nation's full productive capacity
in the interest of war or national defense programs. To this
end, it is my privilege and honor to sit on this Subcommittee
to ensure that the people's will is met and to provide a
platform for small contractors to freely voice their issues and
concerns.
One of the issues that raises the most alarm bells are the
small business contracting and subcontracting. Subcontracting
is vitally important to the health and vitality of a small
business, particularly those that are new to the Federal
marketplace. Subcontracting opportunities are most often the
first and best way for a new small business to engage with the
Federal customer and small firms structure their entire
business model entirely around obtaining subcontracts.
Therefore, it is imperative that maximum effort is made to
ensure subcontracting opportunities are plentiful and fair.
Like the Federal Government, large contractors are required to
develop subcontracting plans and meet goals for partnering with
small businesses.
Unfortunately, as we have seen previously in this
Committee, agencies are not doing enough to ensure large primes
are following through on meeting their subcontracting plans and
the rules themselves surrounding subcontracting plans might be
part of the problem.
I look forward to hearing more about the issues surrounding
subcontracting plans and ways we might be able to hold large
contractors accountable.
Another concern brought to this Committee's attention are
some of the recommendations made by the section 809 panel, a
group established by Congress to address issues with the way
the Department of Defense buys what it needs. One of the
recommendations raising red flags among the small business
community is the proposal to replace the small business set
aside requirement for certain contracts with a 5 percent price
preference. The set-aside requirement is critically important
in that it provides a protocol--correction, a protected pool in
which small and new vendors can compete, develop, and grow,
eventually to compete for larger acquisitions against bigger
companies. Thus, it is important that we maintain the special
requirement in the interest of having robust competition and
ensuring a healthy defense industrial base.
There are other troubling recommendations coming from the
panel's report, such as eliminating the multiple form protest
ability and restricting the SBA's ``once 8(a), always 8(a)''
rule. I hope to learn more from our witnesses about what impact
these recommendations might have on small businesses serving in
the defense marketplace.
Lastly, one of the industries in which small businesses
make up a majority is construction. The Federal Government
depends on small construction companies. Whether they are
primes, subcontractors, or suppliers, every government builder,
VA hospital, and other structure important to the functioning
of our government needs these small construction firms to
succeed, so we need to make sure their concerns are heard and
addressed.
Obtaining and maintain steady cash flow is one of those
issues particularly important to a small construction
contractor, and I hope to learn more about this and other
issues from our witnesses today.
Thank you all for your testimonies and thank you, Mr.
Chair, and I yield back.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you, Mr. Stauber. The gentleman
yields back.
For Committee members that have opening statements that
they prepared, they can submit those for the record.
I would like to just take a few minutes to explain the
timing rules for those of you testifying. You may have been
through this before but just in case. Each witness gets 5
minutes to testify and each member gets 5 minutes for
questioning. There is a lighting system in front of you that
will assist you. The green light will be on when you begin, the
yellow light tells you you have got a minute to go, and the red
light will come on when you are out of time. Just do your best
to try to stay within that time limit.
I would now like to introduce our witnesses.
Our first witness is Ms. Belinda Guadarrama, the founder
and CEO of GC Micro, a leading supplier of computer hardware,
software products, and integrated systems to the defense and
aerospace industries, Federal agencies, and Fortune 1000
companies. She is Co-Chair of the GovEvolve advocacy
organization and has serve as Chair of the NASA Minority
Business Resource Advisory Committee and is a member of the
Department of Energy Task Force on Small Business Development.
Among her many accomplishments, she received a National
Minority Female Entrepreneur of the Year Award from the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce and the Latino Entrepreneur of the Year by
the Latino Business Association. Welcome, Ms. Guadarrama.
Our second witness is Mr. Bruce Lansdowne, the president
and chief executive officer of Trinity Technology Partners,
Inc., a small business that participates in the 8(a) program.
Mr. Lansdowne is a business and program management executive
with more than 20 years of leadership experience and has served
as an executive advisor to the Air Force leadership. He serves
on the board of directors for the Montgomery County Chamber of
Commerce and Donations from the Heart, Inc., a faith-based,
nonprofit organization developed to serve both individuals and
families by providing assistance and resources for those in
need. Welcome, Mr. Lansdowne.
Our third witness today is Mr. Thomas DePace. Mr. DePace is
the CEO and senior engineering manager of Advance Sound
Company, a small business dedicated to audiovisual and security
installations. In this role, he has expanded the core
competencies of Advanced Sound Company from audiovisual systems
to include network infrastructure, lighting control and
automation, as well as access control and intellectual property
security systems. In 2010, Thomas was a 30 under 30 Young
Professionals Award recipient from the Huntington Chamber of
Commerce, and in 2015, he was recognized as a commercial
integrator 40 under 40 Award recipient. I got a 40 under 40
back home in Maine as well. Welcome, Mr. DePace.
And I would now like to go ahead and yield to our Ranking
Member, Mr. Stauber, to introduce our final witness.
Mr. STAUBER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And our final witness is Ms. Dorothy Callahan. She has been
a small business advocate for the past 30 years and has
extensive experience in acquisition, contract management, and
supplier diversity, supporting both the private sector and our
Federal Government. Ms. Callahan is a seasoned veteran in
managing multiple subcontractors and partners for large and
mid-scale procurements and has a long history working with the
Federal acquisition regulation, defense acquisition regulation,
SBA size standards and regulations, and a variety of other
Federal, state, and local procurement regulations. Ms. Callahan
worked for the National Government Services Business
Development organization from 2011 to 2019 as the small
business and strategic partnering director, and in that role
she developed and enabled small business utilization strategies
for the business development capture and program teams. She
also worked diligently to identify small business partners for
NGS. Prior to that, Ms. Callahan was the small business liaison
officer for IBM's U.S. Federal Global Business Services
Division. In her time with IBM, which spanned over 25 years,
she was involved in contracts, administration, management,
sourcing, strategy, subcontracts, management, and bid and
proposal support. Ms. Callahan is an active member of many
government and nongovernment procurement organizations, having
attended as a guest speaker or panelist for several small
business events. She clearly brings us a wide depth and breadth
of experience, and I look forward to hearing your testimony.
Ms. Callahan, welcome.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman GOLDEN. And now we will go ahead and move ahead to
our witness testimony.
Ms. Guadarrama, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENTS OF BELINDA GUADARRAMA, FOUNDER & CEO, GC MICRO;
BRUCE LANSDOWNE, PRESIDENT & CEO, TRINITY TECHNOLOGY PARTNERS;
THOMAS J. DEPACE, CTS, C.O.O. & SR. ENGINEERING MANAGER,
ADVANCE SOUND COMPANY; DOROTHY ANN CALLAHAN, PRINCIPAL, D.
CALLAHAN, LLC
STATEMENT OF BELINDA GUADARRAMA
Ms. GUADARRAMA. Chairman Golden, Ranking Member Stauber,
and members of the Subcommittee, I would like to thank you for
the opportunity to testify today. My name is Belinda
Guadarrama, and I am the founder and CEO of GC Micro
Corporation, a minority-woman-owned information technology
business located in Petaluma, California.
I am testifying on behalf of GovEvolve, a group of small
and midsize ITVARs, firms that enhance the value of third-party
products and play a vital role in the IT industry, providing
software, hardware, and networking products that provide value
beyond just order fulfillment.
GovEvolve members represent WOSB and EDWOSBs, HUBZone
certified, 8(a), service-disabled veterans, small and midsize
businesses.
I founded GC Micro in 1986, and my vision extended far
beyond my desire for personal success. I envisioned a company
where my staff is not just employees but they are my business
partners. This community-minded philosophy has been the
undercurrent of my leadership since GC Micro's founding. My
experience in government, including as a White House Small
Business Policy Advisor, allowed me to see firsthand the
importance of having effective small business policies that
promote growth and innovation in our Nation's industrial base.
I would like to highlight some of the challenges faced by
small and midsize companies in the Federal marketplace, as well
as provide opportunities for change in acquisition policy for
ITVARS, and the entire small business community at large.
First, as this Committee is well aware, the Section 809
Panel recommended eliminating small business set-asides in
exchange for a 5 percent price preference at the Department of
Defense.
Small businesses have everything to lose with this change.
We strongly encourage the Committee to support the more than
51,000 small business contractors that service DOD's mission by
preserving the contracting programs that fulfill the Nation's
policies of ensuring a health industrial base.
Second, as government contractors become larger, a small
business has to decide whether to grow to compete with large
companies, sell the business, or stay small to avoid the
difficulties of competing in a full and open environment. While
the Small Business Runway Extension Act made an important
change for revenue-based size standards, we urge the Committee
to adopt a 3-year average for employee-based NAICS codes to
give these small businesses much-needed time to transition into
full and open competition.
Third, size standards play an important part in government
contracting, defining eligibility for small business programs.
There is not an NCIS code specific to IT resale or to ITVAR
functions. Product provided under ITVARS are listed as a
subindustry or exception in Footnote 18 under NAICS code
541519. To alleviate this confusion, GovEvolve is recommending
the creation of separate ITVAR/IT NAICS code maintaining the
150-employee size standard.
Fourth, as government buying continues its trend toward
large vehicles, it is increasingly challenging for small
businesses to win sole-source awards. GovEvolve supports H.R.
90, which eliminates option years for sole-source contracts.
We also urge you to consider increasing the sole-source
threshold to 8 million and 10 million as expected to be
proposed in the Senate. Equally important is streamlining and
simplifying rules for awarding these contracts. We recommend
the Committee remove the requirement that a contracting officer
must show they do not have a reasonable expectation that offers
would be received from two or more small business concerns.
Fifth, the goal of the FAR Council is to assist in the
direction and coordination of government-wide procurement
policy and regulatory activities. But discrepancies between the
SBA and the FAR create headaches for businesses and the
acquisition workforce. We strongly recommend adding the SBA to
the FAR Council to mitigate these issues and give small
businesses a stronger voice.
Finally, GovEvolve understands the role of subcontracting
as an entry port for small businesses to enter the Federal
marketplace and build past performance. GovEvolve encourages
the Committee to look at incentives that would spur
subcontracting plan compliance and small business utilization.
In conclusion, ITVAR companies like mine have unique
challenges outlined in this testimony. We urge the Committee to
take bold steps to strengthen small business programs and fully
integrate these programs into the government's buying
strategies.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify today, and I am
happy to answer any questions.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you very much, ma'am.
And Mr. Lansdowne, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF BRUCE LANSDOWNE
Mr. LANSDOWNE. Good morning, Chair Golden, Ranking Member
Stauber, and members of the Subcommittee. My name is Bruce
Lansdowne. I am president and CEO of Trinity Technology
Partners. My company develops and offers information technology
services and solutions, and we are located in Greenbelt,
Maryland.
I am here today to testify on behalf of the Montgomery
County Chamber of Commerce (MCCC), of which I am a board
member. MCCC is a 500-member organization located in Montgomery
County that works to move the needle on policies that
positively impact small and midsize businesses in the Federal
marketplace. Thank you for inviting me here today on this very
important segment of our economy.
Trinity is a small business currently providing support to
the Federal marketplace. However, after I started the business
it was challenging to obtain opportunities to participate in
the Federal space. I was fortunate enough to use a professional
relationship that I had previously established with a large
company in order to gain access to the Federal market as a
subcontractor.
We took this opportunity very seriously and as a result, we
began to receive many accolades from the government customer.
Despite our successes though, as subcontractor and providing
our capabilities, it was still a 5-year journey to receive a
prime contract with that particular agency.
This story is not just unique to my company; it highlights
the time and effort put in by small businesses to compete in
the Federal space. However, I took each challenge as an
opportunity to make things better, not just for my company but
for the government customers and all midsize, small government
contractors. It is with this passion for success that I joined
the chamber's board of directors.
The chamber has been at the forefront of finding solutions
to tackle problems in the Federal marketspace that exist around
subcontracting. As background, an important part of the chamber
is GovConNet Council, which is comprised of industry
procurement experts and practitioners. The council meets
monthly to discuss Federal contracting issues that affect small
and midsize firms. Large companies are also an important part
of the chamber and membership, and they support efforts to
assist small and midsize companies to obtain success in Federal
contracting.
Last year, the GovConNet Council identified an issue that
continues to be problematic for small and prime contractors
alike, subcontracting. The council then decided to convene four
stakeholder roundtables with industry, including large prime
contractors and small subcontractors and government officials
to identify pain points in subcontracting for all sides of the
equation. We enlisted the help of Bloomberg Government to
identify what data exists on subcontracting, its accuracy, and
its purpose. According to Bloomberg, prime spending on
contracts requiring subcontracts is surging. Prime contracts
requiring a subcontract plan now total $302 billion, which is
54 percent of all fiscal year 2018 spending. Further, more, our
prime contract spending on these contracts has grown 73 percent
since fiscal year 2014, a huge uptick that indicated we are on
the right track. Through those roundtables, the council
identified recommendations that are a result of extensive
discussions and consultations with members and policymakers.
Our goal is to improve accountability and transparency in
subcontracting for small businesses.
The chamber makes the following recommendations:
One, empower the Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business
Utilization (OSDBU) to monitor and improve subcontracting
compliance.
Maintain and enhance data collected through the Federal
Subcontracting Reporting System (FSRS).
Require the SBA to report subcontracting dollars on their
annual scorecard, not just percentages.
Four, direct GAO to conduct a study of subcontracting
authority, processes, systems, and the reporting of
subcontracting performance against established goals.
And lastly, improve utilization of small business
subcontracting through programs through expansion of sole-
source authority.
In conclusion, we would like to thank this Subcommittee for
its continued efforts to improve Federal contracting access for
small and midsize businesses. The chamber will continue to work
with this Committee to strengthen the role of these businesses
in the Federal marketplace.
This concludes my testimony, and I am happy to answer any
questions that you may have. Thank you.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you very much, sir.
Mr. DePace, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF THOMAS J. DEPACE
Mr. DEPACE. Thank you, Chairman Golden, Ranking Member
Stauber, and members of the Subcommittee, for inviting me to
testify today. On behalf of the National Electrical Contractors
Association (NECA), we greatly appreciate the opportunity to
submit a statement for the record to the Subcommittee on
Contracting and Infrastructure. The Subcommittee should be
commended for holding this important hearing to better
understand the issues facing contractors in the Federal
marketplace and the ways in which simple solutions can bring
about great change for their small businesses.
My name is Thomas DePace, and I am the chief operating
officer of Advance Sound Company in Farmingdale, New York. My
mother and father bought this company in 1988 and have worked
for over 3 decades to transform our family-owned business into
an industry leader. Partnering with over 80 manufacturers in
the industry, Advance Sound Company has become a premier
distributor and integrator of quality audiovisual equipment and
solutions.
After joining the company in 2007, I have worked to expand
the core competencies of Advanced Sound for audiovisual systems
to include network infrastructure, lighting control and
automation, as well as access control and IP security systems.
We have adapted our company to be ready for the ever-changing
technology landscape.
We at Advance Sound Company are proud members of the
National Electrical Contractors Association (NECA), where most
recently our work on Molloy College's Barbara H. Hagan Center
for Nursing Excellence was recognized as a 2017 NECA Project
Excellence Award Winner. NECA is the nationally recognized
voice of the $171 billion electrical construction industry,
that brings power, light, and communication technology to
buildings and communities across the United States. Many of
NECA's 4,000 member companies compete within the Federal
procurement market and recognize its unique opportunities.
Risk is inherent when competing in the Federal marketplace,
and although the Federal marketplace is notorious for limiting
it, that key to success is cash flow. With that said, there are
three concepts related to cash flow that I believe this
Committee has the ability to alter for the better.
Two years ago, NECA contractor, Mr. Greg Long of Long
Electric, testified before the House Small Business Committee
describing one of the biggest issues facing our contractors:
the prompt payment and proper administration of change orders.
Mr. Long's commentary, along with the hard work of this
Committee, led to the passage of the Change Order Transparency
for Federal Contractors Act, H.R. 4754, which requires Federal
agencies to list their practices on the payments of change
orders and their history for doing so. While this legislation
allowed for the protection of contractors on the front end by
increasing awareness, the crux of the problem remained
unaddressed, that being the need for prompt payment on these
changes.
Thankfully, through the leadership of Representatives
Stauber and Veasey, this Committee has recognized the issues
and understands that requiring partial payment for unilaterally
requested change orders is a major step towards alleviating the
unnecessary risks of many small construction contractors assume
as doing the cost of business with the Federal Government. H.R.
2344, the Small Business Payment for Performance Act is a
common-sense solution requiring the Federal Government to
recognize that their delayed payments have real world
consequences for America's small businesses.
Secondly, on construction industry contracts, the Federal
Government has the ability to hold up to 10 percent of the
contract price until satisfactory completion of the work. This
process is known as retainage, and was originally intended to
assure the prompt completion of work. While not all Federal
contracts require the use of retainage, this practice has
caused many subcontractors to be weary of working with the
Federal Government. Retainage sums are often passed down
inevitably laying upon subcontractors to cover the cost.
Because of this, many states have either done away with
retainage on their projects or have lowered their overall
percentage.
One immediate way to mitigate the degree of financial
exposure from retainage is for the Federal Government to follow
the states and lower the overall rate. This would put more
liquidated funds in the pockets of America's small businesses,
and likely decrease the overall cost of Federal construction
projects.
Lastly, as methods for delivering larger infrastructure
projects continue to develop and become more complex, surety
bonding must remain an underlining assurance for contractors.
The Federal Government for decades has provided protections not
only for itself but for the small businesses and their workers
who interact with it through the use of bonding. With the
increased use of public-private partnerships (P3s) on Federal
property, the need to reform the 1934 Miller Act to
unambiguously cover these types of contracts is apparent.
In conclusion, as a contractor, who has worked on numerous
construction projects, I am extremely encouraged by this
Committee's efforts.
Thank you again for this opportunity. NECA and Advance
Sound applaud the Committee's unwavering support of small
business.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you, sir.
And lastly, Ms. Callahan, we will recognize you for 5
minutes.
STATEMENT OF DOROTHY ANN CALLAHAN
Ms. CALLAHAN. Chair Golden, Ranking Member Stauber, and
members of the Subcommittee, my name is Dorothy Callahan, and I
am the president of D. Callahan, LLC, as well as a member of
the Montgomery County Chamber of Commerce's GovConNet Council.
Thank you for inviting me to testify today.
A little background on why I am testifying on this topic. I
have spent my career working at large prime contractors as a
small business program manager and strategic partnerships
director. In these roles, I have been responsible for many
aspects of successfully working with small businesses. This
includes fostering strategic relationships with internal
program deal teams and potential partners, mentoring small
businesses for success in the public sector, and identifying
partnerships to fill key capability gaps while ensuring
customer and mission success, just to name a few. I have also
worked with small businesses at trade shows and other
conferences to promote and identify teaming partners during my
tenure at these large firms.
My past positions give me a unique perspective,
understanding the needs and challenges of both prime and small
business contractors in the Federal marketplace. Based on my
experience, I would like to make recommendations to the
Committee about changes that could be made to allow small
business contractors to be more successful in the acquisition
landscape.
One of my many roles was to plan, organize, and coordinate
the small business program, as well as make recommendations for
input to the corporate strategic approach that would maximize
corporate resources to enhance program efficiency and
effectiveness. I also assisted our small business liaison
office, subcontract and program directors, with the
facilitation of small business goals and accomplishments.
Therefore, I spent many years facilitating and managing
subcontracting plans, which includes being an advocate for our
teaming partners internally. This gave me unparalleled insight
into issues with these plans faced by both primes and small
businesses. One of the changes that I believe would improve
subcontracting for small businesses is to require the
identification of small businesses listed in subcontracting
plans. If the prime wins the contract with a small business
listed on their team, that business should be utilized. This
change would allow contracting officers to more successfully
evaluate a prime's progress on meeting their subcontracting
plan goals.
Another role I had was coordinating and managing all
corporate activities during the Federal compliance reviews by
supporting audits by the Defense Contract Management Agency
(DCAA) resulting in the achievement of an ``exceptional''
rating for my company. An annual past performance evaluation is
required for primes, as well as interim evaluations at least
every 12 months throughout the entire period of performance on
the contract. Since this annual evaluation is already required,
I recommend it include an assessment of the prime's
subcontracting plan. This additional component of the
evaluation would achieve two effects: allow oversight by
contracting officers without additional burden and provide an
opportunity for prime contractors to discuss their progress on
meeting subcontracting goals.
When a prime contractor sets a subcontracting goal, they
are required to show a ``good faith effort'' to meet it. The
definition of this effort is ambiguous and can be interpreted
loosely, much to the detriment of small businesses. Not all,
but some large companies take advantage of this unspecified
term, which leads to more of ``checking the box'' instead of
working towards meeting the goals in their subcontracting
plans. This broad definition does not hold primes accountable
for utilizing small businesses. Therefore, I support the
Committee's proposal that the good-faith standard should be
removed and instead, primes should be assessed on a pass/fail
basis. However, it is important that in this change, the
``fail'' rating is explicitly defined to avoid any confusion or
ambiguity if a prime were to receive this rating. Primes should
also have the ability in this new system to resolve this issue
with the contracting officer, since there are instances where
meeting the goals is not possible.
In my role as the central liaison with the Office of Small
and Disadvantaged Business Utilization offices, I have seen
their effectiveness firsthand. OSDBUs are incredible resources
within agencies that advocate for small business contractors.
They should be empowered to be utilized as an additional
resource to contracting officers to assist in subcontracting
plan compliance and remediation.
In summary, I have dedicated my career to developing strong
relationships with businesses in all socioeconomic categories
to assist in strategic preparation for pursuit of opportunities
and partnerships within the Federal market. I believe the
meaningful policy changes outlined in this testimony will lead
to increased utilization of small businesses in the Federal
marketplace.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today. This
concludes my testimony, and I am happy to answer any questions.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you very much, ma'am.
We are now going to go to member questions. With that, I
would recognize myself for the first 5 minutes. And I am going
to start with Ms. Guadarrama.
You talked a little bit about 809 Panel recommendations and
you suggested that we should look into a sense of Congress
rejecting that panel's recommendations. As far as we know,
there has not been a legislative effort under way to implement
these proposals. And so what is it about the 809 Panel
proposals that are so concerning to the small business
community that would require the Committee to look into
addressing this preemptively through an action on the House
floor?
Ms. GUADARRAMA. Well, my concern is the mere thought that
the 809 Panel is going to be making a recommendation that could
have such a far-reaching effect on small businesses. The SBA
just recently came out with 6 years of hitting the small
business goal. And if you have a program that for the last 6
years has hit the goal, it does not make any sense to look at
it now and say, let's see how we can change the program. If you
look at HUBZone that is set up with a 10 percent preference,
that goal is never reached. So you have a program in place
where the goal is being reached, and then you have a
recommendation from the 809 Panel saying let's move it into the
type of program that HUBZone currently has where it is not
being reached. It makes absolutely no sense. And if anything, I
think it would be extremely devastating for the small business
community who has for years now specifically been working under
small business set-asides.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you, ma'am, very much.
You also talked about making some changes similar to what
was done with the Runway Extension Act, and I want to point out
that through work we did on this Subcommittee, a bill just
yesterday passed the House floor that was sponsored by the
Ranking Member here to try and make the SBA follow through with
the changes of the Runway Extension Act. And I am sure we are
going to be able to get that done. So thanks for that, Pete,
and congrats on getting that through the house.
You have talked about following through with changes that
are not based upon just the receipts but rather the size of the
employee-base standard. Could you talk a little bit about why
you think we should look into looking at the average employees
of the preceding years as a change that might be helpful?
Ms. GUADARRAMA. I think for the same reason that the
changes were made on the revenue-based side of it, I think when
you are looking at small businesses, as they get close to the
point where they are going to be outgrowing the small business
size standard, for any small business the idea that they could
have a little bit extra time to actually get ready to make that
shift from small to other than small, a 3-year averaging would
be very beneficial for them. It would give them a little more
time to actually see what they needed to do, whether it is
increasing staff, changing the business model somewhat, and a
3-year averaging I think would be enough time for the small
business to become more viable under full and open competition
and at the same time it is not a long enough time period that
it would be detrimental to the small businesses that are still
within the program.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you. So a bit of an incentive to
grow while also protecting jobs.
Ms. GUADARRAMA. Yes.
Chairman GOLDEN. All right. Thank you.
Just moving on with what time I have left, Mr. Lansdowne, I
wanted to talk a little bit about subcontracting plans. You
talked about putting on the scorecard for SBA, about the
subcontracting dollars on their annual scorecard. Why do you
think that is a meaningful change since they are already
reporting percentages? What is it about reporting the actual
amount of dollars that you think would be important?
Mr. LANSDOWNE. Sure. I brought a copy of the report,
actually, the scorecard.
When you look at those percentages, you sometimes have
trouble putting it in relativity as to percentages of what. And
the chamber recommended that we show the actual dollars so it
can be more real for the subcontractors, for the general public
who has access to those scorecards. So it just would make it
more clear as to really how many dollars are being spent in the
subcontracting arena.
Chairman GOLDEN. Okay. And very quickly just moving on,
this is something that came up in Full Committee last week. And
Ms. Callahan spoke about it, too. So I am going to ask this
question and then my time will be expired. But if you would
take your time to answer it.
You talked about in your testimony how you worked with a
prime contractor to be a part of their bidding process. They
win the bid and then you do not get the opportunity to work on
the contract itself. I think this is a big problem and I have
heard it is one that happens frequently. So could you talk more
about your recommendation to empower the OSDBUs to monitor
subcontracting compliance in order to help with this issue?
Mr. LANSDOWNE. Absolutely. When that happened to my company
I picked up the phone and called the small business director as
a subcontractor. It did not have a lot of weight because I was
not a government person to talk gov to gov with the small
business director. She mentioned that she would write policy
and that would not help us. It was too late at that time. You
know, it was all over with. So empowering the OSDBU to be an
advocate for the small business to work alongside the
contracting officer because as I have heard across with my
colleagues, they are overburdened with work. They are trying to
get the contracts awarded, et cetera, et cetera. So having them
alongside to help with compliance, to help with remediation of
activities that go on with the small subcontractors that are
having trouble being recognized and utilized on the prime
contracts.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you for that response. I imagine you
put some time into helping develop your portion of that bid and
lost out on the man-hours put in.
Mr. LANSDOWNE. It was very disappointing.
Chairman GOLDEN. Yeah, it is disappointing. Big loss.
I am out of time by over a minute, so I apologize for that.
And I would go ahead and recognize the Ranking Member, Mr.
Stauber, for 5 minutes.
Mr. STAUBER. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. DePace, you said something that I wrote down and it
resonates with me being a small business owner for almost 30
years. And it was that delayed payments have real world
consequences for small businesses. That is a statement that
government should understand, that we cannot allow this to be
put on the backs of our small businesses, so thank you for
that.
Ms. Callahan, you have a ton of experience, and I am
looking forward to you answering some of the questions here.
What are some of the reasons, justified or not, that a
prime might not use a small subcontractor they worked with in
submitting the proposal?
Ms. CALLAHAN. So it could be that when the award has been
made, if something should change within that award then the
skillsets or the capabilities that that company initially
brought to the proposal may not now fit into that change order
within the actual contract award.
Mr. STAUBER. Due to like a change order?
Ms. CALLAHAN. It could be; right. So that would be one
reason that one would not be utilized.
Mr. STAUBER. From your experience, is that the most common?
Ms. CALLAHAN. Especially at an IDIQ level, and then you
have task orders underneath it. When you build your team for an
IDIQ, you are building it on the requirements of that
solicitation. But then there are specific work orders, task
orders that might come out. And not every company is going to
fit each task order. So that could warrant----
Mr. STAUBER. Sure. In your experience, how do primes define
good faith?
Ms. CALLAHAN. What I have seen is kind of how many outreach
events have I attended, how many companies have I talked to,
instead of really looking at what efforts have you taken to
kind of bring that team on, maybe to mentor them, to help them
along to build their capabilities.
Mr. STAUBER. Mr. Lansdowne, you had talked about the
ability to work with the prime and ultimately not getting the
contract. Can you tell us the financial burden that put on your
company? What was the cost for that?
Mr. LANSDOWNE. It was a little while ago but we were
really, truly a startup. And those dollars were very important
to our corporation. So as a small corporation it was a couple
million dollars impact.
Mr. STAUBER. I cannot imagine that, having the ability to
put forth the effort and then losing it like that.
So I think the goal for us is we have the witnesses here.
Your experience is valuable in how we proceed with our
legislation. But from this member's standpoint, there is
nothing more important than protecting and serving our small
businesses across this Nation and giving them the opportunity
to be awarded contracts as a prime and/or a subcontractor. And
so the goal is to make sure that you are represented and you
all bring a wealth of experience to us. So from our standpoint,
I want to say thank you for your testimony. I wrote a lot of
notes here. The whole goal is to make sure that our small
businesses, which the four of you know are the engine of our
economy. The engine of our economy has to be protected and you
are going to bring that experience and help us legislate in the
best way we can as we go forward.
So I want to thank you all for your testimony and shared
experiences. Thank you.
And I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Chairman GOLDEN. The gentleman yields back.
And we will now recognize Congressman Troy Balderson. He is
the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Innovation and
Workforce Development.
Mr. BALDERSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good morning to
everyone on the panel.
My question is for response from the whole panel, each of
you advocated for the importance of supporting small
businesses, and these businesses when they are working as or
with the Federal contractor. The Federal acquisition
regulations are the principal set of rules governing the
government's purchasing process. The system was created to
ensure uniform policies and procedures for acquisition. And
addition, FAR was set in place to determine whether or not the
prime contractor made a good-faith effort to meet its
subcontracting goals. How would each of you alter FAR so that
small businesses could better benefit from partnering with the
Federal Government? From the whole panel, please.
Ms. GUADARRAMA. If I could address that. I think both Mr.
Lansdowne and Ms. Callahan brought up very serious concerns
about the fact that you have small businesses that are
initially included with subcontracting plans and in the end
they are not actually used with it. I think the proposal that
Ms. Callahan came up with, which was to include when you are
looking at evaluation, whether or not they have actually hit
the goals that are out there. Good-faith effort, I think you
can probably have 200 different small businesses in here and we
will all say yes, we have all had the benefit of being part of
a good-faith effort. We have gone to the trade fairs. We have
met with the individuals. That generally has very little to do
with actually having an opportunity to work with the prime. So
if something were actually in place to gauge in terms of the
dollars that they are working with, it would make much more
sense than simply looking at if they have made a good-faith
effort.
In addition to that, what Mr. Lansdowne had also spoken
about in terms of being included initially with it, in my case,
I was working with a contractor who was bidding at a NASA
location. I had a very good reputation out there. They asked me
to go out there and help them actually make the presentation
which I did. Then once they did receive the contract they
decided that there was another company that could probably do
it at a lower price point than I could work with. I think that
happens very routinely to lots of small businesses. And again,
if there were a way to monitor the individuals that were
actually included, the companies included on the small business
plan originally when it is submitted, and then actually see
what is the progress that is being made in working with those
specific companies, it would make a huge difference.
Ms. CALLAHAN. I would like to just add to that because the
subcontracting plan is part of your contract, resilient
contract. And I think often it is overlooked in the CPARs,
which is the Contractor Performance Assessment Report. There is
an item that asks about small business subcontracting. So if
you really want to kind of put some teeth into this, make sure
that looking at the subcontracting plan, I think today these
contracting officers may not--I am not going to say they are
not, some may be, others are not--looking at that
subcontracting plan and its compliance to the subcontracting
plan.
Mr. DEPACE. I think like we have all said, you know, being
able to work on countless projects. We have all spent thousands
and thousands of dollars bidding on projects. Maybe my company
does 100 projects a year and we bid on 5,000 to 6,000. Being
named as a subcontractor from the start would be an advantage
that would give us an opportunity to work with these things.
Making sure that those commitments are met. We have all gone to
various large contractors' meetings. We have been invited on
projects and then all of a sudden somebody comes in and said I
have done this here or I can do this here and it really limits
our ability locally to support local labor. It limits our
ability to continue to grow in the marketplace. And somebody is
just taking the scope and the specification documents that we
have pined over for a long period of time and just put a number
to it. And it is quite disheartening sometimes.
Mr. LANSDOWNE. And lastly, I would agree with all my
colleagues here. Being recognized, specifically by company
name, is very, very important. Instead of checking a box for
8(a) or checking a box for one of the socioeconomic programs
would be very, very helpful. One of the experiences that we had
was after the award of the contract we were then asked for a
best and final offer after the government award. And to your
point, there is no way you can--what do you say? Who do you say
it to? As a subcontractor, you do not exist pretty much in the
eyes of the government because the actual--contractually, it is
with the prime contractor. So to put some teeth in the act to
list the contractor by name, back to empowering the OSDBU to be
able to not take over the contracting officer role but
certainly work alongside because they are overburdened. I will
say it again. They probably applaud here to hear me say that
today. To help them to monitor and to empower them to take
action when these things are not being met.
Mr. BALDERSON. Thank you all very much.
Chairman GOLDEN. The gentleman yields back.
And I am going to do a second round of questions. I know
that Mr. Stauber would like to as well.
Ms. Guadarrama, I want to ask you, you were just
describing, let's throw out some hypothetical numbers that
might be small but maybe people can wrap their minds around
easily. If you as a subcontractor help in a bid and maybe said
you can do some work for $100,000 and then the prime uses those
figures to put out like a million dollar bid and wins the
contract and then they turn around and go with another
subcontractor who says they will do the work for $50,000, does
that save taxpayers $50,000 or is that just added profit for
the prime?
Ms. GUADARRAMA. I think it is just added profit for the
prime. The dollar amount that was in the contract is still in
the contract for the full amount.
Chairman GOLDEN. It is locked in. Yeah.
Ms. GUADARRAMA. And if anything, the taxpayer is probably
being shortchanged on the type of value that the original
company that was added into the contract, the experience that
they could bring, they are probably losing that.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you. Probably a naive question. I
just wanted to get that one on the record.
Mr. DePace, I wanted to ask you a little bit. You were
talking about the construction contracts and retainage. This
sounds to me like some construction workers or even just other
small subcontracting businesses sometimes being asked to work
essentially for nothing and that their retainage itself is
greater than they might actually get out of the work at the end
of the day. Is that correct?
Mr. DEPACE. Yeah, definitely. I mean, there are a lot of
facets to that question. I mean, prompt payment is truly
important, and by the time you are in the construction process
and get a requisition through and it is approved, and if the
Federal Government is taking 150 days to pay, by the time that
cycles starts we are almost 6 months into the process.
Retainage is even worse than that. Sometimes as in
infrastructure or a preliminary contractor we could be working
on large transportation projects where we are performing the
work within the first 6 months of the period and substantial
completion or satisfactory completion of the work is not done
for 36 months. So that 5 or 10 percent is held for that
extended period of time.
Chairman GOLDEN. It is hard to make payment, too, probably.
Mr. DEPACE. Yeah, I mean, it all trickles down, especially
being union workforce, we have to pay health and benefits. We
have a $50,000 a week salary that we need to constantly meet.
We have manufacturers that we need to pay and, you know, we
have net 30 terms with them. It does not matter when we get
paid, so it causes all of us to have, you know, large general
operating accounts. And small businesses that do not understand
that practice while working in the Federal Government do seem
to fail because they do not understand the cash flow
negativity.
Chairman GOLDEN. Well, thank you for that, for taking care
of your workers.
Mr. Lansdowne, I wanted to ask you a question here. You
have made us aware that the Montgomery County Chamber of
Commerce has a program called the Veteran Institute for
Procurement. Can you tell us a little bit about the program and
the benefit it provides?
Mr. LANSDOWNE. Sure. It is a program for free. And yes, I
say it is free. The expense for the actual participants on the
service-disabled veteran-owned and veteran-owned small
businesses, the only cost is the travel to and from there.
There are three platforms by which they can get involved to get
started, to grow, even to do business outside of the United
States, both Federal and commercial. This offers for them the
benefit of collaborating because in small business, you feel
like sometimes you are on an island by yourself. So it provides
other business owners with that venue. It helps them with
processes, internally to strengthen those processes such as HR,
accounting, all those kinds of things to help them move along.
So through that program, which is a 3-day, 27-hour program
certificate for the participants at the C-level, principal
level, ownership level of those corporations. So it creates a
great venue. Over 1,300 companies have graduated from the
program, and it has caused some great results.
Chairman GOLDEN. It sounds like a very worthy program.
Thank you for that.
I think I am going to go ahead and turn it over to the
others who have questions. But I did want to note, you know,
Mr. DePace, on the issue of prompt payment, you made some
reference to this. I know that a couple of our Committee
members here, including the Ranking Member, have done some good
work on the National Defense Authorization Act that we just
passed out of the House last week, so I am sure maybe he would
like the opportunity to talk with you a little bit about that
as well.
Mr. STAUBER. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I am sitting here and listening to Mr. Lansdowne, you talk
about after a prime has been awarded the contract they come to
the small business subcontractor and ask for their last best
offer. I cannot imagine that. To me, it does not make sense.
And as Ms. Guadarrama talked about, they have a subcontractor
that is awarded the bid with the prime and then they ask for
the last best or bring another contractor in there, assuming
they are going to be cheaper. And as you stated, ma'am, it is
not. The contractor, the prime still gets that. And I just,
only from looking at this situation from outside this city, it
is outrageous. And so for me, like I said, cash flow, Mr.
DePace, as you talked about small businesses, that is part of
keeping them sustainable. And for the Federal Government to not
pay you for 150 days, and sometimes even longer because you
missed checking a box or what have you, that is outrageous.
It is such a privilege for me to serve, to hear this
because we need to bring this back to Main Street America.
Fundamentally, it does not smell, does not look right for small
businesses. And I will tell you what. For me, we know we need
changes, and I would ask that, and the Ranking Member and I are
going to get together on this and make some changes. And you
know, the changes that we make do not have to take 5 or 10
years. This needs to be as immediate as possible to sustain our
small businesses, to make sure, Mr. DePace, that your business
stays intact paying your employees a good wage. That is
fundamentally important that we do that. And I am convinced
that the Chair is with me on this and we are going to look at
taking some of your testimony and changing it because I do not
like to have to wait for the pace of government. Because if you
get outside this city, the pace of government is too slow.
Let's use it as the pace of small business, everyday men and
women in small business. That is what I want to do with you,
Mr. Chair, to be able to take this and make a change to benefit
and ensure that our small businesses remain a vital part of
contracting. Thank you.
Chairman GOLDEN. Amen to that. I am with you.
Rep. Balderson, did you want to ask any more questions?
Mr. BALDERSON. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Callahan, this would be directed to you.
In your experience working with large prime contractors, do
you think primes will support the solutions identified today,
specifically eliminating the good-faith standard?
Ms. CALLAHAN. I think that if they are good players in this
they should have no issue with that. It is the bad players that
will raise the flag, raise the issues. But I think in good
players, not a problem.
Mr. BALDERSON. Okay. And Mr. DePace, my question for you is
there a reason why the Miller Act currently does not extend to
the public-private partnership or P3s?
Mr. DEPACE. It is just very unambiguous in terms of surety
bonding. And just like the question you asked Ms. Callahan,
surety bonding really is a process that allows us to have a
lowest responsible bidder, and I think all of us here at this
table, you know, fight the fact of something called, you know,
lowest bidder. By ensuring that P3s are surety bonded, it would
allow a higher level of responsibility on those processes. And
we want to take that ambiguity out of the Miller Act.
Mr. BALDERSON. Thank you.
I yield back my remaining time, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you very much.
I also wanted to ask, Ms. Callahan, you know, I think it is
clear the Ranking Member is worked up about this. I think it is
very unfortunate that this is happening with the issue of
subcontractors sometimes getting cut out. This came out, like I
said, earlier in a Full Committee hearing just last week. But
you did kind of talk a little bit about the issue of like a
change package coming out. What are some of the best practices
on the front end that we might also look at, let's say, in
terms of good contracting, you know, practice at SBA or other
Federal agencies to try and make sure that those change
packages do not have to occur as frequently? I mean, there must
be a way to try and do this so there is more certainty for a
prime so that they are not put into that position. If you do
not have any recommendations, do not worry about it, but----
Ms. CALLAHAN. You know, in thinking about your question,
when you are a large prime contractor, you are building a team
of small businesses. And it is part of your response and the
solicitation. And having the teaming agreements to really
articulate what you are expecting from the partner. And then
that company should be put in your subcontracting plan. You
identify that company and the value they are bringing to the
team. Because they are helping you win because they are
bringing a special skill niche to that team, filling in the
gaps. So I think that is an area that we really become focused.
And who are those teaming partners, looking at those
solicitations and ensuring that there is compliance?
Chairman GOLDEN. That is perfect. I mean, I think I just
gave you an opportunity to talk a little bit about what the
government can do on the front end but I think you kind of went
right to saying it is on the prime and that we should be
ensuring that subcontractors that work hard to be a part of the
bid get an opportunity to be a part of the work crew. All
right. I think we all agree on that.
Do you have any more questions?
Mr. STAUBER. I will just reiterate, thanks for sharing your
expertise today and I will reiterate this, that the Ranking
Member and I have heard loud and clear from your experience on
what we can do, and again, the pace of government is not
allowed with the Ranking Member here. So, the Chair and the
Ranking Member. So I appreciate your time and your talents and
keep up the good work.
Chairman GOLDEN. With that I want to thank all the
witnesses for taking time out of your schedules to be with us
today and sharing your thoughts.
We know here that small businesses across the country
provide quality performance, efficiency, and are constantly
creating new products and services. That is why American
taxpayers benefit when the Federal Government works and does
business with small firms.
And I want to thank the witnesses for their testimony. Your
suggestions are going to help us develop policies that will
make it easier, not harder, for small businesses to get the
contracting opportunities that we want them to, and I look
forward to working with Congressman Stauber on that.
I would ask unanimous consent that members have 5
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
And if there is no further business to come before the
Committee, we are adjourned. Thank you all very much.
[Whereupon, at 11:10 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]