- SUCCESSES AND UNFINISHED BUSINESS IN THE WESTERN BALKANS
[Senate Hearing 116-108]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-108
SUCCESSES AND UNFINISHED BUSINESS
IN THE WESTERN BALKANS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON EUROPE AND
REGIONAL SECURITY COOPERATION
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
OCTOBER 23, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Relations
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web:
http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
38-990 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho, Chairman
MARCO RUBIO, Florida
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
JEANNE SHAHEEN, New Hampshire
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
CHRISTOPHER A. COONS, Delaware
LINDSEY GRAHAM, South Carolina
TOM UDALL, New Mexico
JOHNNY ISAKSON, Georgia
CHRISTOPHER MURPHY, Connecticut
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
TIM KAINE, Virginia
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
TODD, YOUNG, Indiana
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
TED CRUZ, Texas
Christopher M. Socha, Staff Director
Jessica Lewis, Democratic Staff Director
John Dutton, Chief Clerk
SUBCOMMITTEE ON EUROPE AND
REGIONAL SECURITY COOPERATION
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin, Chairman
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
JEANNE SHAHEEN, New Hampshire
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
CHRISTOPHER MURPHY, Connecticut
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
CHRISTOPHER A. COONS, Delaware
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Johnson, Hon. Ron, U.S. Senator From Wisconsin...................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
1
Shaheen, Hon. Jeanne, U.S. Senator From New Hampshire............
2
Prepared statement...........................................
2
Palmer, Matthew A., Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of
European and Eurasian Affairs, U.S. Department of State,
Washington, DC.................................................
4
Prepared statement...........................................
6
Bugajski, Janusz, Senior Fellow, Center for European Policy
Analysis (CEPA), Washington, DC................................
23
Prepared statement...........................................
25
Ruge, Majda, Fellow, Foreign Policy Institute, Johns Hopkins
University, Washington, DC.....................................
29
Prepared statement...........................................
30
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
Responses of Deputy Assistant Secretary Matthew A. Palmer to
Questions Submitted by Ranking Member Robert Menendez..........
46
(iii)
SUCCESSES AND UNFINISHED BUSINESS
IN THE WESTERN BALKANS
----------
WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 23, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee on Europe and
Regional Security Cooperation,
Committee on Foreign Relations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:30 p.m., in
room SD-419, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Ron Johnson,
chairman of the subcommittee, presiding.
Present: Senators Johnson [presiding], Barrasso, Risch,
Shaheen, and Murphy.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. RON JOHNSON,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WISCONSIN
Senator Johnson. Good afternoon. This hearing is called to
order.
I want to, first of all, thank the witnesses for taking the
time for your attendance, for your thoughtful testimony, and
look forward to hearing your oral testimony and your answers to
our questions.
We do have a vote scheduled for 2:45. I spoke with our
floor manager, and she said she wants it wrapped up by 3:30.
So, what I will do is, I will just ask that my opening--my
written opening statement be entered in the record.
[The prepared statement of Senator Johnson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Senator Ron Johnson
Good afternoon and welcome.
The Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on Europe and Regional
Security Cooperation is meeting today to examine recent developments
and opportunities for the future in the Western Balkans. We will hear
from the Administration and a private panel on U.S. interests and
policy options in the region.
Yesterday, for the second time in 2 years, I had the honor of
presiding over the Senate as we voted overwhelmingly to welcome a
Western Balkans nation into NATO. In 2017, the Senate voted 97-2 to
approve Montenegro's accession. Yesterday, North Macedonia was welcomed
into the alliance by a vote of 91-2. These near unanimous decisions
illustrate the bipartisan consensus on the importance of integrating
the Western Balkans into the transatlantic community.
In North Macedonia's case, the path to NATO was paved by courageous
political leadership in Greece and North Macedonia in signing the
Prespa agreement, significant economic and political reforms, and
determined U.S. diplomacy in the region. It was a significant
achievement and has created a palpable sense of momentum behind
resolving some of the region's remaining issues--in particular,
relations between Serbia and Kosovo and political deadlock in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Over the past several years, I have spent considerable time with
Serbian and Kosovar leaders and I am optimistic that both sides will
show the leadership and flexibility to make the hard choices necessary
to secure a more prosperous future for their people. Earlier this
month, President Trump signaled his desire to push forward on a
resolution by naming U.S. Ambassador to Germany Richard Grenell, as his
special presidential envoy for peace talks between Serbia and Kosovo
and Deputy Assistant Secretary Matthew Palmer as special representative
for the Western Balkans. Key pieces are in place, but this opportunity
will likely disappear if the parties do not pursue it with sufficient
urgency.
I urge Kosovo's next government to remove the tariffs imposed last
year and to treat negotiations with Serbia as one of its highest
priorities. Both Serbia and Kosovo will need to be flexible if a
solution is to be found. It is also critical that the EU redouble its
efforts. France's veto against opening EU accession negotiations with
North Macedonia and Albania is disappointing and sends the wrong
message to the region. Normalization of relations between Serbia and
Kosovo would remove a significant agitant in the region and continue
its momentum toward transatlantic integration.
Recent history has shown with remarkable clarity the impact of EU
and U.S. engagement in the Western Balkans. When countries in the
region see the EU and NATO as real possibilities, they have been
willing to implement the difficult political and economic reforms
required for membership. When the West's attention has faltered,
reforms have stalled and corruption has re-entrenched. Much is at
stake. Even a cursory glance at the 20th century shows that stability
in the Western Balkans should be a high priority. This hearing will
explore how we can sustain the current positive momentum in the region.
Senator Johnson. But, I do just want to briefly say that
the Balkans is an important region. There have been some real
turmoil that has spring out of that. I got involved, as,
obviously, a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee,
but particularly with Assistant Secretary Wes Mitchell asking
me to go there and pay attention. And I think, to a certain
extent, that is what this hearing is about. And it is
incredibly important that we, as the United States of America,
expresses the fact that we believe that is an important region,
we have to pay attention to it, we want to do everything we can
for the people of that region to enjoy safety, security, and
prosperity. It is what everybody around the globe wants. That
is what we want for them. So, that, from my standpoint, is what
America represents. It is that kind of leadership, when we
promote those types of values and we help countries achieve
what they really are trying to strive to achieve.
With that, I will turn it over to our Ranking Member,
Senator Shaheen.
STATEMENT OF HON. JEANNE SHAHEEN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NEW HAMPSHIRE
Senator Shaheen. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you for holding this hearing on, as you point out, a very
important region of the world.
And I will echo all of your comments and submit my full
statement for the record.
[The prepared statement of Senator Shaheen follows:]
Prepared Statement of Senator Jeanne Shaheen
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling this important
hearing, and thank you to the three experts we have before us today for
their work on the Balkans, and for taking the time to discuss a region
which I truly believe holds great promise.
As co-chair of the NATO observer group, it gives me
great pleasure to announce that yesterday, the Senate voted
overwhelmingly to ratify North Macedonia's entry into NATO as the
alliance's 30th member.
I also want to take the opportunity to express my great
disappointment with the European Council's strategic error in blocking
the start of accession talks for North Macedonia and Albania.
With this, the EU has not only failed to recognize
significant reform efforts in both countries, it has also dealt a heavy
blow to all reform-oriented governments in the Western Balkans.
I hope the governments of France, the Netherlands and
Denmark reconsider their decision--a decision that undermines the
credibility of the EU and exposes the Balkans to further encroachment
by Russia and other malign influences.
The United States played a leading role in brokering
peace in the Balkans two decades ago, and while it is critical for the
EU to take the lead on integration, it is likewise important that we
continue to support the region's efforts toward prosperity, rule of law
and good governance.
The most recent evidence of this progress was when the
leaders of Greece and North Macedonia entered into the Prespa
Agreement.
I want to thank Ambassadors Jess Baily and Geoff Pyatt
for their tremendous diplomatic efforts in helping the two countries
reach this agreement.
It demonstrated that conflicts can be resolved through
diplomacy, and that our countries are all stronger when we are in
alliance together.
But, these efforts will only be as successful as Balkan
leaders will allow them to be.
Balkan countries must work to protect themselves from
Russian, Chinese and other malign influence by continuing down the path
of reform, fighting corruption and creating economic opportunities for
their people.
Balkan leaders and citizens, alike, must redouble their
efforts to prioritize the future and not waste time rehashing the past.
They must kick-start prosperity and growth by leveraging technology,
diversifying energy sources, increasing linkages and pulling the region
firmly together; and they must tackle issues threatening the region
from within like corruption, criminality and violent religious and
nationalist extremism.
I believe that now is the time for the United States to
reassert its leadership role in the region.
We must seize the opportunity to help create a
democratic, secure and prosperous Balkans firmly aligned to the West.
The issues before us--democracy, rule of law,
prosperity, and good governance--are not new. We have been working on
them together for more than two decades. But today, with growing
challenges to Europe's south and in the East, the Balkans sits in the
balance.
I look forward to the testimony of our distinguished
witnesses and to hearing their perspectives on how the United States
can best work with the region to meet these challenges.
Senator Shaheen. But, I do just want to point out that,
yesterday, the Senate overwhelmingly voted to ratify North
Macedonia's interest--entry into NATO as the alliance's 30th
member, and also express my real concern about the effort, to
date, by France and other countries in Europe to block
secession--accession into the EU by the Republic of North
Macedonia and Albania. I think one of the things that is really
important as we think about the future of this--the Western
Balkans is that we provide an option for the Balkans to look
West, not to look back toward Russia and the East, and that,
whenever we fail in that opportunity, as I think the EU did
recently, that it sends a very strong message to the Western
Balkans that they should not continue with the reforms, they
should not continue to look West and to embrace the values of
the West.
So, I just wanted to point that out. That is in my opening
statement. And I look forward to the hearing.
Thank you, again, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Johnson. Thank you, Senator Shaheen. And, by the
way, completely agree. It is--it really is--the ability to join
NATO, to join the EU, that is what provides the incentive for
these countries to enact and pass sometimes very difficult
reform for those countries, but necessary if they are--they
need the rule of law to attract to attract Western investment.
So, I could not agree more. I was actually pretty honored to be
in the presiding chair both for the accession vote of
Montenegro and for North Macedonia, so we really welcome them
to NATO.
Our first witness is Mr. Matthew Palmer. Mr. Palmer is
Deputy Assistant Secretary and Special Representative for the
Western Balkans at the State Department. Mr. Palmer is a career
member of the U.S. Senior Foreign Service, with over 22 years
of experience under six U.S. administrations. His previous
postings include Director for South Central European Affairs,
Political Counselor at the U.S. Embassy in Belgrade, and Deputy
Director for Mainland Southeast Asia. Mr. Palmer also served as
Director for Europe at the National Security Council under
President George W. Bush. He speaks Serbian, Greek, and
Japanese.
Mr. Palmer.
STATEMENT OF MATTHEW A. PALMER, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY,
BUREAU OF EUROPEAN AND EURASIAN AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
STATE, WASHINGTON, DC
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Shaheen, thank you
for inviting me to appear before you today to discuss the
successes and challenges faced by the countries of the Western
Balkans on their path toward Euro-Atlantic integration.
I would especially like to thank the members of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee for their leadership, for your
leadership, which paved the way for the Senate's approval of
North Macedonia's NATO accession protocol. That step is
critical to demonstrating our ongoing support for the Euro-
Atlantic integration aspirations of North Macedonia and the
wider region.
For the past 30 years, the United States has joined our
European allies and partners in working to fulfill our shared
vision of a strong and free Europe. Over the last decade, our
efforts have started to bear fruit, and we are seeing examples
of progress that bring the region closer to the Euro-Atlantic
family.
One has to look no further than at North Macedonia to see
an example of that progress. Since assuming office in June
2017, the government of Prime Minister Zoran Zaev has not only
signed a treaty of friendship, good neighborliness, and
cooperation with Bulgaria, but also negotiated the historic
Prespa Agreement with Greece, arguably the most significant
purely diplomatic achievement in the region since the Dayton
Peace Accords.
The Prespa Agreement resolved the longstanding name dispute
between the two countries and paved the way for North Macedonia
to become the 30th ally in NATO and eventually to join the
European Union. It also created a model other leaders in the
Western Balkans can follow to break through the nationalistic
and cultural barriers that have held the region back for
decades.
With its peaceful, multiethnic society and fast-growing
economy, Montenegro has emerged as a regional leader.
Montenegro has consistently punched above its weight in its
commitment to global security, and joining NATO in 2017 was a
significant and well-deserved step forward.
Albania has made tremendous strides in its reform path
since joining NATO in 2009, implementing unprecedented judicial
reforms and indicting high-profile criminal suspects.
Despite these successes, the remaining challenges to Euro-
Atlantic integration and regional stability are considerable.
We were profoundly disappointed with the failure of EU member
states to approve opening accession negotiations with North
Macedonia and Albania last week in Brussels. Although we are
not members of the European Union, we agree with the European
Commission's May 29 assessment that both countries have made
significant reform progress, meeting the European Council's
conditions and laying a solid foundation to continue reforms
during the accession process.
The European Council's inaction undercuts EU credibility in
the region, risks the continued implementation of the Prespa
Agreement, demotivates leaders ready to make hard reforms, and
creates a leadership void that Russia, China, and others would
be more than happy to fill.
Secretary Pompeo appointed me to serve as his Special
Representative for the Western Balkans to help tackle these
challenges, underscore the U.S. commitment to the region,
deepen cooperation with our European partners, and make clear
that there is a path to Euro-Atlantic integration, one that is
achievable, even if it is difficult.
One of my top priorities will be to work with President
Trump's Special Presidential Envoy for Serbia and Kosovo Peace
Negotiations, Ambassador Richard Grenell, to help the two
countries reach a comprehensive agreement on normalization.
We expect that the new government in Kosovo will
demonstrate its commitment to this shared goal by suspending
the tariffs imposed on Serbian and Bosnian imports that have
damaged Kosovo's international standing. Serbia, in turn, must
cease its campaign to delegitimize Kosovo in the international
community. This has undermined international law enforcement
cooperation and soured the atmosphere for compromise.
In Bosnia, we are supporting efforts to reach agreement on
a compromise that allows for government formation at all
levels, as well as its submission of the Annual National
Program to NATO. We will continue to call out parochial,
nationalistic, and risk-averse leaders, at both the entity and
state levels, who do little to help ordinary citizens, while
cultivating the new generation of political leaders, at the
cantonal and municipal levels, who have a stake in the future
of the country and the will to succeed.
While Montenegro is the frontrunner within the region to
join the EU, it must stay focused and accelerate efforts to
implement necessary reforms. This includes strengthening the
rule of law and media freedom, and tackling organized crime and
corruption.
While the United States supports the desire of the people
and the governments of the Western Balkans for a more secure,
prosperous, and democratic future, the same cannot be said of
all the external actors operating in the region. Russia rejects
the post-Cold War settlement in Europe and is trying to push
back on it with a variety of tools, overt and covert, in order
to incite divisions and forestall the region's Euro-Atlantic
integration. Chinese authorities have been insinuating
themselves in the region through the ``17+1'' and the Belt and
Road Initiatives, as well as through their investment in
strategic industries, including information and physical
infrastructure, creating new political and economic
vulnerabilities. To support the countries of the Western
Balkans, we need to increase our own engagement with the region
and reenergize our relationships with these important partners.
But, messaging is not enough. We need to increase our own
presence and our investment in the region. It is indisputable
that congressional support has been instrumental in our
successful partnership with the people and governments of the
region. Recent visits from congressional delegations to
Croatia, Kosovo, Montenegro, and Serbia have helped to
reinforce our shared values and demonstrate our strong support
for reforms. We hope to see additional visits from Congress in
the future and ask for your help in supporting U.S. businesses
as they look for opportunities in the region.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Shaheen, thank you again for
the opportunity to meet with you today to discuss our
relationship with the Western Balkans and our continued
cooperation in the region. And I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Palmer follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. Matthew Palmer
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Shaheen, and members of the Committee,
thank you for inviting me to appear before you today to discuss the
current situation in the Western Balkans and the successes and
challenges faced by the countries there on their path toward Euro-
Atlantic integration. I would especially like to thank the members of
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee for their leadership, which
paved the way for the Senate's ratification of North Macedonia's NATO
Accession Protocol. Continued progress on North Macedonia's NATO
accession is critical to demonstrating our ongoing support for the
country's and the region's Euro-Atlantic integration aspirations.
For the past 30 years, the United States has joined our European
Allies and partners in working to fulfill our shared vision of a
``strong and free Europe.'' Over the last decade, many of our efforts
have started to bear fruit. We are now seeing examples of extraordinary
progress that bring the region closer to the Euro-Atlantic family.
One has to look no farther than at North Macedonia to see an
example of that progress. Within 2 months of assuming office in June
2017, the government of Prime Minister Zoran Zaev was able to negotiate
and sign a Treaty of Friendship, Good-neighborliness, and Cooperation
with Bulgaria that recognizes the already strong ties between the two
countries and opens the door to even closer cooperation going forward
in areas as diverse as infrastructure and culture. This agreement
demonstrated that where there is political will, it is possible for
differences between neighbors to be resolved peacefully, and it paved
the way for the historic June 2018 Prespa Agreement between North
Macedonia and Greece. Arguably the most significant purely diplomatic
achievement in South-Eastern Europe since the Dayton Peace Accords, the
Prespa Agreement resolved the long-standing name dispute between the
two countries and paved the way for North Macedonia to become the 30th
Ally in NATO and to eventually join the European Union. Under the
courageous and forward leaning leadership of Prime Minister Zaev and
former Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras, the Prespa Agreement
created a model other leaders in the Western Balkans can follow to
break through the nationalistic and cultural barriers that have held
the region back for decades.
With its peaceful multi-ethnic coexistence, growing economy, and
willingness to work with Kosovo in 2018 to implement the 2015 border
demarcation agreement between the two countries, Montenegro has emerged
as a leader and a role model for other countries in the region. It has
consistently punched above its weight in its commitment to global
security, and joining NATO in 2017 was a huge and well-deserved step
forward for the country. This new NATO member has proven to be a
stalwart ally, putting its troops in harm's way in a number of NATO-led
missions and making steady progress in fulfilling the Wales 2 percent/
20 percent pledge.
In 2016, Montenegro thwarted a brazen coup attempt aimed at
undermining Montenegrin democracy. This coup attempt was only one prong
of Russia's efforts to destabilize the country; Russia also unleashed a
pervasive anti-NATO disinformation campaign to thwart Montenegro's NATO
accession and continues to subject the country to broad-scale hybrid
attacks on a daily basis. Thanks to our direct cybersecurity
cooperation with Montenegro, we have been able to develop patches
against the latest Russian malware that now protect billions of devices
worldwide. On May 9, a Montenegrin court found two Russian GRU officers
guilty of attempted terrorism during the 2016 coup attempt, laying bare
Moscow's blatant attempt to destabilize an independent European
country. The open and transparent trial represents an important step
forward for the rule of law and is an example of Montenegro's
resiliency.
There are a number of other notable successes throughout the region
worth mentioning. Our NATO Ally Albania has made tremendous strides on
its reform path, implementing unprecedented judicial reforms to root
out endemic corruption. Reforms required the vetting of all 800 judges
and prosecutors for unexplained wealth, organized-crime ties, and
competence. Only 43 percent of the 143 jurists vetted so far have
passed, confirming the old justice system's deep corruption and links
to organized crime. Albania also established two new judicial oversight
bodies, the High Judicial Council and High Prosecutorial Council, to
appoint, govern and discipline judges and prosecutors; a key benchmark
in justice reform implementation. The country is now on the cusp of
establishing a new independent special anticorruption prosecution
office and court (SPAK) and National Bureau of Investigation (NBI),
whose job it will be to investigate corruption, organized crime, and
crimes of high officials. And it has taken steps to crack down on
previously untouchable organized crime bosses, as evidenced by the
convictions of high profile drug kingpin Klement Balili and notorious
crime boss Emiljano Shullazi.
Croatia not only became a NATO Ally in 2009, but also joined the EU
in 2013. It will be the next country to hold the Presidency of the
Council of the European Union from January through June of 2020, during
which time it will host the next major EU summit on the Western Balkans
in Zagreb. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the willingness of the three
presidents to discuss linking government formation with the submission
of the country's Annual National Program to NATO represents a
significant step forward and demonstrates that leaders can make
compromises. These are but a handful of achievements the United States
has supported over the past decade.
While it is important to articulate the successes of the region, no
discussion of the Western Balkans would be complete without addressing
the many challenges to the stability of the region and impediments on
the path to Euro-Atlantic integration. We are profoundly disappointed
with the failure of EU member states to approve opening accession
negotiations with North Macedonia and Albania last week in Brussels.
Although we are not members of the EU, we agree with the European
Commission's May 29 assessment that both countries have made
significant reform progress, meeting the European Council's conditions
and laying a solid foundation to continue reforms while opening and
closing acquis chapters.
The European Council's inaction last week risks eroding the EU's
credibility not just in the Western Balkans, but throughout Europe and
globally. By not explicitly recognizing the achievements made by North
Macedonia and Albania and continuing to stall their enlargement
progress, the European Council sends a negative signal to other
aspirants that the door to Europe is barred. It also weakens arguments
asserting the utility of enacting difficult reforms and making
courageous compromises necessary to resolve regional disputes and
promote peace and democratic development. Finally, it creates a
leadership void that Russia, China, and others are more than happy to
fill.
We remind the EU and its member states of their statements in
Thessaloniki in 2003 and in Sofia in 2018 that there is a clear
``European perspective'' for all six Western Balkan aspirants to join
the EU, based on firm, established criteria. The EU member states
should clearly outline real and tangible reforms North Macedonia and
Albania can achieve in the short term that will lead to a more positive
outcome before the EU-Western Balkans summit in Zagreb in May 2020.
Secretary Pompeo appointed me to serve as his Special
Representative for the Western Balkans to underscore the U.S.
commitment to the region and deepen cooperation with our European
partners to make clear there is a path to Euro-Atlantic integration
that is achievable, even if it is difficult. I will focus my efforts on
anchoring the region to the West, working with governments to advance
reforms and strengthen them against outside malign influences, as well
as helping them overcome issues that hold them back from their European
and Euro-Atlantic aspirations.
One of our top priorities that has a significant impact on the
entire region and trans-Atlantic security, is the normalization of
relations between Serbia and Kosovo. With negotiations at a standstill,
both countries risk squandering the best chance in a generation to
normalize relations and move toward a more secure and prosperous
future. Because of the strategic importance of this issue and the
historic and limited window of opportunity for Serbia and Kosovo to
reach a comprehensive agreement, President Trump has also appointed
U.S. Ambassador to Germany, Richard Grenell as the Special Presidential
Envoy for Serbia and Kosovo Peace Negotiations. Together, Ambassador
Grenell and I will work toward helping the parties reach a
comprehensive agreement on normalization. With enhanced political
engagement as well as the pursuit of business and commercial
incentives, we will endeavor to help the parties themselves find a
locally-owned agreement that is durable, implementable, and increases
regional stability. By reaching such an agreement, the parties can
unlock the inherent untapped economic potential that comes with peace
and integration. It is our hope this more robust approach that
highlights the economic benefits of progress will help encourage
Belgrade and Pristina to find a political settlement.
Our message to leaders in both Belgrade and Pristina is clear: you
have an opportunity to refocus on your strategic interest by removing
barriers to negotiations, refraining from engaging in provocative
actions, and returning to the negotiating table with a spirit of
flexibility and readiness to compromise. We expect that the new
government in Kosovo will demonstrate its commitment to these shared
goals by suspending the tariffs imposed on Serbian and Bosnian imports
that have damaged Kosovo's international standing. The next government
should also make a clear and compelling case to the citizens of Kosovo
about the importance of returning to the Dialogue negotiations.
Serbia, in turn, must cease its campaign to delegitimize Kosovo in
the international community. Through its campaign to incentivize
countries to withdraw recognition of Kosovo and block its membership in
international organizations such as INTERPOL, Belgrade has undermined
international law enforcement cooperation and soured the atmosphere for
compromise. This impedes progress toward an agreement that Serbia needs
to reach its own strategic goal of integration with Europe. We are
convinced that President Vucic is ready to negotiate an agreement. Once
Serbia and Kosovo take these steps, we stand ready to work with him to
explore options that will help him build support among the Serbian
people for normalization of relations with Kosovo.
Turning to Bosnia and Herzegovina, we are supporting efforts to
reach agreement or a compromise that allows for government formation at
all levels as well as submission of Bosnia's ANP to NATO. We continue
to find leadership at both the entity and state levels to be
disappointing, parochial, nationalistic, and risk-averse, doing little
to help ordinary citizens. As a new generation of political leaders
emerge at the cantonal and municipal levels, particularly in the
Sarajevo Canton, there is reason to be hopeful. We continue to be
optimistic that Bosnia and Herzegovina can succeed, and as a guarantor
of the Dayton Peace Accords, we remain committed to the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the country.
While Montenegro is the front runner within the region to join the
EU, it must accelerate efforts to implement necessary reforms, such as
strengthening the rule of law and tackling organized crime and
corruption. We are concerned that Montenegro has backslid on media
freedom in light of government interference in the public broadcaster's
management and outstanding unsolved cases of attacks on journalists. We
encourage the government to do more to demonstrate that Montenegro
values and protects journalists, including refraining from incendiary
language that encourages hostility toward journalists and imposing
meaningful sentences for those who commit attacks on journalist and
media property.
The peoples of the Western Balkans and their governments have made
clear what they want--a more secure, prosperous, and democratic future
for themselves and the entire the region. The United States fully
supports these efforts--something we cannot say of all the external
actors that increasingly see the region as ripe for engagement and
interference. Some of these actors have very different values and very
different visions for the future of the region. Russia rejects the
post-Cold War settlement in Europe and is trying to push back on it
with a variety of tools, overt and covert, in order to forestall the
region's Euro-Atlantic integration. It seeks to incite divisions and
chaos. Chinese authorities have been insinuating themselves in the
region through their ``17+1'' and ``Belt and Road'' initiatives, as
well as their investment in strategic industries and information and
physical infrastructure, creating new political and economic
vulnerabilities.
Turkish engagement and influence is present across the Western
Balkans--primarily focused in Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH),
Albania and North Macedonia--and appears to be increasing in scale and
scope in Montenegro as well. Under President Erdogan, Turkey has
invested heavily in the region in an effort to expand its political,
cultural and economic foothold. It has provided development aid,
invested in major infrastructure projects, and restored mosques. We
welcome Turkey's engagement when it serves a constructive role in
helping the countries of the Western Balkans achieve their stated goal
of Euro-Atlantic integration. Also, given Turkey's historical role in
the region and deepening economic ties, Turkey's support of the Kosovo-
Serbia Dialogue and Prespa Agreement is particularly important.
To support the countries of the Western Balkans own stated goals,
we need to increase our own engagement and investment in the region and
re-energize partnerships with these important partners. The countries
of the Western Balkans need to know what they will get--and what they
stand to lose--from the ``deals'' Moscow and Beijing peddle. But
messaging is not enough; we need to increase American private sector
presence and investment in the region. It is indisputable that
congressional support has been instrumental in our successful
partnership with the people and the governments of the region. Recent
visits from congressional delegations to Croatia, Kosovo, Montenegro,
and Serbia have helped to reinforce our shared values and demonstrate
our strong support for reforms. We hope to see additional visits from
Congress in the future and ask for your help in supporting U.S.
businesses as they look for opportunities in the region.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Shaheen, and distinguished members of
this Subcommittee, thank you, again, for the opportunity to meet with
you today to discuss our relationship with the Western Balkans and I
look forward to our continued cooperation in the region.
I look forward to your questions.
Senator Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Palmer.
Let me just start out. Let us hone in on Kosovo and Serbia.
With the new elections in Kosovo, they will be forming that
government. Can you just, first, give me your assessment of,
you know, how that has changed the situation? And, again, I--
with means--President Thaci and President Vucic, there is--
those are certainly two leaders that want to do a deal. It is a
difficult situation. There is no doubt about it. There is
nothing easy about this. But, what is your assessment of the
results of the elections in Kosovo?
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Chairman, these were significant elections
for Kosovo, watershed elections in many ways. What you are
looking at is going to be the first post-KLA government in
Kosovo, the first government that does not include one of the
parties headed by one of the major figures from the wars in the
1990s.
Senator Johnson. So, do you view that as a good sign?
Mr. Palmer. I view it as an impulse, on the part of the
people of Kosovo, for change. And it is understandable. There
is a great degree of frustration on the part of the citizens of
Kosovo with the situation in which they find themselves, both
the degree of international isolation, the economic stagnation,
and the failure of Kosovo's governments to make progress on
commitments and promises to fight corruption and crime. There
is certainly a lot of work to do. The LDK, of course, is no
stranger to government, and, at this point, I think most people
are assuming that the next government in Kosovo is likely to
include both the LDK and Vetevendosje. That is the most likely
outcome to this process of government formation. Vetevendosje
is an entirely new player in government. They have been around
for a long time, but this would be the first time that
Vetevendosje takes a share of power. And they are taking a
significant share of power. They came in number one in the
polls. The presumptive Prime Minister is Albin Kurti. I have
known Mr. Kurti for a long time, but how he is going to behave
in government, how he is going to deal with the kind of
responsibility that comes with that sort of office, is unclear
and uncertain at this point.
Senator Johnson. According to news reports, he has somewhat
de-emphasized the dialogue, looking toward longer-term reforms,
putting those in place first. I mean, does that give you a
little concern, in terms of his commitment to solving that
longstanding dispute with Serbia?
Mr. Palmer. I think that what that reflects is an
assessment on the part of those who did well in the October
elections, that what the people are demanding of the next
government is to focus on domestic issues, on employment, on
economic growth, on fighting corruption. And I think there is
truth in that. You will certainly see, when you talk to the
people in Kosovo, when you look at the poll numbers, when you
look at what it is that people are writing in the newspapers or
talking about in the cafes, there is a lot of frustration with
the domestic scene, and desire for change. And that is all well
and good. Kosovo is capable of doing multiple things at the
same time, however. Even as the next government moves on a
domestic agenda, it is entirely capable of simultaneously
reengaging in the dialogue with Serbia and working to achieve a
full normalization agreement with Belgrade that opens up a
European and Euro-Atlantic future for Kosovo.
Senator Johnson. So, you are the State Department's Special
Representative. Ambassador Grenell will be the President's
Special Envoy Representative. How are you two going to work
together? And what do you view the U.S. role in helping those
two sides reach agreement?
Mr. Palmer. I think we are going to work well and closely
together, Mr. Chairman. I just spoke with Ambassador Grenell a
few hours ago. We regularly speak about these issues and
coordinate our message and the strategy for moving things
forward. I know that Ambassador Grenell is especially
interested in identifying commercial business economic
incentives that can be used to help loosen the lid, grease the
skids, whatever metaphor you might want to use for progress on
the political front. And he is engaged already, actively, with
the parties, with the leadership in Belgrade and Pristina, as
well as with the business communities, to identify those
opportunities and push the parties forward in areas where they
can cooperate and compromise on economic and commercial matters
that stand to benefit all of their publics. And this is
something that I think will be enthusiastically received by the
leadership in--on both sides. This does not obviate the need
for a political solution, that long-term Kosovo's future as a
European country can only be secured through an agreement on
normalization with Belgrade. I think that is broadly understood
in Kosovo, as well. But, at least at first, I think a focus on
business and commercial interests can help reframe the issue in
a more positive way.
Senator Johnson. My assumption, right or wrong, has always
been, the public is going to greet any agreement similarly to
the way the public in Greece and now North Macedonia greeted
their leaders' agreement: Will not be real popular. So, I have
always felt the U.S. role really needs to be to provide the
support, post agreement, to make sure that it works out, that,
you know, in 6 months, both Serbians and Kosovars are looking
at that and kind of shrugging their shoulders, ``Why was this
ever a big deal? This is really working out well.'' You know,
hopefully, for Kosovo, they get recognized by the U.N. and
Western investment begins to flow.
What--one incredibly important economic factor is the power
plant in Kosovo. Do you have any updates, in terms of the
financing of that?
Mr. Palmer. My understanding, Senator, is that the
financing is still coming together and that the companies that
are involved remain committed to the project and are looking to
move it forward. There are a number of obstacles that will need
to be overcome in order to arrange the financing. The United
States remains committed to the Kosova e Re project and to
seeing a new power plant constructed in Kosovo. We think it is
important, vitally important, that the next government
demonstrate that it is committed to ensuring the provision of
basic goods and services to the people of Kosovo, and that
includes making sure that the lights stay on. This is something
that we are going to continue to work with the business
community on, as well as with the next Kosovo Government.
Senator Johnson. I do not know the exact dollar figures,
but the savings are so massive in comparison to the cost. You
know, I think the payback would be pretty short. I--it has
always puzzled me why that has been difficult to really get the
financing. I guess my only solution would be, again, just the
uncertainty, lack of agreement with Serbia, and always concern
about rule of law.
Mr. Palmer. I think there are also some particular
challenges, Mr. Chairman, associated with arranging
international financing for a coal plant, which has opponents
that are arguing against the plant, not on the specifics, but
on the general principles.
Senator Johnson. Right.
Thank you.
Senator Shaheen.
Senator Shaheen. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Palmer, I want to pick up on the Serbia-Kosovo
question, as well. And you talked about the good working
relationship that you have with Ambassador Grenell, who has
been appointed by the President to be a Special Envoy to Serbia
and Kosovo on their negotiations. Can you talk specifically
about how you view division of responsibilities with respect to
dealing with Kosovo and Serbia?
Mr. Palmer. I would look at it more as a partnership,
Ranking Member Shaheen, than necessarily a division of
responsibilities. We share the same goal and objective, which
is to promote a more cooperative relationship between Belgrade,
Pristina, restart the dialogue process, get these countries
moving toward an agreement on full normalization. I do think
that Ambassador Grenell is going to be pushing the parties to
move quickly. Right now, they have the attention of the White
House, they have the full focus of not just the administration,
but the President and the White House. That is a very useful
tool, a very useful instrument. That is not forever. And to
take advantage of that, the parties need to demonstrate that
they are prepared to move on an expedited basis to actually
reach some agreements, implement them, and demonstrate that
they are as committed to reconciliation and normalization as we
are.
Senator Shaheen. And so, are there parameters that you and
Ambassador Grenell have discussed with the State Department and
the White House with respect to what we would encourage Serbia
and Kosovo to think about in any negotiated settlement?
Mr. Palmer. I--Ambassador Grenell and I certainly talked
about this as a path forward. And I think that he has had some
initial exploratory conversations in Belgrade and Pristina. We
are going to continue the dialogue. Ambassador Grenell and I
will maintain regular communications. And what we are going to
do is look for opportunities that we can seize and capitalize
on and take advantage of. Certainly, right now, we are
handicapped some by the fact that Kosovo does not have a
government. So, to really engage on some of these difficult
issues, Kosovo is going to need to form that government, they
are going to need to identify the compromises that are
necessary for a working majority to come together in
Parliament, identify a Prime Minister, split up the ministries
between the coalition partners, all the things that go into
that. I think they understand the urgency of this, as well. And
I am hopeful that they will move quickly to put a government in
place. Kosovo has traditionally taken quite a long time to do
this, and we are underscoring for them that time is not on
their side, and they should move urgently to put the government
together and find a path back to the dialogue process.
Senator Shaheen. And so, have we taken a position on land
swaps as a potential tool in settling the dispute?
Mr. Palmer. What we would like to see, Senator, is an
agreement that is durable, one that is locally owned, one that
is salable in both Serbia and Kosovo. I think it is important
to underscore that any agreement that is comprehensive, that is
really full normalization, is multidimensional. There will be a
security component, there will be a political component, there
will be an economic and trade component, there will be a
cultural component, when you look at issues like the status of
orthodox church properties in Kosovo. As to whether the borders
may or may not be part of an overall comprehensive settlement,
that is really up to the parties to decide if that is a viable
path forward.
Senator Shaheen. I appreciate that. However, there are
experts on the Balkans who think that sets a dangerous
precedent, going forward. So, again, do you have a view on
that? Is that something that we should encourage or discourage
as we are talking to the negotiating parties?
Mr. Palmer. I absolutely understand the Pandora's Box
argument that many observers in the Balkans have made about,
you know, ``If you start changing a border here, what about a
border there? Where do you draw the line?'' I think that is a
legitimate concern. And if the parties move in the direction of
discussing these issues, I think that is something that we
would have to work through and see if, in fact, that was a risk
that could be appropriately managed.
I do also believe that the leadership of the parties, who
are the presumptive government in waiting, have also made clear
that that is not their preferred path forward. So, rather than
get too far ahead of the negotiations, what I am focused on
right now, Senator, and where I am working with Ambassador
Grenell, is to identify a path back to the dialogue process.
There is a lot of hoops to jump through and work that needs to
be done before we even get the parties back into a negotiating
process. So, I do not want to get too far ahead of the process
in determining what it is that they can and cannot negotiate
through this dialogue mechanism.
Senator Shaheen. So, if there are two of you working on
behalf of the United States to work with Kosovo and Serbia,
does that mean that we have a very formal role in that
dialogue? Or, again, can you describe a little bit more how
that works? And the reason I ask is because, during the last
talks, after the war in Kosovo, between Serbia and Kosovo, one
of the things that I heard from the EU Ambassador, who was very
engaged in working with Kosovo and Serbia, was that, every day,
Serbia was being called by Putin or someone on behalf of Russia
to discourage them from continuing to participate in any
negotiations. Are we seeing that kind of interference now on
the part of Russia?
Mr. Palmer. Well, I--Senator, I do not think Russia needs
to do that just yet, because there is no dialogue process, and
there has not been a dialogue process that has been moving
forward for almost a year now. I think it goes back to last
November, was the last time they had a dialogue session. In
order to get back to the table, we need our partners--Kosovo--
to commit to this process, to suspend the tariffs that have
been an obstacle to the dialogue process, and return to the
negotiations with Serbia with a dialogue team or a dialogue
representative that is empowered and flexible and ready to
compromise and negotiate. At which point I fully expect Russia
to resume its spoiler role. It is not at all in Russia's
interests that Serbia and Kosovo are reconciled. It is not in
Russia's interest that Serbia and Kosovo normalize their
relationship. The unrecognized status of Kosovo by Serbia is
the single-greatest source of leverage that Moscow has over
Belgrade and Serbia's behavior, and they use that leverage
aggressively.
So, as this process moves forward, we will be very mindful
of Russia's role, and particularly Russian efforts to undermine
the prospects for success.
Senator Shaheen. So, I am out of time, but can I just
follow that line of questioning, Mr. Chairman?
So, what are we doing to prepare for that? And how are we
urging Kosovo and Serbia to look at any potential negotiations
and address Russian interference?
Mr. Palmer. Well, I think what we are doing, among other
things, Senator, is to have this conversation with both parties
right now, to try and identify what the challenges are to
success, and to reinforce, with both Serbia and Kosovo, the
value of these negotiations. These are EU-led negotiations. It
is the--the United States does not have a formal role in the
dialogue process, itself. We are there, we are supportive, we
are encouraging the parties to reach this agreement, but we
also want them to be well aware of the value, what is on offer
for them, why it is important that they secure this agreement
on normalization. This, frankly, is one of the reasons why the
decision by the European Council not to extend the offer to
open accession negotiations with Albania and North Macedonia
last week was so disheartening, because it sends----
Senator Shaheen. Absolutely.
Mr. Palmer.--exactly the wrong message to both Belgrade and
Pristina. That message is, ``You can do difficult things, you
can make hard choices, you can compromise, and you can still be
denied a path forward to Europe.'' And that is a very
unfortunate message to send, and we are going to work with our
European partners to change that message in advance of the May
timeframe that the European Council has identified as the next
decision point on accession negotiations.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you.
I am out of time.
Senator Johnson. Senator Barrasso.
Senator Barrasso. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Appreciate you being here again. It is good to see you.
The--you know, I recently had the honor to visit our
Wyoming National Guard troops that are serving in Kosovo. The C
Company, 1st Battalion, 297th Infantry is stationed in northern
Kosovo, near the Serbian border. There is the camp up there. I
had a chance to fly up, helicopter, and visit with them and
share a meal and thank them for what they are doing for all of
us. The--they are part of the NATO-led peacekeeping mission to
promote stability and security in the region. NATO supervised
the standup and the training of the multiethnic professional
and civilian-controlled Kosovo Security Force, as you well--you
are well aware.
You know, in December 2018, Kosovo passed legislation to
transition the force into a NATO interoperability military
posture to support international peacekeeping and contingency
operations. So, what U.S. security assistance do you think is
going to be needed as part of this initiative?
Mr. Palmer. Thank you for that question, Senator.
Let me also underscore what a fabulous job the Wyoming
National Guard is doing in Kosovo. They are really, just,
providing tremendous support for that country in a difficult
time, and we are grateful for it.
In terms of what it is that Kosovo is going to need from
the United States through this process of transition, it will
be considerable support, Senator, in that we are working with
the government in Kosovo, we are working with the Kosovo
Security Force on a plan to help transition that force. That
plan will play out over the course of a decade. So, this is not
something that happens over the course of a couple of months or
even over a couple of years; it is a long-term transition. We
are looking for a force that is the equivalent of a light
infantry brigade, one that is equipped largely with defensive
capabilities, but that is also capable of participating in
international peacekeeping operations. And they will require
training and equipment and assistance from the United States
for quite some time.
Senator Barrasso. So, those are all the challenges that
Kosovo is going to face in standing up its own operational
army. Are there NATO allies that really--that oppose the move
to an operational army in Kosovo, do you know?
Mr. Palmer. Yes, Senator. There are a number of NATO allies
that have expressed profound concern about the decision of--by
the Kosovo Government to make this transition, concern about
the transition, itself, and the possibility that the transition
could heighten tensions with Serbia, concerns, in particular,
on the part of those members of NATO who are not recognizers of
Kosovo--Spain, I think, first and foremost among them, that has
expressed some deep reservations about this. And it has
complicated Kosovo's relationship with the alliance.
Senator Barrasso. The--do you know if Kosovo is actively
recruiting ethnic minorities into the security force?
Mr. Palmer. Yes, they are, Senator.
Senator Barrasso. Okay.
I want to just turn to something that I think Senator
Johnson briefly mentioned, in terms of energy and power. And
when I was in Kosovo, I learned that the key--one of the key
barriers to economic growth in the country is energy security.
The--Kosovo relies on two aging lignite power plants. I had a
chance to see one of them while heading up to the northern part
of the country. About 95 percent of its electricity generation
is from those two plants. Kosovo has very large lignite
resources. I had to--I was able to see that, as well, from the
air. Totally, I think 12-and-a-half-billion tons, which is the
second largest in Europe, one of the largest in the world.
Their energy strategy includes building a new 500-megawatt
modern coal-fired power plant. Despite its previous
commitments, the World Bank informed Kosovo, in October a year
ago, that it would not help finance it. And I had to disagree
with the decision by the World Bank. You know, we should be
helping, I believe, countries like Kosovo use the abundant
energy resources that they have that can provide affordable,
reliable, dependable supplies of energy. So, how has this
unreliable supply of energy that can be used impacted the
economic growth and development that we see in Kosovo?
Mr. Palmer. Well, Senator, it is an excellent question. I
would argue that it is almost certainly discouraging investment
in Kosovo from business interests who might otherwise be
amenable to taking a chance and investing in Kosovo. A couple
of things that will discourage that kind of business and
commercial investment. One of them would be the uncertainty of
the legal environment, the enforceability of contracts, there
is too much cronyism. These are all issues that need to be
addressed, and can be addressed, by the next Government of
Kosovo. But, anything that adds to that uncertainty, including
something like the uncertainty of the reliability of the energy
supply, is going to be something that companies are going to
have to factor into their decision-making on potential
investment. So, the administration, the U.S. Government, has
strongly supported the Kosova e Re power plant project. There
are issues not just with arranging the financing of the plant,
itself, but there are issues with the environmental standards
associated with the mine that will be feeding that plant that
will need to be addressed. And here, there is some
responsibility on the part of the Kosovo institutions, Kosovo
ministries, Kosovo government authorities, and things that they
will need to do in order to pave the way for a successful
program and project.
Senator Barrasso. Are there specific requests that the
Government of Kosovo has asked of us, the United States,
regarding assistance in their energy sector?
Mr. Palmer. To work to use our influence to help with the
IFIs and arranging the financing for the plant. That is
something that the Government of Kosovo has asked for our
assistance with. There have been some challenges with this. It
is especially difficult to secure multinational international
support for financing a power plant that is a coal-based plant.
That has been a challenge with the World Bank, as you are
familiar with, Senator. It has been a problem with the--or a
challenge with European banks. It is one that we are working to
overcome, working in partnership with ContourGlobal, an
American company that is interested in making this investment,
managing this plant. But, we also need to encourage and put a
little bit of pressure on the Government of Kosovo to do its
part to ensure that there are no shortcomings in the project
that would make it harder to secure that kind of international
financing.
Senator Barrasso. Well, thank you very much. And thanks for
your service.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Johnson. Thank you, Senator Barrasso.
I am going to ask you the same question on four different
countries or regions.
In your testimony, you talked about Russia and China
influence into the Western Balkans. I would like you to--I
would like you to state what you think the overall objective,
the overall goal of these entities interested in the Balkans,
and what specifically they are doing.
But, let us start with Europe, because we talked about the
Serbia/Kosovo dialogue. You mentioned, correctly, that that is
basically being led by the EU. Representatives of both Serbia
and Kosovo have really been asking the U.S. to get more--you
know, more engaged. So, just in general--and not just with
Kosovo and Serbia, but talk about the EU's goals and objective
as it relates to the Western Balkans, and what, specifically,
they are doing.
Mr. Palmer. In principle, Mr. Chairman, the goals of the
European Union collectively, the goals of the individual EU
member states individually, are the same as those of the United
States, are the same as those of the countries of the region,
which is to pursue a reform agenda that will make it possible
for the countries of the Western Balkans to qualify for
membership in European and Euro-Atlantic institutions. That
means, for all the countries of the Western Balkans, membership
in the European Union, and for all who aspire to it, which
formally at this point is all except Serbia, membership in the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Progress has been made.
Montenegro's accession to NATO, Albania's accession to NATO,
the opening of a clear path for North Macedonia to become the
30th member of the alliance, that is all well and good. The EU
path is harder, it is steeper, it is rockier, it is more
difficult. Montenegro is probably widely considered the
frontrunner at this point, but it still has a lot of work to
do, including, in particular, on media freedom. And we have
been very specific with our Montenegrin friends and partners
about what it is that we would like to see on that front.
Europe is challenged on this issue, in that the opening of
the European path is--requires consensus. And in the meeting
last week of the European Council, that consensus was not
there. And here, I think it is important to underscore that the
vast majority of member states in the European Union supported
the opening of accession negotiations with both Skopje and
Tirana, and it was really France, with marginal support from
the Netherlands, that prevented, that blocked consensus. I
think it is also important to underscore that the European
Council did not say no, they did not say, ``We will not open
negotiations.'' They did not establish new conditions for the
opening of negotiations. They simply noted that, ``We were
unable to secure a consensus.'' That is largely, Senator, in
our view, for reasons that have nothing to do with the
countries in question. It was not about North Macedonia, it was
not about Albania. It was about concerns and questions that the
French, in particular, had about the process of enlargement and
how the process needed to be changed, reformed, and adapted.
Senator Johnson. And I would say those are probably
legitimate concerns, so I am hoping this is a pause, a
reevaluation, that--and can look forward to future progress.
Mr. Palmer. We share that hope.
Senator Johnson. We have--I have limited time. I want to
talk about Russia. I want to talk about China. I do not know
that you can do that quickly. But, I also want to talk about
Turkey. Again, what are their objectives, what are their goals,
you know, what are their current activities in the Western
Balkans?
Mr. Palmer. Sure. In a nutshell, Mr. Chairman, I would
argue that Russia's primary objective in the Western Balkans is
to prevent that region from integrating into the European and
Euro-Atlantic family of nations, to keep the region fractious,
divided against itself, weak, and dependent on Russian
political support and on Russian gas, in particular. So, the
Russian system has an interest in preventing exactly the things
that we are trying to achieve: the agreement between Serbia and
Kosovo on normalization; a deal in Bosnia and Herzegovina that
helps Bosnia and Herzegovina become more functional and that
opens up a European path for Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well;
Montenegro's accession to the European Union; North Macedonia's
accession, as the 30th member of NATO. Russia opposes all of
this.
Senator Johnson. Great player, are they not?
What about China? What about Turkey?
Mr. Palmer. China, I think, is a relative newcomer to the
scene. And I am not entirely persuaded, Senator, that China
thinks about the Balkans in the same way as we do, as a single
coherent space. The point of entry for China into the region is
less engagement in the Western Balkans as the Western Balkans
and more through the ``17+1''. So, the Balkans here is a subset
of Chinese engagement with Central and Eastern Europe. This is
the terminus of the One Belt, One Road Initiative. China is
looking to build influence, make inroads. In part, it is
commercial interests that China is looking as--to this region
as an area where they can win contracts and make money. China
is also looking to build-up political influence, although I
think there is some uncertainty, maybe even on the part of the
Chinese themselves, about how they would intend to use that
influence, other than in a very transactional way, to be able
to divide Europe against itself and prevent consensus on issues
that the Chinese would consider central to their own security.
Here, I am thinking of things like Xinjiang or the South China
Sea or what is going on in Hong Kong, where influence with a
number of member states may be sufficient to block consensus on
a position that China would find at odds with its own
interests.
Senator Johnson. Okay. Talk about Turkey.
Mr. Palmer. Turkey has significant interest in the Western
Balkans. They look at this, in many ways, as being their
backyard. They are interested in developing partnerships; in
particular, with the Federation in Bosnia-Herzegovina, with
Albania, with Kosovo. They have put a lot of priority, in their
engagement in the Western Balkans, in identifying individuals
that they consider affiliated with Gulenist institutions and
putting pressure on the governments in the Balkans to extradite
those individuals to Turkey. There is Turkish money that is
going into religious institutions, madrassas and jamiyahs, that
is developing long-term relationships. I think Turkey sees the
Western Balkans as an area where Turkey should be expected to
play a significant, or even an outsized, role. So, I expect
Turkish interest in the Balkans to only increase over time.
Senator Johnson. Chairman Risch.
The Chairman. I am going to pass, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Johnson. Okay.
The Chairman. I just came by to make sure that Mr. Palmer
had gone home overnight, and came back, instead of staying
here.
[Laughter.]
Senator Johnson. He looks well-rested.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you for that, Senator. It is very
considerate.
Senator Johnson. Senator Shaheen, do you have any further
questions?
Senator Shaheen. I do.
I worked to include language, in the State and Foreign
Operations appropriations bill, instructing the State
Department and USAID to define ways in which the U.S.
Government can help empower youth and be used to promote the
growth of small- and medium-sized businesses in Bosnia-
Herzegovina. One of the things that has distressed me most
about the challenges that Bosnia-Herzegovina faces is the
disaffection of its young people, and their interest in leaving
the country, and not seeing any future there. So, can you talk
about any existing programs that might further that goal, and
what is being done already with the State Department and USAID
to address some of the economic challenges in Bosnia-
Herzegovina?
Mr. Palmer. Absolutely, Senator.
There are a number of programs and projects that we have in
place looking to promote economic growth, looking to create
opportunities for young people. I do believe, though, that,
among the more significant things that we can to do help
accelerate the creation of opportunities is to support, at the
political level, privatization of state-owned and parastatal
institutions. These are inefficient, bloated bureaucracies that
hold Bosnia-Herzegovina back. We would like to see much more
effort put into privatizing these--some of these dinosaur
institutions, creating a little bit of economic dynamism.
I think it is also important, Senator, to underscore that
one of the things that you will see in Bosnia-Herzegovina that
is pretty striking is that you will see young people leaving
Bosnia-Herzegovina who actually have good jobs and solid
economic prospects. They are leaving because they feel the
political climate is not one that lends itself to a positive
future for them and their children. And even though they have a
good job and they have an apartment and they have a stable
economic foundation, they are still looking for opportunities
to move to Frankfurt or London or New York in order to pursue a
life that is more predictable and that is more secure. And it
is this sense of insecurity, as much on the political level as
it is on the economic level, that is driving people to look for
alternatives.
Senator Shaheen. Which I appreciate. I think one analysis
that I have, personally, is that what we did with the Dayton
Accords was not just stop the fighting, but we put in place a
permanent structure that it was going to--was going to make it
very difficult to get over the ethnic divisions within Bosnia-
Herzegovina, and that that continues to be one of the major
stumbling blocks to the ability in the country to put together
a government that offers that long-term stability that the
people are looking for. So, what are we doing to address the
current challenges with the governmental structure that exists
there now? And how are we trying to work to encourage the
people of the country to take a look at that structure and
think about how they might do things differently?
Mr. Palmer. That is an excellent question, Senator.
I think, really, the only answer that I have for you,
fundamentally, is incrementally, that we are trying to move
things along slowly. There have been a couple of efforts over
the years to do the big-bang reforms in Bosnia-Herzegovina.
There was the--something called the April Package, another
thing called the Butmir Process. And both were unsuccessful.
They were unsuccessful for the fundamental reason that the
people who are in position, the ones who need to drive the
reform efforts, by definition are the ones who benefit from the
current structure. They have done ``pretty well, thank you very
much,'' by the existing system, and are not invested in the
kind of change that we would like to see. So, we are trying to
press for incremental change, incremental progress. Electoral
reform is one area where there is opportunity to try and move
things forward. We are, right now, working to promote a
compromise that would make it possible to form the Council of
Ministers, effectively the government at the state level, while
also opening up a path for Bosnia to submit the first ANP to
NATO. The challenge here, frankly, is Milorad Dodik and Milorad
Dodik's lack of interest in doing anything that would seem to
imply a future for Bosnia-Herzegovina within NATO. The ANP
decision, of course, is not a decision on NATO membership; it
is an opportunity for Bosnia-Herzegovina to engage with the
alliance to reform and strengthen the defense and security
sector of the country. It is one that would add value for the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in terms of what it is that
they can get out of their relationship with government. Milorad
Dodik is more interested in shoring up and securing his
position in Republika Srpska than he is helping Bosnia and
Herzegovina. So, we are also looking to identify the next
generation of leaders, young up-and-comers, at the cantonal
level or the municipal level, who may be having a better and a
more modern understanding of the relationship between political
leaders and those who entrust them with power and
responsibility. What is happening in Sarajevo Canton is very
interesting, something that deserves support, civic parties
rather than ethnic parties that are running the cantonal-level
government. This is something that is--that merits attention
and support and a little bit of energy and investment on the
part of the international community.
Senator Shaheen. And so, are we doing that?
Mr. Palmer. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Shaheen. Just to go back to the issue with Serbia
and Kosovo briefly. Again, I would just caution that the
potential for there to be mixed signals and miscommunication if
there are two people who are working on trying to address the
potential future of those two countries, I think, is very high.
And so, I hope you will keep that in mind and, as you are
working with Ambassador Grenell, that the two of you will look
at ways that you can ensure that that does not happen.
Mr. Palmer. Yes, Senator. I agree with that. Absolutely.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Johnson. Thank you, Senator Shaheen.
I guess I would just add, as well, is--you saw there is a
fair amount of interest. A number of us have made multiple
trips over there. So, I just spoke with Ambassador Grenell
yesterday. I can see you two are on the same page, in terms of
the steps forward. I completely agree with those. And I would
just make--just ask you to keep us completely informed, and we
certainly will when we are making trips over there, so that we
are--as, you know, representatives of the United States, we are
on the same page. Because I think we do--we do have an
opportunity, but the window does not stay open forever.
Mr. Palmer. Absolutely, Senator. And I know you travel to
the region frequently, and we are grateful for that.
Senator Johnson. But, again, I want to thank you for, first
of all, your service, your future service, your time and
testimony here today.
And we do have a vote called. So, what I will do right now
is, we will recess, go take a vote, and then we will reconvene
with our second panel.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Johnson. Senator Murphy, did you want to ask Mr.
Palmer some questions before I actually recess?
Senator Murphy. Yes, if I----
Senator Johnson. Okay. We are not recessing quite yet,
then.
Senator Murphy.--if I could.
Good to see you. Thank you very much for sticking around
for another moment.
I do not know if this has--I am sorry that I am just coming
in--I do not know if this has been discussed, but one of the
questions that I had for you was, there has been some question
as to the personnel authority right now over the region. I do
not know if this is something that has been discussed as of
yet. So, you were appointed as Special Representative for the
Balkans on August 30th while you were still serving as the DAS
for Southeast Europe. And then, on October 4th, the White House
appointed Ambassador Rick Grenell as the Special Envoy for
Serbia and Kosovo. This came as a surprise to the State
Department and the leaders in the region. Prime Minister Vucic
gave some fairly candid remarks about his lack of awareness
regarding Mr. Grenell's appointment. What can you tell us about
how the responsibilities are going to be divided in the region,
moving forward? And how does Ambassador Grenell do both jobs at
once? Being Ambassador to Germany is a pretty significant
responsibility in and of itself. And I do not know that this
committee would find it really attractive to have Ambassadors
to major NATO nations spending half of their time out of
country working on really complex problems in other regions.
Mr. Palmer. Sure. No, I appreciate that question, Senator.
It is not an unfamiliar model. I lived, for a number of
years, in Cyprus, working at our Embassy there, at which point
there was a Special Representative for Cyprus, Tom Weston, and
a Special Presidential Envoy for Cyprus, Al Moses. It was a
model that worked pretty well.
What I think you see right now in the Western Balkans, with
both my appointment by Secretary Pompeo and Ambassador
Grenell's appointment by the President, is a commitment on the
part of the administration, a commitment on the part of the
United States, to raise our profile in the region, to
demonstrate to the region that we are there and we are
partnering with them and we are ready to put political capital,
effort, and energy into helping the countries of the Western
Balkans move forward.
I think it is terrific, frankly, that Ambassador Grenell is
there to work as the President's Special Envoy specific to the
Serbia-Kosovo dialogue. I think only good things can come of
that. My mandate is a little bit broader, covers the whole
region. My focus may be a little bit longer-term. I know that
Ambassador Grenell is interested in trying to push the parties
forward, on an urgent basis, to address challenges immediately
and to identify areas of cooperation that can be put in place
urgently. And so, I think that his role and my role will
actually be quite complementary. I look forward to working with
him. He certainly is someone that can bring the full weight and
heft of the White House to this problem set. I think that is
welcome. It is our responsibility to work well and closely
together, and to coordinate carefully to ensure that we are
staying on message.
Senator Murphy. One of the things that Senator Johnson and
I heard when we were in the region, about a month ago, was--and
maybe I will speak for myself, here--but, the concern that, for
the first time, both Pristina and Belgrade were hearing
different messages from the United States and from Europe. They
felt that we were simply not coordinated in the way that we
used to be. And I know some questions were asked earlier about
land swaps. This is amongst the concerns that they had. Have
you heard this concern, as well? And what are the steps that
can be taken to try to make sure that we are delivering a
similar, if not very well coordinated, message with the
Europeans on our expectations of the two parties?
Mr. Palmer. Thank you for that question, Senator.
I would actually, maybe, frame it in a slightly different
way. I think that what the region was picking up was not so
much differences between the United States and Europe, as such,
but differences amongst member states of the European Union and
between the organizing institutions of the European Union and
certain member states. So, I think there was, maybe, different
messages that were coming from different European capitals to
Belgrade and Pristina. Some of those messages were more closely
aligned with the position of the United States than others. The
relationship between the United States and the European Union's
External Action Service, Mogherini and her team, who were
leading the negotiating process, was always very much in
lockstep. I do know that there were some different messages
coming out of different capitals in Europe that I think may
have been fuzzing the message some. And yes, I agree entirely
that we need to work to ensure coherent messaging from the
United States, from European institutions headquartered in
Brussels, and from EU member state capitals.
Senator Murphy. Yes, I think it is harder to coordinate
with the European Union on these questions when we have sent an
Ambassador there who reportedly told the Europeans, upon his
arrival, that he is there to destroy the European Union. But, I
appreciate your recognition that this is a challenge we have to
overcome.
I think the region gets mixed messages from our
administration, as well, because, while you have been
appointed, and somebody who was appointed to layer on top of
you, the budget that the President has submitted to us is a
massive disinvestment in the region. It cuts in half the
funding that we send to Kosovo. It cuts by two-thirds the
numbers for North Macedonia, similar very big decreases. I
mean, we have seen the incredible impact that relatively small
amounts of U.S. aid has on the region. Every time I go,
Ambassadors tell us the enormous reward and payback we get for
relatively small sums. But, they also sort of see this
withdrawal of American interest in the region. We have
personnel that are committed to the region. I do not doubt you
are. But, it is really hard for you to carry that message
effectively when you have Presidential budget after
Presidential budget that tells the Balkan region they do not
matter, at least from a funding standpoint.
Do you believe that U.S. foreign assistance can make a
difference in the Balkans? And what do you say to the
representatives there, who, no doubt, complain to you that
these numbers seem to be perpetually decreasing, at least from
the President's proposed budget?
Mr. Palmer. You know, Senator, it is interesting, but no
Balkan leader has ever complained to me about that. I have
never gotten a complaint that was based on the trajectory of
U.S. budget numbers. The complaints I get are about access.
What they want is people. What they want is time and attention.
What they want are meetings. What they want are visitors. What
they want is the appointment of a Special Representative or
Special Envoy. What they want is to know that they have our
attention. And I would argue that my appointment by Secretary
Pompeo, Ambassador Grenell's appointment by the President, is
part of delivering that message.
Yes, foreign assistance is a vital tool. We can put it to
good use. We have put it to good use in the Balkans. And we
will continue to do so. But, I have never had a Balkan leader
complain to me about budgets.
Senator Murphy. You may do different meetings that I do.
But, I hear, maybe more frequently, from our Embassy staff
there. I mean, I remember my first visit to Belgrade in which
then-Ambassador Kirby talked about the incredible impact that
exchange programs had had. You know, he could point to, you
know, a cross-section of leadership in Serbia that was
sympathetic to U.S. asks and concerns, in part because they had
spent part of their life studying or doing business in the
United States, thanks to programs that facilitated exchanges.
And yet, those programs were being largely shut down or
dramatically pared back. And so, I have heard it from Balkan
leaders, but I have also, maybe, heard it more often from our
personnel, who are in charge of representing U.S. interests,
who see their ability to get our case heard, often connected to
our ability to run smart programming.
But, I appreciate your work in the region. Thanks for
sticking around for my questions.
Senator Johnson. Thank you, Senator Murphy.
So, the committee will stay in recess until we reconvene
after the vote, probably about 15 minutes.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Senators.
[Recess.]
Senator Johnson. Good afternoon again. Reconvene our
hearing. And welcome and thank our two witnesses.
I guess we will start out with Mr. Janusz Bugajski. Mr.
Bugajski is a Senior Fellow at the Center for European Policy
Analysis and host of the New Bugajski Hour--I am terrible at
names, sorry--television show broadcast in the Balkans.
Previously, he was Director of the New European Democracy
Program at the Center for Strategic International Studies. He
has authored 20 books on Europe, Russia, and transatlantic
relations, and is a columnist for several media outlets.
Mr. Bugajski.
STATEMENT OF JANUSZ BUGAJSKI, SENIOR FELLOW, CENTER FOR
EUROPEAN POLICY ANALYSIS (CEPA), WASHINGTON, DC
Mr. Bugajski: Thank you very much, Senator. Chairman
Johnson, Ranking Member Shaheen, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to speak with you
today about both the successes, but also, more importantly, I
would say, the unfinished business in the Western Balkans.
And let me begin by underscoring that the United States
commands enormous respect throughout the region, not only for
saving lives during the NATO intervention, but for expanding
the umbrella of security. We may not fully understand Balkan
history, but we certainly understand Balkan geography. And,
without a final resolution of the outstanding regional
disputes, we give ground to radicals, criminals, and menacing
foreign influences that can pull the United States into another
war. It is in America's national and security interests to help
resolve the remaining Balkan feuds and develop stable and
cooperative states in the region similar to the Baltics and
Central Europe.
My written testimony provides a list of regional successes,
so I am not going to repeat all of them, except to highlight a
few: Dayton Accords for Bosnia-Herzegovina, NATO membership for
Slovenia, Croatia, Albania, Montenegro, and, very soon, for
North Macedonia; European Union membership for Slovenia and
Croatia; independence for Kosovo; the Prespa Accords between
Greece and North Macedonia; and the Brussels Agreement between
Serbia and Kosovo.
But, despite significant progress in the past 25 years, the
region cannot be considered fully secured until at least four
obstacles are handled. The two main disputes involve Bosnia-
Herzegovina and Serbia-Kosovo. Majda is focusing more on
Bosnia, so I would only add two words about Bosnia. I would say
Bosnia is less a multiethnic country than an association of
three ethnic fiefdoms in which nationalist parties maintain the
status quo to protect their spoils. It has no effective central
government. The Serbian entity persistently threatens to
secede. Croatian nationalists increasingly demand a third
entity. And Bosniaks are trapped, frustrated, in the middle.
This precarious status quo cannot be maintained indefinitely,
especially if economic conditions further deteriorate.
In the Kosovo-Serbia dispute, I would say that failure to
reach a bilateral agreement heightens prospects for radicalism
and regional instability. Hence, I fully agree with the
appointment of two Special Envoys. I would add, actually, it
would be good to have another Envoy for Bosnia, but that is a
side question, for now.
The revived talks have to be based on two clear principles.
First, Kosovo's final status was settled over a decade ago,
when it declared independence, and cannot be revisited without
sparking chaos and conflict. Second, Serbia and Kosovo need
cooperative relations to promote their own self-interests in
moving into key multinational organizations.
In an ideal scenario, Serbia recognizes Kosovo as an
independent State, but this seems highly unlikely in the near
future. One viable strategy, which I outlined in my written
testimony, is for both sides to undertake a number of important
steps within a normalization package. I will not go into this
here, but if you ask me, I can lay out a few of these points.
The two region-wide problems are EU blockages and Russian
and Chinese subversion. The EU blockage, has already been
discussed, as Matt was talking about this earlier. I would say
that the decision last week at the EU Summit not to allow
accession talks to begin for North Macedonia and Albania not
only damages EU credibility, but it can undermine the reform
programs in these countries, encourage nationalists and
irredentists, weaken efforts at conflict resolution, and
provide openings for hostile foreign interference.
And my last word is on Russia. The Kremlin views the
Balkans as Europe's weakest flank, where it can undermine
Western cohesion. Russia promotes local nationalisms to weaken
support for NATO, the United States, and the EU. It corrupts
national politicians and businessmen to favor Russian economic
and geopolitical interests. It fosters energy dependence to
gain political leverage. It engages in propaganda offensives
through local media and social networks to undermine Western
values and institutions. And it pursues numerous inter-societal
connections that increase Moscow's influence, whether through
orthodox churches, political parties, or cultural
organizations.
The Kremlin benefits from frozen conflicts and frozen
states. In Bosnia, it encourages the Serbian entity to keep the
country divided and question its future as a single state. In
Kosovo, it undermines statehood and raises the specter of
partition or reabsorption by Serbia. And I believe Moscow will
seek to derail any new American initiative that generates
regional stability. It is worth remembering that the only
successful accords in the region are those where Moscow played
no role.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bugajski follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. Janusz Bugajski
Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Shaheen, and members of the U.S.
Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on Europe and Regional Security
Cooperation, thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today
about the successes as well as the unfinished business in the Western
Balkans.
I will begin with the recent successes and then outline the
remaining problems. But first a few words why the Western Balkans are
important for the United States. The United States expended substantial
diplomatic, political, economic, and military capital in ending the
wars of Yugoslav succession in the 1990's. Halting these anti-civilian
wars was not simply a humanitarian mission it was a trans-Atlantic
security operation. Without American leadership at that critical time,
NATO would have become redundant through inaction, armed conflicts
could have spread outside the former Yugoslavia and embroiled several
neighboring States, and potential hotbeds of political and religious
radicalism, nurtured by outside powers, would have indefinitely
undermined European security.
America commands enormous respect throughout South East Europe not
only for saving lives but for expanding the umbrella of security. We
may not fully understand Balkan history, but we certainly understand
Balkan geography. Without a final resolution of the outstanding
regional disputes we unwittingly give ground to radicals, criminals,
and menacing foreign influences, whether Russia's Chekist and military
intelligence operatives, jihadist terrorists, Chinese economic state
actors, or international smugglers. An unstable South East Europe will
reverberate negatively through nearby countries and regions and in the
worst-case scenario may pull the United States into another future war
to douse the flames. It is in America's national and security interests
to help resolve the outstanding feuds in the Western Balkans and
thereby help develop stable states in a cooperative region similar to
the Baltics or Central Europe.
regional successes
NATO intervention in the West Balkans in the late 1990's, an
enduring although reduced Allied military presence until the present
day, and lasting U.S. and EU diplomatic engagement has led to a long
list of regional successes.
1. The Dayton accords (1995) for Bosnia-Herzegovina helped to end
the war, forged a political agreement between the three major ethno-
national groups, and ensured the recognition of a single state.
2. NATO membership for Slovenia (2004), Croatia (2009), Albania
(2009), Montenegro (2017), and North Macedonia (accession due in 2020)
strengthened the security of each state and deepened bilateral
relations with other members.
3. European Union membership for Slovenia (2004) and Croatia (2013)
ensured substantial economic and structural benefits. EU entry
underscored that these States had constructed stable democratic systems
and market economies. Serbia and Montenegro have begun EU accession
talks, Albania and North Macedonia have EU candidacy status, while
Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosova have EU Stabilization and Association
Agreements.
4. State independence for Kosova (2008) removed uncertainties over
its final status, reassured its majority population that had been
subject to mass murders and expulsions, and led to recognition by all
but four NATO States as well as 115 countries worldwide. Kosova began
to make progress toward entry into several international institutions.
5. The Ohrid Framework Agreement (2001) helped to stabilize the
country by ensuring greater integration of the Albanian population into
Macedonia's political system and governing structures at both national
and local levels.
6. The Prespa Accords (2018) resolved the name dispute between
Athens and Skopje, whereby Macedonia agreed to rename itself as North
Macedonia and Greece no longer blocked its progress toward NATO and EU
membership.
7. Regional cooperation has been enhanced through trade agreements,
greater energy diversification, improved cross-border transportation
networks, and the settling of several border questions, including
Slovenia-Croatia, Croatia-Montenegro, Kosova-Montenegro, and North-
Macedonia-Kosova.
8. The Brussels Agreement (2013) initiated constructive talks
between Serbia and Kosova and ensured progress in resolving several
outstanding disputes over property, energy, telecom, and other
practical issues. Its intent was to more closely integrate the Serbian
community into Kosova's State institutions and to develop cooperative
relations between Serbia and Kosova.
Much of this regional progress has been driven by a consistent U.S.
policy to bring the entire peninsula under the umbrella of a secure
Western alliance. It was accomplished through close policy coordination
with European Union representatives seeking to bring the entire region
into the EU.
unfinished west balkan business
Despite significant progress in the past 25 years, much of the West
Balkan region cannot be considered comprehensively secured until
several obstacles are removed. The lack of resolution compounds the
region's problems, visible in economic stagnation, official corruption,
social instability, ethnic tensions, and population outflows.
International attention needs to focus on the following disputes and
problem areas:
1. Dysfunctional Bosnia-Herzegovina: Bosnia-Herzegovina is a
politically frozen state veering toward renewed ethnic conflict. Dayton
created a complex administrative structure in which ethnic balancing
predominates and layers of governmental bureaucracy contributes to
inefficiency and budgetary burdens. This system has obstructed
effective decision-making, where ethno-national interests predominate
over civil-state interests. Bosnia is not a multi-ethnic country but an
association of ethnic fiefdoms, in which nationalist parties maintain
the status quo to protect their spoils and patronage networks.
Bosnia-Herzegovina has no effective central government, the Serbian
entity persistently threatens to secede, Croatian nationalists
increasingly demand a third entity, and Bosniaks are trapped frustrated
in the middle. Bosnian Serb leader Milorad Dodik has threatened to
torpedo a number of state-wide reforms, including the formation of
joint armed forces, a state court, and police agency, while questioning
other competencies transferred from the two entities to state level. In
this climate of state paralysis, the Serbian entity has steadily moved
from autonomy toward sovereignty and its leaders, with Moscow's
financial and political support, has raised the prospect of separation
and unification with Serbia. This has tempted some Bosnian Croat
politicians to call for a third entity and the partition of the Bosnian
Federation. Meanwhile, Bosniak Muslim leaders have warned about a new
war as they are committed to defending Bosnia's territorial and
constitutional integrity.
The precarious status quo cannot be maintained indefinitely
especially if economic conditions further deteriorate. Economic
decline, state bankruptcy, and social desperation will further
exacerbate nationalist radicalization, while ethno-nationalist leaders
will have fewer resources to offer citizens. This can exacerbate turf
battles in which a unified government will prove even more difficult to
forge and the separatist option will become more appealing.
A durable solution requires more intense involvement by
international actors, especially by the United States which has
substantial credibility as an honest broker. The results of such
mediation would necessitate an overhaul of the constitution to limit or
eliminate entity vetoes and ethnic voting. Bosnia's ethno-politics has
stymied the development of state citizenship, programmatic pluralism,
individual rights, and a competitive democracy. International actors
who continue to dispense funds to Bosnia must also more effectively
tackle endemic official corruption, inadequate rule of law, and
authoritarian tendencies among leaders of all three national groups.
Politicians seeking a more cohesive state that guarantees equal
citizenship regardless of ethnicity should no longer be sidelined.
2. Kosova-Serbia Dispute: The frozen talks between Serbia and
Kosova need to be revived if both countries are to make any progress
into international institutions. The persistent failures to reach an
agreement on bilateral normalization are heightening fears of political
radicalism and regional instability. And without a more prominent
American role, the EU looks incapable of making any significant
progress. Hence, the appointment of two U.S. envoys is an important
step forward. The revived talks have to be based on two clear
principles. First, Kosova's final status was settled over a decade ago
when it declared independence and cannot be revisited without sparking
chaos and conflict. Second, Serbia and Kosova need cooperative
bilateral relations to promote their own self-interests in moving into
key multi-national organizations.
In an ideal scenario, ``normalization'' would mean Serbia formally
recognizing Kosova as an independent State and establishing full
diplomatic relations. This is unlikely to occur any time soon even if
Serbia would benefit from extensive international support for such a
constructive initiative. The easier bilateral deals within the 2013
Brussels Agreement have already been achieved and without tackling the
more difficult problems Serbia-Kosova relations will come to a
standstill. The new American envoys may be open to land swaps or the
exchange of Kosova's northern municipalities containing Serbian
majorities for Belgrade's recognition of Kosova's statehood. However,
they are likely to face significant political obstacles, as the new
government in Prishtina could lose much of its public support if it
surrenders territory to Belgrade. Similarly, the Serbian government is
unlikely to yield or exchange any territory in the Presevo valley,
which contains Albanian majorities, especially with parliamentary
elections looming in April 2020.
The one viable strategy is for both sides to undertake a number of
important steps toward each other that would be part of a
``normalization package.'' This would entail ending the current
bilateral negatives and implementing several positives.
For Prishtina, ending negatives would mean lifting the burdensome
tariffs on Serbian goods and agreeing not to block visits by Serbian
officials to northern Kosova if Prishtina is notified in advance. The
positives can include reaffirming the importance of Serbian Orthodox
religious sites and even providing them with a special status as
internationally protected shrines. It can also mean implementing the
agreement on the Association of Serbian Municipalities, while making
sure this structure has no centralized executive functions that would
promote territorial autonomy and paralyze the State. Bosnia-Herzegovina
must not be replicated.
For Serbia, ending negatives would entail unblocking opposition to
Kosova's entry into international institutions such as Interpol,
UNESCO, or the Council of Europe. It can also cease pursuing Kosova's
de-recognition by foreign governments susceptible to bribery. The most
important positive, short of outright recognition, would be for Serbia
to drop its objections to Kosova gaining a seat in the United Nations
General Assembly. This step could help convince the five remaining EU
states to recognize Kosova. It would also demonstrate Serbia's
independence from Russia, which uses its blocking tactics in the U.N.
as leverage over Belgrade. Simultaneously, Prishtina can play a
positive role by declaring that the progress made in the
``normalization package'' should certify Serbia's compliance with
Chapter 35 in its EU accession agenda. This display of bilateral
goodwill grounded in self-interest would hasten Belgrade's progress
toward meeting the criteria for EU entry.
Washington must be closely involved throughout the normalization
process and the appointment of two special envoys, Ambassador Richard
Grenell for the Kosovo-Serbia dialogue, and Matt Palmer, Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State, for the broader region, indicates that
Washington seeks new momentum to normalize relations between the two
states. Given the standstill over the past year, it is doubtful that
Belgrade and Prishtina would hammer out an agreement without renewed
American involvement.
3. EU Blockage: EU accession remains an ambition in much of the
region because of the benefits that this provides new members,
including accession funds and investments. Although several countries
are candidates for the Union, progress has been stalled because the EU
is preoccupied with internal problems. The EU summit in Brussels on
October 18, 2019 failed to announce the start of accession talks for
North Macedonia and Albania. This is despite the fact that the European
Commission declared in May 2019 that both countries had made sufficient
progress in their reforms as EU ``candidate states.'' Such decisions
have several negative repercussions. They damage EU credibility;
disillusion citizens; nurture the notion that the EU is complicit in
upholding corrupt governments in exchange for a measure of stability;
contribute to domestic political polarization; undermine state reform
programs; encourage nationalists, populists, separatists, and
irredentists; and provide more openings to hostile foreign
interference. Paradoxically, a negative decision on accession talks and
further enlargement will ultimately rebound negatively on the security
of the European Union itself.
4. Russia's and China's Subversion: The Balkan peninsula remains
NATO's internal frontier where Moscow can challenge U.S. and European
interests and project its Eurasian agenda. The Kremlin views the
Western Balkans as Europe's weakest flank and a subversion zone where
competition with NATO and the U.S. can be increased, latent conflicts
manipulated, potential new allies found, and economic opportunities
exploited. Russia pursues five main inroads in the region:
First, it promotes local nationalisms to undermine support for
NATO, the U.S., and the EU and stir conflicts between rival nationalist
projects. Second, it corrupts national politicians and local
businessmen to favor Russian economic interests, support Moscow's
foreign agenda, and oppose Western policies such as sanctions against
Russia for its invasion of Ukraine. Third, it fosters energy dependence
by tying Balkan countries into Russian supplies and pipelines in order
to gain political leverage. Fourth, it engages in propaganda offensives
through local media, internet, and social networks to enhance Russia's
stature and undermine Western values and institutions. And fifth, it
pursues numerous inter-societal connections that increase Moscow's
influences, including Orthodox Churches, political parties, cultural
organizations, historical societies, and sports clubs.
The Kremlin benefits from frozen conflicts and frozen states. In
Bosnia-Herzegovina it encourages the Serbian entity to keep the country
divided and question its future as a single State. In Kosova, Russian
officials claim the Serbian population is repressed in order to
undermine Kosova's independence and raise the specter of partition or
re-absorption by Serbia. Kosova is blocked from entering the U.N.
primarily by Russia's opposition. Unresolved conflicts and disputed
states also enable the Kremlin to claim that NATO has failed to
stabilize the region and to slow down West Balkan progress toward EU
integration.
Moscow will calculate how it can derail any new American initiative
if this is intended to culminate in Kosova's U.N. membership and
recognition by Serbia. Putin's Kremlin does not welcome agreements that
generate stability in the region and enhance prospects for NATO and EU
integration. Moscow may even appoint its own Balkan envoy or demand an
equal voice in the upcoming negotiations. However, it is worth
remembering that the only successful agreements implemented in the
region are those where Moscow played no role, including Dayton, Ohrid,
and Prespa. Any durable accord between Kosova and Serbia must remain
free from Kremlin interference.
The Chinese regime has no design to capture territory or impose its
system of government on States outside its immediate sphere of
influence. Instead, it has three main goals toward southeast Europe.
First, it seeks to expand China's economic reach through trade and
investment. Beijing's Belt and Road Initiative linking China with
Europe envisages the Balkan Peninsula as a focal point for maritime and
overland routes into Europe. Chinese companies purchase cargo terminals
and finance roads and railways throughout southeast Europe and its
loans and export credits become debt traps. Although Balkan governments
welcome investments that rescue declining industries, they are
vulnerable to predatory lending and the surrender of national
infrastructure.
Second, Beijing leverages economic penetration into political
influence. In exchange for financial investments, Beijing seeks Balkan
and European diplomatic support for its policies or to mute criticism
of China in international institutions. And third, China aims to
diminish U.S. political influences. It has developed significant
convergence with Moscow in such areas as anti-democracy promotion,
diplomatic offensives, and anti-American disinformation campaigns.
While seeking to resolve the outstanding disputes in the Western
Balkans, U.S. policymakers cannot lose sight of the growing dangers to
regional security and Western integration from both Russia and China.
Russia's subversion in particular can only be reversed through an
extensive strategic offensive. Moscow's presence is not simply malign;
it is destabilizing and dangerous and could unravel much of what has
been accomplished in the region during the last 20 years. I am
submitting to the Committee a recent report I published with the Baltic
Defense University on conducting a multi-pronged offensive against
Moscow rather than simply playing a static defense. Entitled ``Winning
the Shadow War with Russia'' it details six major arenas for action:
Exposing Influence Operations; Countering Informational Offensives;
Cyber Defense and Counter-Attack; Economic and Financial Penalties;
Military and Security Instruments; and Managing Russia's Dissolution.
Senator Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Bugajski.
Our next witness is Dr. Majda Ruge. Dr. Ruge is a Fellow at
the Foreign Policy Institute at Johns Hopkins University,
School of Advanced International Studies. Previously, she was a
research fellow at the Gulf Research Center, and worked as an
Advisor for the Delegation of the European Commission and the
OSCE Mission to Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Dr. Ruge.
STATEMENT OF MAJDA RUGE, FELLOW, FOREIGN POLICY INSTITUTE,
JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY, WASHINGTON, DC
Dr. Ruge. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Jeanne
Shaheen. It is a great honor to be back to testify before this
committee.
Along with many others, I am deeply grateful to this
subcommittee for their ongoing attention and commitment to the
region. This hearing comes at a critical point of time.
First, the French veto and the start of EU accession
negotiations with North Macedonia and Albania has produced
profound uncertainty and disillusionment of citizens across the
region regarding the future of their countries. It has taken
away key incentive and shattered a narrative that has
undermined democratic reforms in the region. It has undermined
reformists, like the Prime Minister of North Macedonia, Zoran
Zaev, while emboldening obstructionists, and endangering
ongoing reforms such as the reform of the judiciary in Albania.
There is no doubt that, as you mentioned previously,
Russia, China, and Turkey will capitalize it--on this major
European mistake. What is more, in addition, that it will
likely reinforce the exodus of the population from the region.
In the last 5 years alone, Bosnia has lost 5 percent of its
population. It is, therefore, a great relief the Senate
approved North Macedonia's NATO accession protocol yesterday.
The signal you are sending is crucial importance for the people
of the region, who feel abandoned by the West.
Second point. In Bosnia, we will soon mark the 25th
anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement. That is a quarter of
a century of peace brokered under American leadership. And
incidentally, I was in Bosnia when the invitation to testify
for this committee arrived. The mood there is one of optimism
in small pockets of the country where reformist actors are
trying to shake up things at the local level, such as Jarevo
Canton. But, there is also a great deal of anxiety that
American disengagement from North Syria and the recent talk of
border swaps will be interpreted by nationalists as a signal
that the peace in Bosnia is up for grabs.
So, I flew in from Europe last night to remind this
committee to pay greater attention to Bosnia. American
engagement on security, as well as political and economic
engagement, is needed not just to protect, but also to improve
one of its most important and, I underline, bipartisan legacies
in the region.
Third, with regard to Serbia and Kosovo, there is need to
move forward and resolve the outstanding issues, especially
those affecting the lives of ordinary citizens. However, I
would urge caution with the proposition that they can be quick
fixes on offer. Moving ahead too quickly and without full
coordination with key European allies puts at risk fundamental
policies and principles that were upheld by successive U.S.
administrations from both parties. Maintaining territorial
integrity and inviolability of borders remains crucial for the
stability of the region. Any approach involving border changes
risks producing unintended consequences and emboldening those
promoting secessionist agendas, such as Milorad Dodik and
Republika Srpska.
And in this context, I would like to remind this committee
that across the region, the single most important cause of
political instability is not ethnic tensions. Instability in
the region is largely top-down phenomenon. A recent opinion
poll conducted by International Republican Institute showed
that over 50 percent of citizens in Bosnia from all ethnic
groups identify organized crime and corruption as the number-
one security threat, rather than the members of other ethnic
groups.
And here are the measures that U.S. Government, including
Congress, could take to secure peace and stability and to
protect past U.S. investments in the region:
Urge the administration to move ahead with NATO accession
protocol of the North Macedonia as a matter of urgency. Work
with European allies to press forward with regard to Bosnia,
finally adopting NATO's Annual National Program. Bosnia is the
strategic center of the region, but progress has been blocked
by Milorad Dodik, who is acting as Russia's proxy.
Engage France and Netherlands robustly to urge them to
honor the EU's promise to allow the accession process to begin.
Remind the administration that the policy of successive
bipartisan U.S. administrations of more than two decades is
founded on territorial integrity and inviolability of borders
in the Balkans.
Given that the corruption is one of the primary obstacles,
encourage the administration to hold corrupt Balkan politicians
accountable, including through sanctions, and to continue State
Department and Department of Justice programs fighting
corruption and organized crimes.
And finally, congressional views on Western Balkans should
be communicated strongly and directly by bipartisan CO-
delegations visiting capitals in the Balkans, as well as
Brussels, Berlin, and Paris. Congressional voices do matter.
But, when you visit the Balkan capitals, publicly support and
regularly meet with constructive actors, including civil
society, independent thinkers, and elected officials at
subnational level, where a lot of good work is being done.
In closing, let me underline that citizens in the region
continue to have overwhelmingly positive views of the U.S. and
the EU. People are not lining up in front of Russian and
Chinese consulates. And the reason for this is that they are
not leaving just for economic reasons, but because they want to
live in democratic societies. The West remains attractive
model, and it is the membership to Western institutions that
citizens aspire. And they want you to stay engaged.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Ruge follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Majda Ruge
Thank you Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Senator
Shaheen.
My name is Majda Ruge, I'm a fellow at the Foreign Policy
Institute of the School of Advanced International Studies, Johns
Hopkins University. It's a great honor to be back to testify before
this committee.
Along with many others, I'm deeply grateful to the
members of this subcommittee for their ongoing attention and commitment
to the region.
Maintaining peace and stability in the Western Balkans
remains a key strategic interest of the United States. That is because
instability in the Balkans carries grave risks to member states of NATO
and the EU.
This hearing comes at a critical point in time:
First, the French veto on the start of EU accession talks
with North Macedonia & Albania has produced profound uncertainty in the
region and skepticism about honesty and commitment of the EU and
France.
It has taken away a key incentive and shattered the
narrative that underpinned democratic reforms in the region. It has
undermined reformists like PM of North Macedonia Zoran Zaev whose
government showed great courage and leadership by signing the Prespa
Agreement. In doing so it has endangered the survival of one truly
reformist government in the region which in less than 2 years turned a
previously captured state on the brink of conflict into a regional
frontrunner.
Meanwhile, the French veto has emboldened obstructionists
across the region and endangered ongoing reforms such as those in the
judicial sector in Albania. No doubt Russia and China will capitalize
on this major European mistake.
I was glad to see that the Senate approved North
Macedonia's NATO accession protocol yesterday. The signal you are
sending is of crucial importance since the vacuum created by the French
veto is one that other external actors will seek to use to their
advantage.
Secondly, in Bosnia, we'll soon mark the 25th anniversary
of the Dayton Peace Agreement. A quarter of a century of peace in
Bosnia brokered under American leadership. A peace that ended genocide
and the most brutal conflict on European soil since the world war two.
Twenty-five years with practically no episodes of interethnic violence
or retributions.
Incidentally, I was in Bosnia when the invitation to
testify for this committee arrived. The mood there is one of optimism
in small pockets of the country where reformist actors are shaking up
things at the local level. But there is also a great deal of anxiety
that American disengagement from northern Syria will be interpreted by
nationalist opportunists, some backed by Kremlin, that the peace in
Bosnia is up for grabs.
So I flew in from Europe last night to remind this
committee to pay greater attention to Bosnia. American engagement on
security, as well as political and economic engagement is needed there
to protect--and improve--one of its most important bipartisan legacies
in the region.
Thirdly, with regard to Serbia and Kosovo there is a need
to move forward and resolve outstanding issues especially those
affecting the lives of ordinary citizens. However one should be
cautious not to create unrealistic expectations that quick fixes are on
offer.
Moving ahead too quickly and without full coordination
with European allies puts at risk fundamental policies and principles
upheld by successive U.S. administrations from both parties:
Maintaining territorial integrity and the inviolability
of borders remains crucial for the stability of the region. Any
approach involving border changes risks producing unintended
consequences. Even mere talk about such possibility by the U.S.
officials is dangerous because it encourages those promoting
secessionist agendas such as Milorad Dodik and the Republika Srpska.
In that context I'd like to remind this committee that
across the region the single most important cause of political
instability is NOT ethnic tensions. A recent opinion poll conducted the
International Republican Institute showed that over 50 percent of
citizens in Bosnia from all ethnic groups identify organized crime as
the number one security threat rather than the members of other ethnic
groups.
Indeed, instability in the region is largely a top-down
phenomenon. And it is directly correlated to poor governance and
nepotism of actors whose political survival depends on increasing
ethnic tensions as means of staying popular without being accountable.
Here are a number of measures the U.S. government,
including Congress, could take to secure peace and stability in the
Western Balkans and to protect past U.S. investments in the region:
1. Now that the Senate ratification of NATO accession protocol of
North Macedonia is completed, urge the administration to move ahead as
a matter of urgency. The U.S. should also work with European allies to
press forward with regard to Bosnia finally adopting NATO's Annual
National Prorgamme. Bosnia is the strategic center of the region, much
of the legal architecture is already in place, but progress is being
blocked by Milorad Dodik, who is acting as Russia's proxy.
2. Engage France robustly and urge them to honor the EU's promise
to begin the accession process.
3. Remind the administration of the policy of successive U.S.
bipartisan U.S. administrations of more than two decades with regard to
territorial integrity and the inviolability of borders in the Balkans.
4. Given the nature of corruption related challenges in the region,
encourage the administration to build stronger cooperation between
State Department and the Department of Justice, which has been doing
excellent work on corruption and organized crime across the region.
5. Support and regularly meet with constructive actors including
civil society, independent thinkers, and elected officials at sub-
national level where a lot of good work is being done.
6. Finally, congressional views on Western Balkans should be
communicated strongly and directly by bipartisan CODEL's visiting
capitals in the Balkans as well as Brussels, and Paris.
In closing, let me underline that citizens in the region continue
to have overwhelmingly positive views of the U.S. and EU. People are
not lining up in front of Russian and Chinese consulates. For citizens
of the Western Balkans, the West remains the attractive model and it is
to membership in Western institutions that they aspire.
However, if the West leaves a vacuum, others will enter, not least
China. Actors such as Russia and China may not have the ability to set
the agenda and reshape the entire region. But they do have the
potential to reinforce negative trends and undermine Western interests.
As noted at the outset, strategic U.S. interests are at stake in
the Western Balkans. The U.S. remains ``the indispensable nation'' in
that region, not least because the EU is failing to live up to its
role. Congressional voices matter.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Johnson. Thank you, Dr. Ruge.
Let me, first, start with both of you and ask a very
general question. Dr. Ruge, I think you used the word
``optimism.'' How optimistic are you today versus, let us say,
10, 15, 20 years ago, for the region in general?
Dr. Ruge. Much less----
Senator Johnson. Much less optimistic?
Dr. Ruge. Much less optimistic. Ten-fifteen years ago, I
was actually working on programs on the ground in Bosnia, on--
basically, not just implementing Dayton, but consolidating key
institutions that were divided following the end of the
conflict, merging customs and tax services, merging police,
merging defense forces, intelligence services, creating state
border service. And it was a time when the U.S. was heavily
engaged, but also when the U.S. and its key European allies
pulled together in the same direction, and results were very
visible. There is not much of that dynamic that we see on the
ground today, unfortunately.
Senator Johnson. So, is that the primary reason your
shift--is just lack of U.S.-European cooperation, coordination,
and engagement, and involvement?
Dr. Ruge. Lack of--I would say, first of all, lack of high-
level political interest, lack of engagement, relatively
speaking, compared to, say, 2002 to 2006, increasing
disengagement toward other foreign policy and security issues,
and yes, much less cooperation than we saw in that time.
Senator Johnson. Mr. Bugajski, what is your evaluation?
Mr. Bugajski: I would agree, up to a point. It is always a
question of ups and downs in the Balkans. You have to look at
the bigger picture and this is why I have outlined some of the
positive things that have been achieved.
For instance, the Prespa Accords between Athens and Skopje,
last year, which was--if you looked at it 5 years ago--
completely unexpected, and it looked as though they would be
stuck over the name question for generations.
I do agree, though, that there are increasingly pessimistic
indicators in the region. And I would add a couple more, which
were not there 10-15 years ago, which is the degree of Russian
subversion and increasing Chinese involvement in the region,
and sometimes negative Turkish influence. Turkey has, of
course, its own agenda, but it is not a neo-imperial
revisionist agenda like Russia's in terms of trying to regain
greater influence in the region, greater control in the region.
However, all three countries do contribute to the instability,
they contribute to polarization, they contribute, in some
respects, to religious radicalism. I have seen this, in
particular, in North Macedonia. And they subvert politicians.
In other words, particularly, I would say, Russia and China,
the kind of policies they apply goes directly against the kind
of systems, politics, market economies that we would like to
see in these countries.
Senator Johnson. Okay. So, let me kind of ask you the same
question I asked Mr. Palmer, then. Country by country--Russia,
China, Turkey--what is their overall goal and objective? And
specifically, what are they doing?
Mr. Bugajski: Russia, I would say, is the more immediate
danger and the bigger danger. China is a longer-term threat.
Turkey is a less of a danger, but it is involved right now.
Russia has never given up on undermining stability in the
Balkans, to keep the Balkans out of Western institutions, and
to reduce the American role. They play on nationalism, they
play on religion, they play on ethnicity, and on pan-Slavic
question, in order to further their goals. They are also
looking for new allies, not necessarily like in Soviet times,
but allies that will support them on the international arena,
countries that will not go along with the sanctions regime for
their invasion of Ukraine. They also have economic interests.
The oligarchs and the government are closely intertwined in
Russia. If oligarchs benefit, the state benefits. Oligarchs, in
a way, express Russian imperialism through the economic arena.
Disinformation, contacts with orthodox churches, cultural
organizations. Russia is penetrating the region and trying to
push out the United States. What they say about us is that we
are the imperial power, that we are trying to diminish Balkan
independence, we are creating the problems for them. The exact
opposite of what is actually happening.
Senator Johnson. So, Russia's just playing the big
geopolitical game--anti-American, pro-Russian. Okay. So, that
is--but, what about China?
Mr. Bugajski: China does not have territorial or imperial
ambitions toward the region. The Balkans, with China, is more a
question of access into Europe, along the Belt and Road
Initiative. It is part of their way to invest through southern
Europe into the European mainstream. Of course, their economic
practices do not follow the lines of genuine competition. They
corrupt governments, they in-debt governments heavily,
governments that are often crying out for investments, even EU
governments, including the Greek government. The amount of
Chinese investment, for instance, in Piraeus was a result of
Greece's inability to raise alternative investment for the
port. So, China plays on economic weaknesses in order to inject
its influences. In the future, though, the question is whether
that economic clout translates into political influence? Will
Beijing increasingly use that as leverage to capture more
political influence in Europe?
Senator Johnson. Then Turkey.
Mr. Bugajski: Turkey, I would say, does not have the clout
either of Russia or China. It does not have the same ambition.
Obviously, Turkey is a NATO member and is not--has generally
been a good ally, despite of what is happening at the moment in
Syria. However, I would say that it is more the political and
religious influences emanating from the ruling party which have
treated some of the Balkan States as former colonies in which
Turkey insists on extraditing opposition figures or people that
they think, or the government thinks, is linked with the
opposition, particularly Fethullah Gulen. And we have had
cases, for instance, in Kosovo, the kidnapping and not proper
formal extradition, but capture and evacuation of Turkish
nationals to Turkey, which led to the resignation of Kosova's
Interior Minister and a mini-crisis in the government. So, it
is that sort of political pressure rather than any kind of
revisionist or economic agenda.
Senator Johnson. So, Dr. Ruge, while we are on this kind of
train of thought, do you have anything you want to add or
disagree with?
Dr. Ruge. So, I can say I agree with all of the points, but
I would like to add couple of them.
On Russia, first of all, it is Moscow's key policy in the
region to prevent NATO accession of Bosnia and Serbia. I think,
with Macedonia, they have probably given up, but there are two
more countries. And Bosnia, especially, has, until 2006, signed
on almost every step in the NATO accession process, but it is
since the Americans and Europeans have started to disengage
that Russian-backed Milorad Dodik has started obstructing every
single step on the NATO implementation, on, basically,
obligations toward NATO in Bosnia.
Secondly, all of the ties which Mr. Bugajski has mentioned
are very important. What is also important is to say that
Russia's main basis for political influence in Bosnia is the
Peace Implementation Council, and then U.N. Security Council.
And Russia backs both Republika Srpska leadership and--in its
increasingly antagonistic relationship with the West on
building the State and maintaining Bosnian State.
However, there is something that we really need to be
cautious about when talking about the role in Russia, and that
is to avoid confusing and--confusing Russian influence with
what is actually the responsibility of local political elites
for nepotism and corruption. So, what case of North Macedonia
has shown under Zaev's government is that impact of Moscow's
influence is directly proportional to the level of corruption
of the ruling political elite. Once you have reformist
government power that is actually committed to transparency and
rule of law, Russian influence subsides.
On China, what is really interesting on China is whether it
does have a strategy, or not, in the region. It--to borrow a
term from a colleague at the Belgrade Security Conference,
China acts like performance-enhancing drug, which brings out
given government's natural tendencies. And most states in the
region suffer from poor governance, low transparency and
accountability, and poor regulatory framework. China tends to
reinforce these weaknesses.
Loans are provided without mechanism of transparency or
oversight over procurement procedures or implementation of the
project. So, just to give you one interesting example,
Montenegro's highway construction by Chinese Road and Bridge
Corporation, where the government has borrowed about 1.3
billion to construct the highway that EU did not want finance
because it was judged not to have any sort of potential to
compensate for cost of investment. It has increased country's
debt from 63 percent of GDP in 2012 to 80 percent in 2019. What
also happens is that in--because of the weakness of the
government, the contract that was signed with the Chinese Road
and Bridge Corporation, basically, really, very--in a very
untransparent matter, stated that if Montenegro could not repay
its debt within specific timeframe, the EXIM Bank would have
the right to some of its territory.
And so, what is happening is that these countries are
really getting into debt traps. And the problems that the
Western countries are trying to address, which is governance
and rule of law, are just being reinforced and strengthened.
So, I would say that this is one of the key dangers of China's
influence.
Serbia has become the poster child of Chinese involvement.
It signed agreements with China worth more than 3 billion last
year, including Chinese investment in Serbian infrastructure,
steel production, and Serbia's purchase of Chinese military
equipment. Worryingly, Serbia has also purchased more than
1,000 facial-recognition cameras to implement a project that is
first of its kind across Europe.
I could carry on with Chinese constructing the Peljesac
bridge in Croatia to facilitate traffic between the two parts
of Croatia across the sea for about 420 million euros, 85 of
which is financed by the EU. And that is another interesting
phenomena of EU procurement procedures not really containing
that element to monitor how the companies that receive state
aid can win the contracts.
Final mention on Turkey, its role is more complicated.
Traditionally, Turkey has kind of been part of the
institutional infrastructure of the West. It is also part of
the Peace Implementation Council. It is the second- or third-
largest contributor of troops to EUFOR in Bosnia, which is now
tasked with securing safe environment. And generally, it has,
traditionally in the past, supported the integration of the
region in EU and NATO. Its role has been changing over the
last, say, decade, where, as has been pointed out, the AKP
fight against Gulen networks has brought in that element of
foreign policy, and really the question with what happens to
Turkey and NATO, kind of in a global context, is going to also
determine how Turkey acts in Western Balkans, whether it goes
closer to Russia or stays supportive of Western objectives.
Thank you.
Senator Johnson. Senator Shaheen.
Senator Shaheen. So, I pretty much agree with everything
both of you have said. And I guess the question, for me and, I
think, this subcommittee--Senator Johnson and I and other
members of the subcommittee, are very committed to trying to
encourage continued engagement at all levels in the Western
Balkans. So, the question really is, what are the priorities
and the most important things we can do to help address the
current situation?
Based on the discussion to date, I guess I would think
moving as swiftly as possible to get the Republic of North
Macedonia into NATO is one of those things, so that that sends
a clear message that that is still an option for countries like
Bosnia, and trying to engage with France and the Netherlands
and the EU to ensure that accession for entrance into the EU is
still a possibility for North Macedonia and Albania.
What else do you think is important that we think about,
recognizing that we probably cannot do everything we would like
to do, but what else is on that--if you were going to name one
or two other priorities that we need to think about, what are
they?
Mr. Bugajski: Well, those would be the priorities. And the
two major questions, which I talk about in my testimony,
Bosnia-Herzegovina, which Majda has talked about and Kosovo-
Serbia.
Senator Shaheen. Right.
Mr. Bugajski:--In the Kosovo-Serbia case, I do think the
appointment of a new Special Envoy is extremely vital for
restarting the talks. Remember, the talks have been stalled for
the past year. Both sides, of course, face elections. Kosovo
just had them, Serbia is about to have them, in April. But, I
think it is a good time--with a new government in Prishtina,
and Serbia will have a new coalition government after April--to
try and get the sides together. Where is the common ground?
What common ground can be found? What is it that Kosovo can do?
It needs to remove some of the negatives that are in place,
like the tariffs on Serbian imporys, greater protection for
Orthodox shrines, allowing Serbian officials to visit, maybe
revisiting the Serbian municipality association, the Zajednica
question, that was within the Brussels Agreement.
For the Serbian side, it is also very important to press
them to undo things that are negative for Kosovo's interests.
In other words, blocking of membership of international
organizations such as INTERPOL or UNESCO. The campaign of
derecognition that Belgrade engages in, it also needs to desist
from that as it creates a lot of damage. It undermines not only
relations between the two countries, but other countries look
at them and say, ``Well, this is not a very stable region if
there is a major dispute, here.''
Senator Shaheen. Well, can--I am sorry to interrupt, but it
has been suggested to me that part of the issue with Serbia is
that Vucic--the Vucic government is not really interested,
ultimately, in negotiating with Kosovo and reaching a
settlement. Do you agree with that?
Mr. Bugajski: I would put it this way, that Vucic was
surprised when the new U.S. Special Envoy was appointed. And I
think the reason for that is that Belgrade has become very
comfortable with the European Union, which seemed to muddle
along, no decisions were made, Serbia was not pushed to do
anything, they could sit on their hands, basically, on the
Kosovo question, they were proceeding with these chapters in
the Acquis Communautaire progress in the accession process.
That has all changed suddenly. A Special Envoy has been
appointed by the White House specifically on this question. The
EU itself looks as though it is not just blocking North
Macedonia and Albania into accession talks, it looks as though
the French and others are obstructing the whole idea of
enlargement until there is a major reform of the process. What
does that mean for Serbia? They can close all the chapters and
still not get in.
So, it is a sort of desperate times, I would say. It is in
a way, a very good time to get both sides together. I do not
necessarily think that Vucic wants to make any major
compromises, but if he has no other choices, if this is what
America and the European Union, hopefully working together,
push him, and also push Kosovo on certain questions, that there
has to be agreement if you are to make any progress into any
institutions.
Senator Shaheen. Dr. Ruge, do you agree with that?
Dr. Ruge. On which point? Because there were two--kind of
two separate issues. One was what other priorities should be,
and then the other is this whole question on Kosovo-Serbia,
which is, I think, separate.
Senator Shaheen. Well, I guess I was asking if you agreed
with the premise that the Vucic government does not want to,
ultimately, negotiate away anything to reaching agreement with
Kosovo. But, also, are there other priorities that you think we
should consider in the region?
Dr. Ruge. So, just starting on--because----
Senator Shaheen. Beyond those that----
Dr. Ruge. Beyond----
Senator Shaheen.--you have both clearly stated.
Dr. Ruge. Stated.
Just maybe to start on the question of Vucic's government
in Serbia and Kosovo. There is a sense of urgency that has been
imposed, in the last year or two, to come up with some new
deal. And there are at least 23 existing agreements which have
not yet been--four of them may--have been fully implemented,
the rest has not--which focus on different topics, such as
energy, telecom, diploma recognition, freedom of movement, law
enforcement, regulations of commerce. All of these affect lives
of ordinary citizens in enormous manner, and also affect
economy.
From the point of view of Serbia, it--you just wonder where
did the sense of urgency suddenly come from. One says because
of the European Union. In the best-case scenario, Serbia
cannot--and now it is even questionable whether that would be
the date, but would not accede to the European Union before
2025. And the part with resolving relations with Kosovo, and
recognition is basically a part of the chapter 35, which is the
last chapter.
And so, in terms of prioritization, you wonder why sudden
focus to get some sort of a new deal that reportedly also
involves border change, when so many of the existing agreements
have not been implemented? Will the citizens of Kosovo and
North Kosovo wait until--and for another 6 years to even start
thinking about the implementation of the agreements, which----
Senator Shaheen. So, do you have a theory?
Dr. Ruge. Sorry?
Senator Shaheen. So, do you have a theory about why?
Dr. Ruge. I think that it is very untransparent, and I can
only speculate. The whole process has been kind of, I would
say, driven by influences from the region. I think that
probably President Vucic and Thaci have found some sort of a
common interest as to why to push in this direction, but
neglecting, really, the implementation of all of the existing
agreements that have impact on the lives of their citizens.
And--I mean, going back to the first question of Senator
Johnson is, What is the--kind of, how is the situation changing
on the ground, and how is the new Government of Kosovo going to
address the dialogue? Well, the likely new Prime Minister,
Albin Kurti, has, in fact, said precisely that, that he is
going to focus on substance over speed, and that he is going to
focus on really implementing the existing agreements to--you
know, to improve governance, improve economy, to remove the
hurdles that citizens of especially North Kosovo, but also
elsewhere, face.
We talked about energy earlier. Serbia still controls
Kosovo energy transmission lines. And it blocks it from
importing energy from Albania, which is abundant on hydropower
energy.
So, you know, these are things that I think should
talking--we should be talking about.
Senator Shaheen. I would like to change the subject,
because there are two other areas that I am very concerned
about. When I first visited the Balkans in 2010, one of the
things that impressed me was the vibrant press and media that
existed in all of the countries that we visited--Serbia,
Bosnia-Herzegovina--Kosovo, even. And we are certainly seeing a
change in Serbia, at least, with respect to the availability of
a real free press in that country. And we have seen Russia come
in and by--really take over media outlets in Serbia and become
the dominant media outlet in the country. So, are there things
that you all think we should be thinking about with respect to
maintaining a free press that would help? Because, I think, as
in the United States, ensuring democratic government definitely
involves a free and open media.
Mr. Bugajski: Absolutely, Senator. This is something that
we should focus in on regionwide, not just in Serbia, because,
in many countries--it is not just Russian influence, which is--
--
Senator Shaheen. Right.
Mr. Bugajski:--bad enough, but it is also political
influences, it is businesses influences that control media,
self-censorship that journalists engage in not to offend a
politician or a judge or a prosecutor or some businessman who
owns a paper and wants certain things said. So, this needs to
be covered across the region. I think we need a more vigorous,
NGO-funded campaign for media freedoms. Because I think
actually we assume that each generation acquires the knowledge
from a previous generation. Oftentimes, you have to be taught
from scratch, what is a free media? What is free speech? What
is disinformation? What is propaganda that is not really
checked? Russia, unfortunately, is playing the exact opposite
role. It likes to have the media in control of specific
political parties, because then they inject themselves through
that media to control those parties or control politicians. So,
a lot needs to be done, I think, on media education, on free
media, on discerning--public discerning between real journalism
and fake journalism.
Senator Shaheen. Finally, one of the things that we have
heard some concerns about is terrorism and terrorists in the
Balkans. It is destabilizing, not just for the Balkan
countries, but also poses a threat to Europe and to the United
States. How concerned do you think we should be about
terrorists--either ISIS terrorists coming back into the Balkans
or other terrorists coming from other parts of Russia, Europe,
wherever?
Dr. Ruge. I think I could almost have two answers to this
question. We should be concerned, of course, in terms of--but,
there is kind of different--I would say, two different parts of
the answer. One is, how much should we be concerned about
terrorism within--in the region, in these countries? And, you
know, comparatively speaking, especially when compared to
France and Belgium and other States of the EU, with the Muslim
population--Muslim population in Western Balkans has produced
smaller percentage of foreign fighters than, for example,
France. There have been no major terrorist attacks in the
region. That is not to say that we should not be concerned, but
we should be concerned about two different types of extremism.
There is about--both in, kind of--in--on the Islamist side,
but also on the side of Christian orthodox radicalization. And
so, there is--the estimates are very unreliable, because the
intelligence is not readily available, but, from open sources,
there is about 70 to 200 estimated Serbian volunteers who have
departed to fight in Donbass area of Eastern Ukraine on the
side of pro-Russian forces. So, that is one cause of concern.
The other one is, of course, returning foreign fighters
from----
Senator Shaheen. Right.
Dr. Ruge.--Syria, and especially also now in the Kurdish
territories in northern Syria.
And I have some data on Kosovo and Bosnia. In Kosovo, about
110 of the--of its citizens from the Syrian conflict zone have
returned. Others were left behind in the camps. And in Bosnia,
we have also not such reliable information, but about 100 men
still remain in the camps in Syria, all--about 200 have left
altogether. And so far, Bosnian courts have sentenced 25
persons who have returned, to a total of 47 years, but--47
years. Now, that is just some statistics.
But, when it comes to returns and danger, not just in--not
just in the region, but especially to the EU and the NATO
allies, of transition of foreign fighters to Europe, I would
say what we should be concerned with is, again, institutional
weaknesses in the region and the existence of smuggling
corridors that facilitate unchecked travel from--through the
Western Balkan region. And here again, we come back to the
issue of governance structures, institutional capacities, and
accountability. So, yes, that should be a concern.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Johnson. So, I really have, just, basically, two
remaining areas.
Dr. Ruge, I think you talked about--we need to engage in
Bosnia. My assumption, right or wrong, has always been, Okay,
we got the agreement between Montenegro and Kosovo on their
border dispute, then we got the Prespa Agreement, we are
looking at--probably the next possible dispute resolution would
be between Kosovo and Serbia. And the really snarly one is in
Bosnia. So, in what way should we be engaging with Bosnia at
this point in time? And it is a question for both of you.
Mr. Bugajski: Do you want to start, Majda? Or shall I
start?
You are right, Bosnia, I think, is the tougher nut to
crack. Let us put it this way. Between Kosovo and Serbia, I do
not think there is any possibility or prospect, at this point,
of armed conflict. In other words, the conflict is being
contained by NATO, by the U.S., by the American military
presence, by the NATO presence, by the borders, and by the
recognition of two states. Bosnia continues to be a contested
state. And, as has been pointed out--I think Majda pointed out,
it is not only the Serbian side, the Serbian entity, Dodik and
his people, that are pushing, let us say, toying with this idea
of secession to see what our reaction is, but it is now the
Croats--Croat nationalists are becoming increasingly involved
in pushing for a third entity.
I think maybe we do need another Envoy, or at least one of
the Envoys that has already been appointed, to focus more on
Bosnia. Looking at where we have tried and failed--I think Matt
mentioned Butmir and the April Agreements and so forth,
constitutional changes that we wanted--there has to be some
sort of breakthrough, at some point, in which a civic party
enters government and starts to push, not just at local level,
but at national level, and starts to push away some of the
ethnic quotas, the entity blocking, all the accouterments
within Dayton that are no longer successful and promote state
failure.
Senator Johnson. So, let me, quick, ask. Are you amazed
that Dayton is still, basically, in place after so many years?
And is it--I mean, it is well overdue to be replaced by a
permanent deal, but----
Mr. Bugajski: Yes, absolutely.
Senator Johnson.--I mean, is it really fraying around the
edges, and is it going--you know, can we expect it to go on
much longer?
Mr. Bugajski: No, I have been calling for the end of Dayton
since soon after it was applied, because I saw Dayton as,
basically, stabilizing an internal partition into ethnic
fiefdoms. And that is exactly what happened. I can send you an
article I did about 25 years ago. Not much has moved,
unfortunately. We need either a new Dayton or a complete
reformulation of the principles of this State.
Senator Johnson. So, again, a Special Envoy to really
concentrate on it would an initial first step.
Mr. Bugajski: Getting the three national sides together
with some of the civic party organization, civic parties,
NGO's, and others to learn, ``What is it that you want in
Bosnia? What will work? What is it that can keep citizens here?
What is it that you need from the international community? What
role can the U.S. play?'' I think such a solution has been
pushed to the edges, and we now need to concentrate on it.
Senator Johnson. Because it is hard.
Dr. Ruge, do you have anything to add to that?
Dr. Ruge. I would say, really, it all depends on how much
political capital we are willing to invest. I think this
question cannot be answered, apart, separately, because if we
commit fully, not neglecting other areas, because not that much
is needed in the Balkans, but what is needed is focus, time,
close monitoring, and commitment, then America has enough clout
to do Kosovo, Serbia, and Bosnia simultaneously. And I would
like to remind the committee that these countries and the
issues are very much interconnected. I have been arguing, for
the past year, that the idea that we need to focus on Kosovo
and Serbia, and leave Bosnia for after this issue is solved, is
really a misguided policy, because (a) there is no fix--quick
fix in Kosovo and Serbia, but (b) we cannot wait with Bosnia
while we deal with Serbia and Kosovo. So, again, if there is
political commitment, time, focus, cooperation with key EU
allies on the ground--because we are not doing this alone, and
we are not doing this for the first time. We have been on the
ground for the past 25 years. There is plenty of ideas, policy
proposals, people that can be included. But, basically, what is
really needed is political commitment. And, in that regard, you
know, first of all, I think, while dealing with Kosovo and
Serbia, there needs to be a clear red line that Bosnia and
territorial integrity is not going to be touched. And that is
really key American interest, and it is also key interest of
the region.
Secondly--and I have here a little document, which is the
EU enlargement package and Commission opinion on Bosnia's
readiness for membership, which is full of policy
recommendations and priorities on what needs to be done to
improve functionality of Bosnian State. Unfortunately, this has
now kind of been undermined with the events in Brussels last
week. But, still, all of the actors are still on the ground. No
one has left. The key European Embassies are still the major
actors, because Europe is the major trading partner of these
countries. European Commission and EUSR, they are still there.
American Embassy and capable diplomats and Ambassador, they all
know how to pull in the same direction, work on this agenda.
And I think what is really needed from Washington and from the
capitals in the EU is to empower these actors, to give them
political backing, to say, ``We are all pulling in the same
direction.'' But, these voices and support from Washington need
to be heard more loudly.
Senator Johnson. So, you are saying you need an overall
solution, you cannot just pick and choose, in terms of Serbia-
Kosovo, and then turn your attention. You really need to do the
whole thing.
Dr. Ruge. You----
Senator Johnson.--would you agree with that?
Mr. Bugajski: Yes, I would agree with that. I mean, it is
not one package, let us say, all in one piece, but they are
interlinked.
Senator Johnson. Do you----
Mr. Bugajski: If we made a bad decision over Kosovo, this
will affect Bosnia. If for instance, we allow for a partition
of Kosovo, unilateral, in return for Serbia allowing Kosovo to
enter international institutions, Serbia would then use this as
a precedent, as a pretext for Republika Srpska. And I think
that is what some in the Serbian government are aiming for.
Senator Johnson. So, the last thing I want to talk about is
organized crime. In my chairmanship of Homeland Security, you
go down to Central America, for example, and your eyes are
opened. You know, our insatiable demand for drugs has given
rise to the drug cartels, their untouchables. That creates a
level of impunity. But, you find out it is very difficult for
law enforcement, because you are a new sheriff in town, and you
get a DVD from the drug cartels showing your family going into
church, going into schools.
Went with Senator Murphy, and we visited Ukraine, met with
the new prosecutor generator, who, I think, had to have both
arms twisted off to accept that position, which I actually
found very encouraging, but you got a very good primer, in
terms of the overall corruption within that prosecution--within
those prosecutors then--in Ukraine.
So, can you describe, with that kind of granularity, the
type of organized crime we are talking about in the Western
Balkans? And again, I am not assuming it is common between all
the nations there, but can you describe what we are--what you
are talking about?
Mr. Bugajski: Yes, I would say, Senator, that the Balkans
are both a generator of organized crime, but also a transit
route for organized crime, between the Middle East and Europe,
even between South America and Europe, for some of the cocaine
that comes in to ports on the Adriatic Sea.
In terms of internal generation, there is, unfortunately,
because of the lack of rule of law, lack of judicial reform,
connections between politicians and criminals, which exists
throughout the region--I would not single out any particular
country--this not only corrupts the political system, it also
generates revenue for criminals, it means that borders are
porous for criminals, and then into Europe--a lot of the drugs,
people-smuggling, weapon-smuggling go through the region.
Senator Johnson. So, it needs to be all of the above. It
is----
Mr. Bugajski: All of the above.
Senator Johnson.--drugs, human and sex trafficking, it is--
--
Mr. Bugajski: Exactly. Exactly.
Senator Johnson. Okay.
Mr. Bugajski: One thing I would say, though, and I would
not give up on this. Some moves have been made to try and
tackle this problem. And this is precisely where we should be
supporting any new government that pledges itself to really
tackling corruption, because corruption and crime are often
interlinked. And this is why it is worth watching--we mentioned
Kosovo--the new government, the new ``Prime Minister in
waiting,'' Albin Kurti, has actually said--and he is not
implicated in any criminal behavior; he has never been in
government, so he has not been involved or been tempted by
corruption, even, at this point--he has said that we need an
Elliott Ness in Kosovo, we need somebody that actually deals
with these criminals within our institutions, or linked with
our institutions, and try them, convict them, and imprison
them. That has not happened in the region.
Senator Johnson. Is it as brutal as you see in Central
America?
Mr. Bugajski: I do not know Central America well, I do not
know South America that well. I was in Central America many
years ago. There were Communist insurgencies going on at the
time. Organized crime is not as brutal, in the sense of what I
see going on in places like Mexico and Colombia. I do not think
it is as intrinsic to those societies as it has become in
certain Latin American countries.
Senator Johnson. Thank you.
Senator Shaheen, do you have anything further?
Senator Shaheen. No.
Senator Johnson. Dr. Ruge, did you want to add anything to
that?
Dr. Ruge. On organized crime?
Senator Johnson. Sure. Or anything else. Because I think we
are about ready to close out the hearing, then.
Dr. Ruge. On organized crime, I would just remind how
tightly related organized crime is to ethnic politicians and
existing structures, which are either Dayton peace agreements
constitution in Bosnia, which produces an enormous amount of
overlapping competencies, fragmented institutions, et cetera,
that reduce possibilities for oversight and accountability.
It is an inheritance of a conflict, where, in fact,
criminal combatants, smuggling groups, and ethnic leaders were
connected in one network, and it survived in the aftermath of
the conflict. And I think it is important, both in--from the
point of view of security and economy, but it is also important
to keep this in mind when negotiating any solutions for fixing
either Dayton Peace Agreement, electoral law, structures in
Bosnia, or coming to a solution in northern Kosovo, where we
have an enormous amount of legal loopholes that facilitate
smuggling, tax--obviously, tax evasion that facilitate all
sorts of organized crime. And so, you know, if I would have one
recommendation to Special--to Special Representatives that we
have is to really understand to what extent criminality is
interlinked with the issues that we are discussing under the
pretext of protection of ethnic interests.
Senator Johnson. Okay.
Dr. Ruge. If there is one point I would like you to leave
with it is that on.
My final thank you--and this is--basically, ties to my
final point, is--I cannot overemphasize how important it is to
give political support to your career professionals on the
ground who are--who have, you know, institutional memory, who
know what is happening, and who are really trying to push back
against everything that we have identified in this testimony.
And, just as an anecdote, to quote a name of a person who
has actually helped me come here, is your Consular Officer,
Anthony Bronson, in Berlin, who has gone beyond the call of
duty and turned up in the Consulate at 5:30 a.m. in Berlin to
issue me a visa so that I could actually make my plane and come
to Washington.
So, I will leave you with that.
Thank you.
Senator Johnson. Again, I appreciate you giving him a
shout-out.
Senator Shaheen?
Senator Shaheen. Well, yes, I was going to say that. I
think we very much appreciate the expertise, the experience,
and the commitment of our dedicated Foreign Service
professionals, and I appreciate your pointing that out and
recognizing just what a difference they make.
Thank you both very much for your testimony.
Senator Johnson. So, you guys--you seem like you want to
say something.
Mr. Bugajski: No, just thank you, at this point.
Senator Johnson. Okay.
Well, again, I want to thank both you witnesses. I have,
personally, found this hearing to be very informative, which is
the point of----
Senator Shaheen. Not always the case.
Senator Johnson. Well, it is the point of hearings. So,
again, thank you very much.
The hearing record will remain open, for the submission of
statements or question, until the close of business on Friday,
October 25th.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:40 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
----------
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
Responses of Deputy Assistant Secretary Matthew A. Palmer to Questions
Submitted by Ranking Member Robert Menendez
Question. The appointment of U.S. Ambassador to Germany Richard
Grenell as Special Presidential Envoy for Serbia and Kosovo Peace
Negotiations only a month after you were appointed as Special
Representative for the Western Balkans raises many questions about the
decision-making process around this appointment:
Ahead of Ambassador Grenell's appointment, did the State Department
request or recommend the appointment of a Special Presidential Envoy
for Serbia and Kosovo Peace Negotiations in addition to the already-
created Special Representative for the Western Balkans?
Answer. The State Department and White House consulted on the
appointment, and the Department welcomed Ambassador Grenell's
appointment as Special Presidential Envoy for Serbia and Kosovo Peace
Negotiations. Along with my appointment by Secretary Pompeo as Special
Representative for the Western Balkans, Ambassador Grenell's role
underscores the sustained commitment of the United States to the region
and the importance we place on the normalization of relations between
Kosovo and Serbia.
Question. Did the White house ask for the State Department's input
before appointing Ambassador Grenell to this additional role? Did the
White House notify you or the State Department before publicly
announcing Ambassador Grenell's appointment on October 3rd?
Answer. The White House consulted directly with the State
Department on Ambassador Grenell's appointment.
Question. How much of his time is Ambassador Grenell dedicating to
this envoy position? What impact has the time Ambassador Grenell spends
on his additional role had on Embassy Berlin's ability to conduct
diplomatic engagements with the German government? In your response,
please do not refer us to Ambassador Grenell or Embassy Berlin.
Answer. Ambassador Grenell has energetically engaged on Kosovo and
Serbia, in addition to his duties in Berlin. Like the late Ambassador
Richard Holbrooke, who worked to advance peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina during his tenure as U.S. Ambassador to Germany, Ambassador
Grenell is encouraging a durable peace in Kosovo and Serbia while
simultaneously engaging his German counterparts and advancing U.S.
interests in Germany. The Germans, too, are very interested in peace
talks between Kosovo and Serbia.
Question. The process of creating multiple overlapping positions
within such a short timeframe seems to have taken Serbia's government
aback, with President Vucic commenting that ``This was surprising news
to us. You know we have talks and negotiations under the auspices of
the European Union, and we already had in mind the special envoy,
Palmer; we have a fair relationship with him. Now, apparently,
President Trump has appointed a new man as a special envoy.''
Were the governments of Serbia and Kosovo notified of Ambassador
Grenell's appointment ahead of the public announcement on October 3d,
and who notified them? How has the confusion around Ambassador
Grenell's appointment impacted his ability to work with the Serbian
government? How has it impacted your work?
Answer. The State Department had no communication with the
governments of Kosovo or Serbia on the announcement before October 3.
Leaders in both Belgrade and Pristina welcomed Ambassador Grenell's
appointment, which underscores the attention the United States is
devoting to supporting efforts to reach a locally-owned agreement on
the normalization of relations. On October 4, Serbian President Vucic
publicly stated that Grenell is, ``A serious and responsible person, a
person with the trust of the American President.'' Ambassador Grenell
spoke by phone with Kosovo President Thaci and Serbian President Vucic
shortly after his appointment and met with leaders and business
officials in both countries during October 8-9 visits to Pristina and
Belgrade. Ambassador Grenell and I closely coordinate our activities,
which are mutually reinforcing. I will continue to be a regular visitor
to both Pristina and Belgrade where I will meet with a wide range of
public officials and civil society actors to advance U.S. interests.
Question. During the hearing you described your relationship with
Ambassador Grenell as more of a partnership than a division of
responsibilities, but going forward I am concerned that having multiple
officials with overlapping responsibilities will create unclear lines
of communication for our international partners:
If you do not have divided responsibilities and are simply
coordinating on the portfolios, what is the point of having two
positions that basically do the same thing? How do you and Ambassador
Grenell divide up serving as the main contact for the governments of
Serbia and Kosovo as well as other international partners and by whom
was it communicated? On what issues do foreign governments reach out to
you as the primary point of contact and on what issues do they reach
out to Ambassador Grenell?
Answer. This is not the first time there have been multiple U.S.
Government representatives to the Western Balkans. During the Clinton
Administration, both Ambassador Holbrooke and Ambassador Gelbard were
involved in seeking to mediate peace between the Milosevic regime and
Kosovo officials, including the Kosovo Liberation Army.
Today, in addition to our Chiefs of Mission in the region, having a
Presidential Special Envoy for Serbia and Kosovo Peace Negotiations and
a Special Representative of the Secretary of State for the Western
Balkans underscores the importance we place on this region. Ambassador
Grenell, our Embassies in Belgrade and Pristina, and I work closely
together toward a common objective--normalization of Kosovo-Serbia
relations. Our interlocutors in the region and throughout Europe
understand that the United States is focused on facilitating a positive
outcome and they can engage any appropriate U.S. Government official
and receive a coordinated response on U.S. policy.
Question. How frequently does Ambassador Grenell talk to personnel
at the White House about Serbia-Kosovo negotiations? With whom at the
White House does he discuss the negotiations? Do you or other State
Department officials participate in conversations that Ambassador
Grenell has with the White House? If not, does he provide you and the
State Department with readouts of the conversations afterwards? Do you
or other State Department officials help Ambassador Grenell prepare for
those conversations? In your response, please do not refer us to
Ambassador Grenell, Embassy Berlin, or the White House.
Answer. Ambassador Grenell, the staff of the National Security
Council, our Ambassadors in the field, and I are in regular
communication to advance U.S. interests in the Western Balkans, which
includes reinvigorating Kosovo-Serbia negotiations. The State
Department has provided Ambassador Grenell with regular briefings, and
he has participated in briefings held in Berlin by European leaders.
There is frequent coordination on these issues at both senior and
working levels to support the governments in Pristina and Belgrade as
they work toward a locally owned agreement that is durable,
implementable, and advances regional stability and prosperity.
Question. In your testimony, you stated that Ambassador Grenell is
someone who can bring ``the full weight and heft of the White House to
this problem set.'' You also work for the U.S. government. Do you not
feel that you can bring ``the full weight and heft of the White House
to this problem set''? If not, why not?
Answer. Ambassador Grenell's direct access to the President and
ability to act on his behalf ensures we can play a pivotal role and
underscores the political capital we are investing into U.S. engagement
in support of progress on Serbia-Kosovo. Ambassador Grenell has had
regular discussions with President Trump on these issues. His work is
complemented and reinforced by the Secretary of State's attention to
this vital region, as evidenced by my appointment as his Special
Representative. The United States is committed to helping the region
succeed and, as part of this, places tremendous importance on the
normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia, a crucial element
of the Western Balkans' integration into the West.
Question. I share your disappointment with the EU's failure to open
accession talks with North Macedonia and Albania and am concerned about
how that will impact the Balkans' trajectory. Please provide a detailed
list of engagements the State Department has had with the French
government and any other governments State believes were involved in
blocking the opening of talks regarding this issue, including who was
involved in the engagements and when they occurred. Please provide
copies of cable traffic describing U.S. diplomatic efforts on this
problem. Your answer can be provided in classified format if necessary.
Answer. The State Department engaged extensively in support of
North Macedonia and Albania's EU accession with all EU member states
and EU institutions and will continue to do so.
The State Department demarched all 28 EU member states in support
of North Macedonia and Albania's EU accession three times from March to
October, 2019. In advance of the October European Council decision,
U.S. Ambassadors to France and Germany spoke with senior foreign
government officials to encourage consensus decisions at the European
Council in support of North Macedonia and Albania. I personally
traveled in early October to Paris, The Hague, and Berlin, to reiterate
and underscore this message to senior government officials in those
capitals. Senior State Department officials, including Secretary
Pompeo, Deputy Secretary Sullivan, Under Secretary Hale, and Acting
Assistant Secretary Reeker regularly pressed the issue in bilateral
meetings and multilateral fora involving European leaders.
Question. I am deeply concerned that USAID is moving to reduce its
presence in Albania, especially as China ramps up its own presence. As
you stated in response to Senator Murphy, what your counterparts in the
Balkans want ``is people, what they want is time and attention, what
they want are meetings . . . what they want is to know they have our
attention.'' This USAID reduction in presence move is precisely the
opposite of what you said our Balkan partners want.
What have Albanian officials said to you regarding the planned
reduction of USAID personnel? How does State assess this drawdown will
impact U.S. influence in Albania and the Albanian government's and
people's perceptions of the U.S.? What message do you believe this
reduction sends to Albania and to the Balkans as a whole regarding U.S.
commitment to the region?
Answer. Reaction from the Government of Albania to USAID's
transition plan has been mixed. USAID reports that their Albanian
counterparts understand that USAID intends its transition as an
indication of the United States' confidence in the GOA's commitment and
capacity to become a more self-reliant country, able and willing to
lead in solving its own development challenges. Albanian officials have
sought assurances from the U.S. Embassy in Tirana that we will continue
supporting programs aimed at bolstering democratic institutions,
strengthening good governance, and improving transparency and
accountability.
Over the next 2 years, USAID will narrow the focus of its programs
to target the priority sectors of countering corruption and economic
growth. By 2021, USAID anticipates the launch of a new legacy
initiative to continue important work in these sectors. USAID's
transition plan calls for a gradual reduction of its presence in
Albania. By the end of CY2021 USAID will be led by a Senior Development
Advisor (SDA) and supported by two Foreign Service National (FSN)
staff. The SDA will consult with key GOA officials, other donors, civil
society, and the U.S. interagency on priority development issues, and
engage with the private sector and relevant business associations to
develop new investments. USAID currently has a staff of one U.S. Direct
Hire and eight FSNs.
Albania is a strategic NATO ally and partner. The State Department
will continue to support Albania's Euro-Atlantic integration with other
foreign assistance programs, including programs funded through the
Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement (INL) and U.S.
Embassy Tirana's Public Affairs Section (PAS), to strengthen the
justice sector, promote freedom of expression, combat organized crime
and violent extremism, and improve border security. This continued,
strong commitment to helping Albania achieve its desired Western
integration reflects the United States' broader, enduring commitment to
the region overall.
Question. How will the presence of S-400's in Serbia impact any
U.S. or NATO exercises running concurrently or any U.S. or NATO troops
who would be there at the same time? How will Serbia's decision to
conduct an exercise with Russia and S-400's impact future U.S. and NATO
exercises and other interactions with Serbia? Is Serbia looking to
purchase S-400's in the future? Your answer can be provided in
classified format if necessary. In your response, please do not refer
us to the Department of Defense.
Answer. Serbia hosted a joint military exercise with Russia, known
as ``Slavic Shield 2019,'' October 23-29, 2019. According to the
Russian and Serbian Ministries of Defense, Russia deployed S-400 and
Pantsir-S systems for use during the exercise. During the time these
systems were there, there were no U.S. or NATO exercises in Serbia.
While we respect Serbia's right to host exercises on its own territory
with military partners, we have urged the Government to make decisions
that reflect the value it places on its partnership with both NATO and
the United States. The State Department is not aware of plans by Serbia
to purchase S-400's.
Question. In response to a question for the record on Russian
military equipment deliveries to Serbia, Ambassador Godfrey (then a
nominee) stated that ``Press reports indicate that Russia has agreed to
supply Serbia with additional military equipment, but reports differ on
the numbers and types. Equipment recently reported in the press
includes 20 additional BRDM-2Ms armored wheeled vehicles, 30 used T-72
main battle tanks, and Pantsir-S1 air defense systems.''
Has any of this equipment been delivered? Please provide an updated
list of deliveries of Russian military equipment to Serbia since July
2019 and an updated list of reported future deliveries of Russian
military equipment to Serbia, including whether Serbia has signed a
contract for those deliveries and delivery dates are planned. Answer
can be provided in classified format if necessary.
Answer. President Vucic told the press that on July 19, 2019,
Serbia received 10 BRDM-2MS armored scout cars from Russia--an upgraded
variant of a vehicle long in Serbia's inventory. The Serbian government
has not released any information on costs or payments for transport or
upgrades. These vehicle donations reportedly were part of a larger deal
with Russia announced in 2016 that included six MiG-29s delivered in
2017; 20 additional BRDM-2MS vehicles still pending delivery; and 30 T-
72 main battle tanks also still pending delivery. On October 16, the
Serbian government received three new Mi-17V5 military transport
helicopters that it purchased from Russia. Press reported that the
helicopters were delivered to Serbia by Russian military aircraft.
According to press and the Serbian Ambassador to Russia, four Mi-35M
attack helicopters, also purchased from Russia, will arrive soon. On
October 22, components of a Russian military-operated S-400 (SA-21
GROWLER) arrived in Serbia via Russian military aircraft to participate
in a joint Russian-Serbian air defense exercise. On October 23, two
Pantsir S (SA-22 GREYHOUND) arrived in Serbia to participate in the
same exercise. President Vucic publicly stated on October 25 that
Serbia had ``ordered'' and ``paid for'' the Pantsir system. It is
unclear if the systems delivered by Russia to Serbia on October 23
would then transfer to the Serbian armed forces. On October 26, the
Serbian minister of defense said that ``Pantsir is now becoming a part
of the armed forces of Serbia.''
Question. You testified that the difficulties in arranging
international finance for the Kosova e Re plant were due more to a
general disinclination to fund new coal plants more than any particular
objections to this specific plant. However, when announcing that they
would not fund the project the World Bank said ``We are required by our
by-laws to go with the lowest cost option and renewables have now come
below the cost of coal.'' Several independent assessments have reached
similar conclusions:
In light of the fact that the economics of Kosovo's energy options
have changed considerably with the plummeting costs of renewables, when
did the State Department last update its economic assessment of this
project? Can you please share with the committee the State Department's
most recent economic analysis that demonstrates that the World Bank is
wrong, and that coal remains the least cost solution?
Answer. USAID funded a June 2019 study of electricity supply
options, based on the Government of Kosovo's energy strategy. The study
found the costs of implementing a generation mix that included coal and
renewables--as established by the Kosovo energy strategy--were on par
with the costs of other power supply scenarios. Further, a number of
shortcomings in the World Bank's study were identified: among the most
critical was its analysis of Kosovo's electricity sector as an
isolated, single system, disregarding the regional electricity market's
value in providing potential electricity trading and import/export
opportunities. The World Bank report also made no allowance for the
importance of energy security in a region beset with grievances from
past conflicts.
In addition to cost considerations, Kosovo's long-term national
security depends on securing a robust and reliable supply of energy. At
present, Kosovo relies on two of the region's oldest and most polluting
power plants--Kosovo A and B--for 97 percent of domestic electricity
generation. In addition, Kosovo's ability to secure regional market
access to imports on commercial terms is severely hampered by the fact
that Serbia currently controls its energy connections to the European
Grid. Kosova e Re will rely on proven domestic resources and
incorporate the latest environmental technology that will reduce dust,
sulfur, and emissions of dangerous gases including sulphur oxides,
nitrogen dioxide, and carbon dioxide from their current levels.
If this project fails, Kosovo may be forced to consider
alternatives that include Russian-sourced energy. Many Balkan nations
and much of southeast Europe are either directly or indirectly affected
by Russian energy policies and supply; those that are gasified rely
almost exclusively on Russia as a supplier. In order to maintain its
energy independence, Kosovo needs new generation, and Kosova e Re is
the most practical, most efficient, and most feasible option.
Supporting this project is squarely in the U.S. national interest.
Question. The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD) is already funding renewable projects in Kosovo, EBRD is helping
the government organize a renewable energy procurement tender, and both
EBRD and the International Finance Corporation (IFC) are considering
funding additional solar and wind projects:
Does the State Department support these efforts by IFC and EBRD?
Why or why not? How will the reduced capacity factor of the coal plant
caused by these projects coming on line affect (1) the economics of the
proposed coal plant and (2) the electricity rates for Kosovo's
households and businesses? Please provide State's most recent analysis
of that effect.
Answer. The State Department enthusiastically supports renewable
projects in Kosovo and around the world. Kosova e Re, as currently
planned, would add a negligible amount of net capacity to Kosovo's
overall generation capacity, because it would replace approximately
600MW of current coal-fired generation capacity. For this reason,
Kosova e Re and renewables are complementary and equally necessary. The
renewable projects will not reduce the capacity factor of the coal
plant, and will not be the only factor impacting electricity rates for
Kosovo's consumers. Given that current electricity generation comes
from fully-depreciated assets, any new generation is likely to result
in changes to energy costs that will be reflected in energy tariffs
that have yet to be determined by the energy regulatory authority.
Question. Will the State Department commit to refraining from
exerting any political influence over the Development Finance
Corporation's deliberations and decision-making processes regarding
consideration of providing support for the Kosova e Re project
proposal--a process that, as outlined in the BUILD Act, must be made on
basis of a project's merit and delivery of wide-ranging and inclusive
development outcomes?
Answer. The State Department commits to following all appropriate
requirements pertaining to the Development Finance Corporation.
Question. Independent analysis has shown that the Kosova e Re
project would create an enormous financial burden for the Government of
Kosovo. ContourGlobal expects the project to cost =1.3 billion, seventy
percent of which will be financed with debt, and 30 percent with
equity. Under the PPA, all of the fixed costs--including the equity
return and the debt payments--must be covered by Kosovo, and Kosovo
will also absorb significant additional operational costs. This is a
huge burden to bear for a country with a GDP of U.S. $7.25 billion:
Please provide State's most recent assessment of the financial and
economic risks this agreement poses to the Government of Kosovo. How do
these risks compare to those of the renewable alternatives that the
World Bank preferred and are currently being pursued by EBRD and IFC?
Is the State Department concerned that such a large single investment
will crowd out the Government's ability to finance projects and
programs to achieve other important public priorities? If not, why not?
Answer. The State Department acknowledges the inherent risks in
large-scale infrastructure projects. However, IMF statistics show
Kosovo's debt load to be consistently under 20 percent of GDP. This is
considerably lower than in other countries in the region where debt
burdens range from 38 percent in Bosnia and Herzegovina to 74 percent
in Montenegro.
Today, Kosovo's economy loses $350-$400 million annually due to its
persistent power outages. The Kosova e Re project is the largest and
most economically important investment ever attempted by Kosovo, and it
is vital to the country's economic future. Certainly these were some of
the judgments that led the government of Kosovo to make the Kosova e Re
project the cornerstone of its energy policy. The State Department
supports the Kosovo government's pursuit of its energy objectives.
Question. At the time the contract to build the plant was awarded,
Kosovo law required that a minimum of two bidders must tender bids for
a bid to be legally accepted. However, only ContourGlobal submitted a
bid for the project:
Given the concerns you raised in your testimony about how cronyism
and rule of law concerns adversely affect the business environment for
foreign investors, how should the incoming government address the fact
that the procurement process violated Kosovo law?
Answer. The initial planning and procurement for this project began
approximately 13 years ago. In the first round of bidding, in 2006,
four out of six interested firms prequalified. There were four more
bidding rounds between 2010 and 2015, each generating less interest. In
2015, only ContourGlobal (which had bid in every preceding round)
remained interested.
The procurement process in 2015 was led by the Government of Kosovo
Ministry of Economic Development (MED) Project Implementation Unit with
assistance from IFC transaction advisors, and conducted according to
World Bank standards. At its conclusion, no objections or appeals were
filed--including from international financial institutions.
Question. The European Energy Community is now considering whether
the provisions of the contract between ContourGlobal and Kosovo are
compliant with the Energy Community State Aid requirements. The
Secretariat of the European Energy Community made a preliminary
determination that the Agreement may violate state-aid prohibitions by
allocating project risks ``entirely in favor of ContourGlobal,'' and by
shielding ContourGlobal from virtually all of the risks associated with
operating a power plant:
Is this the kind of cronyism that you testified the State
Department is working to end? If Kosovo is found to be in violation of
its treaty obligations, how will it affect the goals of creating closer
ties between Kosovo and the EU, EU ascension, and regional economic
integration? Does this arrangement affect U.S. interests in promoting
an open and competitive business environment in Kosovo, and our
interest in being seen to do so consistently and credibly?
Answer. The Energy Community's prohibition on state aid includes an
exception for new generation necessary to achieve security of supply.
To our knowledge, no case on state aid to date has been opened against
Kosovo. In the event one is filed, we understand the Government of
Kosovo believes it has well-founded legal arguments.
Given the investment climate in Kosovo, a fixed power purchase
agreement was considered necessary to provide guarantees to potential
investors. If Kosovo were to be found in violation of its treaty
obligations, the U.S. would expect the affected parties to negotiate a
solution in good faith.
Question. You testified that it was not only financing that was
holding up this project; that there were things that Government
ministries and officials needed to do if this project is to be
implemented:
Please elaborate on what, specifically, you believe the Government
of Kosovo must accomplish or do differently to get this project
started. Is part of this related to environmental assessment and public
consultation? Please explain any steps that you believe the Government
must take to address these issues.
Answer. While ground breaking is many months away and project
commissioning is not expected until mid-2024, substantial progress has
been made on technical, environmental, and financial tasks since the
contract was signed in December 2017. There are several outstanding
tasks necessary to reach financial closure and move forward with
construction. Some will be challenging for the Government of Kosovo to
complete. The most critical tasks at the moment are obtaining
legislative approval of the state guaranty, securing authorization for
tax incentives incorporated into the contract, completing the power
purchase agreements (PPA), finalizing and beginning implementation of
the mine development plan, and eventually acquiring any necessary
approvals on State Aid issues from the Energy Community.
Question. Completion of a new 500 MW coal plant will also make it
extremely difficult--if not impossible for Kosovo to meet its
commitment under the Energy Community Treaty to reach 25 percent of its
total final energy consumption from renewable energy sources by 2020,
let alone the more stringent targets the Energy Community is expected
to adopt for 2030:
How do you believe that Kosovo should factor these treaty
commitments into its energy sector planning?
Answer. Kosovo is committed to achieving its renewable energy
target of 25 percent by 2020. These commitments are written into law,
and Kosovo is poised to meet them, most likely in 2021. According to
Eurostat, 24.6 percent of Kosovo's total energy consumption comes from
renewables. This data has also been validated by the Energy Community
Secretariat. Support for the KRPP project does not adversely affect
this commitment. In fact, renewable energy continues to benefit from
priority dispatch and thus is arguably better positioned in the market
than other generation.
[all]