- STATE OF PLAY: FEDERAL IT IN 2018
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
STATE OF PLAY: FEDERAL IT IN 2018
=======================================================================
JOINT HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
AND THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MARCH 14, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-75
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://oversight.house.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
31-105 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform
Trey Gowdy, South Carolina, Chairman
John J. Duncan, Jr., Tennessee
Elijah E. Cummings, Maryland,
Darrell E. Issa, California
Ranking Minority Member
Jim Jordan, Ohio
Carolyn B. Maloney, New York
Mark Sanford, South Carolina
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Justin Amash, Michigan
Columbia
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri
Scott DesJarlais, Tennessee
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Blake Farenthold, Texas
Jim Cooper, Tennessee
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Thomas Massie, Kentucky
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Mark Meadows, North Carolina
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Ron DeSantis, Florida
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Dennis A. Ross, Florida
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Rod Blum, Iowa
Jimmy Gomez, Maryland
Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Peter Welch, Vermont
Steve Russell, Oklahoma
Matt Cartwright, Pennsylvania
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Will Hurd, Texas
Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
Gary J. Palmer, Alabama
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland
James Comer, Kentucky
Paul Mitchell, Michigan
Greg Gianforte, Montana
Sheria Clarke, Staff Director
William McKenna, General Counsel
Meghan Green, Counsel
Troy Stock, Information Technology Subcommittee Staff Director
Julie Dunne, Government Operations Subcommittee Staff Director
Sharon Casey, Deputy Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Information Technology
Will Hurd, Texas, Chairman
Paul Mitchell, Michigan, Vice Chair
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois, Ranking
Darrell E. Issa, California
Minority Member
Justin Amash, Michigan
Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Steve Russell, Oklahoma
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Blake Farenthold, Texas
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Greg Gianforte, Montana
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
------
Subcommittee on Government Operations
Mark Meadows, North Carolina, Chairman
Jody B. Hice, Georgia, Vice Chair
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia,
Jim Jordan, Ohio
Ranking Minority Member
Mark Sanford, South Carolina
Carolyn B. Maloney, New York
Thomas Massie, Kentucky
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Ron DeSantis, Florida
Columbia
Dennis A. Ross, Florida
Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri
Rod Blum, Iowa
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hearing held on March 14, 2018...................................
1
WITNESSES
Mr. David Powner, Director of IT Management Issues, U.S.
Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................
3
Written Statement............................................
6
The Honorable Margaret Weichert, Deputy Director for Management,
Office of Management and Budget
Oral Statement...............................................
47
Written Statement............................................
49
Mr. Bill Zielinski, Deputy Assistant Commissioner of the IT
Category, U.S. General Services Administration
Oral Statement...............................................
59
Written Statement............................................
61
The Honorable Jeanette Manfra, Assistant Secretary for the Office
of Cybersecurity and Communications, U.S. Department of
Homeland Security
Oral Statement...............................................
66
Written Statement............................................
68
APPENDIX
Response from Ms. Weichert, OMB, to Questions for the Record.....
92
Response from Mr. Zielinski, GSA, to Questions for the Record....
94
STATE OF PLAY: FEDERAL IT IN 2018
----------
Wednesday, March 14, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Information Technology, joint with
the Subcommittee on Government Operations,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 3:16 p.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Will Hurd
[chairman of the Subcommittee on Information Technology]
presiding.
Present from the Subcommittee on Information Technology:
Representatives Hurd, Gianforte, Kelly, and Krishnamoorthi.
Present from the Subcommittee on Government Operations:
Representatives Hice, Blum, Connolly, and Maloney.
Mr. Hurd. The Subcommittee on Information Technology and
the Subcommittee on Government Operations will come to order.
And, without objection, the presiding member is authorized
to declare a recess at any time.
Good afternoon. Sorry for the wait, but it is Washington,
D.C. And the House of Congress is the people's House, but
sometimes we get a little delayed.
We have had momentum over the last couple years. I think
this year, or this Congress, with the Federal IT modernization
effort through the passage of the MGT Act, the Modernizing
Government Technology Act, we have gained strength and force.
This, now a law, is bipartisan legislation that will, for the
first time, reward and incentivize Federal agencies and CIOs to
cut costs and invest in cutting-edge technology.
The effort, also, of modernization has gained momentum from
Trump administration initiatives like establishing the Office
of American Innovation, releasing an IT modernization report,
and retaining good ideas from the previous administration,
including the U.S. Digital Service.
I am concerned, however, that in some areas we have lost
momentum. We went too long without a Federal CIO. I am glad Ms.
Kent is now in the position and look forward to having her up
here before the committee within the next few months.
I am also pleased that Ms. Weichert is in place as the
Deputy Director for Management at OMB.
I have spoken to my former colleague, Director Mulvaney,
about our efforts here in the subcommittee and how we can work
together to modernize government. He is an enthusiastic
supporter of using emerging technologies to make government
more efficient and accountable.
We need to rethink how we structure the Federal workforce,
to ensure the Federal Government has access to smart, well-
trained IT and cybersecurity professionals, and be working in a
bipartisan fashion, as always, in introducing a bill in the
coming months to establish the U.S. cyber reserves, a public/
private-sector rotational workforce. I look forward to the
witnesses' thoughts on how to best organize and structure this
kind of workforce.
I also continue to have concerns about longstanding GAO
recommendations that remain unaddressed, oftentimes year after
year after year. These open, lingering vulnerabilities put us
at incredible risk, as we saw with the devastating data breach
at OPM, which it is crazy to think was almost 3 years ago.
I want to hear from GAO their most critical open
recommendations and, from the rest of the witnesses, concrete
plans to close them. Let's use this hearing to ensure IT
modernization across the Federal Government continues, even
with more force and strength, in 2018. Let's not lose the
momentum.
And, as always, it is an honor to be exploring these very
important issues in a bipartisan fashion with my friend, the
ranking member, the one and only, the Honorable Robin Kelly
from Illinois.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for calling
today's hearing on the Federal Government's information
technology.
These two subcommittees have prioritized holding agencies
accountable for their compliance with the Federal Information
Technology Acquisition Reform Act in the effort to modernize
our legacy IT systems. We have managed to work in a bipartisan
manner not only to conduct oversight but to introduce
legislation seeking to address the Nation's IT and
cybersecurity problems.
Improving the efficiency and security of the Federal
Government's IT system is essential to our Nation's security.
In order to improve the efficiency and security, we must
modernize legacy IT systems across every Federal agency.
The Federal Government spends nearly $60 billion just to
sustain its existing outdated IT. When agencies must spend 75
percent of their IT budgets merely to maintain legacy systems,
they predictably fall behind in the effort to modernize.
That is why the Modernizing Government Technology Act of
2017 is critical to shoring up our Nation's cybersecurity and
moving us forward. MGT is now law. It creates a working capital
fund called the Technology Modernization Fund that will have
money for efforts like cloud migration for agency CIOs to think
creatively about modernization.
The next couple of months will determine whether the MGT
Act is allowed to spur that type of innovation. I was pleased
to see that the President's proposal budget called for $228
million for the modernization fund. OMB Director Mulvaney
recently released a memo to agencies with guidance on MGT's
implementation.
The board overseeing the modernization fund is in place. It
is now up to Congress to fund this important effort. Our
government technology is too outdated to allow this opportunity
to pass us by.
By allocating these funds, we further our goals under
FITARA to fully empower agency CIOs. I view the MGT Act as a
natural complement of FITARA. We cannot speak about important
efforts, like moving to the cloud and data center
consolidations, without providing the funding necessary to make
that happen.
In addition to modernizing our technology, we must
modernize our Federal workforce to make sure they have the
tools and skills necessary to address the problems of not only
today but tomorrow.
In 2016, GAO found that the evolving array of cyber-based
threats continue to pose a risk to our national security. The
government's inability to attract and retain qualified cyber
professionals throughout the government threatens our ability
to address these cyber threats. Therefore, attracting IT and
cybersecurity talent is critical to the safety of every
American and the security of our country.
I hope that our witnesses can update us on the state of the
Federal IT and how each agency plans to address the
opportunities and challenges facing the Federal Government.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Ranking Member Kelly.
And when the ranking member and chair of Government
Operations get here, we will allow them to have opening
remarks, if they do. But now it is a pleasure to introduce our
witnesses.
Mr. David Powner, probably our most visits to this
committee of anybody in government. Thanks for being here. And
he is the Director of IT Management Issues at GAO.
The Honorable Margaret Weichert, Deputy Director for
Management at the Office of Management and Budget. Thank you
for being here.
Mr. Bill Zielinski, Deputy Assistant Commissioner of the IT
Category at the General Services Administration.
And last but not least, the Honorable Jeanette Manfra,
Assistant Secretary for the Office of Cybersecurity and
Communications at the Department of Homeland Security.
Welcome to you all. And pursuant to committee rules, all
witnesses will be sworn in before you testify, so please stand
and raise your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm the testimony you are about
to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth, so help you God?
Thank you.
Please let the record reflect that the witnesses answered
in the affirmative.
In order to allow time for discussion, please limit your
opening remarks to 4 minutes. Your entire written statement
will be part of the record.
And as a reminder, the clock in front of you shows the
remaining time during your opening statement. The light will
turn yellow when you have 30 seconds left and red when your
time is up. Please also remember to press the button for the
speaker.
So, with that, Mr. Powner, welcome back.
WITNESS STATEMENTS
STATEMENT OF DAVID POWNER
Mr. Powner. Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly, and
members of the subcommittee, I would like to commend your
subcommittee for your consistent and thorough oversight of IT
and cybersecurity issues, in particular with FITARA and with
recently moving the FITARA Enhancement Act and MGT.
This afternoon, I will highlight top priorities for OMB and
agencies. My comments will address three broad areas: human
capital, acquisitions, and operations.
CIO authorities still need to be strengthened, despite
significant improvements from FITARA. Your push to elevate
these positions at departments and agencies is still needed.
Currently, 13 of the 24 CIOs report to the DEPSEC or higher.
OMB plays a critical role here, especially with the recent
focus on agency reorganizations.
Also, cybersecurity and IT workforce needs to be further
strengthened. Specifically, we still need to properly identify
and tackle our workforce gaps. Properly addressing many of
these needs with contractors is a critical part of the solution
here. GAO has ongoing government-wide reviews looking at both
the cybersecurity and IT workforce needs.
Turning to improvements on major acquisitions, we still
need to stay the course with major provisions in FITARA. This
starts with incremental development. Your scorecard shows major
progress in this area, but we still have too many projects not
tackling this in manageable segments.
We also need to have IT shops aware of IT contracts so that
we can avoid duplication and to ensure the right governance
over these acquisitions. A recent contracting review was
discouraging, as only one-third of the agencies had a process
to approve IT contracts consistent with FITARA and OMB
guidance.
And of our sample of almost 100 contracts, only 10 percent
were approved by CIOs or their designee. Strengthening the
relationship between CIOs and chief acquisition officers is
needed.
We also believe the Nation's top Federal IT acquisitions
should have OMB governance over them in addition to agency
governance. The top acquisitions should include VA and DOD's
EHR acquisitions, IRS's K-2 project, SSA's disability case
processing system, and FAA's NextGen acquisitions.
The reason these acquisitions need OMB's attention is
because these agencies, left alone, haven't managed them well.
The administration's attention to VA's EHR solution is spot-on;
we just need more of this. We have a review underway where we
are identifying and profiling these most critical acquisitions.
Regarding operational systems, again, we need to stay the
course with FITARA. Data center optimization metrics provide
great transparency on where agencies are at with their
optimization metrics. And extending the sunset date from 2018
to 2020 will give agencies more time to both optimize and save.
A couple key points here: Savings still can be significant
as we optimize space and equipment. And the MGT working capital
funds can be used to invest in unfunded priorities.
Also, these agencies who can't optimize by 2020 need to get
out of the data center business. We plan to report annually
through 2020 on agencies' data center progress.
We also believe that the Nation's most mission-critical
legacy systems that are costly to maintain and pose significant
cyber risk due to unsupported software need to be replaced with
modern, secure technologies and ultimately decommissioned.
OMB needs to have an active role here to ensure that these
old systems, like VA's VistA system and IRS's Individual Master
File, have plans to replace and decommission.
The administration's recent modernization strategy was
solid on network modernization, shared services, and cyber but
light on tackling these most challenging modernization efforts.
CIOs with average tenures of 2 years don't always focus on
these longer-term, challenging legacy systems, which is even
more reason for OMB to drive this. We have a review underway
where we are identifying and profiling these legacy systems
most in need of modernization.
In conclusion, the American Tech Council, the Office of
Innovation, and the modernization strategy are all positive
developments. Now we need more action and implementation from
OMB and agencies.
Key focus areas should be on fixing CIO authorities in the
IT workforce; regarding acquisitions: incremental development,
CIO alignment with acquisitions, and the focus on our Nation's
top acquisitions is needed. On the operations side, data center
optimization and mission-critical legacy modernization need
continued attention.
Finally, the Comptroller General held a forum with prior
Federal and agency CIOs from previous administrations in late
2016 to explore what has worked over the years in Federal IT.
The results of this forum, summarized on page 10 of my written
statement, are consistent with the comments here this afternoon
and highlight the critical role OMB leadership plays.
Mr. Chairman, again, thank you for your oversight of
Federal IT.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Powner follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Hurd. Thanks for being an important partner on this.
And I misspoke. I apologize. Everybody has 5 minutes.
So, Ms. Weichert, you are now up for your 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MARGARET WEICHERT
Ms. Weichert. Thank you very much. It's great to be here on
Pi Day to talk about this important subject.
So, Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly, and members of the
subcommittees, thank you for the opportunity to appear before
you today to discuss the state of Federal information
technology in 2018.
In December, in testifying before the Senate Committee on
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, I discussed the
range of disciplines that the Deputy Director for Management is
charged with overseeing, including IT, information security,
human capital management, finance, accounting, performance
management, and procurement.
Today, as the newly sworn-in Deputy Director for
Management, I'm working with our agency partners to drive
necessary improvement in those disciplines. And I'm excited to
talk about one of those areas, IT modernization, in depth.
Improving our technology infrastructure is fundamental to
aligning the executive branch to the mission, service, and
stewardship needs of the 21st century. To that end, next week,
we will release the President's Management Agenda, the PMA, an
agenda which places IT modernization at its core.
The PMA sets out a long-term vision for more effective
government that better achieves missions and enhances the key
services upon which the American people depend. IT
modernization must provide the essential backbone of the
government service delivery while keeping sensitive data and
systems secure. And the President's Management Agenda also
links to related critical issues associated with data
accountability and transparency as well as the people and
workforce for the 21st century.
Since the establishment of the Office of E-Government and
Information Technology in 2002, OMB has played a pivotal role
in formulation of IT policy and strategic direction across the
Federal Government. The Office of the Federal CIO, the Chief
Information Security Office of the U.S., and the United States
Digital Service are all in my organization. And, together,
these groups leverage the convening authorities of OMB,
including the CIO Council and the CISO Council, to coordinate
executive-branch IT modernization activities.
In addition, since 2014, U.S. Digital Service has been
focused on improving and transforming the experience of
Americans who interact with government online. This means that
more citizens can easily and seamlessly access government
services online due to more secure identity-proofing. It means
veterans are receiving appeals responses in a more timely
manner. It has enhanced Medicare claims processing, allowing
citizens to access health data online. And USDS has also helped
made it easier for small businesses to compete for government
contracts and for acquisition officers to be better positioned
to acquire commercial technology. Ultimately, all this work is
part of a broader strategy to help rebuild Americans' trust in
government.
Today, I look forward to talking with you about a range of
IT modernization initiatives, including the IT modernization
report, the Modernizing Government Technology Act, Federal
cybersecurity policy, agency IT transformation activities,
including the work of U.S. Digital Service, and the IT
workforce of the future, to name a few areas. More detailed
background on many of these topics is included in my written
testimony for the record.
And, in closing, OMB looks forward to working with the
Oversight and Government Reform Committee and with Congress
broadly on IT modernization. Over the years, this oversight
committee has been instrumental in driving Federal IT
modernization through its role in developing legislation such
as FITARA, the DATA Act, and the MGT Act. Through our
collaborative efforts, I know we will be able to improve
government services and cybersecurity.
I thank the subcommittees for holding this hearing and for
your commitment to IT modernization. I will be pleased to
answer any questions you have.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Weichert follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
Mr. Zielinski, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF BILL ZIELINSKI
Mr. Zielinski. Great. Good afternoon, Chairman Hurd,
Ranking Member Kelly, and members of the subcommittee. My name
is Bill Zielinski, and I am the Deputy Assistant Commissioner
for the Office of Information Technology Category in GSA's
Federal Acquisition Service. In addition, I also serve as the
Office of Management and Budget-appointed government-wide IT
category manager.
I am pleased to be here today to discuss the important role
GSA plays in Federal information technology efforts government-
wide.
The IT Category at GSA enables agencies in the acquisition
of $50 billion in goods and services annually from more than
20,000 industry partners. ITC's top priority is to maximize
customer value and mission productivity.
And while GSA brings significant capabilities to the table
in facilitating the modernization of the Federal Government's
IT infrastructure and applications, it's through the strategic
partnerships with other agencies and our industry partners
where we will make the greatest progress.
For instance, I work closely with OMB's Office of Federal
Procurement Policy and administrator of the Office of
Electronic Government to review the Federal IT spend, determine
where opportunities exist to collaborate on the acquisition of
IT products and services, and implement strategies to get more
value from IT dollars.
In that vein, I would now like to discuss four key ways in
which GSA is supporting the modernization of the Federal
Government's IT infrastructure and applications.
First, in December, the American Technology Council issued
its final report to the President on Federal IT modernization.
The report is the culmination of a months-long process to
develop a strategic plan that approves the security posture of
Federal IT and incorporates feedback from industry and members
of the public.
The report has three key objectives that will inform future
efforts: to reduce the Federal attack surface through enhanced
application and data-level protections; to improve visibility
beyond the network level; and to ensure that policy, resource
allocation, acquisition, and operational approaches to security
enable the use of new technology without sacrificing
reliability or performance.
GSA is directly tasked, in whole or in part, with half of
the 50 action items recommended by the report and is actively
working on these deliverables in accordance with report
timelines.
Second, the MGT Act is another critical tool for
modernizing Federal IT. GSA thanks the members of these
subcommittees for their dedication to getting this legislation
passed.
GSA is tasked with several key actions related to the MGT's
Technology Modernization Fund. Chief among them is providing
broad support for the Technology Modernization Board's
activities, including technical support and the monitoring of
agencies that receive funds from the TMF. Subject to
appropriations, the GSA is prepared to help administer this
critically important fund.
Third, in partnership with the White House Office of
American Innovation, GSA is working to establish five new
centers of excellence. The COEs will house centralized
function-specific talent, products, and acquisition vehicles.
These teams will provide expert advice, development resources,
and support solution implementation in the areas of cloud
adoption, IT infrastructure optimization, customer experience,
service delivery analytics, and contact centers. The first
client agency for the COEs is the United States Department of
Agriculture.
Finally, GSA is helping agencies adopt new approaches for
buying commercial off-the-shelf and as-a-service solutions. By
leading in the development of modular contracting approaches to
enable agile and efficient development of complex, new
requirements, we are able to assist agencies through the entire
lifecycle of procurement and system development.
GSA's unique mix of talent and expertise in acquisition
technology and service delivery, combined with our government-
wide scope and scale, makes our agency an agent of
transformation in how agencies will buy, build, and use
technology.
I want to thank you for the opportunity to appear before
you today to discuss GSA's role, and I look forward to
answering your questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Zielinksi follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
And, Ms. Manfra, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for
your opening remarks.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JEANETTE MANFRA
Ms. Manfra. Thank you.
Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly, members of the
committee, thank you for today's opportunity to discuss the
Department of Homeland Security's efforts to secure Federal
networks.
I would like to begin my testimony by thanking Congress for
its work on the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency Act of 2017. If enacted, this legislation will
streamline the National Protection and Programs Directorate, or
NPPD, and rename our organization to more clearly reflect our
central role in government and private-sector critical
infrastructure security. Much progress has been made, but we
must stay focused until this work is complete. The Department
strongly supports this effort and encourages swift action by
Congress.
Cyber threats remain one of the most significant strategic
risks for the United States, threatening our national security,
economic prosperity, and public health and safety. Over the
past year, Federal network defenders saw the threat landscape
grow more crowded, active, and dangerous. While in many cases
our defenses have been successful in mitigating these threats,
we must do more to ensure our cyber defenses keep pace of
technological change and evolving risk.
In my role at DHS, I head the Office of Cybersecurity and
Communications. A core part of my role is protecting and
managing the overall information security of Federal civilian
networks. To do this, we must first gain visibility to
understand the exposure that the Federal enterprise faces. Then
we need to use our authorities to reduce this risk, whether
that's through directives, guidance, or direct support to
agencies. And, finally, we must build capacity within agencies
to implement our guidance, act on threat information, and fully
leverage the capabilities and services that DHS has to offer.
Programs like the National Cybersecurity Protection System,
or EINSTEIN, and the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation
Program directly serve and enable these three lines of effort.
Last year, the President signed an executive order on
strengthening the cybersecurity of Federal networks and
critical infrastructure, which set in motion a series of
assessments and deliverables to improve our defenses and lower
our risk to cyber threats.
Across the Federal Government, agencies have been
implementing the NIST Cybersecurity Framework. Agencies have
been reporting to DHS and OMB on their cybersecurity risk
mitigation and acceptance choices. DHS and OMB have evaluated
the totality of these agencies' reports in order to
comprehensively assess the Federal Government's cybersecurity
risk management posture.
The assessment found the Federal enterprise to be at risk.
The choices we make to reduce this risk, in both cybersecurity
budget and operational priorities, must be informed by a data-
driven, risk-based assessment of Federal cybersecurity and the
threat environment.
As part of the executive order, my office has been working
with OMB, GSA, and Federal agencies to modernize the Federal
Government's IT infrastructure. We are exploring opportunities
to consolidate network architectures, embrace shared IT
services, all the while emphasizing cybersecurity as a
foundational element to all new IT services.
We recognize that legacy IT systems present considerable
challenges in efforts to secure Federal networks. The risks
posed by these antiquated, end-of-life systems has perhaps best
been demonstrated by the difficulties agencies face in
complying with DHS's binding operational directives which
govern vulnerability patching. Some legacy systems can no
longer be patched, others are not supported by vendors, and
some experience significant performance issues if not
reconfigured during the security upgrade process.
While in most cases DHS and the agencies have been able to
address these issues and either upgrade, transition, or
mitigate the problem entirely, this complicates and adds cost
to agency efforts to patch their own systems--an exercise that
does need to be as painless as possible.
While the use of more modern IT has efficiencies and
convenience of its own, the benefits it brings to cybersecurity
efforts are also significant.
My organization works with departments and agencies to
identify and prioritize high-value assets or those systems for
which a cyber incident could cause significant impact to the
United States. We conduct security architecture reviews to
assess network architectures and configurations and conduct in-
depth vulnerability assets, which determine how an adversary
could compromise these systems, persist in their networks, and
gain access to sensitive data.
These assessments provide system owners with
recommendations to address identified vulnerabilities and
assist them in prioritizing their limited resources to fix the
worst things first.
In closing, I want to assure this committee that DHS is
embracing our statutory responsibility to administer the
implementation of Federal agency cybersecurity policies and
practices by leading the effort to secure the Federal
enterprise, in coordination with my partners on the panel,
following a risk-based approach.
This committee played a key role in championing the passage
of FISMA 2014 and clarifying these important authorities for
DHS, and we thank you for those.
The overarching goal of Federal cybersecurity is to ensure
that every agency maintains an adequate level of cybersecurity
commensurate with its own risk and with those of the Federal
enterprise.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to any questions you may have.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Manfra follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
And now it's a pleasure to recognize the gentleman from
Montana for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gianforte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the panel.
Mr. Powner, it's good to see you again. It seems like
you're here monthly. And I appreciate your help in moving
forward the IT procurement.
Mr. Zielinski, I would like to dive in a little bit into
GSA's role in procurement, particularly as it relates to shared
services. Could you talk a little bit about, to help the
committee, what are shared services and what do you see as the
benefits of mandating those for agencies where appropriate?
Mr. Zielinski. So, in the broadest sense, shared services
is an opportunity for us to, rather than having each agency
independently build out a capability set, to be able to build
those out in a centralized way.
It could be that it is a government-operated, government-
built shared service, or it could be that it is a commercially
offered solution. In working with the Office of Management and
Budget, as well as with our own Unified Shared Services
Management office, we are working to develop a series of shared
services along the lines of business.
There's a lot of opportunities and benefits to this
approach. First of all, there's significant cost savings.
Secondly, as we talked about, the security posture, that
ability for us to protect the shared service and be able to
make changes to that individual or that one shared service and
have all of the participants benefit across the government is
significant.
Mr. Gianforte. Okay. And what IT services are already being
procured under a shared services model?
Mr. Zielinski. Oh, sir, there are a number. What I would
like to offer is to be able to bring the full list, but I'll
give you some examples here today.
Mr. Gianforte. Please.
Mr. Zielinski. For one, we have a shared service offering
that's in and around the implementation or the issuance of the
PIV credentials, the HSPD-12 PIV credentials. That is operated
out of GSA. There are 110 customer agencies with more than
750,000 credentials under active management.
That's an example of a very mature shared service that is
utilized across government. There's shared infrastructure for
agencies to be able to go to, common issuance sites. In
addition, there are shared services for payroll, shared
services for financial services. And we continue to build out
other shared services.
And, again, I will bring back a more complete list of what
those shared service offerings are.
Mr. Gianforte. Okay. So it sounds like shared services
allow us to standardize procurement in such a way that various
agencies don't have to roll their own, so to speak?
Mr. Zielinski. Correct.
Mr. Gianforte. Yeah.
So there's cost savings. You mentioned earlier $50 billion
of annual procurement. If shared services were fully
implemented where appropriate, how big is the size of the prize
in terms of savings?
Mr. Zielinski. Yeah, I don't have an answer for that. You
know, I think that as we are now going through the different
lines of business and identifying those opportunities for
shared services, we'll have a much better or more complete
picture of what those savings opportunities are.
Mr. Gianforte. In instances where you have used shared
services, how much savings resulted?
Mr. Zielinski. It differs based upon the service itself.
And, again, what I can do is bring back some more explicit
information for each of these shared services as to where that
is.
Mr. Gianforte. Okay.
So cost savings are one benefit. What impact does it have
on security when a service is shared versus implemented
individually by the agencies?
Mr. Zielinski. So I would like to start, and I would also
like to ask my partner, Ms. Manfra, to also add in as well.
One of the things that we're able to do is that, as each
individual agency is building out a capability, that means that
those individual agencies are also responsible for ensuring
that they are patching and kind of doing the basic blocking and
tackling that's necessary to secure the capability, and that if
there is something that happens within the overall system that
they have to respond to, that also means that they each
individually would have to do that.
In a shared services instantiation, we have where there is
a central group who is managing that security posture of the
shared service. And that means that, when there is something
that occurs or there is a need for us to make a change or to
address a vulnerability, we are able to do that once and it is
addressed for all of the customers of that.
Mr. Gianforte. And, again, I want to go back to my prior
question. I realize you want to go collect more data, and I do
want an accurate answer. But it seems like shared services
presents an opportunity to standardize procurement, limit
variability, increase security, and lower cost, all of which
are good objectives.
Where is shared services on your priority list as you're
working with agencies on procurement?
Mr. Zielinski. So I will say that, going back to the IT
modernization report, this is one of the core principles within
the President's IT modernization report, is for us to look for
those opportunities to build out shared services to be able to
both speed the modernization but also to increase the
protection. So it is one of the core priorities in moving
forward with modernization.
Mr. Gianforte. And final question: Who should be managing
these shared services within the government?
Mr. Zielinski. The plan, as it stands today, is to look for
managing partners based upon the capability areas. So,
dependent upon what the business function or area is, that
there is a role for the appropriate agency. So, in the case of
HR shared services, OPM would have a significant role, as an
example.
Mr. Gianforte. So, then, they could be a service provider
to other agencies, if necessary?
Mr. Zielinski. Correct.
Mr. Gianforte. Okay. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hurd. Ranking Member Kelly.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
The growing rate of sophisticated data breaches and cyber
attacks in the private and public sector have heightened
concerns over the security and strength of Federal IT systems.
And some of these devastating attacks succeed because
Federal systems are dangerously outdated and obsolete. And I
mentioned in my opening statement that nearly 75 percent of the
Federal Government's IT budget is dedicated toward maintaining
legacy computer systems.
Mr. Powner, why does it take such a large share to maintain
those systems?
Mr. Powner. Well, I think, historically, operational
systems in the Federal Government get a pass. So when you look
at that's something the lights are on and it's running and
we're serving the mission, we might not be serving the mission
efficiently, we might not be serving the mission securely, but
it's gotten a pass over the years. That's been the biggest
problem.
I think this committee, you know, going back to 2016, when
we did the big report with the 8-inch floppy disk at DOD,
helped raise the issue of how old and insecure and costly these
systems are.
We are starting to make progress. The problem is that we
still need firm dates to replace these systems where we
actually turn them off. I mean, I agree with all the comments,
that it's difficult to maintain and patch, there's unsupported
software. But, ultimately, the security solution is turning
them off and decommissioning them.
Ms. Kelly. I'm not trying to be comical, but because the
systems are so old, do we even have the staff--we talk about
the staff for the new systems and the workforce, but what about
the staff to maintain these systems?
Mr. Powner. Well, that--so it's very difficult. I know,
personally, I do a lot of detailed work at IRS, and when you
start looking at assembly programmers there, we're losing them
left and right. We pay a premium to contractors to maintain. We
pay other younger programmers who know modern language as a
retention. It costs money to maintain these systems. And each
year we go on, it costs more and more, and we become more and
more insecure.
Ms. Kelly. And what happens if we just turn it off?
Mr. Powner. Well, right now, we need a lot of these
mission-critical systems to actually do the mission. You know,
the IMF system at IRS, that's where we get $3.3 trillion in
revenue through tax returns. It's critical.
Ms. Kelly. Uh-huh.
Mr. Powner. Chairman Hurd's held hearings on the VA VistA
system. I mean, we still need that to apply medical services to
our veterans.
But, again, you know, that's why we need to keep them
running, because they're mission-critical.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Thank you.
The Modernizing Government Technology Act is a key
component of this administration's continued effort to improve
Federal technology by providing financial resources and
technical expertise to agencies.
Does the MGT Act continue to be, you think, a priority for
the Trump administration and OMB?
Ms. Weichert. Absolutely. The MGT Act and the Technology
Modernization Fund are absolutely priorities for the
administration.
And we've actually pulled together in the President's
Management Agenda, which will be released next week and was
hinted at in the President's budget in February, a wholistic
perspective on how we tackle these issues, which is not purely
the technology piece, as you have mentioned. It includes issues
around data and data structure. It also includes very critical
people issues.
We want to solve these issues wholistically, build on past
successes, and we believe that the MGT and the Technology
Modernization Fund will be great stepping stones toward the
future of really pulling all of these dimensions together so
that they are not siloed by function, where, you know, we have
CIOs, you know, who, by the way, need more authority--and you
all have done great work in FITARA to do that, and we support
that. But we also need the human capital element, the financial
element, the procurement element to be at the same table.
And so what we're laying out in the President's Management
Agenda is that wholistic framework. It was why I was so eager
to actually be here and share. Because one of the root-cause
observations that we had when we looked at how government was
tackling these issues versus the private sector, it was that
lack of integration across function. And we plan to tackle
that, leveraging these authorities that Congress has provided
through the MGT Act and TMF.
And, by the way, we really hope the appropriators actually
fund the TMF.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Powner, can you comment on the steps that OMB is
taking?
Mr. Powner. Well, I think, clearly, the guidance that OMB
just put out, you know, that's the right direction. And that
guidance was very solid. You know, now the hard part is
implementation. You know, we're really good at plans and
guidance in this town, but we're not always good at getting
things done and implementing them completely.
So let's do this right with the MGT Act, because we got
savings out there. As Mr. Zielinski said, with shared services
or still with some data centers, we can populate these working
capital funds and really do MGT right.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
And I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Blum, you're now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Blum. Thank you, Chairman Hurd.
Thank you to our panelists for being here today.
Mr. Powner, your challenge is, in the next 5 minutes, to
make me an expert on cloud computing. Cloud computing has been
in the news lately with the Federal Government. Department of
Defense, I think, is looking at going to cloud computing. I
assume the entire government will be there at some point.
Can you talk to me about the efforts to go to cloud
computing, A? B, financially, is that going to save the
taxpayers money or not? And, C, I'm particularly interested in
the following, and that is, will it be more secure or less
secure or perhaps the same level of security that we have
today, not being in the cloud?
Mr. Powner. So there's all kinds of various aspects of the
cloud. So, like, for instance, on our data center situation we
have, when I say that some agencies by 2020 should get out of
the business of data centers, that's because we have
inefficient data centers that they're not going to optimize,
maybe two-thirds of them. And what we could do there is we
could host our existing applications in a cloud environment or
on servers and infrastructure maintained by contractors who are
cloud providers.
So that's one way that we could actually save money and
have optimized data centers, by actually outsourcing all of it
to the cloud.
We can also, too, in some of the shared service areas that
we talked about, you can actually buy software as a service in
the cloud from many of these cloud providers. And that's
another way where we can save money.
However, there are some of these mission-critical
applications like some of these homegrown systems that are
critical to agencies' mission that you're not going to find
that as a software, as a service, that we've got to actually
just do the hard work and convert those old systems.
So cloud, there's a great opportunity. It's not the
solution for everything. But there's substantial savings.
And from a security perspective, you know, if you really
look, the intel community kind of led the cloud migration. We
were concerned on the civilian side about having enough
security. So if it was good enough for intel, it's probably
good enough for a lot of others.
The other thing you could do is, through your contracting
provisions--and we did work on this, looking at service-level
agreements and contracts--you can specify the level of security
you want from those cloud providers and actually dictate the
level of security. So, in many ways, cloud services can be more
secure than what we currently have.
Mr. Blum. Do you think all Federal IT should eventually end
up in the cloud?
Mr. Powner. There are some aspects that won't be in the
cloud because they're unique to agency missions, but there's a
large portion that could end up being in the cloud.
But there are these pockets of unique applications that we
do that no one else has that we have to do the hard work and
convert those to more modern platforms and modern software.
Mr. Blum. Where are we at today in this journey to the
cloud?
Mr. Powner. So that's a good question. We're doing some
work for this committee where we've done prior works, and we
try to measure it as a percentage of budget or IT spend, and
it's very difficult. You know, we did this work a couple years
ago, where agencies varied from 2 to 7 percent of their IT
budgets were in the cloud. That's improved somewhat. But it's
very difficult to give you a good, hard number right now. We're
working on that for this committee.
Mr. Blum. Thank you.
Ms. Weichert, is it?
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Mr. Blum. OMB, how involved are they in this migration to
the cloud?
Ms. Weichert. So it's a great question, and it is actually
one of the priorities that we're laying out as part of the
President's Management Agenda. Now that the Federal CIO is in
place, it is on her top priority list.
And we're working closely with GSA and the centers of
excellence on the implementation. They've already met to put
together tiger teams in terms of cloud email adoption, and
they're looking at other areas where commercially available
solutions are already in place, secure, and working at some
agencies, to elevate the lessons from those and extend them
across government.
But ultimately the test, to the question that you asked
earlier around which things should migrate to the cloud, it's
essentially going to be dependent on the mission; the service
aspects, so how well we can serve the needs of our citizens and
the American people; and then the stewardship aspects of
financial stewardship. So we're really going to be looking at
balancing those three items.
Mr. Blum. Thank you.
Mr. Zielinski--I hope I pronounced that right--this is kind
of interesting. The centers of excellence, can you just briefly
tell me about that and that effort?
Mr. Zielinski. Certainly. Thank you for the question.
Going back to some of the things that Mr. Powner mentioned,
as agencies are making these decisions about their strategies
for moving to the cloud or considering the cloud, the centers
of excellence are places where we bring together technical
expertise, the engineers and others who understand the dynamics
of matching those business applications and those business
functions to where they best lend themselves to a cloud
application, whether that software is a service or platform is
a service, and then help agencies to find acquisition
strategies for them to be able to move.
So there's a lot of direct assistance that those centers of
excellence provide to a customer agency, and they do that
through bringing together the expertise, as Ms. Weichert said,
being able to make sure that we have all of those functions
working hand in glove, the technical expertise as well as the
acquisition.
Mr. Blum. Is it more of a planning function or more of an
execution function, the centers of excellence?
Mr. Zielinski. It's absolutely an execution function, sir.
Mr. Blum. Because I agree with what Mr. Powner said earlier
about we're good at planning, not so good at following through.
Thank you very much. I am out of time and I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. I now recognize the ranking member.
Ms. Kelly. I just have one quick question and not for Mr.
Powner.
How long have all of you been in your positions you're in
now?
Ms. Manfra. I was appointed in June of last year, ma'am.
Mr. Zielinski. I've been with GSA for 2 years.
Ms. Kelly. In the position you're in now?
Mr. Zielinski. Six months.
Ms. Weichert. The Senate confirmed me on Valentine's Day of
this year.
Ms. Kelly. All relative newbies, okay. No insult to you, I
just knew you'd been around. Thank you.
Mr. Hurd. He's been there forever, I think is the right
answer.
Mr. Zielinski, can we follow up on the centers of
excellence. I recognize myself for 5 minutes. How does this
program differ from 18F?
Mr. Zielinski. So thank you for the question, sir. The 18F
has those technical experts that the centers of excellence can
actually tap into. So as I talked about bringing together the
different discipline areas to be able to bring to bear on a
particular agency problem set and to assist them in being able
to understand the dynamics of their business case and how they
can move forward, 18F, as an organization, would be one of the
areas into which the centers of excellence can reach to bring
that technical expertise to the table.
Mr. Hurd. Got you. And how do we ensure these centers of
excellence, other than having GAO white glove it, how do we
ensure that these don't duplicate efforts that are going on in
the rest of the government?
Mr. Zielinski. So going back to the agenda that has been
laid out by the administration in and around starting with the
IT modernization report as well as with the President's
Management Agenda, it's a very tight weave in terms of ensuring
that there's a collaboration across all those functional areas.
And there are many opportunities for those functional areas
to be brought together to ensure that we are all bringing to
bear the best talent and that we're also not duplicating
effort, sir.
Mr. Hurd. Good copy.
Ms. Weichert, one of the things that is still frustrating,
and I'm glad Mr. Powner alluded to this in the beginning of his
remarks, is CIO authorities. We can't hold CIOs accountable if
we don't give them all the power they need. FITARA gives them
that authority, but in many places the agency CIO doesn't have
the complete budget authority of those--of that entire
operation.
And Transportation is an example. I think they have nine
CIOs, people with the title, nine CIOs, $3 billion-plus budget.
Can we reprogram the funds from those various sub-CIOs
into--under the Federal--under the agency CIO in order to
streamline that budget authority?
Ms. Weichert. So not being an expert on appropriations, I
want to caveat and say that I would love to answer that in more
detail after conferring with some of our budget folks. But what
I can say is absolutely agree with your frustration. It's
something we in the administration share and are looking very
closely at how do we address.
I think in the President's Management Agenda we are laying
out how all of the components of the various authorities across
government, how they work together and how they align together,
and to avoid duplication, while giving the maximum elevated
level of capability to the CIOs.
I think the Technology Modernization Fund and the MGT, in
providing new capabilities around working capital funds, that
is a place we are going to start and are already exploring ways
that we can work with agencies to help them focus and target
resources towards the highest priority projects, as Mr. Powner
has suggested.
In terms of getting additional capabilities, I think the
authorities are different in terms of transfer and how they can
use their working capital funds, that I wouldn't want to give
you an across-the-board answer.
Mr. Hurd. But would you have heartburn if we were to
reprogram some of these to ensure that the agency CIO had all
the budget authority for IT spend across that network?
Ms. Weichert. So I haven't studied that specific issue.
Mr. Hurd. Okay. That's a fair answer.
Ms. Weichert. But what I can say is we are absolutely in
alignment in terms of the idea that the CIO for the broad
agency needs to have all the capabilities and tools to make
these very profound investments.
And the more we can align to the way the private sector
works, where you've got a general manager of a division or an
agency, and their C-suite includes the chief information
officer, the chief financial officer, the chief people officer,
and, where appropriate, the procurement officer, they need to
all be there in lockstep.
Mr. Hurd. And the CIO. I think you said that.
Ms. Weichert. I said that first, yes.
Mr. Hurd. Okay, first. Okay. Gotcha. Gotcha. I agree. And
my teams would get mad because we're talking about how do we
change the FITARA Scorecard to penalize agencies that don't
have the Federal CIO reporting directly to the agency or deputy
agency head.
We've asked everybody why, what's going on, why is that the
case? We've gotten a lot of excuses: ``Oh, it's kind of already
there.'' Well, if it's already there, then change the damn
structure. And so we are looking at having that be reflected in
the FITARA Scorecard.
Mr. Powner, do you have any opinions on the reprogramming
and giving complete budget authority to the CIA--CIO? Let me
rephrase that. The CIO, not the CIA. I don't want anybody to
get mad and run an ad against me.
Mr. Powner. I think the first step is that we understand
all the IT spend. I think many CIOs, we don't even know the
full totality of what we spend at these departments and
agencies. So once we understand that, I do think the CIOs
should control that more.
It's okay, too, if there ARE some business units that
control it and they act in partnership, where the CIO is
working with those business units to spend it appropriately, to
oversee it the right way and that.
So I think there's probably even some blend. I think right
now if we did it completely whole hog, you have complete budget
authority, the whole bit, I don't know if that would--maybe we
need to shock the system as you're intending. That's one way to
do it.
Mr. Hurd. Your word, not mine, sir.
Mr. Powner. But the other way to do it is to have some type
of blend where we know the entire spend and the CIO has a role,
whether they control every dollar or not, but they're still
responsible for governing over it. We've got too much IT spend
that we don't have IT people on it.
Mr. Hurd. You reminded me of something I was going to ask.
And, Ms. Weichert, this may not be something on the top of
your mind.
Or, Mr. Zielinski, I think this is outside of your scope.
The Department of Defense recently made the decision to not
publish their IT amount. I believe it was in a recent--was it
an OMB report? What was it? The analytical prospectus. It said:
Hey, we're going to stop showing DOD's number on IT along with
everyone else.
So we went from spending, the Federal Government spending
$90 billion to $40 billion, and they said, you know, asterisks,
fiscal year 2018, it was roughly $50 billion.
Do you have any insight into that decision, that process?
And we will be bringing--again, not to, you know, show our
hand--but we'll be bringing DOD for the next FITARA Scorecard
hearing to have them answer that directly. But I'd welcome your
thoughts.
Ms. Weichert. Yeah. Unfortunately, that was prior to my
being confirmed, so I wasn't read in on that particular
decision.
Mr. Hurd. When you're talking to them----
Ms. Weichert. I will note it.
Mr. Hurd. --tell them this committee is interested.
Ms. Weichert. I will share that.
Mr. Hurd. And I'd love to have the answer prior to--should
I introduce these into the record?
So, yeah. The analysis in this chapter excludes the
Department of Defense and classified spending, which in fiscal
year 2008 was $42.5 billion, or 44 percent of the IT budget. So
we're going to start showing only 66 percent of the budget as a
whole number, which seems a little odd to me.
Ms. Manfra, one of the things I want to do with the FITARA
Scorecard is transition it into more of a digital hygiene
scorecard as well. I think the elements, as Mr. Powner has
talked about, we've got to continue to double down on those
issues.
But I think being able to highlight at the macro level good
digital hygiene is important. I think the inclusion of the
MEGABYTE Act on that was one of that. Do you know all the
software that's running on your system? And I think only three
were able to answer yes, which is pretty shocking. And, again,
these are self-reporting numbers.
So what are some of the areas that you think that we should
or could be exploring when it comes to digital hygiene and how
we look across that over the entire enterprise?
Ms. Manfra. So I think, first of all, I think that's a
great idea, to include that. Frankly, shining a light on some
of these basic practices has been useful in agencies
prioritizing.
So I briefly alluded to the critical vulnerability
patching. What we saw through years of assessments was just
continued poor patch management programs. Some of it does have
to do with legacy systems and all that.
But what we decided to issue, our first binding operational
directive, was actually to require the time to patch a critical
vulnerability down to 30 days.
And the important way, though, that we were able to be
successful, I think, with this and with other directives and
other guidance that we provide is that we can independently
validate. We're not relying on self-reporting. And so the more
capability that DHS is deploying--in this case it's the
external scanning that we're doing of all internet-facing
devices--that we can say, no, I can see that you haven't
actually patched.
The good news story is that when we--I think fiscal year
2014 average time to patch was somewhere in excess of 200 days
for critical vulnerabilities, which is bad. After the
directive--and it continues, which shows how these things
change behavior--we're averaging in the 10 to 15 days.
And so it's helping them prioritize their very limited
resources by focusing on known issues, and that's what we want
to continue to do, but it's also important that we can
independently validate this.
You talked about knowing what software on your system. So
the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation Program that we've
been deploying, the first phase is hardware and software asset
management. And we've learned a lot through that program in
what agencies thought they had on their network was not exactly
what we found that they had on their network after deploying
these.
And I know in one sense it's frustrating to sort of be in
that environment, but at least we're in a position now where we
do know. We know what's connected to the network and as we
deploy more tools.
And as a side note, this program actually is also very
cost-effective, and we've been able to identify that I think
it's 75 percent cost savings off of schedule--if they had
bought these on Schedule 70.
So we're deploying common tools that are identifying what
and who is on networks. And I believe that this will
fundamentally transform the way that we do, in the first case,
vulnerability management for the government, but eventually we
will get to event management and ongoing authorization in those
programs.
But it has to be through the deployment of these
standardized tools that then feed data back to an agency CIO
and DHS so that we can, through automated sensors, understand
where they are.
Mr. Hurd. Would you have security concerns of publishing
that number of how long it takes to patch software, like the
average it takes to patch software from agency from agency?
Ms. Manfra. I don't know how----
Mr. Hurd. You can take time to think about it.
Ms. Manfra. Yeah.
Mr. Hurd. It's just I think that's an element that, self-
reporting, we can establish a letter grade based on what are
industry best practices. Is a week an A? Two hundred days is
definitely an F, right? Where that's something that we could
package and keep track of and make sure that we're continuing
to shine a light on.
Ms. Manfra. Absolutely, sir. And there's a few other things
that we've identified as very common practices that we're
focusing our guidance on. And we'd be happy to work with you on
how we can improve those practices.
Mr. Hurd. And before we get to the gentleman from the
Commonwealth of Virginia, my last question is, one of the
things that I've--in the 3-1/2 years we've been doing this
together, we've asked a lot of questions about, are you doing
technical vulnerability assessment, penetration testing? And a
lot of agencies have said yes, and then you find out after the
fact they're just doing a scan, that they're not bringing a
third-party system, a third-party vendor to come in and do that
testing.
Your organization has been doing that. Have you seen an
increase in that as a best practice?
Ms. Manfra. So you're right, there isn't a very common
definition of what people mean by penetration testing. You
know, as I noted, we do passive scanning, but that is to
identify one set of issues.
We also do our risk and vulnerability assessments, which is
penetration testing, which is actively going and trying to
identify and exploit vulnerabilities. That's what we would
consider.
We haven't previously taken statistics on what agencies are
using penetration testing. I can tell you that just in the last
fiscal year, we did 42. We focus, prioritize high-value assets.
So we go through all of the high-value assets to do a full risk
and vulnerability assessment, which includes a penetration test
as well as a report to them. But we could definitely follow up
on that.
Mr. Hurd. Well, we'll be asking the agencies this question,
so when we collect that information we'll share it with you so
that you're aware.
Ms. Manfra. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Hurd. Now I'd like to recognize the gentleman from the
Commonwealth of Virginia, the ranking member, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my friend.
And welcome to our panel.
And thank you both to Mr. Hurd and Ms. Kelly for their
leadership of this subcommittee and on this subject matter.
We're really fortunate to have Members who care about the
subject matter and delve into it. It's actually rare. You'd
think more Members would be involved in IT, but they actually
aren't, for various and sundry reasons.
And so one of the great pleasures of serving on this
committee is that--and Mr. Meadows is not here, but the four of
us have really worked seamlessly, in a nonpartisan way, to try
to help rationalize Federal IT policy. And I think for all four
of us, it doesn't matter whether it's a Democrat or a
Republican administration, we want it to work.
And so, in that spirit, welcome.
Ms. Weichert, in March of last year the White House
announced the Office of American Innovation. And after that,
OAI was credited with a whole bunch of projects as large as
pushing the overhaul at the Veterans Administration healthcare
IT system, setting the policy for the Federal Government's
adoption of AI, and presumably implementation of FITARA, data
center consolidation, moving to the cloud, empowerment of CIOs,
and so forth.
Now, under the E-Government Act of 2002, normally that role
would be played by the Federal CIO. Now that presumably we're
going to have a Federal CIO, what is OAI's role going forward,
and how does OMB play a role in all of this as well?
Ms. Weichert. I think it's a great question, and we are
working in lockstep across the administration to set out a
focused agenda for all the elements around not only IT
modernization, but the other enabling capabilities around data
transparency and accountability, as well as the people
dimensions of that.
And OAI did a great job providing catalytic capabilities in
getting a lot of these activities started. But what's been
included in the President's budget in February and what will be
rolled out next week in the President's Management Agenda is
the comprehensive go-forward plan.
We do have a Federal CIO, an outstanding leader from the
private sector who has done execution of change in complex,
highly regulated environments in the financial services and
other industries, who's really here to help continue to carry
that torch.
I think a lot of the activities that have been enabled by
the MGT Act and the TMF are stood up. The Federal CIO actually
met earlier this week with the members of the IT Modernization
Fund Board, and they did a dry run, so that when appropriations
come--I'm hoping they're coming soon--that the board will be
prepared to act quickly.
We continue to work very closely with OAI in terms of
helping shape the strategy and bring to bear the best thinking
of the administration and also marshal resources outside of
government to provide insights that might be helpful in our
journey.
But we in OMB are really leading the direction with the
President's Management Agenda and bringing the executive branch
along. And I look forward to having you all get to see what
we're putting together that's going to be in the PMA launch
next week.
Mr. Connolly. So I know that the chairman talked about
maybe broadening the current FITARA Scorecard at some point to
a digital hygiene scorecard. I would be supportive of that once
we make more substantial progress on implementation of what's
in front of us, because we've seen some backsliding. You know,
DOD, the Big Kahuna, got an F. And so we want to see more
progress, but we can't really see it without leadership coming
from your office.
I assume, but let me ask, you are committed to the metrics
set in the law, FITARA, and the tools, allowing us to try to
facilitate that, that MGT, just passed into law, also gives
agencies, to facilitate implementation of the law.
I assume you're trying to push agencies to meet the metrics
set for them in the law.
Ms. Weichert. Absolutely. And I think the focus
historically, that has been very siloed. In a lot of cases some
of the challenges around FITARA implementation and some of the
things measured in the scorecard hit root cause issues that
were underlying those things. In a lot of cases, people issues
are part of the problem.
Mr. Connolly. Yes.
Ms. Weichert. In some cases data and even the ability to
see the problem is part of it.
So part of what we want to do is actually use the broad
management table to really shine a light on those issues. And
to the extent the scorecard needs to evolve or mature, we'd be
very happy to take input from GAO and work with Congress on
that. But we are very supportive of the spirit of FITARA and
moving forward with that.
And I guess the last thing I'll just say is, my perspective
in the private sector, if you've got a broad failing to meet
the needs outlined in a strategic plan or a set of metrics,
it's incumbent upon the person who's accountable for those,
especially if it's me, to really understand are there root
cause issues that are preventing us from doing that and then
addressing those as well.
Mr. Connolly. Yes, I couldn't agree with you more. And like
you, I come from the private sector. I spent 20 years as a
corporate officer. And what I learned in the private sector and
the public sector is, if the boss doesn't care, neither do I.
Ms. Weichert. Right.
Mr. Connolly. I'll give it lip service.
Ms. Weichert. I care. I care a lot.
Mr. Connolly. Exactly.
But they need to feel pressure. They need to know I'm going
to be evaluated by the boss on implementation, on meeting those
metrics.
And the other thing, and then I'll be quiet, but with
respect to personnel, we've got to empower, in Latin we call it
primus inter pares, the first among equals in CIOs. There has
to be a primus CIO who's got the responsibility, the
accountability, and the power to make decisions. They've got to
be empowered, and everyone has to know that.
If the CIO of an agency is reporting to the deputy
assistant Gromit in the basement, that does not escape the
attention of everybody else. And I might give lip service, but
I know he or she doesn't really have the boss' attention.
We elevate the issue--I mean, we elevate the role of that
person and the stature of that person, we elevate the issue and
its importance in everybody's eyes.
I commend that to you as a reform. It doesn't cost a lot of
money, but I think it would have a profound effect on
performance and would save a lot of money for agencies over
time and make us a lot more effective.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, sir.
And I failed to spend some time on MGT, so I have a few
questions. And, Ms. Weichert, they're probably best for you.
The agencies are still planning to present their
implementation plans of the MGT working capital fund on the
27th of March. Is that correct?
Ms. Weichert. That is correct.
Mr. Hurd. And will you be able to share those with us?
Ms. Weichert. So we will be able to share the status on the
working capital funds early this summer. So we are actively
working with the agencies to understand what specifically their
needs are in terms of implementing on that.
So we already have a number that are well on the way of
implementing it. We have identified some challenges related to
transfer authorities that we need to work out. And we'll
actually be coming back to Congress with some thoughts about
ways to streamline what's needed to actually make it work as
intended in the legislation. But we will be coming back
imminently.
Mr. Hurd. The sooner you come to us on that, we'll do
everything we can to help, because I think it's important by
the end of this fiscal year to have some money deposited in
those funds at a handful of agencies to be sure that it's
working.
Ms. Weichert. We absolutely agree, yes.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Powner, do you think we can do that?
Mr. Powner. Definitely, definitely. And we'll continue to
work with you. I know that's one of the things we want to focus
on the scorecard, too, as we evolve that, to look at the
establishment of those MGT funds and the accountability, who's
in charge of those and that type of thing.
Mr. Hurd. Because if you are able to deposit money in your
MGT working capital fund, it shows a culture of modernization,
and I think that's important to monitor and focus on.
I'd like to thank our witnesses again for being here today.
The hearing record will remain open for 2 weeks for any member
to submit a written opening statement or questions for the
record.
If there's no further business, without objection, the
subcommittees stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:26 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]
APPENDIX
----------
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]