- MARITIME TRANSPORTATION IN THE ARCTIC: THE U.S. ROLE
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
MARITIME TRANSPORTATION IN THE ARCTIC: THE U.S. ROLE
=======================================================================
(115-46)
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JUNE 7, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available online at: https://www.govinfo.gov/committee/house-
transportation?path=/browsecommittee/chamber/house/committee/
transportation
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
38-055 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska
PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee,
ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
Vice Chair
Columbia
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey
EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SAM GRAVES, Missouri
ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
DUNCAN HUNTER, California
RICK LARSEN, Washington
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas
MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania
GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
BOB GIBBS, Ohio
DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
JEFF DENHAM, California
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
JOHN GARAMENDI, California
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
Georgia
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois
ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina
RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
ROB WOODALL, Georgia
DINA TITUS, Nevada
TODD ROKITA, Indiana
SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
JOHN KATKO, New York
ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut,
BRIAN BABIN, Texas
Vice Ranking Member
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia
CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
JARED HUFFMAN, California
MIKE BOST, Illinois
JULIA BROWNLEY, California
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas
FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
DOUG LaMALFA, California
DONALD M. PAYNE, Jr., New Jersey
BRUCE WESTERMAN, Arkansas
ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania
BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
PAUL MITCHELL, Michigan
MARK DeSAULNIER, California
JOHN J. FASO, New York
STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
A. DREW FERGUSON IV, Georgia
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
JASON LEWIS, Minnesota
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
------
7
Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation
DUNCAN HUNTER, California, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska
JOHN GARAMENDI, California
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey
ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana
RICK LARSEN, Washington
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
JARED HUFFMAN, California
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas
ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
JASON LEWIS, Minnesota, Vice Chair
PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon (Ex
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania (Ex
Officio)
Officio)
CONTENTS
Page
Summary of Subject Matter........................................
iv
WITNESSES
Admiral Charles W. Ray, Vice Commandant, U.S. Coast Guard:
Testimony....................................................
3
Prepared statement...........................................
32
Responses to questions for the record from Hon. John
Garamendi of California....................................
40
David Kennedy, Senior Advisor for the Arctic Region, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration:
Testimony....................................................
3
Prepared statement...........................................
45
Responses to questions for the record from Hon. John
Garamendi of California....................................
52
Heather A. Conley, Senior Vice President for Europe, Eurasia, and
the Arctic, Center for Strategic and International Studies:
Testimony....................................................
3
Prepared statement...........................................
57
Responses to questions for the record from Hon. John
Garamendi of California....................................
64
Lawson Brigham, Ph.D., Faculty, International Arctic Research
Center, University of Alaska Fairbanks, and Fellow, Center for
Arctic Study and Policy, U.S. Coast Guard Academy:
Testimony....................................................
3
Prepared statement...........................................
72
Responses to questions for the record from Hon. John
Garamendi of California....................................
78
Molly McCammon, Executive Director, Alaska Ocean Observing
System:
Testimony....................................................
3
Prepared statement...........................................
84
Responses to questions for the record from Hon. John
Garamendi of California....................................
91
Rear Admiral David W. Titley, U.S. Navy (Ret.), Professor of
Practice in Meteorology, Department of Meteorology and
Atmospheric Science, Pennsylvania State University:
Testimony....................................................
3
Prepared statement...........................................
97
Questions for the record for Mr. Titley from Hon. John
Garamendi of California....................................
103
PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
Hon. John Garamendi of California................................
28
SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD
Report entitled ``Maritime Futures: The Arctic and the Bering
Strait Region,'' a report of the CSIS Europe Program, November
2017, submitted by co-author Heather A. Conley, Senior Vice
President for Europe, Eurasia, and the Arctic, Center for
Strategic and International Studies \1\
----------
\1\ This 49-page report can be found online at https://csis-
prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/
171027_Conley_MaritimeFutures_Web.pdf.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
MARITIME TRANSPORTATION IN THE ARCTIC: THE U.S. ROLE
----------
THURSDAY, JUNE 7, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime
Transportation,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11 a.m., in room
2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Duncan Hunter
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Hunter. Good morning. The subcommittee will come to
order. Thanks for being here. Today, the subcommittee will hear
testimony on maritime transportation in the Arctic, and the
need for the United States infrastructure to facilitate safe
and efficient transportation.
For the first time in recorded history, the Arctic is
becoming navigable for large portions each year. Vessel transit
through the Bering Strait has increased almost 200 percent from
2008 to 2017. It is critical that we understand current traffic
flows and the steps that need to be taken to ensure that both
vessels and the environment are properly protected. I am proud
to say that we have finally gained the necessary momentum to
recapitalize the Nation's heavy icebreaker fleet, which is
critical to provide an ensured access to the region.
However, while icebreakers provide important capabilities,
there are many other issues that must be addressed to ensure a
safe and efficient Arctic navigation. Despite United States
vessels patrolling Arctic waters for nearly 150 years, the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, NOAA, predicts
that it could take up to 25 years to survey a fraction of the
navigationally significant waters in the U.S. Arctic using
modern hydrographic methods. This really is the last frontier,
the portion of our Nation's waters about which we still have
much to learn.
Additional infrastructure and operational challenges to
maritime transportation in the U.S. Arctic include: limited
satellite coverage and architecture to support voice and data
communications, the lack of deep-draft port accommodating ships
with a draft of up to 35 feet, unpredictability and flow
patterns of icebergs in shipping lanes, and the lack of channel
marking buoys and other floating visual aids, which are not
possible due to continuously moving ice sheets.
The United States is not alone in our efforts to facilitate
safe commerce in the Arctic. We are part of the Arctic Council,
along with other Arctic nations, like Canada, Russia, and the
Nordic countries. Working together in this consensus-based,
intergovernmental forum allows us to promote environmental,
social, and economic aspects of sustainable development in the
Arctic. The Council is critical to successfully implementing
the International Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters, the
Polar Code.
The potential in the Arctic is hard to fully quantify. For
more efficient shipping routes to mineral wealth, and natural
beauty to scientific unknowns, the Arctic is a great resource,
one for which we must begin making plans today to ensure we can
maximize its potential, while also protecting its unique
character and importance.
I thank our witnesses for being here today, and I look
forward to hearing their thoughts on the issues. I will now
yield to Ranking Member Garamendi. You are recognized.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for
calling this hearing, and for the extraordinary array of
witnesses who have depth and knowledge about what is going on
in the Arctic. I am going to try to be brief, but I am not sure
I can accomplish that. There is no doubt that the Arctic is
warming, and the climate is creating new opportunities and
significant challenges for the Federal Government, especially
for the U.S. Coast Guard.
The retreat of sea ice, the opening of previously
impassable Arctic waters, and the insatiable demands of a
growing global human population will create tremendous
competition and pressure among the Arctic and non-Arctic
nations to access and develop the untapped natural resources of
this nearly pristine region above the Arctic Circle.
As our country's sole military, maritime law enforcement
Service, inevitably, it will fall upon the Coast Guard to
protect the U.S. sovereign interests in the Arctic. Moreover,
when called upon, I am confident the Coast Guard will do the
best it can with the assets and resources available at its
disposal. There is no reason to think otherwise, certainly that
is the history of the Coast Guard.
What does raise concern, however, is whether the Coast
Guard, or for that matter, the entire Federal Government, is
adequately prepared for the inevitable. From what I have read
in today's testimony, it would appear that the Federal
Government is not, neither is the Coast Guard. If anything, the
Federal Government appears to have been far too complacent, if
not negligent, in establishing a solid foothold for the bona
fide Federal presence along what will be a vast and mostly
inhospitable fourth U.S. coast.
The challenges cannot and should not be underestimated, nor
the days of empty bromides and recalcitrant comments by many
simply have to end. The Coast Guard prides itself on being
semper paratus, or always ready. At present, however, that
motto appears to be more aspirational than operational reality.
Consequently, the hearing provides an opportunity to
establish a baseline of information that we can return to and
reassess in future hearings. We need answers to several
important questions, such as: Is the Coast Guard's
recapitalization of its polar icebreaker fleet on schedule? And
for that matter, what about the Coast Guard's other capital
needs to ensure mission performance in the Arctic, such as
ports and facilities?
Has the Coast Guard begun the process of revising its
concept of operations in the Arctic to address all mission
needs, especially the Maritime Domain Awareness, search and
rescue, and oil spill response? Moreover, are the other Federal
agencies, particularly NOAA and the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, aggressively moving ahead with plans to ensure the
availability of deepwater ports, accurate navigational tools,
and telecommunications in the Arctic?
These are just a few of the many questions that we have.
Let me conclude by saying that we cannot afford to ignore what
is unfolding in the Arctic. As a maritime power and Arctic
State, the United States must embrace this challenge, for if
not, rest assured, other nation states, friend and foe alike,
will fill the vacuum. I don't see Mr. Graves here yet. He held
a very important meeting yesterday, and I want to thank him for
putting that meeting together.
The result of that meeting is that the U.S. Navy,
specifically, is not prepared to deal in what is really an
ocean, although often covered by ice. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the ranking member. Today we are going
to hear from Admiral Charles Ray, who we welcome today in his
new position as the four-star Vice Commandant of the Coast
Guard. Welcome, Admiral Ray. And my favorite flag officer
pilot, I would say--pilot. We look forward to working with you
and Commandant Schultz over the next 4 years to support the
Coast Guard and its servicemembers.
Also on the panel we have Mr. David Kennedy, Senior Arctic
Advisor at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration;
Ms. Heather Conley, senior vice president for Europe, Eurasia,
and the Arctic, Center for Strategic and International Studies;
Dr. Lawson Brigham, faculty and distinguished fellow at the
University of Alaska Fairbanks; Ms. Molly McCammon, executive
director at the Alaska Ocean Observing System; and Rear Admiral
David Titley, professor of practice in meteorology at
Pennsylvania State University.
Admiral Ray, it is an honor to have you here.
Congratulations again, and you are now recognized for your
statement.
TESTIMONY OF ADMIRAL CHARLES W. RAY, VICE COMMANDANT, U.S.
COAST GUARD; DAVID KENNEDY, SENIOR ADVISOR FOR THE ARCTIC
REGION, NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION;
HEATHER A. CONLEY, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT FOR EUROPE, EURASIA,
AND THE ARCTIC, CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL STUDIES;
LAWSON BRIGHAM, PH.D., FACULTY, INTERNATIONAL ARCTIC RESEARCH
CENTER, UNIVERSITY OF ALASKA FAIRBANKS, AND FELLOW, CENTER FOR
ARCTIC STUDY AND POLICY, U.S. COAST GUARD ACADEMY; MOLLY
MCCAMMON, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, ALASKA OCEAN OBSERVING SYSTEM;
AND REAR ADMIRAL DAVID W. TITLEY, U.S. NAVY (RET.), PROFESSOR
OF PRACTICE IN METEOROLOGY, DEPARTMENT OF METEOROLOGY AND
ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE, PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY
Admiral Ray. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning,
Chairman Hunter, Ranking Member Garamendi, distinguished
members of the subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to
testify before you today, and ask that my written statement be
entered into the record.
Mr. Hunter. Without objection.
Admiral Ray. On behalf of Commandant Admiral Schultz, and
the entire Coast Guard, I would like to express my gratitude to
this committee's support for your Coast Guard. The Coast Guard
is the Nation's visible maritime presence in the Arctic. We
have been operating there since 1867. And as you all know, it
is a region with a tremendous volume of resources.
The estimates are that the oil and gas resources north of
the Arctic Circle total approximately 13 percent of the world's
undiscovered oil, and 30 percent of the undiscovered gas. Over
the past decade, the Arctic has become increasingly accessible.
It is evolving in the actions and intentions of Arctic and non-
Arctic nations which are shaping the security environment.
Our two nearest peer competitors, Russia and China, have
both declared the Arctic a strategic priority, and they
continue to aggressively develop the capability, capacity, and
expertise to exert influence and seize opportunities in the
region. With your continued support, I am pleased to report
that the Coast Guard is making progress, operationally and
strategically, to achieve year-round access in the Arctic.
I would like to highlight just a couple of those successes.
At that operational level, we conduct a yearly America's Arctic
Shield Operation. In 2017, we deployed ships and aviation
assets to the Arctic. In just a 4-month period, we completed 28
search and rescue cases, saving 20 lives, conducted joint ice-
diving exercises with the Navy, hosted an oil spill seminar,
visited 41 remote villages, and trained over 4,000 citizens in
boating and water safety, and participated in exercises along
with DoD, other Federal, State, local, travel, and
international partners.
At the strategic level, as the chairman mentioned, for the
United States to lead in the Arctic, we must maintain a
physical presence to exert national security and protect our
sovereign rights. For the Coast Guard, the foundation of this
presence is U.S. icebreakers, whose purpose is to provide
assured year-round access to operate in the polar regions.
To this end, reconstituting our Nation's icebreakers is one
of the Service's highest priorities. And we are the closest we
have been in 40 years to realizing the first step in
recapitalizing the heavy polar icebreaker fleet. And I thank
this committee specifically for your efforts in that.
As human activity in the Arctic continues to increase, the
Coast Guard must maintain annual access to protect our citizens
who sail and live on these waters and protect our sovereign
interest. In 2017, there were three cruise ships with over
2,400 passengers sailed just off the north shore of Alaska's
North Slope in waters where mass rescue and pollution response
efforts were challenging.
This last September, the Chinese icebreaker, Xue Long,
closed a close aboard to Nome, Alaska, and requested a medevac
for one of their people. So we boarded the Xue Long and took
their crewmember off there and transferred him for treatment.
The point is, we are not alone up there in the approaches to
our Nation.
Finally, we continue to work collaboratively with
international bodies like the International Maritime
Organization and Arctic Coast Guard Forum to shape governance
and mitigate risk and assure our Nation's influence.
In conclusion, with the continued support of the
administration, this committee, and the Congress as a whole,
the Coast Guard will continue to lead across the national and
international landscape to protect our interests.
I thank you all for your unwavering support, and for your
efforts to ensure that Coast Guard women and men have all the
tools they need to safely do their operations. I appreciate the
opportunity to testify and look forward your questions.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Admiral. Next, we have Mr. David
Kennedy, Senior Arctic Advisor of the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, NOAA.
Mr. Kennedy. Good morning, Chairman Hunter, Ranking Member
Garamendi, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me to testify today on our work to support safe and
efficient maritime transportation in the Arctic. The Arctic is
a vast, extreme, complicated, rapidly changing place. The
issues and challenges there are multilayered, and require
extensive collaboration. To this end, NOAA cooperates with
academic, regional, State and indigenous stakeholders. We also
rely on the support of our Federal partners in the Coast Guard,
NASA, Navy, Interior, Energy, and others.
The dedication of over half the U.S. Coast Guard cutter
Healy's recent schedule to NOAA operations is an example of
that collaboration. For our part, NOAA was glad to support the
Coast Guard and their Arctic Port Access Route Study, and the
Department of Homeland Security as they develop their Arctic
strategy. Since less than 3 percent of the Arctic Circle lies
within Alaska, international cooperation is also a key to
success in the Arctic.
NOAA participates in the Arctic Council and its working
group, such as the Protection of the Arctic Marine Environment
Group and the Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Program. NOAA is
also a member of the Sustaining Arctic Observing Networks and
the Arctic Regional Hydrographic Commission.
NOAA's Arctic work began in 1870 when the Coast and
Geodetic Survey schooner Yukon began surveying Alaskan waters.
Today, NOAA is working to increase its presence in the Arctic.
I will touch broadly on NOAA's services, but highlight our
navigation services to support transportation and
infrastructure.
NOAA supports transportation and infrastructure in the
Arctic with marine navigation products, weather forecasts, oil
spill hazard assessments, preparedness and response, and
environmental stewardship. These efforts support Arctic
residents by improving their decisions, health, economic
growth, and cultural vibrancy. NOAA is also working to increase
our Arctic security, emergency response, and environmental
prediction capabilities.
Alaska Native coastal communities rely on subsistence
hunting for their nutritional, cultural, mental, and spiritual
wellness. NOAA is working with the Arctic Waterways Safety
Committee to ensure research vessel traffic is minimally
disruptive to subsistence hunting. Vessel traffic through the
Bering Strait is predicted to increase five-fold by 2025,
raising the risk of oil and other hazardous material spills.
NOAA supports the Coast Guard response by providing oil
spill modeling, tools, and data management. Last summer, NOAA
participated in a mutual aid deployment exercise on Alaska's
North Slope, and with interagency partners, provided oil spill
response training for North Slope communities. NOAA's
navigation, observation, and positioning services, especially
nautical charts, are essential to moving goods and people
safely and efficiently in the Arctic.
Nautical charts are built upon core NOAA competencies and
responsibilities: positioning, tides and water level data,
shoreline mapping, and hydrographic services. NOAA provides
accurate positioning through the National Spatial Reference
System. To increase the accuracy in the system, NOAA is
collecting airborne and gravity data initially planned to reach
95 percent coverage of Alaska.
Along the coast, NOAA's national water level observation
network provides long-term observations to inform the decisions
of increasingly vulnerable Arctic communities. In cooperation
with the Alaska Ocean Observing System, which you are going to
hear from later, NOAA is developing portable low-cost systems
to fill water level gaps in the Arctic.
Last year, NOAA delivered over 700 miles of Arctic
shoreline data. This data maintains charts and enables mariners
to pinpoint their locations relative to the coast. Less than 5
percent of the U.S. maritime Arctic has been surveyed to modern
international navigation standards. Over the past 3 years, NOAA
and contract partners acquired 1,500 square nautical miles of
Arctic surveyed data.
In 2018, we have seven projects in Alaska and the Arctic
covering 2,066 square nautical miles. To continue our progress,
NOAA will keep asking our stakeholders to inform our survey
priorities. Our Federal advisory committee, the Hydrographic
Services Review Panel, will meet in Juneau this August for just
that purpose.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today, and I
appreciate the subcommittee's time and attention, and look
forward to your questions. Thank you.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Mr. Kennedy. Ms. Heather Conley is
now recognized, senior vice president for Europe, Eurasia, and
the Arctic at the Center for Strategic and International
Studies. You are recognized.
Ms. Conley. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Ranking Member
Garamendi, and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank
you for this opportunity to speak to you today. Nearly 8 months
ago, CSIS completed an extensive research project that examined
our maritime capability needs in the Bering Strait region,
which makes this discussion even more timely.
With your permission, I would like both my written
statement and this report, entitled ``Maritime Futures: The
Arctic and the Bering Strait Region,'' to be included in the
congressional record.
Mr. Hunter. Without objection.
[The 49-page report entitled ``Maritime Futures: The Arctic and
the Bering Strait Region,'' is available online athttps://csis-
prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/
171027_Conley_MaritimeFutures_Web.pdf.]
Ms. Conley. Thank you. I will just make a few brief points,
and then cede the remaining time for discussion. Here is the
bottom line: While trans-Arctic shipping and destination
shipping may be muted today in the Arctic, we anticipate an
increase in maritime traffic through the narrow Bering Strait,
particularly as LNG [liquefied natural gas] carriers from the
Russian Arctic make their way through the narrow Bering Strait
to Asian energy markets.
Transits through the Bering Strait have more than doubled
over the past decade. These increased transits over time will
stretch and expose our thinly resourced and outdated
capabilities until they are simply no longer able to respond to
a major environmental accident or mass casualty incident.
It is clear the United States needs a proactive, long-term
plan to protect the United States coast line in Alaska, patrol
U.S. territorial waters in the North Pacific, the Bering,
Chukchi, and Beaufort, as well as enforce our 200-mile
exclusive economic zone, as well as our maritime demarcation
border with Russia. These tasks are critical to the future
prosperity, safety, and national security of the United States.
The United States Coast Guard is inadequately resourced to
execute this mission in the Arctic, and we, therefore, are not
in a position to sufficiently safeguard U.S. territorial
waters, and the EEZ [exclusive economic zone] when foreign-
flagged vessels traverse the narrow Bering Strait. This is an
even more pressing issue as Russia and China have both declared
the Arctic to be an economically and militarily strategic
region, and their policies both seek influence beyond their
coast lines to secure their future national interests.
Both countries are making substantial economic investments
in the Arctic, while Russia is reasserting itself militarily.
Simply put, American sovereignty in the Arctic can only be
ensured by our maritime presence. But what concerns me the most
is that the United States is placing one very big bet that the
Arctic will remain of limited strategic value, and that our
current, mostly seasonal approach, will be sufficient. And
because Russia and China take such a dramatically different and
long-term view, Russia and China view the Arctic over the next
half century, we view it in the next budget cycle. The United
States must assess our national security and strategic
implications if Russia and China pursue their strategic
interests and we do not.
So here are some of the questions that we need to ask
ourselves: Could the United States lose access to portions of
its maritime Arctic in the future? What are the implications if
America's Arctic resources are exploited and infrastructure is
constructed by Chinese firms rather than American firms? What
if, in fact, Russia and China are simply overextending
themselves economically and militarily in the Arctic? Is it the
right approach to allow them to do that while the United States
husbands its resources? Which nation has the Arctic's future
right?
If the United States is incorrect about the Arctic, we will
be placed at a great strategic disadvantage with significant
military and economic implications for both the North Atlantic
and the North Pacific. Prudence would suggest the United States
must ensure an enduring and credible maritime presence in the
Arctic. America's current posture does not yet meet this
requirement. Thank you very much.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Ms. Conley. I would like to now
introduce the former chairman of this committee, the full
committee, and the ``Dean of the House,'' Mr. Don Young, to
introduce our next two witnesses.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I do appreciate that,
for letting me say words about our Alaskan witnesses. First, we
have Dr. Brigham here representing the University of Alaska, my
university. Dr. Brigham has a distinguished career. He served
in the Coast Guard for 25 years, retiring with the rank of
captain, having served in command of four Coast Guard cutters,
including the Polar Star sailing in Alaska, Arctic and
Antarctic waters.
Dr. Brigham has participated in over a dozen Arctic and
Antarctic expeditions. In 2008, when Captain Brigham was the
signer of the American Geographical Society's Fliers' and
Explorers' Globe, this signing was in recognition of Polar
Star's voyages of 1994, becoming the first ship in history to
the reach the extreme ends of the global ocean, at the North
Pole and the Ross Sea. Antarctica is the closest navigable
portion of the South Pole.
Dr. Brigham's three decades of research have focused on the
Soviet Russian maritime Arctic issues, which are all
interesting, Arctic climate change, maritime transportation,
sea ice remote sensing, Arctic environmental protection.
Ms. Molly McCammon is the executive director of the Alaska
Ocean Observing System, which is a coalition of Government,
academic, and private partners, working to access and integrate
coastal and ocean data to give users the ability to package the
information and data into usable products for the stakeholders.
Ms. McCammon has been involved early in the effort to get
legislation enacted to support the national and regional ocean
observing networks, and each year she continues the community's
efforts to keep supporting Congress on ocean observing systems.
And I want to welcome both of my Alaskan witnesses, I look
forward to their testimony, as all the rest of the panel. This
is an issue which I have a great interest in, so welcome.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman from Alaska. And the
gentleman from Alaska, Dr. Brigham, is recognized to give your
statement.
Mr. Brigham. Thank you for that kind introduction,
Congressman Young. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking
Member Garamendi, and distinguished members of the
subcommittee. I am honored to testify today before you
regarding the roles of the United States in Arctic marine
transportation, and specifically, some very narrow but
important marine infrastructure requirements.
I am a researcher at the International Arctic Research
Center, but also a fellow at the Coast Guard Academy's Center
for Arctic Study and Policy. No discussion on this topic can be
made without review of the Arctic Council's Arctic Marine
Shipping Assessment, which was released, amazingly enough, 9
years ago, but still has great relevance. The United States was
a lead country in this effort with Canada and Finland. All the
eight Arctic States contributed data and information. This
study could be looked at in three perspectives: a baseline
assessment, the first historic snapshot of all the traffic in
the Arctic Ocean; a strategic guide to a host of Arctic
stakeholders and actors, both Arctic and non-Arctic
stakeholders and actors; but importantly, a policy document, as
the 17 recommendations of AMSA, the Arctic Marine Shipping
Assessment, were vetted, negotiated, and approved by the Arctic
ministers of the eight Arctic States. The recommendations, the
17 recommendations I won't list here, but were divided into
three interrelated themes. Enhancing Arctic marine safety,
protecting Arctic people and the environment, and most
importantly, building the Arctic marine infrastructure.
There is no Arctic marine infrastructure in the Arctic
today except for that along the coast of Iceland, the northern
coast of Norway, and northwest Russia. Really, in the rest of
the place, there is no salvage, SAR, environmental response,
environmental monitoring--a whole list of infrastructure that
are required for safe navigation, of course, and protection of
the environment, but particularly for facilitating efficient
and safe marine transportation.
The AMSA report did point out that the changes in the
Arctic and the future of Arctic marine transportation are
certainly related to sea ice, greater marine access;
extraordinary change, profound change in Arctic sea ice, will
allow longer seasons of navigation. But the priority issue is
this: It is important that the economic factors of Arctic
natural resource development, the connection to global markets
and global commodity prices, are the primary drivers of the
future of Arctic marine transportation. This can be seen today
in the Russia north, offshore Norway, and potentially in
offshore Alaska.
It is really all about economics. It is about international
security and global geopolitics, but it is economics driving
the ``train'' for Arctic marine transportation. There is a
general lack of infrastructure, as I mentioned. A recent study
of the Council on Foreign Relations did highlight, the ``Arctic
Imperatives'' study released last March--March 2017, a number
of deficiencies of the United States in its Arctic
infrastructure.
Particularly one fact was highlighted about data from NOAA
that only 4.7 percent of the United States maritime Arctic is
charted to modern international standards, 4.7 percent, maybe 5
percent now. But nonetheless, we have charts for the whole
region. I should add that the hydrographer of the United States
would say, but only 4.7 percent, a low percentage is charted to
modern international standards.
This serious gap in infrastructure is related to human
security, economic, and environmental implications for the
United States. Let me, in the last minute, list the needs:
hydrography is the highest priority. Certainly, NOAA's budget
requires more funding for the marine frontier of Alaska;
implementation and enforcement of the IMO Polar Code;
additional funding and support to the Coast Guard to make sure
that all of the requirements of this seminal governance regime
are applied by the Coast Guard in U.S. Arctic waters.
I would specifically mention the Arctic port to be
developed at Nome in the near term; dredging Nome to 35 feet
plus; building an outer breakwater dock--breakwater dock to
allow for the mooring and support of large ships in all
seasons. This development will provide for the port presence,
and, essentially, provide the physical presence--maritime
presence of the United States in its maritime Arctic.
Icebreaking capacity, of course; Arctic waters monitoring;
the surveillance of marine traffic; search and rescue and
environmental response; the Seward Marine Center and the polar
ship, Sikuliaq, require continued Federal support; and finally,
communications and aids to navigation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to testify
before you today.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Dr. Brigham. Ms. McCammon, you are
recognized.
Ms. McCammon. Chairman Hunter, Ranking Member Garamendi,
Congressman Young, and members of the subcommittee, my name is
Molly McCammon, and I have been executive director of the
Alaska Ocean Observing System for the past 15 years, based in
Anchorage, Alaska. Thank you for you inviting to me
participate, and I hope my written testimony will be entered
into the record.
As part of the national Integrated Ocean Observing System,
my program is mandated by Congress to work with Federal
agencies, local and State governments, and private industry to
facilitate and enhance coastal and ocean observing. I think we
all know that the Alaska Arctic is a challenging environment
for obtaining observations, especially in realtime: due to lack
of power, few roads, often primitive communications. Yet, this
information is essential to meeting the needs that we find now
in the Bering Strait region and in the Arctic.
So to meet these needs, my program, AOOS [Alaska Ocean
Observing System], is partnering with a host of agencies, the
University of Alaska, and private industry to help identify and
fill observing gaps, demonstrate new observing technologies and
infrastructure and develop data products and applications. We
can't depend on the old way of doing things any longer.
These include things like high-frequency radars to measure
surface currents in realtime, for navigation, search and
rescue, emergency response. Alaska has three radar sites on the
North Slope, none in the Bering Strait. Congress added funds
this past year to allow us to install two new radars in the
Bering Strait, and those will go in next year.
X-band sea ice radars. We have one on the North Slope that
is in regular use, but the equipment is old, needs replacing.
Wave buoys. How many do we have in the Arctic? Zero. But with
congressional support this year, we are putting one outside the
Port of Nome later in July/early August, for the first time,
that will be done operationally.
Real-time freeze-up detection buoys. We are trying to keep
assets in the water as long as possible before freeze-up, and
we have been piloting the use of these buoys. They show a lot
of success and could be used throughout the Arctic. Accurate
water levels are needed for safe navigation, mapping and
charting, storm surge forecasting, informed emergency response.
Over our entire west and north coasts, we have four Federal
tide gauges throughout those entire coasts; more are needed.
But these don't work everywhere and they are expensive and
hard to maintain. So we have been working with the State, NOAA,
and several private companies to test a number of cheaper
alternatives. Of particular interest is the use of GPS
reflectometry techniques that have been pioneered by the space
weather companies that require less power and are easier and
less expensive to install and maintain.
The use of AIS--automatic identification system--vessel
tracking stations. We are expanding those and putting weather
sensors on those stations so they can have dual purpose, and
provide local, tailored, wind conditions alongside vessel
tracking information. There are now eight of these in the
Arctic with two more planned for this summer.
We are also using the AIS data to work with the Coast Guard
and with NOAA to help prioritize hydrographic services, so we
can really focus on what are the key essential areas that need
to be surveyed immediately.
A key element of national security and marine domain
awareness is an understanding of a changing marine ecosystem.
So we are working with partners to establish a network of
state-of-the-art ecosystem moorings, and the use of autonomous
gliders to observe underwater conditions in near realtime, and
track marine mammals, especially those that may be threatened
or endangered, especially near a lot of activity that is
happening offshore.
And, lastly, AOOS is now operating a NOAA-certified
regional data assembly center with web-based analytical and
visualization tools and products to help the Coast Guard, NOAA,
and others integrate observing data, and do their jobs better.
How can Congress help? First, as the Arctic continues to
become more accessible and receive greater attention and use,
the United States needs to invest in additional observing
assets in the region to ensure that we have the marine domain
awareness to manage that usage, respond to potential
emergencies, and provide for the Nation's security.
Second, all the activities I have described here all depend
on substantial partnerships and leveraging of resources. These
need to be fostered and enhanced with additional mechanisms for
the ability to transfer and share funds among Federal agencies
with the private sector. And, third, many of these activities
do depend on our integration within the national Integrated
Ocean Observing System program. H.R. 237, sponsored by
Congressman Young, would reauthorize that program, and it is
now before the House Natural Resources Committee, and I urge
its passage and adequate funding for that program.
In conclusion, I appreciate the opportunity to speak to you
today about the United States role of ocean and coastal
observing in the emerging Arctic, and look forward to answering
your questions.
Mr. Hunter. Right on time. Wow, Ms. McCammon, we thank you.
Go Alaska. All right. Admiral Titley, you are recognized.
Admiral Titley. Thank you. I feel like although everything
is being said, not everybody has said it. Thank you, Chairman
Hunter, Ranking Member Garamendi, and distinguished members of
the subcommittee for the opportunity to present today. I am
David Titley, and I currently serve as professor of practice in
meteorology and professor of international affairs at the
Pennsylvania State University.
I had the privilege of serving in the United States Navy
for 32 years, and retired in 2012 as the Oceanographer and
Navigator of the Navy, and Director of U.S. Navy Task Force
Climate Change. I serve in an advisory capacity on numerous
Arctic and climate-related think tanks, including the Center
for Climate and Security. Basically, though, I am really just a
recovering weather forecaster.
In the Navy, we have a saying: Just give me the bottom line
upfront, or BLUF. So here is my BLUF for today's hearing. The
Arctic's physical environment is changing faster than any other
place on Earth today. Today's Arctic climate continues to warm
at the rate twice that of the rest of the world. These changes
in temperature cause the Arctic sea ice to change in two ways:
It is not only decreasing in extent, but also rapidly thinning.
These changes combined lead to a much more variable,
dynamic ice pack that will make maritime transportation more
tempting, more feasible, and paradoxically more hazardous, due
to rapidly changing and less predictable conditions.
Two, our rivals are paying close attention to the changing
Arctic, even if we are not. The Russians are actively
monetizing their Northern Sea Route and rebuilding their Arctic
military capabilities albeit from very low post-Cold War
levels.
China declares itself to be a near Arctic State, and
intends to jointly build a ``Polar Silk Road'' as the northern
flank in its Belt and Road Initiative. China also continues to
court the Nordic States and Greenland.
Three, we need to address the Arctic by taking a ``system
of systems'' approach. We need to address our security,
economic, scientific, and social issues in the Arctic, while
simultaneously understanding the motives and intentions of
Russia and China, and reassuring our friends and allies.
In keeping with the topic of today's hearing, I would
highlight some of the key Arctic shipping issues. The old
Facebook status said it best, ``It's complicated.'' Although
the temperatures are warming in the Arctic and the ice is
melting at unprecedented rates, it can still be very cold. At
minus 30 degrees, it doesn't matter if it is Celsius or
Farenheit, it is cold. And it can be foggy in the summer, which
reduces visibility, and impairs the safety of transportation.
There is still much work to do charting safe passages and
routes for the Arctic. If you get in trouble, you may be on
your own. The current routes available for navigating across
the Arctic have significant draft limitations for modern
commercial shipping. And today's business model of the
container fleet stresses both reliability of delivery date and
shipping very large number of containers to reduce fixed costs.
But we should always be aware of the potential for disruptive
change. The liquefied national gas, or LNG carrier, Christophe
de Margerie, set a transit speed record for commercial shipping
across the Northern Sea Route last August.
Another ship in its class transited the Northern Sea Route
this past February with no icebreaker assistance. While there
are good technical reasons to believe these are ``one of''
events, many revolutions are not recognized until they are well
underway.
So what should we do? Similar to many plans in the
military, I recommend we take a risk-management approach and
hedge for the unknown. It is important that we step back and
consider the obvious. We have never been in a position in the
modern world where access to an entire ocean opened up within a
matter of decades.
We must update our Nation's Arctic strategy in response to
the changes in our National Security Strategy and National
Defense Strategy. We should use all our sovereign assets, Navy,
Coast Guard, and NOAA, to develop a coherent and sustainable
presence in the Arctic, it will demonstrate long-term
commitment to our sovereign interests, reassure our allies, and
send an unmistakable message to our great power rivals.
I recommend we direct and resource the National Science
Foundation to set up a permanent research presence on Svalbard,
the Norwegian island. Both the Russians and Chinese have robust
presence on that island, the United States does not. Develop
and resource a plan in conjunction with State, Native Alaskan
corporations, allied private sector interests, and build out
the foundation of an infrastructure that can support U.S.
objectives for an ice-free Arctic.
My written testimony contains details of such a strategy.
And commit to ratification of the U.N. Convention of the Law of
the Sea. UNCLOS is the governing structure for the world's
oceans, including the Arctic Ocean. Accession to UNCLOS, among
many other advantages, would allow the U.S. to file a claim for
seabed resources north of Alaska for an area nearly the size of
California.
In closing, our country is dealing with a significant
change in the world's climate, and nowhere is the climate
changing faster than in the Arctic. As I stated in my TED Talk,
the ice doesn't care who is in the White House or who controls
the Congress, it just melts. We can either proactively adjust
and shape our Arctic objectives to maximize the U.S. interests,
or we can passively sit back and watch others grab the
initiative.
Thank you very much for your time and attention, I look
forward to taking your questions.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Admiral. We are now going to
recognize Members for questions, starting with myself. I think
the first thing I would like--I think it was Dr. Brigham was
talking about 4.7 percent of the Arctic is charted to modern
standards. If it weren't for Congressman Young here, it would
be closer to zero percent, because on the Natural Resources
Committee, he passed the Hydrographic Services Improvement Act
in 1998, when I was still in college, which enabled us to get
to 4.7 percent over zero. So again, thanks to the Dean of the
House.
I guess my first question, Admiral Ray, how would you align
our Arctic strategy with what General Mattis has talked about
the Arctic in our National Defense Strategy? That is a trick
question. Think about it.
Admiral Ray. Thanks for the question, Mr. Chairman. As I am
pretty sure you are aware, we have a long-lasting relationship
with the Navy in terms of working these issues. We got a fleet
mix board that meets its--it is a longstanding, many years, and
it has got an Arctic Working Group to work together on that.
Our intelligence communities work together on assessing the
Arctic situation. We work together in multiple exercises. I
think the staff told me about 700 in the last couple years,
tabletops and other things like that. So we have got these
longstanding processes where we work with the Navy. And then
this summer, the Alaskan Command is hosting a symposium in 2
months, in August, where we will all sort of be--the military
and other Federal agencies will fall in up in Alaska and we
will work together to address specific strategic concerns and
kind of assess the situation to see what we are doing.
And, finally, as you know, we have got tremendous support
from the Navy with regard to icebreaker recapitalization. Our
integrated product team, if it weren't for the Navy, I mean,
they are the experts in building unique types of ships. So they
have been a real help for us the whole course of the way. So I
would say that we are lockstep with the Navy when it comes to
both tactical operation and strategic issues, sir.
Mr. Hunter. Sir, I mean, we established a Joint Program
Office out of this committee and the Armed Services Committee.
The reason I asked the question, the Arctic isn't mentioned in
the National Defense Strategy at all. So to all of you, General
Mattis talked about everywhere on Earth basically, except for
the Arctic. And it seems really myopic and shortsighted that we
do this all the time as a Nation, and that is why we are
sitting here trying to hurry up and build icebreakers that
weren't in the game at all.
I guess that was the point to the question. How can you
formulate what the Coast Guard is going to do in the Arctic
without a joint strategy from the Navy and the Coast Guard,
which Mr. Garamendi and I have mandated now in the National
Defense Authorization Act. You got Senator Sullivan is going to
carry that, too. So that is going to--by September of this
year, we are going to require both this committee and the Armed
Services Committee, a Navy-Coast Guard joint plan on what the
strategy is because right now, there is nothing written down.
And we know, from being in the military, at least you and
I, unless it is written down, especially at your rank, and it
is documented 1 million times and put in a bunch of PowerPoint
slides, it doesn't exist. So right now, no matter what you say,
and there is a Joint Program Office for the acquisition side,
what is the strategy side? No one has talked about that,
because it is not in the NDS, so there is no way you even have
to align the Coast Guard strategy with the National Defense
Strategy because there is no National Defense Strategy for the
Arctic. Does that make sense?
You cannot align with the National Defense Strategy in the
Arctic because there is no National Defense Strategy in the
Arctic, which is a huge lapse in what the Office of the
Secretary of Defense put out. We are going to fix that by
asking you and the Navy to come back and tell us what your
strategy is, if you have a joint strategy, does that help the
Coast Guard? I mean, if you have a strategy from the Department
of Defense that says, here are our goals in the Arctic, here is
what we want to do over the next 30 years, here is our plan, I
would think that that would inform the Coast Guard massively,
and NOAA and everybody else here, on what kind of equipment you
are going to have, the accessibility, what is going to be in
the region, all those kind of things. That is my question.
How do you know what the Coast Guard is supposed to do if
there is no joint strategy between you and the other ocean
Service?
Admiral Ray. Well, sir, we have been up there for a while.
And so we have assessed the situation over the last 150 years,
and we have had four Commandants in a row that have talked
about this fourth ocean that you talked about in your opening
comments. And so, I think we have done a pretty decent job of
assessing the situation, and we have got this longstanding 200-
year relationship with the Navy. So I certainly am not
disagreeing with you, I will just say that we are not operating
independently. And so we are ready to roll up our sleeves and
work the Navy as the direction comes out, sir.
Mr. Hunter. OK. I would just say, long term--the reason we
are asking you to come back in 3 months is to present a
strategy, because there isn't one. That's it. So we can build
the ships, and we are doing that now, finally. The icebreakers
are going to be built, there needs to be a strategy to go along
with that. And if OSD is not going to do it, which they haven't
done it, I would recommend that you do it. The Coast Guard
should come up with your strategy. What is your strategy?
Because the Navy doesn't want to be in the Arctic.
Remember, oil right now is at 65 bucks a barrel. You can
bet $1 million that as soon as it goes up to $80, $90, $100 a
barrel, all the big oil companies are going to be back in the
Arctic again. There is only one reason they are not in the
Arctic, only one, because oil is cheap right now--cheap-ish.
Once that changes, they are all going to be there again. And it
is going to be a mad-dash rush to how do we support all this
activity in the Arctic, because they are going to be there as
soon as it goes up again. Boom, they are all going to be there.
With the stuff that they have put down when oil went down under
$100 again, they just left everything sitting there, and they
are going to be out again. It would be great to have a strategy
for what our plans are and how you are going to incorporate the
icebreakers as a service before all that happens. And then it
has got to be done within days as opposed to the time we have
now and the luxury of time.
With that, I thank you all for being here again. I yield to
the ranking member.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you and the
Dean of the House for bringing an extraordinary panel before
us, raising a critical issue. The language that is in the House
version of the NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act] should
give the Department of Defense a swift kick to deal with the
Arctic Ocean. You are quite correct, Mr. Chairman, when you
said that the Navy has no interest.
Yesterday's meeting that Mr. Graves put together was
shocking in that the Navy simply has abandoned the Arctic
Ocean, other than submarines, no surface interest at all. And
if I am wrong, I am ready to have the Navy come and tell me
that I am wrong in my assessment of yesterday's meeting.
I think my question is one that--I don't expect a response,
but I would like it in writing. First of all, the Coast Guard
will, with the passage of the NDAA, and I hope before the NDAA,
work with the Navy on developing the answer to the requirement
that there be a strategy. And I asked the Navy yesterday to
proceed ahead of the law to get on with the question.
So my issue really goes to the other witnesses here, and
that is, each of you have made recommendations. I don't expect
the Department of Defense, since they totally ignored the
Arctic in the National Defense Strategy, to come up any time
soon with a proposal, but each of you have made
recommendations. When taken together, you have, in fact,
developed at least a major part of an Arctic strategy.
So I would ask each of you to put an estimate of the cost
of your recommendations together with the recommendation. You
can simply submit the recommendations and add another
paragraph, another sentence. This strategy to map the coast
requires X personnel, equipment, and the cost is about this
amount. I think this committee is, and certainly under the
chairman and his staff, and my staff, is ready to develop an
Arctic strategy, since the whole of Government has ignored it.
And I think we are ready to do that in the various
opportunities we have in appropriations as well as in
authorization. So if you would do that for us, it would then, I
think, lead to at least a major part of it.
The Coast Guard is doing much of that, specifically with
the icebreakers, but there is more to it that than. So if the
Coast Guard would also carry out putting numbers and personnel
and equipment with each of the recommendations that have been
put forth today, we will be along the way.
With regard to the U.S. Navy, there are those of us that
are on the Seapower and Projection Forces Subcommittee, two of
which are sitting next to each other here, that I suspect will
have conversations with the U.S. Navy about its withdrawal from
the Arctic Ocean, other than submarines. So I am going to let
it go at that. And so, if you would all provide us the
information, that will be the foundation for an Arctic strategy
that I think this committee will put together. I thank you. I
yield back.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize the
former chairman of the full committee, a man who stands behind
you over--in front of an un-iced Alaska in the background here
that looks at us every day, the Dean of the House, Mr. Young.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
panel. We are all saying the same thing. I am pleased with the
panel. No one is really saying anything contradictory of what
should be done in the Arctic. As the only person that lives in
the Arctic--by the way, I live above the Arctic Circle, there
is no ice there in that picture, but I do, and we do have a
changing climate. I think for the better. I have to say that.
We have a new opportunity.
I was just thinking, you know, a good thing about Captain
Cook. This is not a new idea, I mean, he was trying to find a
Northwest Passage, it took him 3 years and 10 days to get to
the inlet into Anchorage. And to show you how things can
happen, he thought he had found it, and he went down one arm of
that inlet, and he got to the end of it and he said, turn it
again. So he turned it around, and that is where he got
Turnagain Arm. I want you to know--how do you like that for a
story?
But my interest is that we have got to have a plan, and may
I thank all of you--if Congress writes a plan without your
input, we are going to screw up. So we need to have--I would
say, Mr. Chairman, one of the good things we could do, maybe we
ought to have an Arctic czar, because every agency is willing
to work with one another, but no one is really figuring out how
to do it.
And maybe we ought to have an Arctic czar because this is
where the future is of the Nation, or the world, is above the
Arctic Circle. That is where the mineral resources are, that is
where the oil is, that is where the fish are going to be. That
is where the action is going to be 100-200 years from now. And
give China and Russia credit for that because they recognize
it, we do not.
And, Ms. Conley, I liked your statement because if we don't
get to this and recognize it for the importance of it, we are
going to end up with another Wrangel Island. If any of you
don't know where Wrangel Island is, that belongs to the United
States of America. But we didn't pay any attention to it and
Russia settled it, now they have a huge settlement there. And I
get people writing me letters, why don't we get our Wrangel
Island back? Well, we would have to go to war to get it. But it
was extremely valuable.
So, Mr. Chairman, I like what I hear. I just think we ought
to have a collusive group, and maybe come to the suggestion of
us--and, Ms. McCammon, and would thank you for your statement,
you and my Alaskan witnesses. Let's have a plan. Give us your
plan how it could be done so we can make some pretty sound
decisions when we have a chance to do that, because we are
going to have to do it.
I mentioned yesterday at our meeting that Mr. Garret Graves
put on, the general public doesn't understand the Arctic yet.
They are sort of out there, that is the Arctic. And we have to
understand it until we can raise the attention of this. But we
have to do it, otherwise the public--I go to Members on the
floor, and I said, what about the resources in the Arctic?
Where? How about the new shipping channels? What? Do you know
any navigational aids because the other countries are going to
use it. And what is going on up there, you know, how many
things--they don't have any idea.
So, Mr. Chairman, I think our challenge is to listen to the
witnesses, and they are all agreeing. Let's see if we can put
something together, with your information, and then I think the
chairman ought to introduce, with the ranking member, a future
piece of legislation that creates the Arctic--I call it
symposium, but has one person in charge, and I know maybe
someday when someone is not sitting on this committee, they
might want to be the czar of the Arctic. I need a new job
maybe, you never know.
But I just--you know, I love what you are saying, and thank
you. And let's just see, maybe you all are going to get
together after this meeting, and maybe you ought to do that,
Mr. Chairman, tell them to do it and come back to us and see
what we can do. Thank you. Yield back. That was a statement,
that wasn't----
Mr. Hunter. We could have an Arctic czar that even sits on
the Joint Chiefs, it would be called the Commandant of the
Coast Guard. That would be a great Arctic czar.
Mr. Lowenthal, you are recognized.
Mr. Young. Chairman, just 1 second.
Mr. Hunter. Yes, sir.
Mr. Young. We talk about icebreakers. Icebreakers are great
and I support icebreakers and I want icebreakers, but that is
not all of it, it is the infrastructure. We have no ports up
there. We don't have the communication. We did have quite a bit
when they were looking for oil and they withdrew, but we don't
have that anymore. We are sort of out in the middle of La La
Land right now, and that is where our job is.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman. Mr. Lowenthal, again,
recognized.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
all the members of the panel for being here and educating us on
the infrastructure and the needs that are definitely needed in
the Arctic. This question is for Mr. Kennedy and Admiral Ray.
You know, as you know, the National Ocean Policy includes
important goals and policies to enhance maritime transportation
and security in the Arctic. As part of the policy, the Coast
Guard, NOAA, and other partners were asked to coordinate the
oil spill prevention, the containment, and the response
efforts, including the development of new tools, to improve our
modeling and responses to these incidents.
Can you fill us in on how this collaboration is working?
How it is going on? And what progress you have made towards
these goals?
Admiral Ray. Sir, I will talk about the response side of
it, the modeling obviously is in the expertise of NOAA. With
regard to response, every summer when we go up on Arctic
Shield, at least for the last several years, we send research
and development projects to see what we can do to improve our
capability to respond to oil spills and ice waters, waters on
the edge of the ice pack, waters--in fact, it is different, a
lot different than the Gulf of Mexico. And I will just be quite
frank, we are not where we need to be yet when it comes to
responding. We are still pushing it, we work with NOAA, and
across the interagency to get the ideals that we go up and test
every summer. But I don't--I don't think we are where we need
to be yet when it comes to responding to a significant oil
spill in the Arctic.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you. Mr. Kennedy.
Mr. Kennedy. I agree with Admiral Ray. We are working hard
to try and do better. We have spills, drills. There was an oil
spill technology workshop in March in Anchorage, looking at
Arctic and Alaska technology and where we are and where we need
to go. As you heard from the different panelists, that place is
far, far away. And we have logistics issues, we have
communication issues, and the science is not all there yet.
Very clearly, it isn't there. And with the dramatic changes, it
is pretty hard for us to keep up the research to stay on top of
those changes and how they relate to responding to a spill and
any other sort of hazardous issue. So we're not there. We are
working on it. There is a lot of focused interest and
attention, but I would not--we are not there yet.
Dr. Lowenthal. I want to follow up, and this again is for
Mr. Kennedy and Admiral Ray on these, where we are going in
terms of the policies and where we are. You have indicated that
we are really not there in implementing what we really need to
do.
So I would like to know how we are engaging all the
stakeholders as we plan for this ocean future. And so I am
wanting to know how NOAA and the Coast Guard are implementing
the marine planning in the Arctic. What are the key data sets
and the needs that you have identified that we need to ensure
safety and coordination between the ocean stakeholders? Can you
elaborate at all on that--what you are looking at and what we
need to look at ourselves? I know we are not there yet, but
maybe you can tell us a little bit more about--as we move
towards increased development, how all the stakeholders are
participating?
Admiral Ray. Sir, we have got captains at the port. In
Alaska, we have got one in Anchorage that actually covers all
the way out to the western part of Alaska and up north. And we
have got standing committees that include all the--by design,
they include all the stakeholders from the local communities.
And so, they convene on a regular basis and talk about the
issues. As we go up north there, as I think you may recall from
my opening statement, we engaged in about 40 different coastal
villages in Alaska in the summer.
Dr. Lowenthal. Uh-huh.
Admiral Ray. So when we go there, we--kind of the way you
interact with the folks up there is they like to say--you kind
of talk about these issues, you bring them up, and it is really
human interaction is how we work through some of these things
when you are talking about responding in waters that they
traditionally fished in and hunted in and done--so that is the
primary tool that the Coast Guard uses. It is a similar
arrangement that we used in Miami or L.A., it is just a
different--and it is tailored to the nature of the stakeholders
in the region.
Mr. Kennedy. Sir, NOAA has regional coordinators in Alaska.
Their primary responsibility beyond providing the Coast Guard
and whoever else the data and information that we generate to
support a response, their job is to try and reach out to all
aspects of the communities that might be involved in response.
So that includes down to and including, as Admiral Ray said,
the indigenous folks. I think I mentioned in my testimony, we
have actually gone out and done a training in some of the
villages. But that also includes academics. The State of Alaska
is a very, very strong partner, we interact with them on a
regular basis, as well as the Coast Guard, I mentioned in my
testimony, again, several other Federal agencies, Department of
the Interior, BOEM [Bureau of Ocean Energy Management], in
particular, I spent a lot of time working with them.
And, so, that is--oh, industry, I want to make sure to
include industry, because when something happens and you have
got a response, industry is going to be kind of helping manage
that, and you got to understand where they are coming from, you
got to be familiar with who they are, how they think, and what
they bring to the table. So all of that, in terms of
integration.
In terms of what information do we need that we don't have,
you have heard from this panel: observing of all different
kinds. So that is everything from all of the oceanographic data
from currents to temperatures to, you name it, to the whole
biological communities. As this change is occurring, there is
dramatic change in where species are. And, again, we are having
trouble keeping up with all of that, but it is absolutely
essential for us to understand that. There is permafrost
issues, there is sea ice, I could go on. But there are the
three or four categories of data and information that we don't
have enough of that we are working collaboratively with other
partners to try and gain.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you. And I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Graves, you are recognized.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you very much.
I appreciate all of you being here.
Admiral Ray, I want to follow on the questions that I think
the Chairman Young and Congressman Hunter asked, and
Congressman Garamendi asked. I think you are seeing a theme
here that there is strong concerns about lack of integration
between the Coast Guard and the Navy.
I fail to understand why we continue to have separate
documents, separate strategies, all these people talking about
playing together, but at the same time, we are missing
opportunities for efficiency.
To try to dissect or tease out the Navy mission as opposed
to the Coast Guard and the Arctic is very difficult for me to
understand. And I want to commend Congressman Hunter, the
subcommittee chairman, for his work in the NDAA bill. I think
you are aware of an amendment that he added that forces a joint
strategy.
But, quite frankly, that is not something that Congress
should have to step in and do. That is something that is common
sense, and I think there is a great bit of frustration on both
sides of the aisle that that is not happening already. And I
just wanted to get your feedback on that and help me--I guess,
maybe give us some comfort and help us understand why we
continue to see these silos.
Admiral Ray. Thanks for the question, Congressman.
I won't speak for the Navy. What I will tell you is that
there is no air gap between the Navy and the Coast Guard from
the top to the bottom. I mean, we just had staff talks a couple
months ago--or it has actually been about 3 months ago with
Admiral Zukunft to the CNO. And the Arctic and what we were
doing there was part of our discussions.
We work at my level and all the way down to the, you know,
the deck play level. I concede, obviously, that we don't have a
national strategic document that is authored by both. I think
the last similar document was a 21st-century seapower document
that is probably about 10 years old now that had to kind of
prescribe that we would work together and develop Arctic
policies and procedures or, you know, kind of strategies.
So as I told the chairman, we are certainly, you know,
willing to fall in and work on this process with the Navy. But
I want to assure you that I don't--absent the strategy, which
you all can see, there is no big air gap between the Coast
Guard and the Navy. I mean, it was a conscious effort to
transmit the icebreaking surface mission to the Coast Guard
after World War II, and we have been doing that since the
1940s.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Admiral, what does Russia and
China and Norway, what do all these other Arctic nations know
that we don't in regard to the fact that they have
exponentially more Arctic capabilities than the United States
does?
Admiral Ray. Well, I won't speak for a lot of the other
countries. My assessment is that, for instance, with Russia,
they have 60 percent of the Arctic coastline. I think it is
over 50 percent of the Arctic coastline. And it is a
significant part of their GDP, and Ms. Conley can attest to
that.
So if petrochemicals or petroleum products are the biggest
part of the GDP of Russia, then the North Slope or their
northern coast is the biggest part of that. So they have
obvious economic interest, but what they are doing goes way
beyond economic activity. We observe that and are aware of
that.
The other nations--you know, there are eight Arctic
nations, and so each one of them has got a little different cut
on this. Some of them are primarily fisheries, and they are
trying to protect those stocks. That is more on the Atlantic
side. We are not fishing north of Alaska right now except for
subsistence. There is no commercial fishing.
So each country has their own perspective, but I will tell
you, they are collectively demonstrating an interest to the
event that they can to being able to operate up there. And that
is what we have been talking about for several years, we, the
Coast Guard, that you have got to be able to operate up there.
You know, virtual presence is absence, and so we need to be
present there, and that is what we have been--with the help of
this committee, we are the closest we have been in 40 years.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Well, I certainly agree with that.
But I think I would share the concern of virtually everyone up
here about the lack of polar capacity and the implications that
is going to, I think, continue to have on our Nation.
I am going to violate my own advice. Dr. Brigham, I just
want to--I don't know the answer to this question, but Dr.
Akasofu, how is he doing? And don't answer that question----
Mr. Brigham. I think he still comes into the office and
does his science.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Yeah, OK. All right. Well, in a
previous life, I had the opportunity to work with him. An
extraordinary amount of time we lost contact. Please, pass on
my best to him. He was an amazing resource for us in regard to
climate change science and Arctic ice coverage and other things
and enjoyed working with him. So thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Huffman is recognized.
Mr. Huffman. I want to thank the chair and the witnesses
for a very interesting conversation about policy and American
leadership in the Arctic. And I totally understand the national
security implications for why we need to have a greater and a
safer presence in the Arctic.
I am also hearing a lot of interest in safety for shipping.
It makes perfect sense. But a lot of this has to do with
mineral development, fossil fuel development, and other things
that raise questions about environmental standards and
environmental protection.
And I am wondering, before we get too far into the massive
costs of all of these things, if anyone is thinking about what
American leadership looks like in the Arctic when it comes to
protecting the unique natural resources of the Arctic and the
ecological values.
Is this just a rush to exploit things from the Arctic, or
is American leadership also attempting to project our standards
and environmental values into this conversation? And I would
open that up, certainly, to any of the witnesses that want to
speak to it, because I haven't heard much about that.
Mr. Brigham. Yes, Congressman.
The United States, through the Arctic Council, has been a
leader in all things related to environmental protection and
sustainable development. This Arctic Marine Shipping
Assessment, which I mentioned in my testimony, is really an
overview of--and a strategy for how to protect people and the
environment.
So I think we have been there. I think the State
Department, through the Arctic Council, representing us there
and all the agencies, including the Coast Guard, and at the
Arctic Council, have been world leaders in environmental
protection, marine safety, and this question of infrastructure
that relates to all of that.
Mr. Huffman. Anyone else want to add to that? Yeah.
Ms. Conley. Congressman, I would also add, I think there
are some exciting opportunities. You look at the five Arctic
coastal States, plus five major fishery States joining together
in placing a moratorium on fishing in the central Arctic, the
high seas. That is a preemptive diplomatic effort to make sure
the science is there before the fish arrive. And so I think
that is a good example.
We know there is going to be work to look at biodiversity
beyond national jurisdiction. That is looking at the high seas
area, again, to ensure that we have strong biodiversity. The
Arctic is front and center at that conversation.
We also have, even in the business community, the Arctic
Economic Council which is very focused on making sure that any
investor, any business practices in the Arctic have the highest
standards. It takes extraordinary stewardship to make sure that
any economic activity is done at the highest level, but this is
something that we do have practice with, but we have to ensure
it.
So I think there is actually some very good news on that
front, marine-protected areas, but it does require continued
vigilance.
Mr. Huffman. All right. I appreciate that very much.
I want to, if I can, ask specifically about black carbon.
And Mr. Kennedy, I know that the United States is trying to
make some progress. The International Maritime Organization, it
is my understanding, is moving fairly slowly on addressing
emissions pollution, particularly black carbon.
Current targets by the Arctic Council nations to reduce
black carbon emissions, many people believe need to be
strengthened, and we need a more active U.S. role in leading
that change. So I would like to ask you if you think it is true
that the Arctic is particularly sensitive to black carbon for
maritime emissions and the implications of that.
Mr. Kennedy. It is certainly true that black carbon is a
contributing factor, and NOAA is not a leader in the discussion
about black carbon. I can say what I just said because I have
been in many conferences and sessions where EPA, for the most
part, has led the discussion about black carbon and----
Mr. Huffman. That is not very reassuring right now, but
please continue.
Mr. Kennedy. So I can't claim to be an expert, but, yes,
indeed, it is an issue. Everybody from the Arctic Council to
science ministerials have been discussing it, and it has been a
little bit of a slog to----
Mr. Huffman. Would you agree that without adequate
international regulations that address these maritime
emissions, rising Arctic maritime transportation because of
this will actually accelerate the already alarming trends we
see in the Arctic?
Mr. Kennedy. I don't think I can be the one to make that
statement, but I think, logically, if you have additional
activities going on there, carbon is going to be an issue, and
it is an issue.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Garamendi is re-recognized.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Titley, your work at Penn State covers a variety of
issues, some of which you have spoken to. First of all, is
there any doubt that the climate and the Arctic is warming and
that there is going to be an opening of the sea channels?
Admiral Titley. Thank you, sir, for the question.
I think there is extremely high confidence the Arctic will
continue to warm, and the only question on a seasonally ice-
free Arctic is not if, but when. Reasonable people can
disagree.
When I started the Navy's Task Force on Climate Change, the
consensus was in the 2060s, 2050s and 2060s. I was telling the
Navy probably the 2035 or so. I would still say 2035, which is
coming up very soon. By the time we get to 2020, that is going
to be next decade. So we have 15-ish years to prepare for when
we have seasonally ice-free Arctic.
Now, it is going to freeze up in the winter, probably for
everybody's life in here and our children's life. But over
time, by the time we get to the latter part of the 21st
century, we will start seeing weeks and even months of ice-free
conditions, and I think that is what the Russians and Chinese
are----
Mr. Garamendi. I wanted to get that on the record, because
that is foundational for everything that we have been talking
about here.
Also you have spoken to Russia and to China. Why is China
interested in the Arctic?
Admiral Titley. I think China is interested--well, first,
Heather Conley down at the other end of the table here is
really the expert on this. But as I understand this, China is
looking at this primarily from an economic perspective. If you
look at their Belt and Road Initiative, this really encircles,
actually encircles Eurasia. And the so-called ``Polar Silk
Road'' is the northern component of that encirclement.
So I think they see this as if you put China as the hub of
the late 21st-century, early 22nd-century world, they want to
ensure they have resources. They also look at their fossil fuel
resources.
I am sure you are aware that the Chinese are very concerned
about the Strait of Malacca. They think the United States could
interdict their supply of energy through the strait; whereas,
if you are bringing it across the top of Russia, which is at
least their friend for now, and through the Russian waters on
the side of the Bering Strait, I believe if you are in Beijing,
you see that as a more assured access along with land lines
through Russia for energy.
Mr. Garamendi. Earlier today, I was at a meeting in which
it was stated that the critical importance of being on the key
committees, China is imposing itself on the Arctic Council,
and, as I understand it, seeking a position at the committee
level, and, therefore, will be in a position to direct or to
influence the decisions. Is that correct, Ms. Conley and Dr.
Brigham? Jump in.
Mr. Brigham. No, I think the eight Arctic States have
control over the Arctic Council. There is no question about it.
They have non-Arctic State observers, like China and India,
Italy, 13 non-Arctic States. And so they observe, they
participate, but minimally. It really is the eight Arctic
States in the Arctic Council which is a consensus body in a
governmental forum with nonbinding, generally, decisions.
So it is a weaker body, but nonetheless, focused on
environmental protection, sustainable issues. China has a voice
with other non-Arctic States, but I would argue not an
overwhelming voice there. But they are at the table.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Kennedy, you jumped in, and Ms. Conley,
you both kind of sat up in your chair when I raised that
question.
Ms. Conley. Thank you. Just on China's role in the Arctic
Council, I think what we are seeing is a growing confidence
since they became observers in 2013. They are managing their
way through the working groups. It is their funding and their
scientific presence and activity. They are opening new
scientific research centers in northern Iceland, their presence
in Greenland. They believe they have a valid role. Their
environment is impacted by the changes in the climate, although
there is some scientific dispute whether mid-latitude countries
are impacted. So they think they have a science presence. And
the funding of indigenous groups and elsewhere are building
that credibility and that voice.
The Arctic Council has an observers manual. They have to
follow those procedures. But I would say, their funding, their
presence, their visibility, not unlike that we have seen in
Antarctica with their growing science presence, science is
presence. Presence ensures that sovereignty.
Just to follow up with Admiral Titley, we have had a
longstanding--in fact, Lawson came with us--a track 2 dialogue
with China's Arctic scholars for the last 3 years that looks at
China's interest in the Arctic.
I would absolutely say it is shipping, it is the diversity
of those shipping routes, absolutely from the Straits of
Malacca, but it shortens by up to 30 percent east/west transit
for Chinese goods. It is absolutely an energy requirement,
mineral resources, rare earth, which is why they are
particularly interested in Greenland, potentially Iceland, and
the mining capabilities, as well as the LNG and their
participation in Yamal.
The protein, the fishing stocks, which I think is an
undervalued issue that Beijing is quite interested in, which is
why they wanted that seat at the table to be part of that 5
plus 5 dialogue that I mentioned to you.
Tourism, believe it or not, you are going to continue to
see a wave of Chinese tourism in the Arctic. We are already
seeing that in Finland and elsewhere. Their commercial presence
then allows their tourism presence to come.
So it is going to be a comprehensive presence over time.
They are investing the high-level diplomacy, the economic
diplomacy, and then we know many of the commercial ventures
that China produces has a PLA PLN component to it. We have to
understand and research the strategic implications of what a
greater Chinese infrastructure presence and science presence
means to our interest.
So, for instance, if China builds an air base or an
airstrip, or airport very close to Thule Air Force Base in
Greenland, does that have strategic implications for the United
States and our missile defense radar system?
Does a growing surface-to-air missile presence on Wrangel
Island in Russia, does that impact our missile defense
architecture at Fort Greely, Alaska? Those are the types of
questions we have to really start asking. That is the strategic
look ahead that has been missing, in my view, from all of our
Arctic documents that we have produced over the last several
years.
Mr. Garamendi. I thought you were going to mention Djibouti
rather than Iceland, but----
Mr. Kennedy. I have nothing to add to that. That was a very
comprehensive answer.
Mr. Garamendi. Admiral.
Admiral Titley. Yeah. I would only add to Ms. Conley's
statement, in addition to the resources, I think another reason
China is looking so hard at Greenland, at Iceland, Norway, they
are looking for an eastern terminus for a transpolar route. We
don't even think of a transpolar shipping route.
We have--just like 9/11, we have a failure of imagination.
We don't think about that ice-free--seasonal ice-free Arctic,
or an ice-free Arctic with only--or an ice-covered Arctic but
with first-year sea ice, but with ships that can transit
unassisted through that sea ice.
They are looking at how to connect the Pacific and the
Atlantic over the top. And, you know, sometimes we laugh at how
they do it. It is a little clumsy from time to time, but less
and less each day. So this is not only a twofer, but multiple
things: Everything that Ms. Conley talked about, plus how do
they control, how do they have first say in the strategic
Atlantic port for the Arctic for that over-the-top route.
Mr. Garamendi. I think your answers to the question I raise
make my point, is that China is a major player, and it is using
its economic power and political power to influence the
policies in the Arctic. I think that is underway.
If I might, Mr. Chairman, our task is to make choices. We
are in the process of choosing to spend $717 billion this year
on the Department of Defense. If we took $1 billion of that,
which is one-thirteenth thousandth of that money, $1 billion,
and spent it on the Arctic, just did a quick calculation here,
we would have $700 million a year available to build
icebreakers. In other words, we could build the six that are
said to be required over the next decade.
We could have $50 million a year for shore facilities for
the Coast Guard and science. You have $50 million a year for
communications, $50 million for domain awareness, $50 million a
year for mapping, $50 million for research, and another $50
million for whatever else you want to do; $1 billion, of the
$717 billion that we intend to spend on the Department of
Defense this year. Food for thought. And that is why I asked
each of you to put numbers and material and people, whatever,
behind each of your recommendations, because our task is to
make choices. And talking to our colleagues here, we may very
well want to do an Arctic strategy piece of legislation.
I yield back.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the ranking member.
This is probably the best panel we have had on the Arctic
since I have been the chairman, which has been 6 years now.
This is the best panel. Everybody always disagrees on stuff and
that is fine, but I think you all agree on two things: The
Arctic is opening rapidly, and it could be even faster than we
think, and technology allows our competitors to move there
faster than we might think. People always do what we--we have
never been right about where the next war is, never. Never. We
always prep for the wrong place, always, and that is just a
fact of life. And I think the Arctic is one of those places.
And I joke with my friends that we here in Congress are on
the board of directors of America. We are, kind of. And the
Navy right now is in its warfighting box, its warfighting
bubble, if you will, with Korea. We are no longer locked in a
massive land war in Iraq and Afghanistan, so there is money
going to the Navy again for ships.
And they are looking at Asia, and they are looking around
the world, and they are in their war bubble. And that is fine.
And the Arctic is not where they--they are not playing at war
in the Arctic right now so it is not a priority. That is my
opinion of why they are not involved.
Mr. Young brought up a czar of the Arctic. We have a czar
of the Arctic. Admiral Ray, it could be you, it could be
Commandant Schultz, but it should be somebody--I mean, you are
already here. You are already doing it. You are the ones that
are going to have the Arctic strategy that we help you put
together that you bring to us in September. Hopefully that will
negate the need for anything--for us to do anything
legislatively, because we shouldn't be doing that. But we need
to make sure that you are.
So you all agree on one thing: The Arctic is opening up
very quickly; and two, we are slow in our ability to--we are
slow right now in our planning for how to not just extort the
Arctic for natural resources, but how to make sure everybody is
going to up there, and being clean, driving clean, fishing
well, what they are--I mean, we have the oversight over that
around the world except for there, and that needs to be fixed.
And the Coast Guard is doing it, Mr. Garamendi and I, Mr.
Graves. And Don Young has been doing this for over 30 years,
working on this one issue. So now that we are getting the
boats, I think you need the strategy to go with the boats.
And you are in charge, Admiral Ray. I mean, Admiral Schultz
is the Arctic czar, as far as I am concerned, and we are going
to get our information from you. And, hopefully, it is enough
so that John and I can just sit here and not do anything and
say, hey, that is a great strategy, let's implement it, as
opposed to having to change it or create it ourselves.
Mr. Garamendi. Just one question.
Mr. Hunter. Sure.
Mr. Garamendi. Is there anybody here from the U.S. Navy?
Mr. Hunter. Admiral Titley.
Admiral Titley. Retired Navy, which means I do not have to
start everything with ``I support the President's budget.''
Mr. Garamendi. Admiral, as good as you are, you don't count
in answering my question.
Admiral Titley. Not at all. But----
Mr. Garamendi. My question was asked for a very, very
specific reason, and there is no one in this room from the U.S.
Navy.
Mr. Hunter. So that is very telling. And my answer to that
is, that that is fine, because with Congress' funding and with
the Coast Guard's strategy and ability and know-how from being
there, I think we have this down.
And we are going to drag the Navy along screaming and
kicking, but we are going to drag them and we are going to make
sure, too, that they do--tow them along. We are going to make
sure that they do the right thing, too, when it comes to the
actual icebreaker itself, meaning--and this is a time for a
different discussion, but now that we are getting the ships, we
don't want to see LCS communication suites on the Coast Guard
icebreaker. We want to make sure that the Navy gets involved
where they are supposed to and stays away where they need to
stay away when it comes to the acquisition.
So with that, thank you all for being here, very
informative discussion. And, finally, we are moving on this
stuff and we are making a difference, and we are making changes
because of all of you, and the few that actually came to the
hearing today, which we appreciate.
With that, the hearing is over.
[Whereupon, at 12:29 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]