- COMMITTEE ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
COMMITTEE ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
JANUARY 29, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-1
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available:
http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov
_________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-359 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York, Chairman
BRAD SHERMAN, California
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
Member
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
KAREN BASS, California
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TED S. YOHO, Florida
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
AMI BERA, California
LEE ZELDIN, New York
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
JIM SENSENBRENNER, Wisconsin
DINA TITUS, Nevada
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
BRIAN MAST, Florida
TED LIEU, California
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
DEAN PHILLPS, Minnesota
JOHN CURTIS, Utah
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
KEN BUCK, Colorado
COLIN ALLRED, Texas
RON WRIGHT, Texas
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan
GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
GREG PENCE, Indiana
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey
STEVE WATKINS, Kansas
DAVID TRONE, Maryland
MIKE GUEST, Mississippi
JIM COSTA, California
JUAN VARGAS, California
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
Jason Steinbaum, Staff Director
Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
CONTENTS
Rules of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, 116th Congress........
4
House Foreign Affairs Committee Professional Staff...............
24
House Foreign Affairs Subcommittees..............................
29
APPENDIX
Hearing Notice...................................................
36
Hearing Minutes..................................................
37
Hearing Attendance...............................................
38
COMMITTEE ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING
TUESDAY, JANUARY 29, 2019
House of Representatives,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:15 p.m., in
Room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Eliot L. Engel
presiding.
Chairman Engel. We are going to make this abbreviated,
because I understand a vote has been called and there is liable
to be a whole series of votes. So I think we are going to do
this as quickly as we can, as fast as we can.
A quorum is present. Let me start by welcoming all members
to this organizational meeting of the House Foreign Affairs
Committee for the 116th Congress.
We meet today to do a bunch of things, but because of the
votes I propose that we quickly adopt the committee rules and
professional staff member list, and then afterwards we can
introduce the new chairs and ranking members as well as new
committee members.
Pursuant to clause 2(a) of House rule XI, the next order of
business is adoption of the committee's rules for the 116th
Congress.
[The information referred to follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Engel. A copy of the proposed rules has been
distributed to each of you in advance.
The changes from the last Congress are relatively minor. We
made some adjustments to the jurisdiction of the subcommittees,
some additions to ensure that our rules conform to the House
rules, and some changes to enhance transparency and oversight.
The proposed rules are a bipartisan product, and I thank
Mr. McCaul for working with me on this package. I would like to
give Mr. McCaul a chance to make any statement he may wish on
the rules.
Mr. McCaul. We are fully in support of the rules package,
and it is my understanding that we will vote on that first and
then make opening statements and introduce the new members.
Chairman Engel. Does any member wish to be recognized?
If not, I move that the proposed rules be adopted as the
rules of the Committee on Foreign Affairs for the 116th
Congress.
All in favor, say aye.
Those opposed, say no.
The ayes have it, and the proposed rules are adopted.
Without objection, the motion to reconsider is laid on the
table and staff are authorized to make technical and conforming
changes to the rules.
The next order of business is to adopt the list of
committee professional staff members, as required by House
rules.
[The information referred to follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Engel. You have in your folders the list of staff.
We are very fortunate to have such a talented and dedicated
staff on both sides of the aisle. In particular, I would like
to recognize my staff director, Jason Steinbaum, who most of
you know, and the ranking member's staff director, Brendan
Shields.
Without objection, I move that the committee staff list be
adopted.
OK. So moved.
Thank you, Mr. McCaul, and thank you to all our committee
members.
Let me yield to Mr. McCaul for any remarks he may wish to
make.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Chairman Engel. It is a great honor
to serve alongside of you as the lead Republican on the Foreign
Affairs Committee.
This is a historic committee that deals with serious issues
of war and peace. It dates back to the Continental Congress,
where Benjamin Franklin served as its first chairman.
In the next 2 years, America will be met with many
international challenges. Some of these problems are very
familiar; others have yet to materialize. As we sit here today,
we are seeing in real-time the fight for the future of
Venezuela. I know all of you hope there is a peaceful
transition of power and that democracy triumphs over tyranny.
As we confront these challenges, it will be important for
all of us to work together to put forward the best solutions.
As I have always said and always heard Chairman Engel say many
times, partisanship must end at the water's edge. This
committee has enormous responsibilities, and I look forward to
showing the American people that both parties can unite to do
what is best for our country.
Some of my priorities are to confront our adversaries by
taking real steps to counter China and Russia and increase
pressure on Iran and North Korea; bolster engagement with our
allies, including NATO and Israel; enhance our presence and
leadership around the world; expand market access for American
business abroad; reform and streamline the State Department,
with its first comprehensive reauthorization since 2002, and
modernize our foreign aid programs; secure America by combating
human trafficking, transnational organized crime, gangs, and
drug cartels, in addition to enhancing cybersecurity and
counterterrorism measures around the globe; ensure the American
Government is doing all we can to tackle childhood cancer in
the developing worlds, especially in Africa.
There will be times we may not see eye to eye, but in those
instances I look forward to having a respectful and civil
debate.
I would like to take this opportunity to recognize my
subcommittee ranking members and introduce new Republican
members of the committee.
First, the vice ranking member, Representative Ann Wagner,
former Ambassador to Luxembourg.
Congratulations, Ann.
Next, on Africa, Global Health and Human Rights, and
International Organizations, Representative Chris Smith, who
has served in Congress for 38 years as a champion of human
rights.
Next, Asia, the Pacific, and Nonproliferation,
Representative Ted Yoho, who has become a real leader and a
real expert in this area and this region.
Next, Europe, Eurasia, Energy, and the Environment,
Representative Adam Kinzinger, an Air Force veteran who served
in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Next, Middle East, North Africa, and International
Terrorism, Representative Joe Wilson, an Army veteran, father
of four sons who have served our country in the military, and
one of the nicest guys you will meet in Congress.
Next, Oversight and Investigations, Representative Lee
Zeldin, a former attorney who served in Iraq and continues to
serve in the Army Reserves today.
And then finally, Western Hemisphere, Civilian Security,
and Trade, Representative Francis Rooney, former Ambassador to
the Holy See.
The new Republican members joining our team are: Ken Buck
from Colorado, former prosecutor with the Department of
Justice, served as chief for the Criminal Division in the U.S.
Attorney's Office; Tim Burchett from Tennessee, former mayor of
Knox County and served 16 years in the State legislature;
Michael Guest from Mississippi, a former district attorney;
Greg Pence--I think we all know his last name very well--from
Indiana, a former Marine and businessman; and Guy Reschenthaler
from Pennsylvania, a U.S. Navy veteran who served in the JAG
Corps in Iraq, he also served as a district judge in the
Pennsylvania legislature; Steve Watkins from Kansas, a graduate
of West Point, MIT, and Harvard, combat veteran who served in
Afghanistan; and, last, Ron Wright from my home State of Texas,
who has been involved in politics for 30 years and worked with
Congressman Joe Barton, my dear friend.
I want to congratulate all of you. I am delighted at the
experience we have, particularly the military and veteran
experience and prosecutorial experience in foreign policy. I
know everyone is ready to get to work.
And, with that, Mr. Chairman, let me say what an honor it
is to serve with you, and, above all, I will cherish our
friendship.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Engel. Thank you very much, Mr. McCaul.
Let me just say at the outset, those of you who have been
on the committee for the past several years know that Chairman
Royce and myself had an extraordinary relationship. We always
said that politics should stop at the water's edge when it
comes to foreign policy, and we conducted ourselves that way. I
believe that the same thing will be true of Mr. McCaul and
myself.
I want to just say that, while people may have differences
of opinion, we can do it in a respectful way and even find out
that maybe with a little bit of tweaking here and there we
could actually agree on most of the things.
I would hope that the traditions from the past 6 years on
the Foreign Affairs Committee will continue with myself and Mr.
McCaul as leaders of the committee.
I am very honored to serve as chairman of this very
important committee, and I hope to continue our longstanding
tradition of bipartisan cooperation to advance American
interests around the world. And previous chairmen from both
parties have been fair, transparent, and inclusive, and my
commitment is that I will follow in their footsteps.
The committee will do good work. It will not shirk its
responsibilities. We will conduct thorough oversight of the
agencies, programs, and policies under our jurisdiction. That
is our constitutional obligation. It is what the American
people expect us to do.
There will be times when we disagree on policy matters, and
that is what democracy is all about, but those disagreements
should not descend into personal animosity. And, as I said, I
look forward to working with Mr. McCaul to set a positive tone
and make sure the voices of all of our members, Democrats and
Republicans alike, are heard.
I would like to now take a moment to introduce our
subcommittee chairs and the new Democratic members of the
committee.
First, the chairs: Brad Sherman will serve as chair of the
Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific, and Nonproliferation. Albio
Sires will serve as chair of the Subcommittee on Western
Hemisphere, Civilian Security, and Trade. Ted Deutch will serve
as chair of the Subcommittee on Middle East, North Africa, and
International Terrorism. Karen Bass will serve as the chair of
the Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights,
and International Organizations. Bill Keating will serve as
chair of the Subcommittee on Europe, Eurasia, Energy, and the
Environment. And Ami Bera will serve as chair of the
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations.
The vice chair is Joaquin Castro. He is a valuable member
of the committee and will be a great vice chair. I look forward
to working with him.
Now our new Democratic members.
First, we have Susan Wild, who won a special election to
serve the remaining 2 months of the 115th Congress in the 15th
District of Pennsylvania and now represents the new Seventh
District. Previously, she served as the Allentown city
solicitor.
Next, we have Dean Phillips, a newly elected Member
representing the Third District of Minnesota. He was a
businessman before coming to Congress.
Next. we have another newly elected Minnesotan, Ilhan Omar,
who represents that State's Fifth District. Prior to joining us
on Capitol Hill, she was the assistant minority leader in the
Minnesota House of Representatives.
Next, we have Colin Allred, a newly elected Member
representing the 32d District of Texas. Previously, he served
at the Department of Housing and Urban Development and played
professional football. We can challenge some of the other
committees on that.
He is followed by Andy Levin, a newly elected Member
representing Michigan's Ninth District. Before coming to
Congress, he was a union organizer, human rights activist, and
green energy entrepreneur.
Next, is Abigail Spanberger. She is a newly elected Member
representing the Seventh District of Virginia and previously
served as a CIA case officer.
She is followed by Chrissy Houlahan, a newly elected Member
representing Pennsylvania's Sixth District. She is an Air Force
veteran, engineer, entrepreneur, and educator.
Next, we have Tom Malinowski, another first term Member,
who represents the Seventh District of New Jersey. Previously,
he served as Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy, Human
Rights, and Labor, on the staff of the National Security
Council, and worked at Human Rights Watch.
Next, is David Trone, a newly elected Member representing
Maryland's Sixth District. Previously, he worked at his family
business, a well-known retailer of fine wine and other
beverages.
He is followed by Jim Costa, who is in his seventh term
representing the 16th District of California. He previously
served on this committee, and we are very happy to welcome him
back.
And next, we welcome another Californian, Juan Vargas, who
is now in his fourth term, representing the Golden State's 51st
District of California. Like Jim Costa, he is also returning to
the committee.
Last but not least, we have Vicente Gonzalez, now serving
his second term representing the 15th District of Texas.
[The information referred to follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Engel. And now we are done, and we have to go and
vote. So I want to thank everybody. We will see you on the
floor.
The committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:28 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]