- REAUTHORIZATION OF THE SBA'S ENTREPRENEURIAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS
[Senate Hearing 116-84]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
------
S. Hrg. 116-84
REAUTHORIZATION OF THE SBA'S ENTREPRENEURIAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
----------
MAY 1, 2019
----------
Printed for the use of the Committee on Small Business and
Entrepreneurship
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
REAUTHORIZATION OF THE SBA'S ENTREPRENEURIAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS
S. Hrg. 116-84
REAUTHORIZATION OF THE SBA'S ENTREPRENEURIAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
MAY 1, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Small Business and
Entrepreneurship
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
37-795 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
----------
MARCO RUBIO, Florida, Chairman
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland, Ranking Member
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
JEANNE SHAHEEN, New Hampshire
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JONI ERNST, Iowa
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
CHRISTOPHER A. COONS, Delaware
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JOHN KENNEDY, Louisiana
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri
Michael A. Needham, Republican Staff Director
Sean Moore, Democratic Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Opening Statements
Page
Rubio, Hon. Marco, Chairman, a U.S. Senator from Florida.........
1
Cardin, Hon. Benjamin L., Ranking Member, a U.S. Senator from
Maryland.......................................................
3
Witnesses
Panel 1
Gutierrez, Allen, Associate Administrator, Office of
Entrepreneurial Development, U.S. Small Business
Administration, Washington, DC.................................
5
Ware, Hannibal ``Mike,'' Inspector General, Office of Inspector
General, U.S. Small Business Administration, Washington, DC....
11
Panel 2
Myhre, Michael, CEO, Florida SBDC Network, Pensacola, FL.........
32
Haughton, Kiesha, Managing Director, Maryland Women's Business
Center, Rockville, MD..........................................
51
Yancey Jr., W. Kenneth, CEO, SCORE Association, Herndon, VA......
58
Craven, Darcella, President, Veterans Business Resource Center,
St. Louis, MO..................................................
77
Alphabetical Listing
Cardin, Hon. Benjamin L.
Opening statement............................................
3
Craven, Darcella
Testimony....................................................
77
Prepared statement...........................................
80
Addendums....................................................
436
Gutierrez, Allen
Testimony....................................................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
7
Responses to questions submitted by Chairman Rubio, Ranking
Member Cardin, Senators Scott, Hirono, and Rosen...........
100
Haughton, Kiesha
Testimony....................................................
51
Prepared statement...........................................
53
Responses to questions submitted by Senator Hirono...........
128
Myhre, Michael
Testimony....................................................
32
Prepared statement...........................................
34
Responses to questions submitted by Senator Hirono...........
121
Rubio, Hon. Marco
Opening statement............................................
1
Ware, Hannibal ``Mike''
Testimony....................................................
11
Prepared statement...........................................
13
Responses to questions submitted by Chairman Rubio...........
114
Yancey Jr., W. Kenneth
Testimony....................................................
58
Prepared statement...........................................
60
Responses to questions submitted by Chairman Rubio and
Senator Hirono.............................................
131
REAUTHORIZATION OF THE SBA'S ENTREPRENEURIAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS
----------
WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 2019
United States Senate,
Committee on Small Business
and Entrepreneurship,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:30 p.m., in
Room 428A, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. Marco Rubio,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Rubio, Ernst, Romney, Hawley, Cardin,
Cantwell, Markey, Coons, and Rosen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARCO RUBIO, CHAIRMAN, A U.S. SENATOR
FROM FLORIDA
Chairman Rubio. The hearing will come to order. I want to
thank everyone who is going to join us here today. I say at the
outset, we have four votes at 3:00 p.m. so members will fly
through here at some point, juggle all this, and see how we
make it work. We are just joking. We must have made someone
upset in this committee because we keep getting magnets for
multiple votes, but anyway. The hearing today is titled the
reauthorization of the SBA's entrepreneurial development
programs. This is our third in a series of hearings focused on
reauthorization of the Small Business Act.
I believe it is vital the committee reauthorizes the Act.
That we take a look at the SBA's small business programs to
ensure that they are meeting the needs of today's entrepreneurs
and operating in an efficient way. In essence, we have
modernized the program to reflect the realities of today's
economy. Today we are going to focus on the Small Business
Administration's four main entrepreneurial development
programs. The Small Business Development Center, or SBDC
program, the Women's Business Center, or WBC program, the
Service Corps of Retired Executives, or SCORE program, and the
Veterans Business Outreach Center, or VBOC program. Each of
these programs is providing entrepreneurs and small-business
owners with specific and tailored training to help them start
and scale their business. With the SBA's Office of Advocacy
reporting roughly 30.7 million small businesses in the U.S.,
2.5 million of which are located in the State of Florida, the
potential impact these programs can have on business creation
and growth is immense. What do these programs offer our
Nation's entrepreneurs?
The SBDC program focuses on providing technical and
managerial training to entrepreneurs at every stage of business
creation. The SBDC network is the SBA's largest entrepreneurial
development program with nearly 1,000 center locations
nationally in rural and urban areas of the country alike. The
WBC program offers entrepreneurs business training and
counseling; however, it specializes in entrepreneurial training
targeted to meet the unique needs of female entrepreneurs.
There are more than 100 WBCs located throughout the U.S. The
SBA supports the SCORE program, which focuses on providing
entrepreneurs with personalized business mentorship and
training. SCORE provides services both online and at more than
300 centers often co-located with SBA district offices.
The final development program we will be discussing is the
VBOC program which provides U.S. military veterans and their
families with entrepreneurship education and assistance at 22
center locations. In addition, VBOC serves a unique and vital
role within the Department of Defense Transition Assistance
Program by providing transitioning members in the military with
a two day Boots to Business-business entrepreneurship course.
Undoubtedly, small business owners are benefiting from the
SBA's development programs. In Florida alone, the SBDC network
reported that their services impacted more than 280,000 jobs,
generated more than $36.7 billion in sales, and resulted in the
creation of more than 4,500 new businesses.
All of these development programs have not been without
criticism. Just last Thursday, the SBA's Office of Inspector
General, OIG, released an audit report on the SBA's oversight
of the SCORE Association. The audit uncovered systemic issues
within the SCORE Association and the SBA's oversight of the
SCORE programs. Specifically, the report notes that the SCORE
Association misused Federal grant funds. Some of the most
egregious incidences of misuse include the SCORE Association
redistributed more than $100,000 worth of grant money to be
used for year-end bonuses for SCORE employees, 66 percent of
which went to four senior-level Association executives. The
Association awarded 9 of the 25 contracts without following the
cooperative agreements requirements, including a failure to
solicit proposals through open competition and failure to
obtain proposals from at least three firms. The CEO of the
SCORE Association, whose salary from Federal and foundation
funds totals more than $440,000 a year, solely used Federal
grant dollars rather than nonprofit foundation funds to hire an
executive coaching consultant. And the SCORE Association used
Federal funds for prohibited costs such as alcohol and
unallowable local travel expenses.
These egregious infractions of taxpayer dollars went
undetected by the SBA. Unfortunately, this is not the first
time that the SCORE Association has been criticized for the
mismanagement and commingling of Federal funds. Following
Hurricane Sandy, the SBA awarded a number of disaster technical
assistance grants to resource partners aiding in recovery
efforts. The SCORE Association received one such grant. Later
in 2017, the OIG audited SCORE's use of those disaster
technical assistance funds, specifically auditing $840,000
worth of program expenses and the audit reported that SCORE
failed to consistently comply with grant requirements,
ultimately recommending that SBA recover approximately 46
percent of these funds or roughly $391,000 of the total
disaster grant.
While the SCORE program did repay these funds to the SBA
over time, there was clearly an overarching issue within the
program that has continued to allow for the misuse of Federal
funds without the SBA detecting it. Unfortunately, concerns
surrounding the SCORE program do not stop with the misuse of
taxpayer funds. It has recently come to the attention of the
committee that the SBA OIG is currently managing three separate
criminal investigations of embezzlement and whistleblower
protection violations related to the SCORE program. In one such
instance, the OIG has substantiated that a SCORE chapter
treasurer who identified an instance of fraud was removed from
their position in an act of retaliation for whistleblowing, a
decision that was sanctioned by a SCORE district director and
the Association's national vice president of field operations.
Clearly, after reviewing the Inspector General's audit
report and the details surrounding these criminal
investigations, I have severe concerns about the operation,
oversight, and management of the SCORE program. I look forward
to not only discussing these concerns but also examining the
entrepreneurial development programs as a whole throughout
today's hearing.
With that, I recognize the Ranking Member.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, RANKING MEMBER, A
U.S. SENATOR FROM MARYLAND
Senator Cardin. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for
convening this hearing. As the chairman pointed out, we are
already going to apologize to the witnesses because there are a
series of votes that are scheduled to start at 4:00 p.m. this
afternoon which will interrupt the continuity of our hearing
and we apologize for that. This is an extremely important
hearing on the entrepreneurial development programs under the
SBA as we continue to look in this committee at reauthorizing
and strengthening the tools that are available under the SBA.
The SBA provides vital training and support to American
small businesses through the four programs that the chairman
has mentioned. They all deal with having resource partners that
help us provide the services for small businesses in our
community. The largest, as the chairman pointed out, the Small
Business Development Centers partner with colleges and
universities to deliver the training to entrepreneurs at all
stages of business development. The Women's Business Center
provides training and mentorship to women entrepreneurs,
particularly in economically and socially disadvantaged women.
SCORE program pairs entrepreneurs with expert business mentors
and training workshops at little to no cost. And the Veterans
Business Outreach Centers provide business counseling to
transitioning service members, veterans, and their spouses.
Mr. Chairman, I just want to brag one moment about one of
those programs, on the Veterans Business Outreach Center, which
was started in Maryland as a private enterprise by the
Montgomery County Chamber of Commerce. And it was a national
program to help returning warriors, giving them the information
they needed in order to be more effective in dealing with
Government contracts and to set up their businesses. It has
been extremely successful. The program has graduated more than
1,200 participants who report that their revenues increased by
an average of 64 percent in the first year of completing this
very successful program.
Collectively these four programs have trained more than 1.2
million entrepreneurs during the Fiscal Year 2018. That is an
impressive number, but as has been pointed out, it merely
scratches the surface on the needs that are out there. So, the
needs are much greater than we are meeting today but it is very
effective in those that they do meet. Data shows that small
businesses created by entrepreneurs who receive at least three
hours of SBA counseling have higher survival rates than small
businesses created by entrepreneurs who receive less counseling
or none at all. So, these programs are important programs.
Last month we heard from Connie Evans, President and CEO of
the Association for Enterprise Opportunity, made the case for
increased access to business counseling before the committee
when she said sufficient capital and credit enable
entrepreneurs to get their businesses off the ground but
sometimes those with a vision and passion lack the technical
skills necessary to keep their doors open. That is where these
programs come in to make sure that we not only get them off the
ground, but they can continue and grow and add to the economy.
Ms. Evans testified that the medium annual revenue growth
for businesses that receive both capital and technical
assistance from the SBA microloan program is 30 percent higher
than businesses that receive only capital. As we examine the
current state of major SBA entrepreneur development programs,
my fear is that the SBA is barely scratching the surface of the
benefits that the entrepreneurial development can bring to the
American economy, which has experienced a 40-year decline in
new business formations.
SBA may have reached more than 1.2 million entrepreneurs in
Fiscal Year 2018, but the number represents less than 5 percent
of our Nation's entrepreneurs. Lastly, let me just join the
chairman in pointing out that first, when we look at
entrepreneurial programs and target populations that they serve
in the small business community, we have to put effective
oversight. And yes, the oversight on the SCORE program that the
report that we received is very alarming and we need to follow
up on that to make sure that these actions have been corrected
and that we have protections in place that prevent any further
violations of our expectations.
And one question I will be asking is how do we determine
accountability for these programs. But I also believe we need
to make sure that these programs are reaching particularly the
underserved communities, and how well are we reaching
communities that have had a hard time with entrepreneurship
because of historic discrimination and a lack of opportunity.
Are we really focusing on making up for that disadvantage?
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses, and I look
forward to the process this committee is using reevaluating and
on reauthorizing our programs.
Chairman Rubio. Thank you. I will work on my first panel.
Mr. Allen Gutierrez is the Associate Administrator of the Small
Business Administration's Office of Entrepreneurial
Development. He previously served in the U.S. Small Business
Administration from 2001 to 2006. During his tenure with the
SBA, he served as Senior Advisor to the Chief Operating Officer
and Senior Advisor to the Office of International Trade.
Mr. Hannibal Mike Ware is the Inspector General of the
Small Business Administration. He was confirmed in the Senate
by unanimous consent last year. He is responsible for
independent oversight of the SBA's programs and operations. He
also currently serves as the chairman of the Audit Committee
for the Council of Inspectors on Integrity and Efficiency. I
thank you both for being here today. We will open with you, Mr.
Gutierrez.
STATEMENT OF ALLEN GUTIERREZ, ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE
OF ENTREPRENEURIAL DEVELOPMENT, U.S. SMALL BUSINESS
ADMINISTRATION, WASHINGTON, DC
Mr. Gutierrez. Great. Thank you very much Chairman Rubio,
Ranking Member Cardin, and members of the committee for
inviting me to testify.
I am proud to serve as Associate Administrator for the
Office of Entrepreneurial Development at SBA. In this role, I
administer programs and initiatives that provide counseling and
training to small businesses. This is my second time at the
agency, having served at SBA from 2001 to 2006. In between, I
was a National Executive Director of the Latino Coalition, one
of the Nation's largest advocacy organizations. The Office of
Entrepreneurial Development overseeing SBA's primary counseling
and training programs. Under the OED umbrella are what we
commonly refer to as SBA resource partners, Small Business
Development Centers, SBDCs, Women's Business Centers, and
SCORE.
Our partnership with these organizations is very valuable
to OED and the agency, and we have a good relationship with
them. Since taking on the role with OED, I have worked directly
with the leadership of each organization to review our
contractual agreements and performance expectations. This led
to our establishing common performance matrix across all three
organizations with a goal of better connecting how
entrepreneurs that receive counseling might later interact with
SBA services or loan programs. This will allow us to better
capture data on new business starts and will encourage greater
focus on underserved and rural communities.
Related to this are some recommendations for the committee
to consider as part of your reauthorization process. Among
them, we would like to work with you and the resource partners
to foster better data collection and to remove existing
limitations. We would also like to work with you to review
potential performance incentives for SBDCs so as to spur them
to meet their goals. Some other areas of focus for OED include
building on our 113 women business centers and our desire to
establish centers in Idaho and South Carolina, two of several
states without a WBC presence. Also, we would want to continue
our efforts with our Emerging Leaders program which has been
very successful in training small business owners. We are also
happy coordinating our agency's outreach efforts to Native
American communities.
Lastly, we will continue to monitor aspects of the SBDC
program, for example, first-year evaluations of the new
performance standards, the ability of the network to match
increased Federal dollars, and the carryover and utilization of
fiscal year funds. In view of my colleague's testimony, let me
also speak to the recent SBA Inspector General's report on the
SCORE program.
First, let me say that we work very well with our IG. An
immediate leadership priority for Administrator McMahon was to
address outstanding IG recommendations. In our February
testimony before the committee, she shared the agency resolved
over 140 IG recommendations during her two-year tenure of which
90 percent in my office that we also were able to clear as
well.
As I mentioned earlier about my own leadership within OED,
I engaged the resource partners very early in my tenure. With
all three resource partners, we updated our notices awards,
established stronger internal controls, and with respect to
SCORE, our developing REGs and SOPs that have never been in
place before. These efforts served us very well with the later
engagement with IG and in their investigation.
Three of their recommendations are already closed and we
already have a plan for closing the remaining eight. Chairman
Rubio, ranking member Cardin, and members of the committee, I
appreciate the opportunity to testify. Thank you for your
continued support of the agency on America's small business. I
look forward to continuing to work with you and your staff.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gutierrez follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Mr. Ware.
STATEMENT OF HANNIBAL ``MIKE'' WARE, INSPECTOR GENERAL, OFFICE
OF INSPECTOR GENERAL, U.S. SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION,
WASHINGTON, DC
Mr. Ware. Chairman Rubio, Ranking Member Cardin, and
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to be here today. I am both proud and grateful to
represent the dedicated men and women of the Office of
Inspector General and speak to you about their important work.
In the last six years, my office has issued 10 reports to
the administrator regarding entrepreneurial development
programs offered by SBA. From Fiscal Year 2014 through Fiscal
Year 2018, we reproduced five reports on the Small Business
Development Centers and SCORE entrepreneurial development
programs, and two reports on the Boots to Business program,
which is the Veterans Business Development program. We are
currently performing a review of SBA's oversight of Women's
Business Center's compliance with grant requirements.
As a result of our work in the grant programs, we issued a
report and our consolidated findings at the beginning of this
Fiscal Year. We identified systemic risks which led us to
identify grants management as one of the most serious
management and performance challenges facing SBA in Fiscal Year
2019. Most recently, we published our report on SBA's oversight
of the SCORE Association in late April, which further
reinforced the findings of our consolidated report. Across
these reports, we made 68 recommendations, 56 of which are
closed. Despite the agency's corrective actions to address our
recommendations, SBA's decentralized oversight of the agencies'
grant programs hampers agency-wide improvements. SBA has three
separate program offices overseen as grant programs, the Office
of Entrepreneurial Development, the Office of International
Trade, and the Office of Veteran Business Development.
SBA then has three program offices responsible for
awarding, monitoring, and closing out grants to support SBA's
entrepreneurial development grant programs, the Office of
Grants Management, the office of Small Business Development
Centers, and the Office of Women's Business Ownership. Each of
these offices has its own separate and individual set of
policies and procedures. Our work also has found SBA's
processes to monitor how grant recipients spend Federal funds
and to assess performance of its grant programs was
ineffective.
As a result, SBA's grant programs are at a risk of funds
not being used for their intended purpose and of not achieving
program goals and objectives. We made four recommendations to
address these systemic issues, all of which remain open.
Regarding our report addressing SBA's oversight of SCORE, our
audit objectives were to determine whether SBA has effective
oversight to ensure SCORE spend Federal funds in accordance
with cooperative agreement requirements and measure, achieve
program goals. We found that program officials did not
effectively oversee SCORE's use of Federal funds and did not
accurately measure or report SCORE's performance goal
achievements.
Despite the long-standing partnership between SBA's SCORE,
program officials did not keep track of the total cost of the
program and did not perform a complete financial examination of
SCORE. Compounding these issues, SCORE relied on more than 300
accounting systems to track Federal funds, which affected its
ability to perform effective oversight. SCORE commingled
Federal funds with unrestricted donations and used Federal
funds for unallowable, unallocable, and unsupported costs. We
questioned over $700,000 of costs that did not adhere to the
cooperative agreement requirements or were not properly
supported. We made 11 recommendations as a result of our SCORE
audit, three of which we closed prior to issuing the report
because of agency corrective actions.
In addition, our report, as was the case in several of our
most recent reports on entrepreneurial development programs as
well as GAO report 0849, have identified problems with SBA's
performance system of record, the entrepreneurial development
management information system or EDMIS. The system is
inefficient and prone to error. Technology lapses with it
continue to impact program management. SBA officials
acknowledged there are systemic issues with its grant
management processes and have documented plans to address them.
That said, we will continue to perform reviews and make
recommendations for corrective action to promote efficiencies
and effectiveness within SBA's grant programs. Thank you all
for the opportunity to speak to you today.
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ware follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Thank you. Mr. Ware let me begin with you.
If I were to break down your report really two central
findings, the first is the misuse of Federal grant dollars by
SCORE for additional excessive staff bonuses and allowable
contracts prohibited costs including alcohol. In fact, you
found that the SCORE Association redistributed more than
$101,000 worth of grant funds to be used for bonuses, 66
percent of which went to just for senior-level SCORE
Association executives. That is correct, right?
Mr. Ware. Yes.
Chairman Rubio. $62,000 for the Vice President for field
operations, $41,000 to the Vice President of Finance, $33,000
to the Vice President of Information Technology, and $33,000--
there are bonuses--to the Vice President of Marketing. All with
taxpayer funds. That is correct?
Mr. Ware. This is correct.
Chairman Rubio. And you also found that the SBA failed to
detect all of these items?
Mr. Ware. Yes.
Chairman Rubio. I believe the report notes that the SBA did
not adequately monitor SCORE's financial reporting
requirements, allowing for these bonuses to go undetected. You
just cited in your opening statement but how many
recommendations did you make in particular about the monitoring
of financial reporting requirements? How many have been
adopted? How many are pending? On the specific matter of the
misuse of grant dollars for additional or excessive staff
bonuses and the inability of SBA to spot it, how many
recommendations for corrective action did you identify or
recommend in your report on this specific matter, and how many
have been adopted so far?
Mr. Ware. On the specific ones relative to the financial,
we had eight recommendations and I think of the ones that we
have closed already is, let me see, one right here, one from
this one and two from the performance side.
Chairman Rubio. So, of the eight so far, one was adopted
during the process so there are seven outstanding?
Mr. Ware. Yes.
Chairman Rubio. Okay. And then, the second finding outlines
the failure to effectively collect program metrics and
establish minimum outcome-based performance measures. If you
could just repeat how many recommendations on that program in
particular.
Mr. Ware. Three for that and one already closed.
Chairman Rubio. Okay. If I am correct, in 2017 an audit of
the disaster technical assistance received by SCORE following
Hurricane Sandy noted that SCORE failed to consistently comply
with grant requirements. They used grant funds for unallowable
costs, including non-competitive contract awards, unsupported
advertising, meal charges. Your office ultimately recommended
that SBA recover over 46 percent of SCORE's total disaster
technical assistance grant. What actions need to be taken to
ensure that the continued misuse of grant dollars in instances
like this do not persist into the future, whether a
recommendation is made as part of that finding, how many of
those have been adopted?
Mr. Ware. The recommendations were indeed made according--
oh, you are asking specifically how many were made for that?
Chairman Rubio. For the Hurricane Sandy relief 2017. Do you
know if there was a list of recommendations provided to them?
Mr. Ware. Yes. I do not have the specifics on the 2017
report, but I will be glad to get back to you on that.
Chairman Rubio. And finally, I am just on the audit. It is
my understanding that your office is currently working on three
criminal investigations.
Mr. Ware. Yes.
Chairman Rubio. In general terms, can you walk us through
each investigation and if you have any initial findings on the
three?
Mr. Ware. Definitely. Well, two of them have to do with
embezzlement of funds and basically, the embezzlement of funds
can happen because of the lax internal controls that are in
place in SCORE chapter areas. So, in those two cases, you
either had an individual who opened a checking account and used
SCORE funds and another one who opened a credit card. We have
made two arrests, got one conviction, and one already with the
return of funds for that.
On the third, the third one is the one that alarms in terms
of the whistleblower protection and that one is currently in
the hands of, well, SBA currently. I was going to say the
acting administrator at this point. What happened in this case
is that the second one, the one that we already got a
conviction on, it was at the Seattle, Washington, office and
the treasurer of that, the volunteer treasurer, notified our
office that there was fraud in the program. We investigated the
matter, found that that was the case. Like I said, it had a
conviction. That office terminated the volunteer and terminated
the volunteer partly because of the volunteer's work with our
office.
Our current investigations verify that, confirmed that that
was indeed the case, it was partially a reason and that the
board said that it was fine. They had an outside attorney come
in to do that, but our findings showed that the outside
attorney never spoke to the treasurer and never considered the
fact that that aspect of it in terms of dealing with our
office.
We have forwarded those findings to the Office of the
Administrator as is required under the Whistleblower Protection
Act, mainly because it is a volunteer. If the person was an
employee, it would have gone to the Office of the Special
Counsel.
Chairman Rubio. So just to cut to the chase, on these three
cases, these are all at the chapter level, right?
Mr. Ware. Yes, sir.
Chairman Rubio. And so, is it your opinion based on looking
into this that neither the SBA nor the SCORE Association have
the proper financial oversight, centralized oversight over
program's chapter locations?
Mr. Ware. This is the findings of our report and across the
board. They have 300 different accounting systems at the
chapter level. Some of those systems are kept on private and
the volunteers on personal computers. I would say the controls
are lacking.
Chairman Rubio. Thank you.
Senator Cardin. Well, you know, your report is very
concerning to us and, you know, we try to get Mr. Gutierrez to
respond on having proper oversight. It seems to me the
structure itself causes you concern, the fact that there are
different offices within SBA that are responsible for grant
making depending on the program and oversight, there is
different offices. That there is not a consistent standard in
operation within the SBA to monitor whether the performance is
being done as expected, evaluation as well as legally required,
and then in some cases whether they are committing criminal
activities, the system doesn't lend itself to a common
oversight system. Is that what we are saying?
Mr. Ware. That is exactly what I am saying. Do you want me
to continue? That is exactly what we are saying, and we have
been working with Mr. Gutierrez as he came in. Once we did this
comprehensive look at the programs across, based on all the
work that was done. Because we were wondering, you know, you do
the one and they make the changes in this one, but each one of
them is treated kind of in a silo fashion.
When we elevated everything to take a look across the
board, we were able to make for central recommendations that
could address this and one of those was for the agency to take
a real hard look into whether centralization of these programs
with a single office or individual responsible for ensuring
integrity in the programs is a viable practice for the agency.
Senator Cardin. Let me ask you one more question. Can this
be done by the agency under existing legislative authority or
do they need changes in the SBA law in order to implement these
types of changes?
Mr. Ware. That is a very good question. I am not a hundred
percent sure they need changes in existing law, but I have a
strong inclination that they do not. This is a structural
decision within SBA as to whether or not they could do it with
the resources that they have or whether or not that would
benefit them in other areas.
Senator Cardin. Of course, Congress sometimes wants to act
to direct even though they may not have the authority but to
give clear direction in which way we want to move. Mr.
Gutierrez, do you want to respond to that question also? Do you
have the authority to make these changes? Are you looking at
the recommendations of the IG from the point of view of a more
consolidated approach to holding the program, resource
partners, etc. accountable for performance as well as complying
with the law?
Mr. Gutierrez. In regards to--thank you, sir. In regards to
as it relates to grants management, I know that internally from
the findings that we are working together with the Office of
Grants Management and other entities within the agency to
really strengthen and tighten controls and make sure that what
was the findings to really get to the point of making it
effective and efficient. Sorry Senator. To make it efficient
and efficient from that standpoint and within the guidelines of
the rules and laws.
Senator Cardin. I would tell you this. Mr. Ware's findings
are very, very serious and we would expect a more direct answer
to this committee as we are working on the reauthorization. We
cannot tolerate the type of lack of compliance with our rules
that has happened in the SCORE program, so we will need a more
direct answer as we are doing our work.
Mr. Gutierrez. Yes, sir. And let me add that to that and
related to specifically SCORE, today is my official two year
anniversary coming into at leadership in OED. Since this
anniversary today, as mentioned in terms of Hurricane Sandy,
when I first got there out of the 18 that we are finding, 16
were completed last year. There are two more findings that will
be done in the next month related to Hurricane Sandy.
As it relates to, currently right now as it relates to the
IT findings, I would say that already proactively under my
leadership when I first began, that is reflective, three
already being closed and resolved. The other eight that are
resolved, not unresolved. We have given very effective
timelines to the idea of when we will be finishing this year. I
would say that we also--I am sorry, is that we included and
started the SOPs, regulations, tightening in the notice of
award, and terms and conditions, things that have never been
done before within the Office of Entrepreneurial to really have
full control over this.
Senator Cardin. Thank you for the answer in regards to the
SCORE audit but as we pointed out, the SCORE audit it just
reflects, from the Inspector General's point, a weakness within
the entire SBA entrepreneur program system, well beyond SCORE.
So, we really want to have a system in place that has clear
direction and accountability. So that is not just complying
with the letter of the law, which they have to do, but also
that we have a uniform way to evaluate whether they are
accomplishing the objectives in which Congress set up these
programs, and it seems to me that in both cases compliance with
our rules, regulations, laws are not--you do not have the right
structure for oversight but it is also difficult for us to see
the value we are receiving.
My basic understanding is we got great value for the
entrepreneur programs collectively but obviously we cannot
evaluate that unless we can understand how individual programs
are being held accountable within the SBA structure.
Mr. Gutierrez. Yes, sir and we have, you know, in my
written and also my oral certainly I have really--we are
strengthening that within the cooperative agreements. New
performance matrix really holds all three of the resource
partners accountable to make sure that we continue in a very
unison and partnership approach to reach out to as many
entrepreneurs and small businesses across America. And that is
something that as mentioned in my written testimony, that
unfortunately when I first got there I was presented with, for
example, in SBDCs a 41 percent or close to 27 of the 63 that
had not been meeting the goals at all or maybe one goal in all.
That is very disheartening for me knowing that we want to
continue to provide those tools and services for the future of
entrepreneurs that are the backbone of the small businesses
across the country.
So, I am happy to say that within these two years span we
have gone from a 41 percent down to 29 percent. That is, you
know, we wanted to be--I want all of them, we want all the
resource partners to reach their full capacity as much as
possible in every State.
Chairman Rubio. Thank you.
Senator Romney.
Senator Romney. Thank you. I appreciate the work that both
of you do and how important that is to provide for economic
opportunity for our citizens. Appreciate the work of the
Inspector General in reviewing the deficiencies in the
oversight of some of these programs and Mr. Gutierrez
appreciate also the work that the SBA is taking to implement
changes that might prevent these kinds of things from occurring
in the future.
One question in my mind, it relates to the effectiveness of
these programs and, you know, as I read the information about
that the success of these programs and how dramatically
people's revenues have grown following training in each one of
these programs and how many people are involved in them, I hope
that these accurately reflect the kind of a return in
investment that we would hope to see, but I ask myself whether
in this day and age, whether some of these programs ought to
be, ought to transition to more online programs, and likewise
whether any of these programs should go from being overseen and
managed by the Federal Government to instead being overseen and
managed by States?
I know that is a question kind of out of the blue for both
of you, but it has been my experiences when I served as a
Governor that often times States being closer to the economy
and the needs of the people in their respective jurisdictions
have a better sense of what is the best way to help people get
good jobs and to find entrepreneurial activities. Governors at
each State have Offices of Economic Development. They are
working very hard to attract businesses to their States but
also to put people in positions to create new jobs and it seems
somewhat duplicative to have the Federal Government pursuing
the same programs that are being pursued by the State
Government and so I turn to primarily Mr. Gutierrez in this
regard, but are all of these programs, ones that really require
Federal oversight and Federal management and Federal grants, or
should some of these to be returned, at some stage, to the
State and potentially even online coursing?
Mr. Gutierrez. Great, thank you, sir, for the question.
Certainly, I would say that, you know, our SBA bandwidth has
released our 68th district offices and over 700 personnel
across the country. Certainly, work very closely with
organizations, economic developments, with the State leaders to
really make it a win-win in terms of a partnership.
In regards to I would say in terms of the technology and
21st century approach, you know, I know that Administrator
McMahon was here a couple months ago and she--I mentioned about
the Women Digitalization Program that will be within my office,
and we are excited about that because it is really a new way of
thinking outside the box of having a 24/7 opportunity online to
help entrepreneurs, women entrepreneurs in this first phase, to
really have access otherwise that they did not in terms of
challenges of regional base or brick-and-mortar access, but
certainly those are things that we are looking at that how we
can better reach out to the entrepreneurs across the country.
Senator Romney [presiding]. On behalf of the chairman,
Senator Coons.
Senator Coons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, I have a
particularly warm spot in my heart for SCORE since it was
initially founded in Wilmington, Delaware, back in 1953. I have
seen the great work it is capable of doing. One of my real
concerns here is that, if I understand your conclusions right,
Mr. Inspector General, there is a lack of consistent coherent
oversight in terms of grants administration in no small part
because there are 300 different chapters. How many full-time
employees does SCORE have Mr. Gutierrez? Is it 30?
Mr. Gutierrez. Are you saying the SCORE Association or my
office, I am sorry.
Senator Coons. How many folks work at SBA overseeing SCORE?
Mr. Gutierrez. We have the Office of Entrepreneur Education
that oversees that and that is roughly around six individuals,
two primarily oversee it on a daily basis.
Senator Coons. And how many volunteers are there as part of
the 300 chapters of SCORE around the country?
Mr. Gutierrez. I don't--I wouldn't----
Senator Coons. May I suggest 11,000. Okay. My recollection
is that one of the things that has made SCORE really stand out
is it has a huge number of volunteers providing free mentoring
and counseling to small businesses and startups. A vast network
of volunteers around the country relative to a very small total
oversight staff. I know we may get to hear more about that in
the next round, but I just wanted to put this in some context
because at least in my State I have seen and heard a number of
instances where SCORE did really positive work for virtually no
cost, but now we are hearing from you some concerning
allegations. There have been I think you said three
prosecutions and several hundred thousand dollars to $600,000
of misappropriated, inappropriately spent Federal funds.
It is our job in reauthorizing SCORE specifically and the
SBA more broadly to understand what is being done right, what
is being done wrong, and what are the statutory changes. I
think Senator Cardin asked this question previously. Are there
ways in which current statute limits the SBA's ability to
implement the IG's recommendations?
Mr. Gutierrez. No, sir. I would say that under my watch it
is just a matter of really having it from top going down of
making it a priority to making sure that we continuously, like
I mentioned, for example, earlier this year, even before the IG
report came out, we recognized in terms of what we called a
fiscal agent co-sponsorship that the SCORE network had been
doing with the field as well as with us in headquarters after
next week, small business week, we are eliminating that. And
that is a proactive approach and looking at----
Senator Coons. How long do you think it will take you to
fully implement all of the IG's recommendations about SCORE?
Mr. Gutierrez. In the eight that are remaining, I think
that the two that are going to take a little bit longer, that
we will work with at SCORE and sitting down with Kenneth and
his leadership team, is the remedy and recovery, two of those
recommendations that will take--I would like to work with
Kenneth and give him the opportunity and staff to provide us
any additional information or things that would be helpful for
us to present to the IG for consideration.
Senator Coons. How long do you think it will take you to
complete the IG's recommendations. You said you will need a
little more time. Give me a year, five years, two weeks? How
long do you think it will take?
Mr. Gutierrez. We have it in the report no later than by
next year all will be resolved and the eight that are pending.
Senator Coons. Mr. Inspector General.
Mr. Ware. 2020 is the last date was that they provided us
in terms of reconciling the figures.
Senator Coons. Do you find that credible?
Mr. Ware. I found, in my experience at SBA, that under this
under this current administration they have really put their
foot on it in terms of making sure that they meet our--or they
asked for a small extension. It was not anything really
egregious.
Senator Coons. I got to say I enjoyed a very constructive
relationship with the administrator, Mrs. McMahon. I have known
Mr. Yancey and SCORE broadly. I was quite struck by this report
and I am eager to hear if there are any barriers in terms of
statutory needs, resource, or support needs but I think we need
to get an update on the progress you are making.
Senator Cardin. Would the gentleman yield the floor
momentarily?
Senator Coons. Absolutely.
Senator Cardin. The fact that we do not have an
administrator, a deputy administrator, seems to me it is going
to make it more challenging to meet deadlines and, you know, it
is hard to hold an agency accountable when you do not have the
leadership there, just to point that out.
Senator Coons. That is correct. Let me ask the last
question. The response is to the IG's report states SBA did not
conduct an annual financial analysis of SCORE because Congress
did not require it. Is there any reason that we should not
require it going forward?
Mr. Gutierrez. What I would say, sir, is that I am--it is
my understanding from the SCORE Association and headquarters
and Kenneth Yancey that they are consolidating all the
financial systems to their headquarters. What that will be and
will be implementing from my office is annual financial review
besides their audit report that they do with a third party. So,
we will be able to implement that this year coming later.
Senator Coons. Is there any reason we should not require
that?
Mr. Gutierrez. No. I mean we are going to be doing it. We
are going to be--that is one of the things that we are working
with Mr. Ware in saying what is the plan of action we are going
to take under the serious things that came out on the report.
Senator Coons. Well, I am co-sponsoring a bill to
reauthorize SCORE. I think that bill is going to end up being a
vehicle for some specific and targeted work in response to the
IG's report but also to try to sustain what I view is the very
valuable work in SCORE nationally now over decades. So, I look
forward to the second panel and I really appreciate your work
Mr. Inspector General and your appearance here before us today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Hawley. I am going to now ask my round of
questions. I just want to--what my colleagues have said, the
chairman, Senator Cardin, Senator Coons, Senator Romney, about
just how striking this report is. I wish we did not have to
talk about what we are talking about here today, but Mr.
Gutierrez let me just start with you. Your written testimony,
which I have read, it appears it was submitted prior to the
revelations of the IG report. Is that correct?
Mr. Gutierrez. The written testimony, I do not know the
exact date it was submitted but----
Senator Hawley. But you did not know about the misallocated
funds, the embezzlement, the excessive bonuses, the retaliation
against whistleblowers, and so forth. At the time that you
submitted your written testimony you did not know about any of
that.
Mr. Gutierrez. Well my staff and myself were very closely,
as a closing, came about through Mike's office in terms of
getting to--in my requirement to respond before the official
came out publicly in terms of all the record requirements and
recommendations that they came out with and how we would
resolve them and working with the staff.
Senator Hawley. So, I guess my point is and I am not sure I
follow your answer. My point is that I assumed you did not know
about it because your written testimony gives absolutely no
indication that there are any issues at all that we should be
aware of and yet the IG's report is really quite jaw-dropping.
I am just wondering, you have been in this role for two years.
There are previous IG reports that document a number of these
problems. Just help us understand.
I mean, what are we looking at here? What is the scope of
the problem and are we really--how can we trust the steps can
be taken now? We have had previous reports in the past. It
appears that these problems are endemic. That they are ongoing,
and they are quite severe. I mean help us and I am struggling
to understand here why at this point we should trust your
office with any taxpayer money at all.
Mr. Gutierrez. That was a question I asked myself the first
day I walked in there and saw all the reports that they gave
me. That was very alarming for me, very disturbing, given that
it is taxpayers dollars. And our role as the Office of
Entrepreneur Development is to provide that environment to be
able to help entrepreneurs and small businesses.
This is the perfect example I mentioned a bit earlier. When
I was approached by the Sandy recommendations that the findings
from Mr. Ware's office, previous leadership did not want to
take a strong stance on it. Myself and under the leadership of
Administrator McMahon in reference to 140 that were cleared, 90
percent cleared out of my office, as we take this very
seriously and want to move forward. That was my first step. My
second step was, as I mentioned, creating, putting together a
standard of operating procedures, regulations, more terms and
conditions in the notice of awards to really under look and
provide more oversight as it relates to all this.
There is still more, and I am not trying to skirt that. And
certainly, we are going to be working very closely to make sure
that the eight are still going to be resolved and be taken care
of, and make sure that we get them done in a timely manner.
Senator Hawley. You know, in light of these reports my
staff reached out to the folks in my home State of Missouri who
work in this area, economic business development, to see if any
of the revelations that are detailed in Mr. Ware's report were
a surprise them and I am sorry to say that the near-universal
reaction is that they were not surprised. That they, to put it
mildly, among professionals in the field in my State, neither
SCORE nor the SBDC programs are considered particularly
worthwhile. I mean this is, I have to say, it is a big problem
and I just, as we consider additional funding in the future, I
have a lot of questions. And this report has raised a lot of
questions in the track record area. It has raised a lot of
questions. I yield back to the chairman.
Chairman Rubio [presiding]. The following question here.
And I apologize, Mr. Gutierrez if you have been asked this
already after I stepped out but let us close the loop on the
SCORE program. I guess, do you feel like you have a handle on
what the systemic flaws are that allowed individual chapters to
sort of walk away from the appropriate practices, and do we
have in place, are you building and putting in place a plan to
remediate those flaws?
Mr. Gutierrez. Yes, sir. I would say that as I began,
certainly not only with SCORE to be honest with you but with
all the resource partners and really looking inside out in all
the cooperative agreements, what are the things that were
missing there to hold them accountable, from performance matrix
to financial oversight to grants management.
And specifically going back to SCORE, it certainly that not
only, as I mentioned, the regulations, the SOPs, strengthening
the terms and conditions within the grants awards, more
oversight with my staff, and really, from top down, really it
is important for me and it is vital that we really have more of
a tighter control on everything. And that has been a culture
change that I have brought within that office in the last two
years.
Now, I will say that from a district level perspective as
well, we have--throughout our 68 district offices too. We have
implemented a system internally as it relates to share point as
via annual meetings, visits that our representatives have with
the different SCORE chapters to making sure that we are
following up on that. And then lastly mention we have--
previously it was the annual reviews, the financial review that
we are going to be implementing at their headquarters.
Now that they are consolidating other accounting systems in
headquarters, we will also be doing that as well, visiting and
making sure that we have the financial reviews done on a yearly
basis.
Chairman Rubio. And my final question has to do with
overlap of some of the programs, or let me say, some overlap is
expected between the SBDCs, WBCs, the Veterans Business
Outreach Centers but you cannot walk into, for example, a Small
Business Development Center and receive the same training that
you get through a Women's Business Center or a Veterans
Business Outreach Center but they are only 116 WBCs, are only
22 VBOCs nationally so it is impossible for every entrepreneur
to have proximity and access to those unique services that
those programs provide.
So, what can we do, what suggestions do you have? Have you
given any thinking to how the SBA entrepreneur development
partners utilize the existing network of centers to ensure that
all entrepreneurs and small-business owners are able to receive
these specialized resources even when a physical center is not
accessible to them for one of those two programs be it Women's
Business Center or the Veterans Business Outreach Center, or
even in the reverse a Small Business Development Center?
Mr. Gutierrez. Yes, I would say that a couple of things,
sir. It would be that first and foremost as we mention the
women's visualization outreach that we are going to be rolling
out, one of the things that we have coming up in the next month
and a half is socialization. And I have mentioned this to all
the trade associations and their boards and chairman's that we
will be working hand-in-hand providing the tool kits and
information to work together as it relates to a 24/7 approach
for women entrepreneurs coming in, if they do come into an SBDC
Center, that they can have an additional avenue to direct women
entrepreneurs to be using the women digitalization platform.
As it relates to, I think collaboration is a very important
thing that is needed too. That is something that we are
requiring within our district offices to really work with all
the previous resource partners, the trifecta of SCORE, or SBDCs
and WBCs, if WBCs are located in that area, to really work
closely together in the collaboration with district offices to
make that a resource available to--I have seen and experience
it in different parts of the country where it becomes a win-win
situation for that entrepreneur.
Chairman Rubio. Well, I thank you both for being here. I am
going to call the second panel before someone shows up and asks
another question. But I thank you both for your time. This is a
topic we are going to have to explore as we work through this
reauthorization. I know members will have additional questions
about it, so thank you. And while we transition up at the desk,
I am going to go ahead and introduce the second panel.
Mike Myhre is the CEO of the Florida Small Business
Development Center Network under the University of West
Florida's Office of Economic Development and Engagement in
Pensacola. Prior to this position, Mr. Myhre was the Minnesota
State Director of The Office of Entrepreneurship and Small
Business Development, and he led the Minnesota Small Business
Development Network. Kiesha Haughton is the Managing Director
of the Maryland Women's Business Center. She has more than 12
years of experience in entrepreneurship and small-business
economic development with Government agencies and nonprofits.
Kenneth Yancey is the CEO of the SCORE Association, a
position he has held for the past 26 years. Before joining
SCORE, Mr. Yancey served as the Executive Director for the
National Business Association. And Darcella Craven is the
President of the Veterans Business Resource Center located in
St. Louis, Missouri. In this capacity, Ms. Craven is dedicated
to assisting honorably discharged veterans and their families
with starting and expanding businesses. In 2015 the Small
Business Administration presented her with a Veterans Business
Outreach Center of the Year Award as part of the National Small
Business Week.
I thank you all for being here. I am just going to start
from left to right and recognize you first Mr. Myhre. Thank you
for being here.
STATEMENT OF MICHAEL MYHRE, CEO, FLORIDA SBDC NETWORK,
PENSACOLA, FL
Mr. Myhre. Thank you, Chairman Rubio, Ranking Member
Cardin, and members of the committee, and thank you for your
leadership and serving on this important committee that
recognizes how vital supporting small business success is to
the American economy. And thank you also for inviting me to
testify today.
America's SBDCs have a unified purpose and that is to
utilize our intellectual capital and resources to help small
businesses realize unimaginable possibilities for prosperity,
both for their business and for our economy. We achieve this
purpose by providing our Nation's job creators and economic
contributors with access to world-class professional expertise,
help them create new possibilities, and be more competitive and
profitable, while being responsible and accountable stewards
that are laser focused on generating economic outcomes that
contribute to the prosperity of the American economy. Our
success in this effort has been validated repeatedly over the
past 40 years and we appreciate your past and continued
support.
In my written testimony, I outline a number of key
characteristics shared by America's SBDCs, some that have been
identified as best practices in GAO review of 52
entrepreneurial assistance programs across Commerce, HUD, SBA,
and USDA, including our shared commitment to a culture of
innovation, continuous improvement, and performance excellence
through our SBDC's accreditation process, a quality and
continuous improvement process based on the principles of the
NIST-Baldrige performance of excellence program. Also, out of
shared commitment to significantly leverage SBDC Federal
program funding, all SBDCs are required to raise an investment
to provide more than half of the total program budget.
In Florida, we have 40 investing partners that help bring
nearly two to every--$2 of non-Federal investment to every
dollar of Federal investment. We also have a shared commitment
to a culture of collaboration and cooperation that balances the
performance expectations of all of our investing partners,
including those of Congress, our Federal, our State, and our
local Governments, sponsoring institution of higher education
among many others. Finally, we also have a shared commitment to
serve the diverse and complex needs of our existing and
aspiring small businesses and to assure that those services are
available to all individuals, including underserved
communities, women, and proudly our veterans.
One of the areas though that I take great pride in is the
vital role in which we contribute to disaster response and
recovery, which often goes unrecognized and unmeasured by our
Federal agency partner. As a critical member of the State
Emergency Response Team, the Florida SBDC network is the
State's leader for business response and recovery. As such, we
are committed to being the first responders and on the front
lines to ensure our State's principal job creators and economic
contributors have the professional guidance that they need to
successfully navigate the often overly complex recovery
process, including leading the coordination of Federal and
State recovery resources for small business, and helping
administer the State of Florida small business Emergency Bridge
Loan program, a short-term, quick capital program for those
businesses impacted by disaster. Regrettably, we do not receive
any additional funding for our disaster response and recovery
efforts.
And Mr. Chairman and members, I would be remiss if I did
not mention our fellow Floridians, American citizens, and small
businesses in the Florida Panhandle who are still in dire need
seven months following Hurricane Michael. I plead that we come
together, that Congress comes together, to pass a disasters
supplement bill that is much needed by the community in order
to make a recovery before it is too late.
Now, it has been 10 years since the authorizing language of
the SBDC program has been reauthorized, longer for some other
ED programs. SBDC's entrepreneurial development budget includes
$247 million in Florida, excuse me, in Federal taxpayer
investment and deserves a thorough review to ensure that each
program's continued relevance is in alignment with the assessed
needs of America small business. Regular reauthorization will
help ensure that each program is accomplishing Congress' intent
in contributing to taxpayer return on investment. As the
committee undertakes reauthorization, I recommend that the
committee do five things.
First, clearly define each entrepreneurial development
program's purpose and small business market focus to avoid
duplication of efforts and market confusion. Once that is
defined, I recommended that appropriate performance metrics are
defined that align with each program's intended purpose, market
focus, and contribute to meaningful economic outcomes. Where it
is determined that program purpose and market focus overlap,
consider economies of scales and enhance program service
delivery through consolidation or integration of programs. When
establishing each program's performance, consider an equitable
method for determining, negotiating, and allocating these
performance goals that account for individual market and
economic conditions. Performance goals should not be punitive
but rather motivate and drive behavior. Strengthen also the SBA
and SBDC economy and foster shared partnership and shared
investment by clarifying the specific authorities and
responsibilities of each partner, including clarifying the
required terms the agency must adhere to for negotiating and
collaborating with the association of America's SBDCs.
In any area of disaster recovery, mandate SBA disaster
recovery coordination and collaboration with each SBDC program
when responding to a disaster event. And streamline a funding
mechanism for SBDCs to receive disaster supplement funding to
assist in both short-term and the long-term recovery needs a
small businesses is impacted. Also increase the SBDC program
authorization and support appropriate increases for effective
entrepreneurial development programs to expand both capacity
and enhanced capabilities.
And finally, improve the ability of SBDCs to operate and
manage entrepreneurial and Small Business Development programs
across Federal agencies, like those that exist in Commerce,
DLA, and USDA. So, in closing, I look forward to working with
the committee and the committee staff to ensure that we are
providing all entrepreneurs and small-business owners the
resources that they need to start and grow their business, and
if necessary recover and recover successfully. And I welcome
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Myhre follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Thank you.
Ms. Haughton.
STATEMENT OF KIESHA HAUGHTON, MANAGING DIRECTOR, MARYLAND
WOMEN'S BUSINESS CENTER, ROCKVILLE, MD
Ms. Haughton. Thank you, Chairman Rubio, Ranking Member
Cardin, and distinguished members of the committee for the
opportunity to share this testimony with you.
My name is Kiesha Haughton. I am the Managing Director of
the Maryland Women's Business Center and have also served as
Secretary of the Board of Directors for the Association of
Women Business Centers, the national organization that
represents women's entrepreneurial development, I would like to
thank the committee for holding this hearing today. Maryland
WBC is part of a network of 114 women's business centers. The
WBC program is a public-private partnership with over 30 years
of success in providing training, counseling, and mentoring,
and access to capital for women-owned businesses nationwide.
In Fiscal Year 2018, centers reached more than 151,000
clients assisting with millions in private capital infusion,
leading to nearly 12,000 new businesses. According to the SBA's
2015 OED report, 96 percent of the WBC clients reported revenue
growth total in $658 million and 25,000 jobs created. The
Maryland WBC headquartered in Rockville with two satellite
offices in Frederick and Bowie is proud to be amongst this
network. We are also proud to be the only WBC located at an
HBCU through our partnership with Bowie State University. WBC's
often tailor services to meet the needs of their local
community.
The Maryland WBC has met the demands of our small business
community by rolling out specialized program offerings like our
procurement, advanced tech, international trade, childcare,
retail, and women's business leadership programs. We are
particularly proud of our procurement series that helps
businesses position themselves to take on Government contracts.
This program has supported clients like Houri Tamizifar who is
the owner of Cynuria Consulting and winning contracts that
increase sales by over 400 percent in her first and second-year
business. Charlisa Watson, owner of CRW Associates has secured
a $66 million grant or contract with the Department of Defense
after receiving our business and procurement assistance.
While many things are going well, Congress should still act
to strengthen and modernize the WBC program. For over 30 years
the maximum grant amount remains capped at $150,000.
Legislation to reauthorize the WBC program should increase that
cap, allowing well-established centers like the Maryland WBC to
expand their impact with increased funding support. As the only
WBC in Maryland, our center receives significant demand for our
services, but due to the cap, we currently only cover three
counties in our State, leaving in 21 jurisdictions without
coverage. Increasing the cap in our grant would enable us to
assist more entrepreneurs.
Therefore, I recommend Congress raise the cap on individual
center grants to $350,000. This would require additional funds
for the program so the WBC is asking for $30 million in funding
for the WBC program in Fiscal Year 2020. As a practitioner, I
fully support this request and encourage Congress to consider a
growth potential of the return on investment of this
authorization level. Another improvement would be the removal
of burdensome reporting procedures and establishing an improved
reporting system as EDMIS is problematic and in need of
updating, as we heard earlier. Since current reporting
requirements for all SBA resource partners are not the same, we
would also like to see consistency on audits, grant reporting
requirements, and grant application opportunities which would
include this disaster relief.
Additionally, and important to note, funds raised above the
Federal match are subject to Federal spending guidelines,
creating a disincentive to overmatch their funds. Lastly, while
some WBCs stand alone, others are hosted by larger
organizations or universities. The Maryland WBC is hosted by
Rockville Economic Development, Inc. (REDI) and thanks to
community support and partnerships with economic development
organizations in Montgomery, Frederick, and Prince George's
counties, the Maryland WBC has grown increasingly self-
sufficient over the years.
However, there is no established process for centers to
graduate from their host organization and transition into a
stand-alone center. Statewide impact can be challenging for
WBCs hosted by local jurisdiction named host or other large
organizations when attempting to raise funds in a competitive
and often territorial environment due to branding confusion.
When reauthorizing the WBC program, I would ask Congress to
implement a clear transition process with continuity of
services for WBCs ready to graduate from their host who are
newly established, stand-alone entities without having to close
down and reapply as a new center. The WBC program fills a
growing need for the distinct populations served, and I am
thankful for the committee's continued bipartisan support of
this program.
As a proven program, I urge Congress to make these
necessary changes during the reauthorization process to
maximize our success. I appreciate the opportunity to testify
today and I am happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Haughton follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Thank you.
Mr. Yancey.
STATEMENT OF KENNETH YANCEY, JR., CEO, SCORE ASSOCIATION,
HERNDON, VA
Mr. Yancey. Chairman Rubio, Ranking Member Cardin, and
members of the committee, thank you for inviting me to testify
today regarding the reauthorization of the SCORE program.
Founded 55 years ago as a resource partner of the Small
Business Administration, SCORE has now helped more than 11
million entrepreneurs to achieve their dreams of starting or
growing a small business. This is accomplished through SCORE's
Nationwide network of 11,000 volunteers who offer free and
confidential business advice and provide educational workshops.
Today, SCORE stands as a uniquely American organization, and
its fusion of two historic national ideals, the entrepreneurial
spirit and volunteerism.
My written testimony provides SCORE's request regarding
changes to enabling legislation and reauthorization. At SCORE
we believe our client success is our success. Our mission is to
foster vibrant small business communities through mentoring and
education. This creates small business success, in turn,
creating jobs and strengthening the American economy. Helping
our clients means meeting them where they are and serving them
how they want to be served, whether that is in person or
online. Our online educational programming includes weekly
webinars, video mentoring options, and virtual conferences. Our
volunteers come from all across the country with first-hand
knowledge gained through their experience in all areas of
industry and business.
Last year they generously gave 4.3 million hours of their
time to serve our clients. In return, clients rated our
volunteers with a net promoter score of 85. To provide context,
a net promoter score of 50 is considered excellent while 70 and
above is considered world class. As you all know and we have
discussed, the SBA Office of the Inspector General recently
audited SCORE and the report was released last week. SCORE is
taking these findings very seriously. There are some legitimate
issues that need to be immediately addressed. We have already
met with SBA and are committed to working with them to remedy
all items in the report.
We also believe that there is additional information
available that will clear up misperceptions and alleviate some
of the concerns raised in the report. We will collaborate with
SBA on solutions that will strengthen the SCORE program and the
SBA oversight process. SCORE is committed to being better
stewards of the Government funding we receive. To that end, we
are in the process of centralizing accounting for all 300 SCORE
chapters, an initiative we first identified as critical in
2016. This new system eliminates issues related to commingling
of funds at the chapter level. With this system, no chapter
will maintain cash, debit cards, or checks which significantly
lessens the risk of theft. This will also make it easier and
more efficient for the SBA to perform financial oversight
audits as suggested by the report.
I mentioned that we believe there are misrepresentation, or
excuse me, misperceptions. By this, I mean that the audit
report does not tell the whole story. For example, at no point
did we intentionally disregard the policies and procedures
related to the awarding of contracts. As an example, we reached
out to numerous hotels in various cities when choosing a
location for our 2017 National Leadership Conference. The hotel
chosen was the only one in Baltimore with the necessary room
count and dates available. It was also the best cost based on
room rates, food, and travel expenditures. However, our process
and the result was not properly documented for the Inspector
General. We will not make this mistake again. The IG audit
reported not having whistleblower policies in place and an
accusation of discouraging volunteers to use the policy. In
fact, we do have a whistleblower policy in place and the
chapter situation where this policy applied, it was effectively
used.
Another issue in the report related to excessive bonuses.
Today we have a staff of only 24 people serving 11,000
volunteers and over 300,000 clients. Offering a competitive
compensation package is one way we can assure that we deliver
on our mission. We perform a salary survey every three years
with a third party vendor to ensure that we are appropriately
compensating our employees based on industry standards. We are
happy to share this data with you, with the SBA, and with the
Office of Inspector General.
We are not perfect. We can and will improve. We stand by
our mission, vision, values, and clients' success. With your
support, we can ensure that this valuable program continues to
achieve its mission of helping anyone who dreams of opening or
growing a business.
Thank you for your attention and I look forward to
answering any and all questions that you have, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Yancey follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Thank you.
Ms. Craven.
STATEMENT OF DARCELLA CRAVEN, PRESIDENT, VETERANS BUSINESS
RESOURCE CENTER, ST. LOUIS, MO
Ms. Craven. Good afternoon Chairman Rubio, Ranking Member
Cardin, members of the committee, and ladies and gentlemen in
the gallery.
I am Darcella Craven, a service-connected veteran and
President of Veterans Business Resource Center or the VBRC. The
VBRC has been in business since 2004, and we assist veterans
and military families who startup and expansion of small
business. We are headquartered in St. Louis, Missouri, and
operate the VBOC in region seven of the SBA which covers
Missouri, Kansas, Iowa, Nebraska, and Southern Illinois. And
because of that I am really happy to see that Senator Ernst and
Senator Hawley are part of this committee. It makes me excited.
VBRC has helped thousands of military families and military
affiliated personnel navigate the small business world through
seminars, webinars, one-on-one counseling, outreach events, and
training. Please review my written statement and the documents
I provided for the impact that the VBRC and the VBOC has had in
the Midwest. We know there is no shortage of information out
there for small business owners. One simply has to put small
business assistance in Google and a million links pop up. One
of those is the SBA's website, which is a treasure trove of
information and videos. It is amazing. However, ladies and
gentleman, if I give you a gold brick and you do not comprehend
the value of gold, it is simply a beautiful doorstop. I suggest
to you that one of the most important tasks that we do at VBOCs
is help our military-affiliated personnel understand the value
of the information they are exposed to through not only SBA
family resource partners but the broader community. We get our
clients to the right resource, at the right time, with the
right information.
The national VBOC program boasts amazing success stories
and has helped thousands since its inception, yet there are
still so many more who are not aware of all the available
resources, or if they are, they do not comprehend how to
actually navigate those resources. Each partner has its own
niche and the VBOC stand prepared to help navigate those
resource partners offerings. Again, right resource, right time,
right information. I have been in this game for over 20 years
and I can see the positive evolution of the Small Business
Development Centers, the SCORE chapters, and the Women's
Business Centers.
I have witnessed the movement from the separate entities
being this is me, mine sort of like the Daffy Duck cartoon
through to the mentality of a collaborative partnership that
really works together to assess entrepreneurial need and help
small businesses get the job done. Yet, if I had a dime for
every time a client said that they did not understand a
resource partner or how to navigate them, I could just retire
and focus on my dog's Instagram account for the rest of my
life. Ladies and gentlemen, part of what we do at the VBOC is
ensure that the word gets out about the many Federal, State,
and local resources that are available, both Government and
non-Government. We also bust up all the myths out there that
there are grants being offered by the SBA and they are just
waiting for veterans and small businesses to come and get them,
that we work with vocational rehabilitation for our service
connected veterans who are in the VR&E program and help them to
navigate that space, that is a whole other thing, work with the
rural communities and all the stuff and challenges that they
have, and we ensure that military spouses and families are not
forgotten.
To that point, we must ensure that our programs are truly
focused on military families and we just don't throw the name
military family over top of an existing program just to placate
that community. Throughout my time at the VBRC, I have
witnessed the frustration of the military personnel in dealing
with other resource partners, not because the partner was
incapable, but because there was a misunderstanding in
communication. As we used to say in the Army, bottom line up
front, the language barrier is real. VBOCs provide that
translation not only from the military member but to the
provider but vice versa. The VBRC has only succeeded because we
enter a community with the spirit of collaboration as our lead
for our charge. We look to see what is already happening in the
community, how is this ship turning, and we asked how we can
help.
In that, in our region, for example, we have offices inside
the Kansas City SBA because as we are having a conversation
with a client, it is much easier to pick up and walk down the
hall rather than make a phone call. We work collaboratively
with universities to bring Boots to Business to Reboots in Iowa
that are Ag-based. We work and share offices at the Urban
League Empowerment Center in Ferguson, Missouri, in a community
that we all know has been hard hit. We make sure that the
veterans in that community are getting the same service. We
partner with St. Louis district to host week-long national
small business training so that we can celebrate small
businesses completely. We move clients to the well-established
military Veterans Service Center at Bellevue University. There
is no need to reinvent the wheel. It already exists.
We partner with the Kansas SBA to bring the 2019 Kansas
Supplier's Conference in conjunction with way too many partners
to name here. We have 100 percent participation by our SCORE
and SBD chapters on all seven military posts in our region and
I will take a hooah for that. As military members and
entrepreneurs, we are used to finding resources and
collaborating to make a mission. We understand how to read the
environment and pivot as necessary, and indeed this program's
growth is proof that centers can and have collaborated.
Consider this as I conclude, in 2018 alone we had 4,827
counseling sessions, participated in 146 training events, had
over 45 outreach events, and that is willfully old because it
is my problem for not getting stuff in, and conducted 38 Boots
to Business sessions all with 3 staff members and over 100
volunteers.
I ask you to understand that if we are truly to record our
impact and not just activity, we need to ensure funding and
legislation that allows us to hire the appropriate staff and
pay them well so that we can maintain consistency across
entrepreneurial development programs. We need to ensure that
our programs are not only stabilized, but they can grow.
Thank you for your time. I welcome any questions and make
it a powerful day.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Craven follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Cardin [presiding]. Well, let me thank all the
witnesses as we indicated at the beginning of the hearing. We
are shuffling back and forth because there is a series of votes
on the floor of the United States Senate. So, I have already
cast my vote on this vote and so chairman Rubio is going to
vote and then he will be coming back. So, Ms. Haughton, I want
to start with you if I might. Sorry I missed your testimony,
but I have been briefed about it.
I have been educated as to why we have limited service for
the women business centers in Maryland and I have been told it
is because we had the local capacity through resource partners
to be active in Rockville through a group that was prepared to
provide the services that are needed. And as you have pointed
out, you have also provided services up in Frederick and in
Bowie but because of the cap of $150,000, it makes it difficult
for you to expand services although you are prepared to do
that.
So, if the cap was raised, you say you could handle
services in other counties. How would you go about doing that
in Maryland?
Ms. Haughton. So typically, thank you for the question
Senator Cardin. Typically, the way we work within the State of
Maryland is we partner with the economic development
organization as well as other resource partners. And so, in
Frederick, Montgomery, and Prince George's County, we get
funding support from the county of Prince George's County. We
get funding from the city within Bowie, the city of Rockville,
Montgomery County Government, as well as the economic
development organization, and the economic development
organization in Frederick. What we look to do when we expand
into other counties is to also encourage the economic
development organizations there to partner with our program to
ensure its success. So, it is critical for us that as we look
to move on, besides getting the Federal dollars which, we know
we have to match dollar-for-dollar to work with the local
economic organizations to ensure that we meet that match.
Senator Cardin. But there may well be areas on which the
resources locally are not as available in other counties that
are underserved, and therefore, we are really dependent upon
the resources of a community which works to the disadvantage of
underserved communities, does it not?
Ms. Haughton. So, it does, and it is interesting you say
that because, for example, we have been in communications in
Southern Maryland and resources are scarce there, so what we
had talked about is doing a collaborative tri-County support
for the program so that we can make sure the services for women
entrepreneurs are available to them. So, for us it is critical
that we engage them at whatever capacity they are able to
assist in supporting our program but also to reach out into the
community. We have a lot of volunteers that participate in
assisting our women entrepreneurs and so we do tap into that as
well.
Senator Cardin. And I thought Senator Coons point in the
last panel was very accurate and that is there is a relatively
small amount of Federal funds involved here that is leveraging
a lot of activity in the private sector and volunteers, etc. We
recognize that but we want to make sure that it is fair. That
is underserved communities get the needs that are required that
they need even more than other communities and it is becoming a
challenge. If any of you want to respond, you heard the
Inspector General talk about the loose structure within the SBA
on both the grant making and on accountability. How do you find
working with the SBA as to the understandings of the mission
and accountability and performance in the grants that you are
receiving?
Mr. Myhre. I would be happy to respond.
Senator Cardin. I am going to interrupt for a moment.
Senator Markey has not yet on his roll call. Please do. Now
with the question.
Senator Markey. An excellent question so do not forget it.
In Massachusetts we are very proud of our Women's Business
Center, the Center for Women and Enterprise headquartered in
Boston. They were founded in 1995 and are set to expand in
their efforts to cover New England, Vermont, Rhode Island, and
it uses the SBA funds and programs we are discussing today to
make a real difference in the region. And the Women's Business
Center serving Eastern Massachusetts trained and counseled over
1,200 women, and they helped those women-owned businesses
create over 1,000 new jobs and put $30 million into our
region's economy. And the Center for Women and Enterprise did
all that using a staff two people dedicated to this mission and
that is because there is a $150,000 cap on these Women Business
Center grants.
And they told me directly that they could do so much more
so I would like to echo what I have heard so far, what I know
Ms. Haughton has already spoken to, and I would just like you,
if you could briefly to just expand on that, that if you lifted
the cap what happens in terms of opportunities for women and
job creation?
Ms. Haughton. Thank you for that question. One of the
things that we--the reason why we are asking for the cap
increase is because we know that there are constraints in what
we are actually been at being able to perform and do in our
State. If we were able to get the cap increase to $350,000,
which is what we are asking for, we would literally be able to
expand more effectively throughout the State of Maryland. We
are already right now----
Senator Markey. By extension in Massachusetts.
Ms. Haughton. Exactly. For every Women's Business Center,
and I can only speak to mine right now, but for every Women's
Business Center, it is the same situation. If there was an
increase in the cap, they would be able to expand more. And
then the other thing I would add to that is, instead of
creating new centers, it makes sense to increase the cap for
centers that have already proven they are effective, they are
efficient in what they are doing, they have a record of their
performance, and it makes sense to enable those centers to be
able to expand into other areas instead of just recreating new
centers.
Senator Markey. Exactly and I thank you so much. And, you
know, I apologize because the roll call is on the floor and I
don't want to miss--but I did not want to miss asking that
question.
Ms. Haughton. Thank you.
Senator Markey. Sign me up for this mission to increase the
cap.
Ms. Haughton. Awesome. Will do.
Senator Cardin. Thank you, Senator Markey. Now, if we go
back to the question as to how effective you are and how clear
it is to you the accountability standards as a resource partner
in the grants that you are receiving and how this is being
evaluated by SBA.
Mr. Myhre. Certainly. Thank you for the question Senator
Cardin. I think it is extremely clear from an SBDC's
perspective. When you look at the Small Business Act and you
look at the code of Federal regulations, there is a clear
understanding what types of reviews and accountability SBDCs
are subject to in order to receive the Federal funding which
they receive.
All SBDCs are required by the agency to go through annual
project office reviews and every other year program manager
reviews, which are really programmatic reviews looking at the
centers or SBDC's compliance and performance, but also in
statute we are required to go through every other year
financial reviews but as an educated CPI will tell you that
they meet almost every single standard as relates to general
governing accounting practices. So, they are really financial
audit examinations. Furthermore, SBDCs are part of institutions
of higher education, generally public institutions of higher
education, and therefore are also subject to their own now
university reviews and to our State auditor reviews.
So, we are reviewed consistently to assure that we are
being good stewards of the taxpayer dollars that we receive,
that all resources are allowable and allocable to their
intended purposes, and that funds are not being commingled or
spent any unallowable way.
Senator Cardin. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Ms. Craven. Senator, I am going to add that plus as a
nonprofit organization we also have a whole lot of folks making
sure that we are doing things properly. I think the challenge
that we have as the new kids on the block with the SBA is that
we are so entrepreneurial. We are looking to pivot, we are
looking to do all these things, and the SBA has regulations and
rules they must follow.
So, it often causes us to kind of say, okay, well we want
to do this. Our grants manager gets us every time, she is like,
no you can't do that. Here are the rules you have to follow.
So, we have a great time with them. As a matter fact, we have
such a good relationship that throughout our time, we have been
doing this since 2008, we have moved from a Web-cat database
which was similar to EDMIS, to now a Neoserra which is much
more dynamic, and it makes for a lot easier for us to put in
data and put information and parse that out as we need to.
So, our challenge is not really us with them, it is them
keeping us to make sure that we are ensuring that we are
following our notice awards because again as an entrepreneurial
agency, we are constantly wanting to jump and do these kinds of
things. So, I would say the SBA folks do a great job of making
sure that we keep in order. I would also, if I had a magic
wand, I would and I know as a taxpayer I do not want to see
this, but as a person who tries to help small businesses, I
would love to see them have a little more flexibility in how
they can work with the programs here.
I mean it is really difficult to try to figure out ways to
ensure that we are giving good information to the clients that
are coming out as in keeping with all of these rules that you
have to do, oh, and by the way, the entrepreneur is trying to
take off and do things, so.
Senator Cardin. Mr. Yancey, in the SCORE program, how? That
is what the recent audit was?
Mr. Yancey. Yes, sir. My perception is over the last number
of years the SBA is doing more and better to hold us
accountable as an organization. The call for the IG audit is
the first audit that our organization has had in many years. I
go back 26, I think it has been at least 10 since the IG came
in and visited us. I think as Mr. Gutierrez said a little bit
earlier, there is a great deal more focus on the transactional
aspects of our relationship. How we follow through and follow
up on the rules and regulations, and clearly you saw that the
answer to that, in several instances, is not well. I do think
that there are some systemic issues with us, and I am counting
on SBA, the Office of Entrepreneurial Development, and
certainly the IG to help us get everything on track. And I
believe that they will, and we will stay there.
Senator Cardin. So, and any one of you, I am interested as
to how easy it is for you to interact with other resource
partners in your same areas. I recognize that you do not have
any others in Maryland, but do you have contact with Women
Business Centers and you share issues with the Veterans
resource partners? Is there a sharing of information and do you
recognize how the grants are being used in other communities so
that you can use best practices to try to expand the services
that you are providing?
Mr. Yancey. Senator Cardin, if I may. I believe that there
is excellent sharing particularly at the local level where
resources exist in communities or where they are close. I think
that there is excellent referral opportunities, best practices.
I think we share clients is not the right term, but we move
clients back and forth depending on the expertise and the
benefit that different programs bring at the national level. I
have good relationships with my counterpart at ASBDC, with
Women's Business Centers brand new to the position, and
expecting similar so I think the opportunities are good to
continue and I think the relationships are positive.
Mr. Myhre. Senator, the SBDC has great collaboration and I
think I would say what Mr. Yancey said, it is more at the local
level and it is necessarily at the State level. Florida is a
very large State and as you indicated earlier, WBC, SCORE, and
VBOCs are not in every market, therefore requiring SBDCs to be
more flexible in the scope of services in which they must serve
or offer and in the markets in which they must serve.
But I can tell you that from my former experience in
Minnesota, I actually stood up and created SCORE chapters
within SBDC markets because we came to an agreement at the
Statewide about what the specific services and markets we would
focus on through each program. And through that type of
collaboration, we were able to expand the services of many of
the programs that were not in existing markets previously,
assuring that the full scope of services and the diversity of
services could be available to all entrepreneurs no matter what
stage of the life cycle in which they were at.
Ms. Craven. And to add to that, I am going to say, yes now.
I have been in this business for a while and when I first
started, the answer to that question would have been a
resounding no. Not one resource partner wanted to work with
each other, period. I have my numbers to get, you go and get
yours. That was kind of how it was. Over the last, gosh, maybe
15 years?
We have built solid relationship specifically in the region
seven or sometimes it is just us coming and supporting your
event so that the other organization can see that we really are
here to help you and we are not here to take your client or any
of those kinds of things. You have that mentality because I
strongly believe that a lot of the metrics that are being asked
for from all of us are very activity-based metrics. How many
folks can you get, how many businesses can you start, tell me
how many counseling hours you did.
Those are all important and we like to see them so that we
can measure how you are spending your hour, but it is harder to
really, truly show impact for how you developed a business from
the woman who walks in the door and has no complete idea what
she wants to do all the way through to a business who is now
hiring 75 other people who look and act just like her from her
community. Trying to measure those activities is very impact
and it takes a lot more time. Unfortunately, we all sometimes
only have a year to try to get those in, so I think if we can
move away from a whole lot of just activity-based metrics,
still want to use those, but then also figure out a way how you
can include some of the more impact based metrics, I think that
you would not have that problem at all across the country.
Senator Cardin. Just by observations, I have seen different
centers, especially in the Small Business Development Centers,
that have different capacities and a lot of it is local
abilities. I recognize that. And the fact that there is not a
lot of Federal resources going into any one particular program
based on the services that they have, it seems to me that
sharing of information, particularly about local capacity to
expand service is very important to leverage these programs to
the maximum extent possible.
So, I think that the sharing of information will challenge
communities to do better and provide additional services. I
really do think though that there is a need for special
attention to underserved communities and that is a requirement
that is on the program. I recognize that, but when you look at
the numbers, we are still not reaching where we should in
underserved communities. So, as we are looking at
reauthorization, we would welcome your suggestions and thoughts
as to how we can better accommodate the objectives of these
programs.
We have already heard about cap increases. I recognize
that, but there may be other aspects in reauthorization where
we can help you share information, build greater capacity in
communities that do not have that capacity today to be able to
apply for and get these grants, and then with particular
emphasis on underserved communities. We would appreciate that
information. I know the chairman will be returning momentarily.
The next vote started around four minutes ago. What I am going
to do because I know they are trying to keep these votes moving
now on a 10-minute cycle because people are anxious on the
floor of the Senate. We are going to go into a brief recess,
and the chairman should be returning, as I said, momentarily.
Thank you.
[Recess.]
Chairman Rubio [presiding]. Nobody else is here. Everybody
else is voting. I think maybe though, let me just get this one
out of the way because I do want to get to other topics other
than SCORE, but and I am sorry I am going to ask this.
Mr. Yancey, I wanted to ask, first of all, and I do not
want to make this about you because it is not. This is a
systemic issue that you are talking about. So, but I am asking
this for a reason. Your compensation is largely from foundation
funds, meaning raised from the private sector, is that correct?
Mr. Yancey. A portion of my income, yes, does come from the
foundation.
Chairman Rubio. But, when an executive coach consultant was
hired, it used solely Federal grant funds rather than not-for-
profit foundation funds. That is what the IG found, is that
correct?
Mr. Yancey. Yes.
Chairman Rubio. Why is that?
Mr. Yancey. It was a mistake on our part. We had not
thought to divide that cost. We will happily fix that. We do,
sir, provide a stipend from the foundation to the association
every year just to make sure that we do not improperly take
advantage of the Federal dollar on that side of our business,
and it is not enough to cover that particular expense with the
coach. And that was inappropriate. It is totally on my watch,
totally on my head, and we will fix it.
Chairman Rubio. And the Board of Directors solely use
Federal grants and not the not-for-profit foundation funds to
support the meeting expenses. Do you put that in the same
category?
Mr. Yancey. We will put that in same category. One-twelfth
of our board time spent on the development foundation side and
we will make sure that one-twelfth of those costs are properly
accounted for. Again, the stipend which is $4,000 a year is
certainly sufficient for some minor accounting things but not
sufficient for that meeting, and you know it is again my
responsibility, my fault, and my apologies, and I will fix it.
Chairman Rubio. And how about the argument you heard made
already that it is very difficult to manage at the district
level where the funds are being spent and decisions are being
made of such a large number of--the argument is that there
should be some more centralized oversight and more uniform
standards. Is that something that you think would be
appropriate given what we learned?
Mr. Yancey. I think that it is absolutely required, and we
recently completed a futures initiative related to our program,
and what we recognize is that we need to centralize far more
functions than just that. We have spent the last two years
developing a centralized accounting system. It is now being
rolled out to 20 chapters. We will have all chapters on board
in 2020. We believe it is absolutely the right thing to do, and
as I mentioned in my verbal testimony, it does eliminate all
checks at the chapter level, all cash at the chapter level,
debit cards and credit cards, so the opportunity for risk,
theft, or any other type of issues at the chapter level will be
lessened dramatically.
Chairman Rubio. Okay. Mr. Myhre, the Florida SBDC network
has played a vital role in disaster recovery. I don't think a
lot of people associate these programs when we think of
disasters we think about FEMA but the incredible role this has
played in--could you, and we have had a series of disasters not
just Northwest Florida but hurricanes, the previous year where
we had all this red tide and algae blooms that have always had
a tremendous impact on small businesses. So, could you sort of
walk us through a little bit, describe the specific role that
the SBDCs have played following disasters in Florida which has
been a State impacted, unfortunately, by a number of disasters
over the last few years.
Mr. Myhre. Certain. A number of places across the country
have been impacted by major events but Florida especially over
the last two and a half years, four major hurricanes----
Chairman Rubio. Don't say that too much because then we got
to share the money with these other places. Florida has been
unusually----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Myhre. Florida. Florida has been hit hard.
Chairman Rubio. This is a joke in case people are watching.
Mr. Myhre. There is not one square acre in Florida that has
not been touched by a major event over the last two years.
Chairman Rubio. Good job.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Myhre. Four hurricanes, red tides, algae blooms. It has
been a constant in full-time job, especially for Florida SBDC
because of our position in Florida statute. We are defined as
the State's principal Small Business Development organization
or agency. And because of that particular placement, we are
part or an instrumental part and defined as a primary principal
partner as the State's Emergency Response Team, specifically
for business industry and economic stability.
So, we work hand-in-hand with Florida Department of
Economic Opportunity, the Department of Emergency Management,
and we are there at the State Emergency Operations Center when
a major event occurs. So, when FEMA and SBA come in to
Tallahassee and into that SEOC, we are there with our State
agency partners to drive and direct the work. I think that that
is a unique quality of Florida. I think that we are probably
the national leaders in that respect, making sure it is the
State that is really driving the bus rather than the Federal
government when it comes to the allocation or appropriation of
those Federal resources immediately following a disaster event.
So, the Florida SBDC works hand-in-hand with SBA, and the
cooperation and collaboration especially with the number of
events that occurred over the last two and a half years has
actually significantly improved, but it was not always that
way. It would be the fact that SBA would come on in and simply
move forward on their own and in their own judgment, but the
State has done a much better job of just basically instructing
the agency to work directly with the SBDC.
So, after Hurricane Michael, I am proud to say that within
10 days we stood up 10 business recovery centers well before
FEMA stood up its first disaster recovery centers. That created
certain challenges and chaos in certain areas, but we put two
of our mobile assistance centers right in the heart of the most
impacted areas after Hurricane Michael, had SBA personnel there
to assist the businesses and the citizens, the homeowners,
renters, etc. with disaster assistance in Panama City and in
Mexico Beach.
So, I am very proud of that work and the assistance that we
have been able to provide, but that takes away from what it is
that we are charged to do, and for that, for all intents and
purposes, the performance expectations that our agency expects
of us on blue sky days has been a full-time job. No additional
Federal resources or State resources to do that work so it has
taken away from core operations and now it creates challenges
about what we do in the long term. We have been challenged in
fact that while there is the RISE Act that was not intended to
be a mechanism to provide resources for all of the
entrepreneurial development programs to provide long-term
recovery assistance. It has not been proven to be fruitful for
us. And what I mean by that is we were basically instructed go
to EDA or go to HUD where there is disaster supplement money
following Hurricane Irma. And we did that, and we put an
application forward to EDA and we did not get funded. And that
was to provide the long-term necessary assistance that small
businesses needed well after FEMA and SBA left to ensure that
we were not just giving them Federal Government assistance,
that is these disaster loans and more debt service to add to
their financial burden, but helping them make sure that they
were able to recover their markets, expand their markets, you
know, recoup or rebuild their businesses to assure that they
would be paying that taxpayer debt service.
So you know, that is what keeps me up at night right now is
what am I going to do to make sure that I have to allocate our
general operation funds, this long-term recovery system that is
still needed so desperately, and in Monroe County, which is the
Florida Keys for those that don't know, to the other adversely
impacted areas, the Southeast, or excuse me, the Northeast into
the Southwest, parts of the State and certainly now to
panhandle of Florida.
Chairman Rubio. Thank you. Miss, I am sorry if I
mispronounce this, Ms. Haughton. Haughton, got it. Yes, when
you look at the statue not only explicitly requires Women
Business Centers to provide financial, management, and
marketing assistance to small businesses owned and controlled
by women but from your testimony it is clear that this program
provides women entrepreneurs with much more than what the
statute describes.
So, as we move forward with the authorization process, how
can the Small Business Act be modernized to better reflect the
services that are being provided by Women's Business Centers?
Ms. Haughton. Well I had mentioned a number of different
things that we think need to be consistent across the board for
all entrepreneurial development programs, but I think it is
important to note that the Women's Business Centers are most
impactful when they have the flexibility to pivot and to really
meet the needs that we find are arising within the communities
we serve. And so, we need to be able to have the flexibility to
tailor programs specific to the needs that we see of our women
entrepreneurs.
Chairman Rubio. After you have heard today repeatedly, the
Women's Business Centers provide counseling and training
tailored to fit the needs of these entrepreneurs. There are
only 116 of these centers across the country so it is
impossible for them with only 116 centers to be everywhere. In
Maryland, how is the WBC program in general partnered with the
other resource partners to ensure that entrepreneurs have
access to those unique services even if they do not have a
physical center nearby?
Ms. Haughton. Right. Well, thank you for that question. I
think partnership is critical and that is how we operate our
Women's Business Center, That is how most Women's Business
Centers operate because, as you mentioned, our resources are
scarce and so just at this table here we have worked with some
Small Business Development Centers. We have referrals that we
do back and forth, particularly on the local level.
We have a conference, an annual conference, where we had
the VBOC actually participating in it and we recently had a
meeting with our local SCORE chapters to really identify what
are the expertise that their counselors bring that we can tap
into for our women entrepreneur. I think collaboration and
partnership is critical and we do not only do it with the SBA
resource partners but just going within the community and
pulling in on volunteers that are willing to, you know, devote
their time to support our entrepreneurs is also key.
Chairman Rubio. Thank you. Ms. Craven, throughout this
reauthorization process one of the challenges that keeps coming
up in over and over again is the lack of clear and consistent
metrics on the SBA's entrepreneurial development programs.
Currently the annual performance report includes metrics on the
number of clients that are served by the VBOCs, the number of
Boots to Business participants, the number of businesses formed
from the program but as a practitioner of the program, do you
believe that the metrics are giving us a full picture of
everything the VBOCs are doing?
Ms. Craven. As with all things in small business, Senator,
the answer is it depends. So, if we are just talking about, as
I said before, activity-based things, then yes, we can measure
how many times people come to a program. You could have numbers
driven things, those are all possible. Unfortunately, what we
are not able to measure is how long it takes sometimes for a
person to hear a bit of information and then finally get to a
resource partner.
We here at the VBRC we could actually, we do actually have
a process where I can measure when you first call me, how long
it takes you to actually sign up so we can measure that
particular time, then how long it takes you to respond back to
an email or a phone call or come to an event, and then we can
measure all the different pieces, so how long does it take you
to go to the SCORE concert that we suggested you get to or the
SBDC class that you are supposed to go to or did you go through
the certification training. We can do all those kinds of
things. That is really harder to measure, a person's mentality
to call up Darcella and say, Darcella we sent you to a program,
but we see yet that you haven't gone. Why not? She is going to
come back and say, I have got these problems, I have got kids
in school, or something happened. Life exists. There is all
these other things that can impact. I need a new job. There are
all these other things that are really harder to try to
measure. So again, it depends.
Yes, if you just want activity-based stuff, we got that.
All of us can do activity-based things. If you just want to
know how many businesses I can start in Missouri, if you give
me $3,000 I can get you 30 of them by the end of the week. It
does not cost that much to start a business. What it does cost
though is the time to make sure that that really is the right
business for you. Do you have resources? Do you have a
community that can support you? You think you want to start a
small business because you want to spend more time with your
children, probably not going to be the right thing to do, start
a small business.
So, there are all these other little nuances that really
take a lot more time and I think the challenge comes in that,
as I said before, many times we have this year to try to get
all of that in and sometimes the answer might be no, Darcella
came to the program and it is a year and a half, and she still
hasn't called me back.
Chairman Rubio. So, it is not a perfect analogy, but it is
similar to a conversation I have had often in the office with
constituents during casework, so we can measure metric, how
many cases come in and how many get closed and there are a lot
of cases where you write a letter to a Federal agency, you get
a response. Here is your response, case is over, or you can
decide we are not happy with the response. We are going to try
this five different ways until we get you the outcome but it
takes longer and the longer you spend on an individual case,
the longer it is to close the case and a longer it is to close
the case if you are just measuring it on, you are just looking
at the metrics and you are saying, what its taking forever to
close some of these cases but if they are complex.
And I would imagine I think what you are saying is that
when you get people in this program or any of the specialized
entrepreneurial programs, volume matters clearly, but
additional to the value is we are trying to help a unique
subset of individuals and the reason why these programs exist
is because there are unique challenges that people in that
profile are facing to get entrepreneurship. So that is a long
way of saying it. Is that more or less along the lines of
what--because I think that comparison is something many members
of the Senate would understand. If it makes sense or it seems
to align.
Ms. Craven. Absolutely. You said it perfectly. Thank you.
Yes, it really does and particularly when we are talking about
veterans and military family members. Often times there are so
many other things they have that are competing for their time
and attention that sometimes they come to us and they say, we
heard this person at a tap program who said something about
small business, and we think he was tall guy. So, we have got
to figure out which business were you in, how did they got--oh
yeah, that was Joe, here is his number. There are just all
these other things. Absolutely.
Chairman Rubio. So, I guess my last question is on, if you
go back to a recent SBA Office of Inspector General report they
noted that there were some inefficiencies in the Boots to
Business program in particular. They noted that there were
improvements needed to better reach the program's targeted
population and increase program participation. I guess again as
someone who is a VBOC Director, do you find that to be true and
if so what could we do to improve the reaching, the targeted
population and increasing participation in the program?
Ms. Craven. Thank you. So, we are all singing on the same
sheet of music and I want to do some clarifications. The Boots
to Business program is designed to help transitioning military
members and their families with comprehension and understanding
of what small business might be as an option afterwards. So
that is a 10,000 ft. view of entrepreneurship. How we try to
make it a little more clear and local and specific is we bring
in local entrepreneurs, and SBDC, the SCORE chapters, whoever
that resource partner is. Sometimes it there is a chamber, or
it is a local attorney. We bring those people in to actually
explain that education.
So, it is actually quite--it is not quite correct to say
that the program needs to be changed a little bit because it is
really an assessment program. Now where it is more specific is
when it is when it is a reboot, it is off the military post,
and we can kind of have much more specific education programs
around agriculture or food trucks, for example. But what I will
say is that in order to make it better, to kind of been improve
it because we are always looking for improvement, sometimes a
veteran or military family member can come into that training,
it is not mandatory by the way, so they can choose, select to
come into that training, sometimes they are three to six years
out still.
So, they still have three to six years to serve in the
military. If we can narrow that down to have the Department of
Defense or the people, whomever is in control of that, you
could nail that down to people who are two years or less, that
would be amazing. That would really help with showing the true
impact of that information because if you still have got six
more years to go, Uncle Sam can still send you wherever Uncle
Sam wants to send you. A couple of other things that we could
do is encourage them to bring their military spouse or their
significant other. Nothing worse than seeing a person getting
new information and then the spouse doesn't, so that is a
disaster waiting to happen, and then also maybe doing a pre-
assessment of those clients who do elect to come.
It is a very different conversation if I am having
conversations with 70 percent of the room who has no idea what
entrepreneurship even is versus 70 percent of the room who used
to be National Guard reservists and had small businesses before
they deployed. If I could get that information prior to that
class, we could make that much more impactful because you can
bring in different counselors and different resource partners.
Chairman Rubio. I appreciate all of you and your patience
with these votes today and the running around and we still have
one more so starting at any minute now. So, I want to thank all
of you for being here. I appreciate all of our witnesses' time
and the insights that you have given us. This is third. We have
nine of these different hearings as we go through and try to
reauthorize, but it is very useful because it allows us to help
push modernization in adapting these programs to a rapidly
changing economy with a perhaps needs and challenges that 20
years ago, 10 years ago, were not as acute as they are today.
And I think even in the concept of entrepreneurship itself is
changing as technology has displaced people, so it has opened
up new opportunities.
I think in some ways technology has made it easier than
ever to go into business on your own as an independent
contractor, in other ways it has made it more challenging. You
know, depending on what industry you are in, but nonetheless,
unique opportunities and in particular with our Florida which
is a State that has many veterans. I am always interested in
during their time in the service of our country these people,
our veterans, pick up real skills, in many cases are unique
skill sets that could have commercial applicability and helping
them channel that is sometimes difficult in terms of--unless
you have the right people helping you with that guidance.
So, as I said, by the way it is also hard in many cases to
acquire capital for a startup because you have been serving
your country for 20 years. What were you doing two years ago? I
was in Iraq, you know. And so, it is a real challenge as we
have seen. Nonetheless, I thank you all because your insights
today are going to be very useful to move forward.
The record for this hearing will remain open for two weeks,
and any statements or questions for the record should be
submitted by Wednesday, May 15th at 5:00 p.m.
Again, thank you all for being here, and with that, the
meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:26 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]