- BREATHLESS AND BETRAYED: WHAT IS MSHA DOING TO PROTECT STORING THE VALUE OF WORK: MINERS FROM THE RESURGENCE OF BLACK LUNG DISEASE?
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
BREATHLESS AND BETRAYED:
WHAT IS MSHA DOING TO PROTECT STORING
THE VALUE OF WORK: MINERS FROM THE
RESURGENCE OF BLACK LUNG DISEASE?
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON WORKFORCE PROTECTIONS
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION
AND LABOR
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, JUNE 20, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-30
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and Labor
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: https://edlabor.house.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-909 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND LABOR
ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT, Virginia, Chairman
Susan A. Davis, California
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina,
Raul M. Grijalva, Arizona
Ranking Member
Joe Courtney, Connecticut
David P. Roe, Tennessee
Marcia L. Fudge, Ohio
Glenn Thompson, Pennsylvania
Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tim Walberg, Michigan
Northern Mariana Islands
Brett Guthrie, Kentucky
Frederica S. Wilson, Florida
Bradley Byrne, Alabama
Suzanne Bonamici, Oregon
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Mark Takano, California
Elise M. Stefanik, New York
Alma S. Adams, North Carolina
Rick W. Allen, Georgia
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Francis Rooney, Florida
Donald Norcross, New Jersey
Lloyd Smucker, Pennsylvania
Pramila Jayapal, Washington
Jim Banks, Indiana
Joseph D. Morelle, New York
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Susan Wild, Pennsylvania
James Comer, Kentucky
Josh Harder, California
Ben Cline, Virginia
Lucy McBath, Georgia
Russ Fulcher, Idaho
Kim Schrier, Washington
Van Taylor, Texas
Lauren Underwood, Illinois
Steve Watkins, Kansas
Jahana Hayes, Connecticut
Ron Wright, Texas
Donna E. Shalala, Florida
Daniel Meuser, Pennsylvania
Andy Levin, Michigan*
William R. Timmons, IV, South
Ilhan Omar, Minnesota
Carolina
David J. Trone, Maryland
Dusty Johnson, South Dakota
Haley M. Stevens, Michigan
Susie Lee, Nevada
Lori Trahan, Massachusetts
Joaquin Castro, Texas
* Vice-Chair
Veronique Pluviose, Staff Director
Brandon Renz, Minority Staff Director
------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON WORKFORCE PROTECTIONS
ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina, Chairwoman
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Bradley Byrne, Alabama,
Mark Takano, California
Ranking Member
Pramila Jayapal, Washington
Francis Rooney, Florida
Susan Wild, Pennsylvania
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Lucy McBath, Georgia
Ben Cline, Virginia
Ilhan Omar, Minnesota
Ron Wright, Texas
Haley M. Stevens, Michigan
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hearing held on June 20, 2019....................................
1
Statement of Members:
Adams, Hon. Alma S., Chairwoman, Subcommittee on Workforce
Protections................................................
1
Prepared statement of....................................
4
Byrne, Hon. Bradley, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Workforce Protections......................................
5
Prepared statement of....................................
6
Statement of Witnesses:
Brown Barnes, Ms. Cindy S., Director, Education, Workforce,
and Income Security, Government Accountability Office......
111
Prepared statement of....................................
113
Cohen, Dr. Robert, MD, FCCP, Clinical Professor,
Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, University
of Illinois School of Public Health........................
8
Prepared statement of....................................
10
Link: Attachments 18-19..................................
22
Link: Attachment 33......................................
22
Hairston, Mr. Gary, Vice President, Fayette County Black Lung
Association................................................
23
Prepared statement of....................................
25
Howard, Dr. John, MD, Director, National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health.............................
86
Prepared statement of....................................
89
Roberts, Mr. Cecil, President, United Mine Workers of America
36
Prepared statement of....................................
38
Link: Attachments 1-4....................................
70
Link: Attachment 12......................................
70
Watzman, Mr. Bruce, Former Member, National Mining
Association................................................
28
Prepared statement of....................................
30
Zatezalo, Mr. David, Assistant Secretary of Labor for Mine
Safety and health, Department of Labor.....................
104
Prepared statement of....................................
106
Additional Submissions:
Scott, Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'', a Representative in Congress
from the State of Virginia:
Letter dated June 19, 2019 from United Mine Workers of
America (UMWA) and United Steelworkers (USW)...........
147
Letter dated September 21, 2018..........................
152
Letter dated April 2, 2019...............................
157
Letter dated April 26, 2019 from the U.S. Department of
Labor..................................................
160
Link: Mine Safety and Health Administration..............
198
Questions submitted for the record by:
Chairwoman Adams
Responses to questions submitted for the record by:
Ms. Brown Barnes.........................................
216
Dr. Cohen................................................
217
Mr. Hairston.............................................
218
Dr. Howard...............................................
219
Dr. Roberts..............................................
220
Mr. Watzman..............................................
223
Mr. Zatezalo.............................................
224
BREATHLESS AND BETRAYED:
WHAT IS MSHA DOING TO PROTECTSTORING
THE VALUE OF WORK: MINERS FROM
THE RESURGENCE OF BLACK LUNG DISEASE?
----------
Thursday, June 20, 2019
House of Representatives,
Committee on Education and Labor,
Subcommittee on Workforce Protections,
Washington, D.C.
----------
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:15 a.m., in
Room 2175, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Alma S. Adams
[Chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Adams, DeSaulnier, Takano, Wild,
McBath, Stevens, Byrne, Cline, and Wright.
Also Present: Representatives Scott, and Foxx.
Staff Present: Tylease Alli, Chief Clerk; Jordan Barab,
Senior Labor Policy Advisor; Ilana Brunner, General Counsel -;
Emma Eatman, Press Assistant; Daniel Foster, Health and Labor
Council; Eli Hovland, Staff Assistant; Stephanie Lalle, Deputy
Communications Director; Jaria Martin, Clerk/Assistant to the
Staff Director; Kevin McDermott, Senior Labor Policy Advisor;
Richard Miller, Director of Labor Policy; Max Moore, Office
Aid; Veronique Pluviose, Staff Director; Banyon Vassar, Deputy
Director of Information Technology; Katelyn Walker, Counsel;
Cyrus Artz, Minority Parliamentarian; Courtney Butcher,
Minority Director of Coalitions and Member Services; Akash
Chougule, Minority Professional Staff Member; Rob Green,
Minority Director of Workforce Policy; Bridget Handy, Minority
Communications Assistant; John Martin, Minority Workforce
Policy Counsel; Sarah Martin, Minority Professional Staff
Member; Hannah Matesic, Minority Director of Operations; Alexis
Murray, Minority Professional Staff Member; Brandon Renz,
Minority Staff Director; Ben Ridder, Minority Legislative
Assistant; Heather Wadyka, Minority Operations Assistant, and
Lauren Williams, Minority Professional Staff Member.
Chairwoman ADAMS. The Subcommittee on Workforce Protections
will come to order. Welcome, everyone. Good morning. I note
that a quorum is present. The committee is meeting today to
receive testimony for a two panel hearing entitled ``Breathless
and Betrayed: What is MSHA doing to Protect Miners from the
Resurgence of Black Lung Disease''.
Mr. Griffin from Virginia will participate in today's
hearing with the understanding that his questions will come
only after all members of the Subcommittee on Workforce
Protections and the full committee on both sides of the aisle
who are present have an opportunity to question the witnesses.
Pursuant to committee rule 7c, opening statements are
limited to the Chair and the Ranking Member. This allows us to
hear from our witnesses sooner and provides all members with
adequate time to ask questions.
I now recognize myself for the purpose of making an opening
statement.
Today the subcommittee is going to explore three troubling
developments impacting our Nation's coal miners and assess
whether the Administration is making adequate efforts to
protect miners' health and economic well-being.
First, we will address the resurgence of black lung
disease, which has taken the lives of 78,000 coal miners since
1977 and caused suffering in thousands more. Congress codified
the first enforceable limit on coal mine dust levels in the
1969 Coal Act and the rate of black lung disease began to
decline in the 1970s, '80s, and '90s. More recently, the rate
of black lung disease has come back with a vengeance. Nearly
one in five long-tenured miners in Appalachia have been
diagnosed with black lung disease. This is four times the rate
anywhere else. Black lung clinics and researchers at the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, NIOSH,
have documented a steep increase in the rate of the most severe
form of the disease, called progressive massive fibrosis, or
PMF.
PMF, or complicated black lung, is caused by inhalation of
coal and silica dust at both underground and surface coal
mines. Miners gradually lose the ability to breathe as they
wheeze and gasp for air. There is no cure for black lung. It is
a progressive disease and it gets worse with time.
We have a chart up that you can look at. Posted on the
screen are photographs of three sets of lungs. The one on the
left is a healthy lung, with a tan colored tissue. In the
center, the lung with speckled black opacities, is from a coal
miner with simple black lung disease whose breathing is
impaired. On the right, the lung encased in solid black mass is
from a miner with progressive massive fibrosis, or complicated
black lung.
For some with PMF, survival requires a lung transplant, but
only those healthy enough to withstand the surgery are
eligible. Even then, life expectancy does not usually exceed 5
years. Most troubling, PMF is now afflicting miners at far
earlier ages. Causes are being documented in miners in their
30s and 40s.
As the second slide shows, the rate of PMF declined sharply
in the 1970s and kept dropping until the late 1990s. But then
progress reversed and rates now exceed levels diagnosed in the
1970s. Miners' increasing silica exposure has been identified
as one of the main causes of the resurgence of PMF.
Many of the thickest coals seams in central Appalachia have
been mined out and the seams that remain have coal embedded in
quartz-bearing rocks that contain silica.
As mining machines grind through thinner coal mine seams,
they are cutting quartz and coal together. Miners who inhale
this dust are inhaling larger amounts of silica, which is 20
times more toxic than coal dust alone. Let me repeat that,
silica is 20 times more toxic than coal dust.
And while the Mine Safety and Health Administration, or
MSHA, implemented a more stringent coal dust rule in 2014 under
the Obama Administration, far more can be done. Serious
problems remain to be addressed and those will be discussed
during this hearing today.
This much is clear, black lung is back at epidemic levels
and mine safety regulators and the industry have failed in
their jobs to protect miners from this completely preventable
occupational disease.
Today's hearing will also address the solvency of the Black
Lung Disability Trust Fund. When miners are disabled from black
lung disease they can file a claim for black lung benefits with
the Department of Labor. If a mine operator shuts down or files
for bankruptcy, however, benefits are paid from the Black Lung
Disability Trust Fund. That Fund is financed by a small tax
paid by mine operators on each ton of mined coal.
But on December 31, 2018, Congress allowed the tax rate to
drop by 55 percent. If the previous tax rate is not reinstated
the Government Accountability Office projects that the deficit
in the Trust Fund will exceed $15 billion by 2050. While Trust
Fund can borrow to pay miners' benefits and refinance its debt,
allowing the tax rate to sunset effectively shifts the cost of
black lung disease from the coal industry, which caused the
problem, to the tax payers.
And, finally, we will examine how black lung claimants
could be harmed by the Texas lawsuit that is seeking to
invalidate the Affordable Care Act. That suit was brought by
Republican Attorneys General and supported by the Trump
Administration. A lower Court opinion already struck down the
ACA on Constitutional grounds and an appeal is now pending. The
Texas litigation not only threatens to eliminate the ACA's
protection for people with pre-existing conditions, Federal
subsidies for low income people to purchase private health
insurance and Medicaid expansion, but repeal would also
eliminate the so called ``Byrd Amendments'' to the ACA.
Those provisions, which are enacted with the support of the
Black Lung Association and the United Mine Workers Union,
restored important eligibility criteria that enabled miners and
their families to receive compensation under the Black Lung
Benefits Act.
Despite the growing surge of black lung disease, the
skyrocketing red ink in the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund,
and the threat to miners from the attempt to repeal the ACA, we
have heard nothing from this Administration about any actions
that would protect and defend the threatened health and
benefits of this Nation's ailing miners.
I want to thank our witnesses for their testimony,
especially those who have traveled some distance to be here.
I also want to give a special thanks to the miners who have
traveled from the coal fields of West Virginia.
And now I yield to the Ranking Member, Mr. Byrne, for his
opening statement.
[The information follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Alma S. Adams, Chairwoman, Subcommittee on
Workforce Protections
Today, the Subcommittee is going to explore three troubling
developments impacting our nation's coal miners and assess whether the
Administration is making adequate efforts to protect miners' health and
economic well- being.
First, we will address the resurgence of black lung disease, which
has taken the lives of 78,000 coal miners since 1977 and caused
suffering in thousands more.
Congress codified the first enforceable limit on coal mine dust
levels in the 1969 Coal Act, and the rate of black lung disease began
to decline in the 1970's, 80's and 90's. Now the rate of black lung
disease is coming back with a vengeance. Nearly one in five long-
tenured miners in Appalachia have been diagnosed with black lung
disease. This is four times the rate elsewhere.
Black lung clinics and researchers at the National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health or NIOSH have documented a steep
increase in the rate of the most severe form of the disease called
Progressive Massive Fibrosis or ``PMF''.
PMF, or complicated black lung, is caused by inhalation of coal and
silica dust at both underground and surface coal mines. Miners
gradually lose the ability to breathe, as they wheeze and gasp for air.
There is no cure for black lung - It is a progressive disease and gets
worse with time.
Posted on the screen are photographs of three sets of lungs. On the
left, is a healthy lung with tan colored tissue. In the center, the
lung with speckled black opacities is from a coal miner with simple
Black Lung disease, whose breathing is impaired. On the right, the lung
encased in solid black mass is from a miner with progressive massive
fibrosis or complicated black lung.
For some with PMF, survival requires a lung transplant. But only
those healthy enough to withstand the surgery are eligible. Even then,
life expectancy does not usually exceed five years. Most troubling. PMF
is now afflicting miners at far earlier ages - cases are being
documented in miners in their 30s and 40s.
As the second slide shows, the rate of the PMF or complicated black
lung is higher now than the rate in the early 1970s. The rate of PMF
declined sharply in the 1970s and kept dropping until the late 1990s,
but then progress reversed, and rates now exceed levels diagnosed in
the 1970s. Miners' increasing silica exposure has been identified as
one of the main causes of the resurgence of PMF.
Many of the thickest coal seams in central Appalachia have been
mined out, and the seams that remain have coal embedded in quartz-
bearing rock that contains silica.
As mining machines grind through thinner coal mine seams, they are
cutting quartz and coal together. Miners who inhale this dust are
inhaling large amounts of silica, which is 20 times more toxic than
coal dust alone.
Let me repeat that--silica is 20 times more toxic than coal dust.
While the Mine Safety and Health Administration or MSHA implemented
a more stringent coal dust rule in 2014 under the Obama Administration
in 2014, far more can be done.
Serious problems remain to be addressed and those will be discussed
during this hearing. This much is clear: black lung is back at epidemic
levels.
And mine safety regulators and the industry have failed in their
jobs to protect miners from this completely preventable occupational
disease.
Today's hearing will also address the solvency of the Black Lung
Disability Trust Fund. When miners are disabled from black lung
disease, they can file a claim for black lung benefits with the
Department of Labor. If a mine operator shuts down or files for
bankruptcy, however, benefits are paid from the Black Lung Disability
Trust Fund. That Fund is financed by a small tax on each ton of mined
coal.
But on December 31, 2018, Congress allowed the amount mine owners
contribute to the fund to drop by 55 percent. If the previous tax rate
is not reinstated, the Government Accountability Office projects that
the deficit in the Trust Fund will skyrocket to $15.5 billion by 2050.
While the Trust Fund can borrow to pay miners' benefits and
refinance its debt, allowing the tax rate to sunset effectively shifts
the costs of black lung disease from the coal industry--which caused
the problem--to the taxpayers.
Finally, we will examine how Black Lung claimants could be harmed
by the Texas lawsuit, brought by Republican Attorneys General and the
Trump Administration, that is seeking to invalidate the Affordable Care
Act. A lower Court opinion already struck down the ACA on
constitutional grounds, and an appeal is now pending.
The Texas litigation not only threatens to eliminate the ACA's
protections for people with preexisting conditions, federal subsidies
for low-income people to purchase private health insurance and Medicaid
expansion, but repeal would also eliminate the so-called ``Byrd
Amendments'' to the ACA that--with the support of the Black Lung
Association and the United Mineworkers union--had restored important
eligibility criteria that enabled miners and their families to receive
compensation under the Black Lung Benefits Act.
Despite the growing insolvency of the Black Lung Disability Trust
Fund and the threat to miners from the attempt to repeal the ACA, we
have heard nothing from this Administration about any actions that
would protect and defend the threatened benefits of this nation's
ailing miners.
I want to thank our witnesses for their testimony, especially those
who had to travel some distances to be here. I also want to give a
special thanks to the miners who have traveled from the coal fields of
West Virginia.
I yield to the Ranking Member, Mr. Byrne, for his opening
statement.
______
Mr. BYRNE. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for yielding.
As the name of this subcommittee suggests, we all share the
common goal of keeping hardworking Americans out of harm's way
at their jobs. We want to help ensure that all workers return
home to their families safe and healthy.
Workers in the mine industry have been an extremely
important part of the American economy for decades. As someone
who comes from a coal mining state, I have been a strong
supporter of the men and women who provide for their families
by working in this industry. I want us to do everything we can
to ensure their safety is protected.
As such, it is essential that federal programs designed to
provide benefits to these workers are effectively managed to
ensure that promised protections and benefits are available now
and in the future.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration, or MSHA, is
responsible for protecting American mine workers by
establishing and enforcing safety and health regulations
governing all above ground and underground mines. It is vital
that MSHA maintain high standards of safety while also allowing
the industry to innovate for the benefit of mine workers and
the American economy.
In 2018, MSHA reported more than 330,000 Americans were
employed by the mining industries. In that same year the agency
reported the second lowest number ever recorded of mining
fatalities. However, one fatality is still too many. And we
need to continue promoting the best possible policies to ensure
a safe and healthy workplace.
When discussing the safety of mines, we cannot forget about
the hazards whose effects might not be visible until years
later, in the form of illnesses such as black lung disease.
This illness has lasting effects that can devastate workers'
bodies and make life more difficult and painful.
Today, we will hear from witnesses sharing their stories
about some of their hardships. And I want to thank you for
being here to provide your testimony. We all share a common
goal of preventing and eliminating black lung disease.
I look forward to hearing from both panels of witnesses on
how we can best accomplish this goal, and ensure those already
diagnosed with the disease are receiving the proper benefits.
I am encouraged by the Trump administration's work in this
area and its latest regulatory agenda, which includes a request
for information on respirable crystalline silica. It is
critical for the agency to determine if the current respirable
dust standards are providing the best and most feasible
protection for miners.
However, I think this hearing is missing a crucial voice in
the examination of black lung benefits by not including the
director of the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs here
to testify today. As you know, this committee is responsible
for oversight of the OWCP at the Department of Labor, which
administers benefits for the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund
and plays a key role for miners who are Trust Fund
beneficiaries.
Funding for the Trust Fund, however, is provided by an
excise tax on coal. While that excise tax falls under the
jurisdiction of a different House committee, the Committee on
Ways and Means, it would have benefitted everyone in this room
to have heard directly from the OWCP so we can have a better
understanding of the program.
I look forward to the testimony from all of the panelists
at today's hearing. I believe we can all work together to
create common sense, workable, and innovative approaches to
ensuring miners have a safe and healthy workplace.
With that, Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
[The information follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Bradley Byrne, Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Subcommittee on Workforce Protections
Thank you for yielding.
As the name of this subcommittee suggests, we all share the common
goal of keeping hardworking Americans out of harm's way at their jobs.
We want to help ensure that all workers return home to their families
safe and healthy.
Workers in the mining industry have been an extremely important
part of the American economy for decades. As someone who comes from a
coal mining state, I have been a strong supporter of the men and women
who provide for their families by working in this industry. I want us
to do everything we can to ensure their safety is protected. As such,
it is essential that federal programs designed to provide benefits to
these workers are effectively managed to ensure that promised
protections and benefits are available, now and in the future.
The Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) is responsible for
protecting American mine workers by establishing and enforcing safety
and health regulations governing all above-ground and underground
mines. It is vital that MSHA maintain high standards of safety, while
also allowing the industry to innovate for the benefit of mine workers
and the American economy.
In 2018, MSHA reported more than 330,000 Americans were employed by
the mining industries, and that same year the agency reported the
second lowest number ever recorded of mining fatalities. However, one
fatality is still too many, and we need to continue promoting the best
possible policies to ensure a safe and healthy workplace.
When discussing the safety of mines, we cannot forget about the
hazards whose effects might not be visible until years later in the
form of illnesses such as black lung disease. This illness has lasting
effects that can devastate workers' bodies and make life more difficult
and painful.
Today we will hear from witnesses sharing their stories about some
of these hardships, and I want to thank you for being here to provide
your testimony. We all share a common goal of preventing and
eliminating black lung disease. I look forward to hearing from both
panels of witnesses on how we can best accomplish this goal and ensure
those already diagnosed with the disease are receiving the proper
benefits.
I am encouraged by the Trump administration's work in this area and
its latest regulatory agenda, which includes a request for information
on respirable crystalline silica. It is critical for the agency to
determine if the current respirable dust standards are providing the
best and most feasible protection for miners.
However, I think this hearing is missing a crucial voice in the
examination of black lung benefits by not including the director of the
Office of Workers' Compensation Program (OWCP) here to testify today.
As you know, this Committee is responsible for oversight of OWCP at the
Department of Labor, which administers benefits for the Black Lung
Disability Trust Fund and plays a key role for miners who are Trust
Fund beneficiaries. Funding for the Trust Fund, however, is provided by
an excise tax on coal. While that excise tax falls under the
jurisdiction of a different House Committee, the Committee on Ways and
Means, it would have benefited everyone in this room to have heard
directly from OWCP so we could have a better understanding of the
program.
I look forward to the testimony from all the panelists at today's
hearing. I believe we can all work together to create commonsense,
workable, and innovative approaches to ensuring miners have a safe and
healthy workplace.
With that, I yield back.
______
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Byrne.
Without objection, all the members who wish to insert
written statements into the record may do so by submitting them
to the committee clerk electronically in Microsoft Word format
by 5:00 p.m. July 5th, 2019.
I will now introduce our witnesses for panel one.
Our first witness will be Dr. Robert Cohen. Dr. Cohen is a
clinical professor in the Department of Environmental and
Occupational Health Sciences at the University of Illinois
School of Public Health. Dr. Cohen is a leading researcher on
occupational lung diseases, with a focus in workers affected by
mineral dust exposure.
Our next witness is Mr. Gary Hairston, who is vice
president of the Fayette County Black Lung Association. Mr.
Hairston is a retired coal miner who worked in the mines for 27
years before being forced to leave mining at age 48 due to
black lung disease.
Since then Mr. Hairston has been active in fighting to
ensure that fellow miners impacted by black lung receive the
benefits they are entitled to.
Following Mr. Hairston will be Mr. Bruce Watzman. Mr.
Watzman, who is testifying without affiliation, was formerly
the senior vice president for regulatory affairs, National
Mining Association, and their chief regulatory affairs officer
before retiring last year.
Our last witness on panel one will be Mr. Cecil Roberts,
president of the United Mine Workers of America. Mr. Roberts is
a sixth generation coal miner and West Virginian. Since 1995 he
served five terms as president of the UMWA. He started his
career as a coal miner and a UMWA member in 1971.
We appreciate all of the witnesses for being here today. We
look forward to your testimony.
Let me remind the witnesses that we have read your written
statements and they will appear in full in the hearing record.
Pursuant to committee rule 7d and the committee practice, each
of you is asked to limit your oral presentation to a 5 minute
summary of your written statement.
And let me remind the witnesses as well that pursuant to
Title 18 of the U.S. Code Section 1001, it is illegal to
knowingly and willfully falsify any statement, representation,
written document, or material fact presented to Congress, or
otherwise conceal or cover up a material fact.
Before you begin your testimony, please remember to press
the button on the microphone in front of you so that it will
turn on and members can hear you. And as you begin to speak the
light in front of you will turn green. After 4 minutes the
light will turn yellow to signal that you have 1 minute
remaining. When the light turns red your 5 minutes have expired
and we will ask you to please wrap up.
We will let the entire panel make their presentations
before we move to member questions. When answering a question
please remember to once again turn your microphone on.
I will first recognize Dr. Robert Cohen.
Dr. Cohen, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
TESTIMONY OF ROBERT COHEN, MD, FCCP, CLINICAL PROFESSOR,
ENVIRONMENTAL AND OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH SCIENCES, UNIVERSITY OF
ILLINOIS SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTH
Dr. COHEN. Chairwoman Adams, Ranking Member Byrne, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, my name is Robert
Cohen. I am the director of the Mining Education and Research
Center at UIC, the University of Illinois at Chicago. I am also
professor of medicine at the Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine.
I direct the Black Lung Center of Excellence and am the
medical director of the National Coalition of Black Lung and
Respiratory Disease Clinics, which has 60 sites across 15
states serving over 13,000 miners.
My testimony will cover three issues. First, there is a
resurgence of severe black lung disease in the United States.
Second, overexposure to respirable crystalline silica is an
important contributing factor to this resurgence. And, third,
there are short and long-term policies that MSHA, the Mine
Safety Health Administration, should adopt to stem the
resurgence black lung disease.
First, evidence of resurgent of black lung disease comes
from reports of outbreaks of hundreds of cases of progressive
massive fibrosis, or PMF, the most severe form of the disease,
from former miners attending clinics in Kentucky and
southwestern Virginia.
Our UIC research group, in collaboration with NIOSH,
analyzed national data on former miners applying for Federal
black lung benefits. And you can see on slide one that from
1970 until 1996 the numbers of PMF cases among claimants
remained below 2 percent. But after 1996, this increased
dramatically, reaching 8.3 percent of claims. Shockingly, there
have been a total of nearly 2,500 miners determined to have PMF
since 1996. Those of us who care for these young miners in our
black lung clinics see them fighting for breath. They suffer
from the loss of ability to do simple daily tasks, like walking
to the mailbox, playing with their children and grandchildren,
not to mention a loss of their careers, hobbies, and ability to
support their families. They suffer from early mortality in
spite of our heroic attempts to treat them, including referrals
for lung transplantation.
Let me remind you, there is no cure for this disease. It
confers an early death sentence.
What is the evidence that silica plays a role? Crystalline
silica is present in rock strata above, below, and between coal
seams. Mining activities generate freshly fractured respirable
silica, which is highly toxic and causes significantly more
lung scarring than coal dust. We see evidence of silica by
looking at the number of miners' chest x-rays with large round
scars which have been associate with silicosis. The proportion
of these miners with these scars has increased in central
Appalachia, paralleling the increase of severe disease in these
miners.
But we go beyond chest x-ray shadows and look at the lung
tissues of miners with PMF. We examine PMF lung tissue from
coal miners in the NIOSH National Coal Workers Autopsy Study.
On slide two you can see that we evaluated the type of PMF,
whether it was a coal, mixed dust, or silicotic type, that was
present to see how this disease has changed over time. Results
from 376 miners showed a significant increase in the silicotic
type of PMF from 24 percent of cases before 1990 to more than
40 percent after that time. This indicated that miners dying
more recently were nearly twice as likely to have silicotic
type of disease.
Lastly, we see evidence of the role of silica when we look
at the mineral particles in the lungs of miners with PMF using
the electron microscope and an x-ray probe. Data from the first
eight modern miners and ten historical comparisons show that
the concentration and proportion of silica particles in lung
tissues was nearly double in the modern cases.
What can be done? The passage of the new 2014 MSHA dust
rule was a significant step forward, but MSHA must go further
and sample respirable crystalline silica more frequently than
quarterly. NIOSH has developed an in-mine silica analyzer,
which pared with a personal quartz monitor, provides rapid
estimates of exposure to silica, such as at the end of each
shift. Results of monitoring could inform inspectors and
operations on the need to change ventilation or place the mine
on a reduced dust standard.
MSHA should increase the frequency of monitoring for silica
until a tamper proof personal quartz monitor becomes available.
In addition, MSHA should adopt the current Occupational Safety
and Health Administration's permissible exposure limit of 50
micrograms for silica for coal miners.
Finally, surveillance must be enhanced for miners working
in the hot spots of central Appalachia. They should be offered
more frequent health screening, including chest x-ray and
spirometry testing every 2 to 3 years rather than every 5
years.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this testimony and
I will be pleased to answer any questions that you may have.
[The statement of Dr. Cohen follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Attachments 18-19: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/
CPRT-116HPRT40933/pdf/CPRT-116HPRT40933.pdf
Attachment 33: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CPRT-
116HPRT40934/pdf/CPRT-116HPRT40934.pdf
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you.
We will now recognize Mr. Hairston. You are recognized for
5 minutes, sir.
TESTIMONY OF GARY HAIRSTON, VICE PRESIDENT, FAYETTE COUNTY
BLACK LUNG ASSOCIATION
Mr. HAIRSTON. Chairman Adams, Ranking Member Byrne, and the
subcommittee, I would like to thank you for letting me be here
today.
My name is Gary Hairston. I worked in a coal mine for 27 1/
2 years. I am the vice president of Fayette County Black Lung
Association. I just want to thank you for this opportunity to
speak here today.
I worked for Westmoreland Coal Company. That is where I
started, at Westmoreland. I was 21 years old when I went there.
I was a trainee, a redhead they called us; I worked for
Westmoreland 8 1/2 years. I worked for Maben Energy for 6 1/2--
13 years. I worked for Maben Energy for 13 years as a--at
Brushy Gap and Stoney Gap as a scoop operator and electrician.
I worked 6 years with Massey Coal Company as an electrician and
working on belts.
At them mines, there was plenty of dust. Maben Energy was
the worst. I tell you, the dust there, you couldn't even see--
when you are running equipment you couldn't even see where you
are really going.
I tell you what, it was so bad at Maben Energy that we
didn't even hang curtains. The only time we hung curtains is
when the--we know the inspector was coming or he was around the
mine. And on top of that we didn't even--we had to put our dust
samplers in a good area. We couldn't put them where the dust
was out so we wouldn't get a bad sample.
At Massey also there was plenty of dust where I was working
at, but there the only time I really--the bad--the worst dust
was when I was in the return, had to work on equipment while
the mine was operating. They wouldn't shut down--they wouldn't
put them out in the good air, they put them in the place where
they can keep running the coal.
I was 48 years old when I had to quit work. I couldn't even
play with my grandkids. Then I had to watch my wife work go out
of the house and started to work to help us make the ends meet
at our house. You don't know how that feels when you're balled
up and people have to take care of your house. And you see your
wife go out to take care of it. I never did think at this young
age that I wouldn't be able to take care of my family.
But I am really here to talk about two things today for the
Black Lung Association and the communities with black lungs. We
are here to try to get something done about--the first thing is
excise tax on coal intended to pay the cost of the run of the
Black Lung program and to pay the Black Lung benefits for
miners like me.
When the coal company goes bankrupt it is up to the Federal
Black Lung benefit that start taking over where the coal
company just quits paying. When they file bankruptcy they ain't
got to pay no more black lung to us, they--we got to be turned
over to the Federal Government.
After 32 years Congress allowed more than half of the
excise tax to expire in January. So now the excise tax is only
$.50 instead of $1.10, $.25 on surface mining, where it was
$.50. According to the Government Accountability Office, this
decrease will cause the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund to
reach a debt of $15.4 million in 2050. And the coal company
doesn't have to worry about paying because then it will be
turned over to the tax payers. You all will be paying for what
the company should be paying for.
Especially at the time when more coal miners are getting
black lung, the coal companies don't want to pay nothing. They
are turning the excise tax over to the people.
Our second concern was the effort of the Attorneys General
and the Trump Administration to end the Affordable Care Act to
the court because the Act continues to--I am sorry. I am just
upset.
[The statement of Mr. Hairston follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman ADAMS. Mr. Hairston, we are going ask some
questions when we finish, so thank you for your testimony,
and--
Mr. HAIRSTON. Thank you all for letting me speak.
Chairwoman ADAMS.--I am just, you know, very compassionate
about all that you have been through. So we thank you for just
being here today and sharing your story.
Mr. HAIRSTON. Thank you.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Okay. All right.
We will now hear from Mr. Watzman. You have 5 minutes,
sir.
TESTIMONY OF BRUCE WATZMAN, FORMER MEMBER, NATIONAL MINING
ASSOCIATION
Mr. WATZMAN. Thank you, Madam Chair, and members of the
Subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity to be with you today
to share my views based on almost four decades of experience
working on issues related to miner safety and health.
In December 2018, I retired from the National Mining
Association following a 37-year career. During my career, I was
primarily responsible for representing the industry on issues
impacting the health and safety of our nation's coal miners,
including issues related to the federal Black Lung Program.
During my career, I served as a member of the National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Mine Safety and
Health Research Advisory Committee, and participated as a
member on numerous NIOSH and MSHA partnerships formed to
address specific safety and health issues.
The views expressed today are solely mine. They do,
however, reflect positions the industry has advanced to improve
miner safety and health. I was involved in the development of
those positions and I believe they would, if enacted, result in
safety and health improvements beyond those we've already
achieved.
At the outset, let me be clear, if we had the ability to
turn back the hands of time to prevent the suffering that has
been reported, I can assure you that the industry would have
already done so. Unfortunately, this cannot be done. But what
we can and must do is to ensure that 10, 15, or 20 years from
now there will be no more suffering, nor the need for another
hearing because lung disease among coal miners will have been
eradicated.
The disease that is being reported on today results from
exposures that occurred 10 to 20 years ago. It does not reflect
the improvements of MSHA's new dust rule and the impacts of
that will not be known for many years to come. What is needed
today is to ensure that the actions MSHA has already taken, and
those being contemplated, are based on sound science, reflect a
complete understanding of the relationship of exposure and
disease, provide mine operators the ability to utilize all
tools available to protect the workforce, and, most
importantly, are protective of miners' health.
During my career, I was privileged to work with many
talented individuals in industry and academia who work day-in-
and-day-out to ensure that every miner returns safely to his or
her loved ones and who upon their retirement would be able to
enjoy the fruits of their labors. Much success has occurred,
injury and fatality rates are down. But what was missed, and
everyone bears some responsibility, is that we ignored certain
warning signs that should have caused us to broaden our
examination of the emerging increases in black lung disease.
I recall several meetings I attended, with people within
NIOSH and others, where early warning signs were indicated. We
talked about rapid progression CWP in a meeting with NIOSH. We
sought additional information so we could further examine it
when I was part of the industry. Unfortunately, the requests
were denied due to HIPAA concerns.
We talked about the clustering that has occurred in
southern Appalachia, the area which has become characterized as
the ``hot spot'' region because of keen interest of the cases
of PMF were being diagnosed following a latency period far
shorter than traditional coal workers' pneumoconiosis. It was
following this that researchers, including those at NIOSH,
began to identify silica as the culprit resulting in these
cases of early onset disease.
During this same time, we worked collaboratively with NIOSH
and MSHA in the development of the personal continuous dust
monitor. I will tell you that is a game-changer as it relates
to dust sampling in the industry. But as reliable as the CPDM
is in measuring coal dust concentrations, it unfortunately does
not provide real time silica sampling. A renewed effort to
develop a real-time silica monitor must be a priority.
But there are additional things that must be done. We must
change so that mandatory surveillance, mandatory x-ray
surveillance is applied across the industry. We have no
baseline understanding today of the prevalence of the disease
because only approximately one-third of the miners participate
in the x-ray surveillance program. Without that basic
information employers can't work with their employees to help
them during their working career.
In tandem with this, the Part 90 program that MSHA
administers must be changed. Exercising a Part 90 right under
the law is at the discretion of miners. Studies have shown that
only approximately 15 percent of the miners exercise this right
to be moved to a less dusty workplace at no loss of pay. The
law needs to be changed to accommodate that.
Thirdly, the use of administrative controls and personal
protection must be recognized for mining. It is recognized in
other industries and it is long overdue for mining.
Madam Chairwoman, I thank you for the time. I look forward
to your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Watzman follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you, sir.
We will now recognize Mr. Roberts. You have 5 minutes,
sir.
TESTIMONY OF CECIL ROBERTS, PRESIDENT, UNITED MINE WORKERS OF
AMERICA
Mr. ROBERTS. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for this
opportunity and also Ranking Member Byrne.
My name is Cecil Roberts. I am president of United Mine
Workers. I have represented coal miners now for 42 years. Prior
to that I was a coal miner for 5 1/2 years.
In my career I have worked closely with the medical
community, particularly Dr. Cohen, and before him, Dr.
Rasmussen, who is revered in the coal fields of southern West
Virginia. Unfortunately, he has passed away. I have also worked
with the Black Lung Associations.
And let me just comment on my friend, Mr. Hairston. And I
want to thank him for his courage to come here today, suffering
from pneumoconiosis and having the courage to testify before
this committee.
I have also worked with all of the clinics throughout the
coal fields, and I am a board member of the Cabin Creek Clinic
in southern West Virginia. So I am a native West Virginian, and
I come here with a vast amount of time that I have spent on
this issue. And I must say, in all due respect and honesty, the
views of workers in the coal fields are not good with respect
at how they have been treated by their government, whether it
is at the state level or the Federal level. And I don't have to
point very much further than how we got the first Act to
protect coal miners in 1969. It took 159 years, by the way,
before this government decided they ought to try to keep miners
safe. And that was when the first law was passed in 1969. It
would not have passed in 1969, Madam Chairwoman and members of
this committee, if 78 miners had not lost their lives at
Farmington in northern West Virginia in the blink of an eye.
And all the widows and all their friends gathered around that
mine portal, shown on television in 50 states in the United
States of America. That would never have happened if the
country had not witnessed this.
Along with the passage of health and safety language, we
got the first recognition--the first time in 1969, after 159
years, the first time that anyone in this government said there
was such a thing as pneumoconiosis. For years and years there
had been a denial that there was such a thing. Miners knew they
were sick. Miners were dying in their 40s. They thought they
had something called miners' asthma because the medical
community never identified it as an occupational illness and
neither did their government.
So there is a long tough history here. It wasn't long after
the passage of this Act--in the '80s, there was vast fraud
throughout this coal industry. Over 500 companies were cited
for fraud, taking samples of miners who work for them, and over
4,000 citations issued. That wasn't the first time this
happened. This has happened repeatedly throughout history.
I want to go quickly, Madam Chairwoman, because I don't
want to just talk about this problem, I want to talk about some
solutions here. And beginning on page 56 of my very lengthy
testimony that we have submitted, we suggest that Congress
needs to take necessary action, number one, to require the
Federal Mine Safety and Health Administration to assume the
responsibility for conducting respirable dust sampling. We can
no longer allow coal companies to do this. That is like me
calling up the police and say I am speeding on 79. It saves a
lot of money, but I am not going to do that. And the coal
industry can no longer be responsible for administering the
protections these miners needs about what kind of dust they are
exposed to. Remember, it is the coal companies that take these
samples and there is a long history of fraud here.
Number two, Congress needs to take action to require the
Federal Mine Safety and Health Administration to promulgate an
emergency temporary standard that recreates a permissible
exposure limit for silica. Dr. Cohen spoke to this. We can all
come here today and act like we need some more time, but coal
miners don't have any time. They are dying in West Virginia and
they are dying in Kentucky and they are dying in Virginia, and
they don't have any more time to wait here. We need an exposure
limit for how much silica you can be exposed to.
Number three, Congress needs to take the necessary actions
to require the Federal Mine Safety and Health Administration to
promulgate an emergency temporary standard that expands the
walk around rights to allow coal miners to be part of this
sampling. They are not part of this, only the coal companies
take these samples. So coal miners need to be part of this.
Number four, Congress needs to take the actions that are
necessary to address the problem of miner representation and
participation, not represented by organized labor. Organized
labor, we take care of this ourselves because of our contract,
but non union miners don't have these protections.
Number five, Congress must take immediate action to restore
an increase to funding stream necessary to pay for benefits
owed to coal miners from the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund.
And with that, Madam Chairwoman, I would just point out
that I have presented to this committee a lengthy presentation.
Every committee that has ever been established in this Congress
to deal with this, have failed to do so, so I hope today that
we take some action to protect these miners.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Roberts follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Attachment 1-4: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CPRT-
116HPRT40935/pdf/CPRT-116HPRT40935.pdf
Attachment 12: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CPRT-
116HPRT40936/pdf/CPRT-116HPRT40936.pdf
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you, sir, and thank all of you for
your testimony.
Under committee rule 8a, we will now question witnesses
under the 5 minute rule.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hairston, thank you again for being here, thank you for
your courage.
Can you describe to us how you discovered that you had
black lung and PMF?
Mr. HAIRSTON. First time I realized I was outside working
on a piece of equipment and it started raining, and I ran up
some steps and when I got in the bath house I couldn't breathe.
I think I am getting ready to die. But I didn't pay that no
attention. I just kept on working. And I was in the mine by
myself one time, up on the section carrying an oxygen tank out
of the mine, when I got down to where I needed to take it out
on the tracks, I am sitting there, laying there, couldn't
hardly breathe, trying to figure out--it seemed like I am going
to have to wait to tell my--my wife, tell them I didn't make it
home.
Then I got pneumonia and when I went to the hospital they
seen a mass on my lung. They thought it was cancer, but they
come to found out it was black lung. After they did a biopsy on
it they showed it was complicated black lung.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Okay. So can you describe for us what it
is like to have this disease and can you tell me a little bit
about what is happening to the miners that you worked with?
Mr. HAIRSTON. When you can't do what you want to do, when
you want to do something with your kids and you can't--and I am
keeping one of my grandsons now that I could just watch him
play ball and I can't even help him. Even when I try to do
work, I have got to take--go at a pace. And looking at all the
other coal miners, some of them is in worse shape than I am.
Some of them, they pretty much can't even walk 10 feet before
they have got to stop and start to rest.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Okay. So can you tell me, when you worked
in the mines did the mine operators game the system by keeping
samplers out of the dust? And what happened when MSHA
inspectors arrived at that time?
Mr. HAIRSTON. Yes. At the one mine that I worked at we
didn't hang the curtain until the inspector came. And most of
the time, even with the dust sampler, we either covered the
hole up--when the inspector was on section we covered the hole
up until he come around, then we pull the tape off of it so it
wouldn't take the dust up.
The boss told us not to get no bad sample, but I knew it
came from the higher up than the boss.
So we did everything we could to keep from getting a better
sample because if we got a better sample they recommend us or
they say if we didn't do better we had to worry about them
trying to get rid of us.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you, sir.
Dr. Cohen, the mining industry and MSHA have argued that
the alarming rise in black lung and PMF that we are seeing now
is a result of exposures 10 years ago and things may have
changed for the better. They caution that it might be too early
to take any action.
How would you respond to that? And should we just wait 10
years or do we have enough evidence from the research that you
and others have done to act today?
Dr. COHEN. I believe we have the obligation to act today.
The evidence shows that the case numbers are still rising. We
don't have any evidence that is plateauing or that is stopping.
And I think that we would be doing a huge disservice to wait
until we have another generation of miners with this disease to
get data from the new rules.
And as we talked about, the new rule really doesn't address
silica, which is really a huge part of this problem, in the way
that we need to.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you, sir.
I want to now recognize the Ranking Member for the purpose
of questioning the witnesses.
Mr. BYRNE. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Watzman, in your testimony you discussed the fact that
MSHA does not recognize work practices of personal protection
equipment as tools to reduce a miner's exposure to dust. Do you
think if MSHA were able to recognize these measures today it
could help to mitigate health risks, such as black lung
disease? And, if so, could you explain why?
Mr. WATZMAN. Well, I do. I do believe that the traditional
ways of limiting dust exposure in the mines is through air and
water. And there is only so much air and water we can bring
into the mines before that, in and of itself, creates
unintended hazards.
If we had the ability to use personal protection there are
devices that are used in other industries that provide a
continuous stream of clean air over the miner's breathing zone.
Those are used on occasion, voluntarily provided by operators,
but they are not recognized by MSHA.
Similarly, the ability to rotate miners who are exposed to
high concentrations of dust so that they are not exposed to the
full shift. Again, this is a practice that is used in other
industries, it is recognized in other industries, but the Mine
Safety and Health Administration regulations, as they are
written today, don't recognize those practices.
Mr. BYRNE. You also mentioned in your testimony that MSHA's
regulations should allow for worker rotation programs you just
mentioned. If you don't mind, further explain how this works
and why this could help offer additional protections to miners.
Mr. WATZMAN. Sure, let us assume--let us talk about a miner
who is running a continuous miner. That is a machine that is
cutting the coal, one of the highly designated concentration
areas in a mine. Rather than exposing that miner during a full
shift, if it is an eight-hour shift, rotating provides the
ability for the operator to change out two individuals during
the shift so that during the second half of the shift the miner
who was operating the machine during the first four hours, let
us say, is then moved to a less dusty part of the mine to
perform other job functions. So you are limiting the time that
the miner is exposed to the areas where there may be high
concentrations of dust.
Mr. BYRNE. It sounds like the NIOSH x-ray surveillance
program has real potential to allow us to get a better
understanding of the prevalence and severity of black lung
disease. We all want to see the eradication of the disease.
Should we consider making the x-ray program mandatory? Is there
pushback on making this mandatory?
Mr. WATZMAN. Well, I would say it should be mandatory and
that should be a priority. It should be done tomorrow. Today,
only one-third of the miners participate in the x-ray
surveillance program. We don't have a full understanding of the
severity or the incidence of disease across the industry.
But more importantly--more importantly is that without
participation in that program we don't know what the miners'
health status is during their working career.
If we had that information and it was shared with the
operators, the operators could work with the miners to help
them during their working career to move them to less dusty
parts of the mine. Right now, we have a pre-employment
physical, there is an x-ray that is required, there is a
follow-up x-ray that is required three or five years later, and
then there is no requirement during the remainder of the
miner's working career.
This is really a health issue. It is really having more
information available to help the miner during their working
career.
Mr. BYRNE. And I ask, is there pushback to this?
Mr. WATZMAN. Well, I think there are others on the panel
who that question would be more appropriately addressed to, but
I can tell you that on the occasions when I was working for the
industry and we raised this issue, there was pushback. I
couldn't understand it because we were addressing this from
solely a health issue, but there was pushback.
Mr. BYRNE. Well, I will go ahead and open it up then, is
there anybody on the panel that wants to push back against the
suggestion Mr. Watzman made?
Mr. HAIRSTON. I do.
Mr. BYRNE. Okay. Yes, sir, please.
Mr. HAIRSTON. Reasons that coal miners don't get no x-rays
is because they scared. If they go get an x-ray when the docs
come around, they will fire them. So they are scared to take
that test. So they won't go take them.
Mr. BYRNE. All right. Mr. Watzman, do you want to respond
to that?
Mr. WATZMAN. Well, there are protections that are already
written in the law. You can't discriminate against a miner, you
move a miner under Part 90 to a less dusty environment, no loss
of pay. There are discriminatory protections in the law. If
they are not adequate then they should be looked at, but I
think we need to get to the point where all miners are
participating in this program so that we can address their
health considerations during their working career.
Mr. BYRNE. Thank you. I appreciate your testimony.
I yield back.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you very much.
We will now recognize Mr. Takano from California; 5
minutes, sir.
Mr. TAKANO. Thank you, Chairwoman Adams, for this very
important hearing on mine safety standards and the urgent need
to protect miners from exposure to dangerous levels of silica.
Research has shown that silica dust lodges in the lungs
forever--forever. And we know this. I can barely contain my
anger by certain people coming before this committee. It is
much more toxic than coal dust.
In 2016 OSHA updated their silica standards and lowered the
permissible exposure level. And even this information, even
with this information, the MSHA silica standards still have not
been updated. And we know this.
Mr. Hairston, I understand why people who are desperate for
their jobs, who may not know what is in the law, who may be
unprotected by labor unions, wouldn't want to have those x-rays
done.
Miners have reported that cutting rock was like being in a
room full of smoke or sitting on a cloud. We can't afford to
wait another 10 years to address this epidemic. Miners would
not be dying at these drastic levels if there was effective
regulation and strong Federal enforcement. I am hopeful that
this hearing will shed light on the issue and help us come up
with effective strategies to protect miners.
Dr. Cohen, if MSHA were to require the use of end of shift
monitoring equipment at all mines, what effect would that
likely have on worker exposure, assuming the mine operators did
not game the results?
Dr. COHEN. I think there is no doubt that it would reduce
exposure. It would identify tasks that are generating huge
amounts of this toxic respirable crystalline silica. You might
be entering a seam that has, you know, silica within there,
cutting rock, rooftop, or cutting other thing that would have--
generate a lot of silica. I think it would help them change
their practices and reduce exposure.
Mr. TAKANO. How would mines respond to that information?
Dr. COHEN. I think that they would then be able to use the
engineering controls that are available. I think that you can
with water and with ventilation. I think it is very possible to
reduce dust levels. And I think that those engineering controls
could be implemented and force change to organize in such a way
as to reduce the exposure for these miners, or other
alternatives could be done. I think that information would be
very useful in a very practical time period.
Mr. TAKANO. What changes could they make if they identified
higher exposures to the end of the shift?
Dr. COHEN. Then the next shifts that are working would be
able to institute these ventilation changes or institute other
practices that would reduce those exposures.
Mr. TAKANO. Dr. Cohen, how certain are you that silica is
responsible for the spike in black lung diseases and black lung
cases, particularly progressive massive fibrosis or complicated
black lung? How certain are you?
Dr. COHEN. I am very certain. I think the evidence is very
strong.
Mr. TAKANO. And what evidence do you have that would allow
you to conclude that silica is the right culprit?
Dr. COHEN. Well, I think that we have evidence on three
levels. We have the x-ray evidence that I spoke of, the pattern
of disease that is associated with silica, we now have
pathology case series in a larger series of pathology where we
are looking at the tissue to see what is the particle in the
tissue. And, finally, we are actually examining at the particle
level what is the percentage and concentration of silica. So we
are amassing evidence on many levels that silica is an
important part of this problem.
Mr. TAKANO. Thank you, Dr. Cohen.
Mr. Hairston, thank you so much for being here and sharing
your story. And I applaud you for your advocacy and the work
that you do to help other miners.
Can you speak to what changes miners and mine operators
could make if they have identified high silica exposure at the
end of a shift? What changes could they make?
Mr. HAIRSTON. Not too much, but I am telling you, when you
worked nine to ten hours a day, you don't get out of the dust
exposure. If they cut back on the hours that you work and cut
back on how many days you work a week, it would help, but--
almost anything, because your lungs get a chance to clear out.
When you work now that you don't--your lungs don't never get a
chance to clear.
Mr. TAKANO. What do you recommend that MSHA and Congress do
to ensure that silica exposure is reduced for miners? What are
your thoughts about that?
Mr. HAIRSTON. The water and the--having the air right, it
would help a lot. That would be one of the things to try to get
enough water and air up there to try to push the dust out. That
would help a lot to try to keep from getting the exposure of
it.
Mr. TAKANO. Well, thank you, Mr. Hairston. I appreciate
your courage in being here today and I am sorry you are
suffering from this terrible, terrible work-related disease.
Mr. HAIRSTON. Thank you.
Mr. TAKANO. I appreciate your time.
I yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you. We are going to yield to Mr.
DeSalnier of California for 5 minutes.
Ms. Stevens is recognized.
Mr. SCOTT. Are you going to recognize the Ranking Member?
Chairwoman ADAMS. She is not ready for that yet.
Ms. STEVENS. Thank you, Madam Chair. I am delighted to be
at this hearing in this moment.
I am from Michigan and I ran for the seat because we wanted
to stand up for the hard working men and women of this country
and our labor movement. I asked to get on this committee for
the very reason of what we are discussing here today. This
subcommittee around workforce protections and the inalienable
rights that include not dying on the job.
After declining since the 1970s, black lung disease among
today's coal miners is back with a vengeance. It is affecting
more than one in five miners in central Appalachia and these
rates are just clearly higher than they were in the '70s. This
is alarming and should immediately trigger the swift
involvement of our Federal Government to allocate the resources
and bring all stakeholders to the table.
Dr. Cohen, I wanted to ask you what some of the
improvements that Congress can do to build upon the Obama
Administration's respirable dust rule might be. And, if you
don't mind, maybe kind of talking a little bit about that with
the rule and why it hasn't been implemented and what we can do.
We would appreciate it.
Dr. COHEN. I think that the silica standard for MSHA was
sort of on the regulatory agenda towards the end of that
Administration, but time ran out and they were not able to get
that enacted. But I think we have an incredibly well researched
and well documented OSHA standard for silica. Silica dust is
the same whether it is a construction worker digging a tunnel
versus a miner digging a tunnel. It is the same toxic material.
There is no difference, depending on which regulatory agency is
covering that worker. So it makes no sense whatsoever that we
have one standard that is part of a complex formula that
doesn't seem to be effective, and another standard that is very
straightforward, 50 micrograms per meter cubed, action levels
of 25 micrograms per meter cubed. Let us take care of this. And
it was a very long 40 year process to get that standard. We
should just adopt it for miners.
Ms. STEVENS. Thank you.
Mr. Roberts, thank you for your leadership. The mine
workers--you are an incredible leader and we are glad that you
are here.
What are some of the missed opportunities happening now
that are holding us back from preventing more cases of black
lung from affecting the young workers. I think Takano kind of
touched on this, but if you could just dive in a little bit
deeper for us, particularly from your vantage, we would
appreciate that.
Mr. ROBERTS. I think it would be helpful for the committee
to understand that when you have PMF, the most severe form of
black lung, the cure for that is a lung transplant. That is it.
It cost $1 million each. And you live about 3 years. So that is
the cure. So we are now debating whether we should do something
about this, right. So--and I don't mean to be overly critical,
but sometimes I can't help myself after being here so many
times over the years.
First of all, we have got to place in the hands of coal
miners more power. They have absolutely no idea at the time
they are being tested for exposure to dust, how much they are
in. The new system helps with that. If you had a system that we
just discussed about end of shift silica readings, there is no
guarantee that they will know what that reading is. And a third
thing about that is there is no standard. So until we have a
standard that these companies have to meet, we are doing
absolutely nothing by having the end of shift review of this
because coal companies will make the decisions about whether or
not they want to do something about the amount of silica that
is being presented to miners who are working in the mines.
So we have to have more power to the miners, more rights to
the miners, and we have got to take the system out of the hands
of the people who operate the mines. And I am not here
suggesting that all coal companies are bad. I am on record here
in Congress that most coal companies want to do the right
thing. But as I just pointed out, originally there are a lot of
coal companies that do not.
Ms. STEVENS. Well, and there are certainly a lot of issues
where it is easy to point the finger, but that doesn't
necessarily solve the problem.
Mr. ROBERTS. That is correct.
Ms. STEVENS. And so what you are talking about with
standards, as someone who also sits on the House science
committee with oversight of the National Institute of Standards
and Technologies, we know very well the importance of what
standards will bring to this, the justice and, frankly, the
health outcomes.
I do a lot of hearings. I can't think of a more important
hearing around the general health outcomes and the protections
of our workers.
So you mentioned you have been here a lot, that you have
been having this conversation on repeat. I want to let you know
it is a new day in this Congress with the leadership.
Chairwoman ADAMS. The gentlelady is out of time.
Ms. STEVENS. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you.
We will now recognize Dr. Foxx from North Carolina, the
Ranking Member of Ed and Labor.
Mrs. FOXX. Thank you, Dr. Adams. And I want to thank our
panel members for being here today.
Mr. Watzman, mining is a vital part of the American economy
and mine workers deserve a workplace that ensures their basic
health and safety. One factor that is so difficult with black
lung disease is the latency period between a worker being
exposed to dust and the onset of the disease. In your view, are
we able to know if the recent MSHA standard, the 2014
Respirable Coal Mine Dust Rule, is providing workers with the
needed protection? And, based on information currently
available, what actions, if any, should we be considering
today?
Mr. WATZMAN. I don't think we have enough information yet.
The Rule came into place in 2014, we have fully implemented
across the industry the continuous personal dust monitor. That
information is provided to the Mine Safety and Health
Administration electronically. It is tamper-proof protected
when it is shared. And based upon the information that MSHA has
reported, dust levels across the industry are down
dramatically. That is a step in the right direction. But I
think we need to learn more over time in terms of whether this
is effective or not.
You know, it is unfortunate because of the latency period
that it takes so long to understand the effectiveness. And when
the National Academy of Sciences recently issued their report
on respirable dust, they pointed to that, that because of the
latency period--and it is not my words, it was their
conclusions--because of the latency period, we really don't
know whether or not dust standards are effective in a short
enough period of time.
So it is a problem, but I am not sure that there is much we
can do to overcome that because of the 10- to 20- year latency
period before disease presents itself.
Mrs. FOXX. Thank you.
Mr. Watzman, you have been actively engaged in the mining
industry and worked with MSHA for over 30 years. How would you
characterize the way the agency identifies priorities and
addresses concerns? The title of today's hearing implies the
agency has been willfully ignoring its duties. Based on your
experience, is this the case?
Mr. WATZMAN. I don't think that is a fair characterization,
quite honestly. I think the agency does as good a job as it can
working with its stakeholders to identify priorities. They
inherited a dust rule from the prior administration. They are
implementing that dust rule, enforcing that dust rule from the
prior administration. They have not turned their backs on that
issue, they have not revised the dust rule, they have not
proposed revisions, as far as I know right now, to those
underlying standards. So I think that they do a good job. Could
they do a better job? I am sure we could all point to
organizations who could do a better job working with their
stakeholders, but I don't think it is a fair characterization
to say that they have turned their back on the miners.
Mrs. FOXX. Thank you again.
Mr. Watzman, we all want to see the elimination of advanced
lung disease related to mining activities while preserving jobs
that are vital to these workers and the communities. It is
clear the mining industry has continued to evolve and improve
practices over the years as new information and technologies
become available.
How can we continue to encourage and facilitate the
creation of additional new technology moving forward?
Mr. WATZMAN. Well, there is a barrier that needs to be
overcome. There are technology providers who provide technology
outside the U.S. but aren't bringing it into the U.S. This is
an issue that the Assistant Secretary talked about early in his
tenure. We need to come up with better procedures to get new
technologies introduced, especially in the underground coal
environment. MSHA has a very rigorous, time consuming, and
expensive approval and certification process. We need to
recognize where technology is approved by international
standard setting organizations, that approval should be
adequate for introduction into the U.S., and I hope that the
agency is moving in that direction.
Mrs. FOXX. Thank you, Mr. Watzman. And, again, I want to
thank the panelists for being here today.
I yield back, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you very much.
I will yield now to the gentlelady from Pennsylvania, Miss
Wild.
Ms. WILD. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Hairston, good morning. I am sorry that I wasn't here
for the oral testimony portion, but I have read your written
testimony and I appreciate it.
In a letter from November of 2018 Hal Quinn, the National
Mining Association CEO, stated that the ``industry is committed
to ensuring that all miners who suffer from black lung receive
the benefits they deserve''. And in your experience, I would
like to ask you, which includes working as a coal miner for 27
years before you were diagnosed and as vice president of the
Fayette County Black Lung Association, would you agree or
disagree with Mr. Quinn's statement that the industry is
committed to ensuring that all miners who suffer from black
lung receive the benefits they deserve?
Mr. HAIRSTON. I disagree.
Ms. WILD. So that hasn't been your experience?
Mr. HAIRSTON. No.
Ms. WILD. Can you tell us a little bit about your
experience in terms of the benefits that you believe you should
have received that you haven't?
Mr. HAIRSTON. When I filed for mine, the company waited
until the last minute to even protest it. Then I think we
fought mine for 2 years and Washington and Lee University
wanted to help me get mine. And most coal miners, most of them
try 10, 15 years before the ever get it. They always find some
kind of way--at one time they were hiding the x-rays, knowing
that they had it, they get these expensive hospitals to say
that you ain't got it. So it ain't helping us.
Ms. WILD. Let me stop you stop you there for a second
because I want to go to Dr. Cohen and ask Dr. Cohen about--
well, before I get to Dr. Cohen, let me go to Mr. Watzman.
In June of 2018 there was a Reuter's article on the
resurgence of black lung disease and the coal industry's
opposition to maintaining the tax rate that supports the Black
Lung Disability Trust Fund, and you were quoted as saying more
often than not we are being called upon to provide compensation
for previous or current smokers.
Mr. Watzman, can you explain that comment to Mr. Hairston
or any of his work colleagues that jeopardize their health for
the benefit of the coal industry? And specifically, can you
provide us with any credible medical or scientific study that
backs up your claim that smoking is the root cause of coal
miners becoming disabled and therefore qualifying for black
lung benefits?
Mr. WATZMAN. I don't have it with me, but I will provide a
study for the record that I am familiar with for your benefit.
Ms. WILD. Who authored that study, Mr. Watzman?
Mr. WATZMAN. I can't recall off the top of my head.
Ms. WILD. And it is your position that study supports the
claim that smoking is the root cause?
Mr. WATZMAN. I don't--I didn't say that it was the root
cause.
Ms. WILD. Well, that was my question. So you don't have any
evidence that it--smoking is the root cause of coal miners
becoming disabled.
Mr. WATZMAN. No, I didn't--no, I don't.
Ms. WILD. Okay, thank you.
In addition, in June of last year the National Mining
Association distributed a fact sheet to congressional offices
that asserted that there was a ``decline in medical black lung
disease'' and that the reduced black lung excise tax rate was
more than sufficient to provide monthly disability payments.
First of all, question, did you review and approve that
fact sheet before it was distributed?
Mr. WATZMAN. I didn't--I was not solely responsible for it,
but I would have been involved in its development at that time.
Ms. WILD. Okay.
Dr. Cohen, I would like to turn to you. Do you care to
comment on that statement that there has been--according to the
National Mining Association's fact sheet to congressional
offices, that there has been a decline in medical black lung
disease?
Dr. COHEN. Yeah, I think that is wrong. And I think that--I
think
Ms. WILD. And can you tell us what your evidence reveals?
Dr. COHEN. We have evidence from active working coal miners
that is part of the NIOSH Coal Workers Health Surveillance
Program that shows that the rate of disease on chest x-rays is
increasing, we have evidence from former miners that are
applying for black lung, including outbreaks from clinics, and
then a review of national data from the Office of Workers'
Compensation Programs, Black Lung Benefits Program that clearly
shows that the rates of severe disease and compensated workers
is increasing.
Ms. WILD. And can you give us any kind--can you quantify
that at all?
Dr. COHEN. Well, I think that one of the most shocking
numbers that from 1996 to the present, 2,500 miners have been
compensated for disabling progressive massive fibrosis, the
most severe form of the disease. And that curve I showed a bit
earlier shows that it is just a very steep increase as opposed
to what we would really hope for, is that under modern dust
controls that we would be decreasing and eliminating this
disease.
Ms. WILD. Mr. Hairston, I hope that our committee will be
able to do something to help you all.
With that I yield back.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you very much.
We will now yield to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Wright.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. WRIGHT. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
First, Mr. Hairston, I was here earlier for your opening
testimony and it was very compelling. And no one can know fully
what you have been through unless they have had that disease,
so God bless you and your family. I know it has been tough.
Mr. Watzman, I wanted to ask you, because this hearing kind
of underscores the difficulty that Congress has in implementing
any kind of new regulation or anything like that when you have
this time lapse that has been discussed here. If we look at car
accidents over the last 30 years, it is going to include an
awful lot of accidents before cars had air bags, for example.
And, so, my first question to you is how do we get a handle
on this, realizing that there has been an awful lot of
improvements made in the last 25-30 years, and yet we don't
have the data to know exactly what the effect of that is going
to be until we are further down the road? Is there any data
that is more recent that can be applied to this?
Mr. WATZMAN. Well, we have data that becomes available as
the NIOSH x-ray surveillance program--as miners participate in
the NIOSH x-ray surveillance program and that data becomes
available. But, again, that is only a fraction of the workforce
and that is the problem, that we are looking at 30-35 percent
of the workforce.
And human nature, at least as it relates to me, tells me
that if I am not feeling well I go see my physician. But if I
am feeling well, I have no need to go to the physician. Yet,
there may be an underlying disorder that I am not aware of. And
that is why we feel so passionately as an industry or the
industry feels so passionately, and I still feel that I am a
part of it, that the x-ray surveillance program should be made
mandatory so that there is a better understanding of the
breadth of disease across the entirety of the industry and so
that operators can work with their employees to take action to
protect them during the remainder of their working career.
Mr. WRIGHT. And you hit on another point when you mentioned
percentages because while percentages may be up, the total
number of miners is down. And so if you are going to do an
accurate comparison with the past, it needs to be an apple and
apple comparison, not an apple and orange comparison.
Mr. WATZMAN. That is correct.
Mr. WRIGHT. Right. So I just want to throw that out there
that if we are going to be making these comparisons over time,
then they need to be relevant comparisons. You don't apply--you
know, you can talk all day long about how the percentage is up,
but if the total number is different, then it is going to skew
the conclusion. Isn't that correct?
Mr. WATZMAN. That is correct.
Mr. WRIGHT. All right. Thank you very much.
And I yield back.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you very much.
I will now yield to the Chair of Education and Labor,
Chairman Scott from Virginia.
Mr. SCOTT. Thank you, Madam Chair.
President Roberts, you are aware of the reporting by Howard
Berkes of National Public Radio about the epidemic of
progressive massive fibrosis that really brings us here today.
And your testimony calls for an emergency temporary standard
for a more protective silica standard. Does your testimony call
for the same standard that NIOSH has been recommending for 40
years?
Mr. ROBERTS. I think the standard that was promulgated by
OSHA would be the standard that I would encourage this
committee to take into consideration as they deliberate this
issue.
If I could just elaborate slightly, you do not really need
to wait 10 years to determine when a miner has been in the
mines 5 years and he has PMF that you might want to wait
another 10 years, because that miner is going to be gone.
Mr. SCOTT. The Mine Safety and Health Administration, MSHA,
has the authority to issue an emergency standard when it
determines that miners are exposed to a grave danger from
exposure to substances or agents determined to be toxic or
physically harmful. Are miners exposed today to that grave
danger?
Mr. ROBERTS. Oh, absolutely, they are exposed to grave
danger as we are sitting here today.
Mr. SCOTT. Thank you.
Dr. Cohen, we have heard reference to the 2014 improvement.
What improvements on the silica standard were made by that 2014
standard for mine workers?
Dr. COHEN. There was no specific improvement in the silica
standard in the 2014 regulations. The total dust was lowered
from 2 milligrams to 1.5.
Mr. SCOTT. Well, I thought you said that silica was causing
the problem of progressive massive fibrosis?
Dr. COHEN. It is.
Mr. SCOTT. And so the 2014 change didn't have anything to
do with silica, is that right?
Dr. COHEN. I don't believe that it addressed it adequately,
no.
Mr. SCOTT. Now, it is my understanding, Dr. Cohen, that
NIOSH has been recommending a better standard, the same
standard that applies now with OSHA, but not mine workers. Is
that right?
Dr. COHEN. That is my understanding, yes.
Mr. SCOTT. Okay. What has happened for 40 years?
Dr. COHEN. I think that it was a long process to get the
new OSHA standard through and that finally was passed. And I
think that it is just absolutely nonsensical that doesn't apply
to miners as well. They are workers exposed to the same dust,
so I think that has to be done and should be done. And the data
is there for that.
Mr. SCOTT. Mr. Hairston, you talked about the reluctance to
get x-rays. Why are people afraid to get x-rays?
Mr. HAIRSTON. They scared of getting fired.
Mr. SCOTT. And why would they be fired in light of the fact
that they have rights to be transferred?
Mr. HAIRSTON. I know a few guys right now, they got fired
because they wouldn't work in dust. They fighting right now to
try and get their jobs back.
Mr. SCOTT. And they get--they are reluctant to tell the
employer because the employer--the last employer is stuck with
the Workers Compensation, is that right?
Mr. HAIRSTON. Yes.
Mr. SCOTT. And so if they can get fired before they get
sick, when they might be sick, maybe they will go somewhere
else and somebody else will be responsible. Is that the danger?
Mr. HAIRSTON. Yes, sir. Because if you say something about
it, the coal company will fire you before the government can do
anything about it. You still got to wait for the government to
do what they got to do to get your job back. Then you got to
hire a lawyer. How many coal miners can get lawyers to fight
their cases?
Mr. SCOTT. Thank you.
Now, President Roberts, you indicated that protections that
union members have that non union members don't have in terms
of worker protections in the contract. Can you explain what you
meant?
Mr. ROBERTS. Yes. Although the law says certain things, to
expect that a coal miner that doesn't have representation at
the mine is going to exercise those rights knowing full well
that at some point in time something could happen to him and he
would be discharged, they do not exercise that right, they
being the miners in non union mines. Our contract, as well as
the law, says we can withdraw ourselves from any situation that
we feel dangerous to our health or any situation that we feel
that could injure us. And we exercise--we being our members--
that on a frequent basis.
Mr. SCOTT. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I yield back.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Scott.
I will now recognize Mr. Griffith from Virginia for 5
minutes, sir.
Mr. GRIFFITH. Thank you very much. Let me thank you, Madam
Chair, and Ranking Member Byrne, and my friend, also from
Virginia, the Chairman of the full committee, Mr. Scott, for
inviting me to be a participant in this today. This is very
important to the constituents in my district. I represent the
part of the hot spot that was mentioned earlier, southwestern
Virginia, and it is important.
Mr. Hairston, I believe I heard you say that you got help
from Washington and Lee University School of Law. Is that
correct?
Mr. HAIRSTON. Yes, sir.
Mr. GRIFFITH. And as a proud alumnus of that institution, I
am glad to know they are doing some good stuff. It is a good
school and they do a lot of good things.
Mr. HAIRSTON. Yes, it. They do.
Mr. GRIFFITH. And I have heard the same thing you said in
your answers to Representative Scott, to Chairman Scott were
the same as I have heard in the district, and that is people
are afraid to go get the x-rays for fear that they will be some
other reason that they lose their job.
So I am intrigued because I want to find answers to this
problem. I mean I am a big supporter of coal mining, but I want
to make sure that we take care of our miners.
Mr. Watzman, you indicated that we should have a universal
x-ray system. Do you think that might solve this fear problem?
I mean if everybody has to do it--and I will tell you, it is
not an alien concept, because my mother was a school teacher,
and I forget how many years it was, but every 3 or 5 years she
had to go and get a chest x-ray to make sure she didn't have
tuberculosis, because there was at one time a huge tuberculosis
problem. So what seems to be the resistance to having everybody
get an x-ray every so many years? And then that way you have
got a better chance of being able to help people quicker. And
it is not that somebody like Mr. Hairston be asking for the x-
ray, everybody had to get it.
And, Mr. Robertson, I want your comment on that too, but
Mr. Watzman?
Mr. WATZMAN. Well, that is what we believe should be the
case, that every miner participates in a mandatory x-ray
surveillance program. Will that address the concerns of
discrimination and getting fired, I don't know the answer to
that. What I do know is that will provide information to the
miner and to the employer so that they can work with them
during the remainder of their working career to protect their
health as best as possible.
Mr. GRIFFITH. And I appreciate that.
Mr. Roberts, your thoughts? Because I don't have an opinion
per se, I am just trying to learn here today.
Mr. ROBERTS. Thank you.
My view of this, and I believe that this will be the
correct view, we do not necessarily have a problem with miners
getting x-rays every 5, 6--whatever it might be years. Our
problem is that we do not think that coal companies should be
privy to that information. We have a HIPAA law that says that
no one can have my medical records and we are going to say to
the coal companies, who have got a less than stellar record in
some instances here, here you go, here is the x-rays for the
people who are working--that is going that is going to be
something that miners will resist to no end. So I think we need
to protect their privacy here.
Mr. GRIFFITH. And I am going to look forward to thinking
about that and trying to figure it out, because I also know
that sometimes a miner, even if he has a problem, won't
exercise his rights for the same fears that he isn't getting
the x-ray for now.
The other thing I thought was intriguing today, Mr.
Watzman, was this idea of the personal--let me see if I can get
it right here--the personal protective devices. I mean I have
got research from Virginia Tech, and some researchers there
have been working on it, they agree with the silica issue, but
they think there may be other factors as well. And every
mountain is a little bit different and there are different
minerals in every mine, and sometimes even the mines that
aren't in Appalachia have high concentrations of minerals. But
if we had a personal protection device, it seems to me if that
is not too heavy or burdensome, that would eliminate a lot of
these concerns about whether it is coal, which we now think it
is not as bad as the silica--and I think that is right, based
on the science, and yet there is this research ongoing about
other things. You have said that is a good idea. You think the
industry would accept that?
Mr. WATZMAN. They are--in selective instances they are
already being used voluntarily in the industry. These are
devices--
Mr. GRIFFITH. Okay. And your answer is yes? Because I am
running out of time.
Mr. WATZMAN. The answer is yes.
Mr. GRIFFITH. Mr. Roberts, what do you think? Do you think
the miner would be willing to do that? Because to me that seems
like a really practical solution.
Mr. ROBERTS. It really depends on your job, Congressman.
And let me give you an example, if you don't mind.
Mr. GRIFFITH. Yes, sir.
Mr. ROBERTS. I ran a shuttle car in about 40 inches of
coal, and you could touch the top as you ran up the--went up to
the miner to get unloaded. When you came back you couldn't see
anything on the other side because the coal was dragging on the
top. You cannot put a shuttle car operator in an air stream
helmet and expect him to operate that shuttle car safety
without running over top of somebody. If you are in other
occupations in the mine, you cannot wear an air stream helmet.
It is impossible. There are some places you can, but in a lot
of places you can't.
Mr. GRIFFITH. Well, maybe we need research to figure out
how to make those devices a little bit less intrusive.
I will also tell you that one of the things that might tech
folks said we might want to take a look at is--Virginia Tech
folks said we might want to take a look at is the mine
processing, getting the mine ready. Because apparently the dust
rules don't apply until you are actually mining the product,
and yet you are digging through a lot of rock to get that seam
ready to be mined.
I am out of time, so I yield back.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you all very much for your
testimony.
And I want to thank all of the witnesses on panel one for
your participation today. Certainly I learned a lot myself and
certainly have a lot of compassion, Mr. Hairston, for what you
have been through. And hopefully we will have an opportunity
and will make a way to really provide some support.
Members of the Committee, what we have heard is very
valuable. The committee may have some additional questions for
you, and we ask the witnesses to please respond to the
questions in writing. The hearing will be open for 14 days in
order to receive the responses. I remind my colleagues that
pursuant to committee practice, witness questions for the
hearing record must be submitted to the majority committee
staff or committee clerk within 7 days. The questions submitted
must address the subject matter of the hearing.
We are going to seat the second panel. Well, let us take 5
minutes to recess to seat the second panel.
All right, thank you all very much.
[Recess]
Chairwoman ADAMS. Our first witness on the second panel
will be Dr. John Howard. Dr. Howard is the Director of the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. He has
held that post since 2009. Dr. Howard previously served as
director of OSHA from 2002 to 2008. Prior to coming to OSHA Dr.
Howard was chief of the Division of Occupation Safety and
Health of the California Department of Industrial Relations,
Labor, and Workforce Development.
The next witness will be Dr.--
Mr. ZATEZALO. Zatezalo.
Chairwoman ADAMS.--Zatezalo, assistant secretary for the
Mine Safety and Health Administration. Prior to leading MSHA,
Dr. Zatezalo was CEO of Rhino Resources, a Kentucky coal mine
operator. He also served as chair of the Kentucky and Ohio Coal
Associations. He is a native West Virginian and he started his
career as a coal miner.
The final witness is Miss Cindy Brown Barnes, Director of
Education Workforce and Income Security for the Government
Accountability Office. Miss Brown Barnes leads the GOA team
that audited the Department of Labor's management of the Black
Lung Disability Trust Fund. She has more than 30 years of
experience performing audits of Federal agencies.
Welcome to all of our witnesses. We appreciate all of the
witnesses for being here today and look forward to your
testimony.
Let me remind the witnesses that we have read your written
statements and they will appear in full in the hearing record.
Mr. BYRNE. Madam Chairwoman?
Chairwoman ADAMS. Yes?
Mr. BYRNE. I have a parliamentary inquiry.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Yes, sir, state your parliamentary
inquiry.
Mr. BYRNE. I appreciate Ms. Barnes from the GAO being here
today, but it is my understanding that she will speak on issues
related to the funding of the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund,
and those issues are not within the jurisdiction of the
committee. Do we have a responsibility to limit our hearings to
subjects we can address in this committee, allowing adequate
time for the other issues?
Chairwoman ADAMS. GOA was invited to testify because the
Black Lung Benefits Act falls squarely in the jurisdiction of
this committee and this subcommittee, including the
administration of the program by the Department of Labor. This
subcommittee can conduct oversight of the tax rate and the
Trust Fund solvency even if we cannot legislate on the tax as
that falls in Ways and Means. Indeed, Chairman Scott and Ways
and Means Chairman Neal are co-requestors of the work being
performed by the GAO on the Trust Fund solvency.
I want to remind everyone that the DOL secretary is one of
the three trustees of the Black Lung Benefits Disability Trust
Fund and GAO's testimony is addressing not only the tax but the
maladministration of self-insurance, the Office of Workers'
Compensation programs.
As the minority is aware, the GAO work is still underway,
but when it is complete it may be timely to hold another
hearing and ask OWCP to testify, however, GAO's work is not
expected to be completed until the fall. And I would add that
if the minority felt it was important to have testimony here
today, the minority could have invited them to testify or made
a request to the majority to consider an additional joint
witness. However, our staff did not receive a communication in
reference to that.
Mr. BYRNE. Thank you for your response.
Chairwoman ADAMS. All right. Thank you.
Our final witness--I think I just introduced her. Okay, all
right.
Thank you very much. We appreciate all the witnesses for
being here today and look forward to your testimony.
I do want to remind the witnesses that we have read your
written statements and they will appear in full in the hearing
record. Pursuant to committee rule 7d and committee practice,
each of you is asked to limit your oral presentation to a 5
minute summary of your written statement.
I want to remind the witnesses that pursuant to Title 18 of
the U.S. Code Section 1001, it is illegal to knowingly and
willfully falsify any statement, representation, writing,
document, or material fact presented to Congress, or otherwise
conceal or cover up a material fact.
Before you begin your testimony, please remember to push
the button on the microphone in front of you so that it will
turn on and the members can hear you. And as you begin to speak
the light in front of you will turn green. After 4 minutes the
light will turn yellow to signal that you have 1 minute
remaining. When the light turns red your 5 minutes have expired
and we ask that you please wrap up.
We will let the entire panel make their presentations
before we move to member questions. When answering a question
please remember once again to turn your microphone on.
I will first recognize Dr. John Howard. Dr. Howard, you are
recognized for 5 minutes, sir.
TESTIMONY OF JOHN HOWARD, MD, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH
Dr. HOWARD. Good morning, Chairwoman Adams and Ranking
Member Byrne, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. My
name is John Howard and I am the Director of the National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, or NIOSH, which
is part of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
I am here today to provide two brief updates. First, I will
provide an update on the science, showing how inhaling
respirable crystalline silica contributes to U.S. coal miners
developing a lung disease called pneumoconiosis. And, second, I
will describe NIOSH's efforts to improve the technology for
assessing coal miners' exposure to quartz, the form of
crystalline silica found in coal mine dust.
Quartz is the most common type of crystalline silica.
During coal mining activities rock that contains quartz can be
disturbed, generating dust that contains respirable particles
of crystalline silica which miners then can inhale.
We know that when miners in certain jobs, such as roof
bolting, workers at the mine face and surface miners engage in
drilling through layers of rock covering the coal seam can
develop a lung disease called pneumoconiosis as a result of
their inhalation. Specifically, miners can develop a type of
pneumoconiosis called silicosis. Miners can also develop coal
workers' pneumoconiosis, or black lung disease, mixed with
silicosis.
Science tells us that quartz plays a contributing role in
the current outbreak of pneumoconiosis in coal miners,
particularly in the central Appalachian region, which includes
eastern Kentucky, western Virginia, and in West Virginia. In
these areas approximately 20 percent of active underground coal
miners with 25 or more years of mining tenure have evidence of
pneumoconiosis.
We know this from several lines of evidence, including,
one, radiographic exams performed during coal workers' health
surveillance surveys, two, Mine Safety and Health
Administration inspection data, three, interviews of coal
miners with progressive massive fibrosis, and, four, analysis
of coal workers' lung tissue.
Timely monitoring of quartz would provide better protection
for miners. As a first step, NIOSH is researching technologies
to advice the science of assessing quartz exposures in the
field, specifically developing and testing a prototype for a
field based rapid quartz monitor, which I have with me today, a
type of self assessment tool also known as an end of shift
silica monitor. The rapid quartz monitoring prototype is based
on three components, a sampler, an analyzer, and a quartz
concentration software calculator.
Concurrently, NIOSH is funding through its external
contracts program the development of a stand-alone near real-
time continuous quartz monitor for compliance sampling.
Development and certification of the near real-time continuous
quartz monitor for compliance sampling could take a decade or
more, so it is not a near-term solution for assessing quartz
exposure.
Between 2016 and 2018 NIOSH conducted usability tests of
the field based prototype rapid quartz monitor, or end of shift
silica monitor, in four coal mines in West Virginia, including
three underground mines and one surface mine. The mines
conducted the testing in collaboration with NIOSH, collecting
more than 200 area and personal dust samples. During those
tests the method used to provide only an estimate for quartz,
still the mines were able to use the information from the field
test prototype rapid quartz monitor to assess the efficacy of
the dust control technology and were able to identify
occupations and tasks characterized by exposure to high
concentrations of quartz.
At this time, NIOSH is supporting MSHA evaluations of the
prototype to determine how well the results correlate with the
analytical results provided by the standard laboratory based
MSHA P-7 approach. Sampling will be conducted in MSHA districts
2 and 3 and will be expanded to include samples from each MSHA
district across the United States.
Although the field based prototype rapid quartz monitor, or
end of shift silica monitor, shows promise as a self assessment
tool for exposure to quartz in coal mines, it is not currently
ready for use as a compliance tool.
In the meantime, more frequent quartz sampling, as opposed
to dust itself, but quartz sampling, and more frequent enhanced
medical surveillance would be appropriate, including retired
coal miners.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I would be happy to answer any
questions.
[The statement of Dr. Howard follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you very much.
We will recognize assistant secretary, Mr. Zatezalo. Five
minutes, sir.
TESTIMONY OF DAVID ZATEZALO, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF LABOR FOR
MINE SAFETY AND HEALTH, DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
Mr. ZATEZALO. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman Adams, Ranking
Member Byrne, members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me here to testify today.
It is my honor to appear before this subcommittee and to
represent President Trump, Secretary Acosta, and all 1,860
dedicated men and women of the Mine Safety and Health
Administration.
What distinguishes MSHA from other federal safety agencies
is our foundational mandate of inspecting every underground
mine at least four times per year and every surface mine at
least twice. I am pleased to report that in 2018 MSHA fulfilled
that mandate with over 37,000 inspections.
Our one MSHA initiative began last year by creating the
unified position of administrator for mine safety and health
enforcement. We evaluated all mines for distance from MSHA
offices and identified 90 mines where it made sense to cross-
train inspectors. The Mine Safety and Health Academy
established and revised curriculum with input from the NCFLL,
which represents our field staff, and provided up to 56 hours
of classroom training for those inspectors, plus 24 hours of
on-the-job training with a seasoned inspector.
During the six months beginning last October, inspectors
with those 90 mines spent 41 percent less travel time than
previously. Clearly, this saves taxpayer dollars, but
ultimately this is about more effectively achieving MSHA's core
mission. Instead of spending time driving, our inspectors can
spend more time on site interacting with miners and observing
them.
Understand that MSHA will retain specialists in their
current roles to cover specific mining conditions, such as
ventilation experts for underground coal mine inspections,
which are prone to special hazardous conditions. In keeping
with our promise to the House of Senate Appropriations
Committee, MSHA's office of accountability will audit crossover
mine inspections to ensure that enforcement personnel adhere to
MSHA's policies and procedures.
MSHA's injury and fatality data show the most common cause
of fatalities is powered haulage accidents, accounting for half
of fatalities in recent years. We launched an initiative
focusing specifically on the three most common types of haulage
fatalities, which are mobile equipment collisions, belt
conveyers, and seat belt use. Last June, we published a request
for information seeking input on these technologies, practices,
and other ways to prevent such fatalities and held seven public
hearings along the way. In the recently released spring unified
agenda, MSHA announced our intention to issue a propose rule
addressing powered haulage.
In addition to more strategically focusing on the day to
day safety of miners, we are paying very close attention the
``H'' in MSHA, which is miners' health. MSHA continues to
aggressively enforce existing standards to ensure that miners
are protected from exposure to respirable dust and quartz. I am
encouraged by mine operators' plus 99 percent compliance with
the 2016 respirable coal dust rule in controlling coal miners
exposure to quartz. The number of quartz samples collected has
increased by 335 percent between 2013 and 2018. And since
August of 2016 MSHA samples indicate average quartz exposures
are 75 percent below the threshold limit on average.
This can further improve with real-time quartz monitoring,
similar to CPDM technology, which NIOSH continues to develop,
along with MSHA's collaboration. Whereas over 16 percent of
quartz samples exceeded the standard in 2008, only 1.2 percent
exceeded that standard in 2018, which is the lowest rate since
MSHA began keeping records.
Samples that exceed the standard are reviewed in senior
staff meetings. Field staff issue citations per regulations and
follow up to ensure the mine addresses the cause to avoid
future exceedances. And to compel compliance we have not
hesitated to issue 104(b) withdrawal orders.
In addition, in the 2014 Respirable Coal Mine Dust Rule,
MSHA committed to a retrospective study of the dust rule and
last year we issued an RFI seeking comments on how best to
structure that study.
Due to the decades-long latency period between exposure and
disease manifestation, a medically valid study cannot be
completed in the near-term, but MSHA anticipates the study will
confirm that dramatic increases in sampling and compliance
translate into reduced black lung incidents going forward.
In May of 2019 MSHA published an RFI in its regulatory
agenda that includes both coal and metal, nonmetal, quartz, or
silica standards.
In closing, I want to inform the Subcommittee that MSHA is
more vigorously pursuing operators who refuse to pay delinquent
civil penalties. Shortly after I testified last February, we
launched an enhanced Scofflaw Initiative and I am pleased to
report that so far it has accounted for nearly $8 million that
otherwise would not have been collected.
Again, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss MSHA's
important work with you. I look forward to answering any
questions that members of the subcommittee may have.
[The statement of Mr. Zatezalo follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you very much.
I will recognize Miss Brown Barnes for 5 minutes, ma'am.
TESTIMONY OF CINDY S. BROWN BARNES, DIRECTOR, EDUCATION,
WORKFORCE, AND INCOME SECURITY, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY
OFFICE
Ms. BROWN BARNES. Chairwoman Adams, Ranking Member Byrne,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
discuss our part in ongoing work on the Black Lung Disability
Trust Fund solvency and the Department of Labor's, or DoL's,
oversight of the program.
The Black Lung benefits program helps miners who have been
totally disabled due to black lung disease. Coal companies
found liable or the Trust Fund pays these benefits. The Trust
Fund may pay if, for example, a company goes bankrupt. A
domestic coal tax is the Trust Fund's primary funding source.
Today I will discuss, one, the future insolvency of the
Trust Fund given the coal tax decrease and declining coal
production, and, two, provide preliminary observations
regarding DoL's oversight given recent coal company
bankruptcies.
Last year we reported that multiple factors have challenged
the finances of the Trust Fund since it was established about
40 years ago. Its expenses have consistently exceeded its
revenues, interest payments have grown, and actions taken that
were expected to improve Trust Fund finances did not completely
address this debt. As a result the Trust Fund has borrowed from
the Treasury almost every year since 1979. This caused debt and
interest to accumulate.
Trust fund revenue will further be challenged by the 55
percent coal tax decrease that took effect this year and by
declining coal production into the future.
We did simulations that demonstrate that future Trust Fund
revenue may not be sufficient to cover beneficiary payments and
administrative costs through 2050. For example, we simulated
that Trust Fund revenues for this year would be $187 million
less than last year due to the coal tax decrease. As a result,
the Trust Fund will need to continue borrowing from the
Treasury to cover its expenses. When this occurs, the Federal
Government is essentially borrowing from itself and from the
general taxpayer to finance benefit payments to coal miners
with black lung disease.
As you can see in the figure, by 2050 our simulation shows
that outstanding debt could exceed $15 billion. Even if the
black lung program stopped paying all beneficiaries this year,
the debt could still be over $6 billion by 2050 using the
current coal tax rate. However, various options, such as
adjusting the coal tax and forgiving interest or debt, could
reduce future borrowing and improve the Trust Fund's financial
position.
Our preliminary observations indicate that Trust Fund
finances have been further strained by coal operator
bankruptcies. Since 2014 insolvent coal miner companies have
cost the Trust Fund over $300 million. Federal law charges the
DoL with ensuring that coal companies have insurance to secure
their black lung benefit liabilities. To do so companies can
ensure, meaning they must obtain acceptable collateral in an
amount deemed adequate by DoL to secure their liability. As you
can see in the table, since 2014 there have been three
bankruptcies of large self-insured coal operators that have
resulted in substantial losses to the Trust Fund. For example,
the collateral DoL required from Alpha Natural Resources was
just $12 million, although the estimated liability was about
$207 million. As a result, an estimated 685 beneficiaries will
be added to the Trust Fund with an estimated loss of nearly
$185 million. There are 22 remaining coal operators that DoL
has authorized to self-insure and many of these pose a
financial risk to the Trust Fund.
Our preliminary analysis indicates that DoL did not
regularly review these operators so that they could adjust
collateral as needed to protect the Trust Fund. For 10 of these
companies the last review occurred between 16 and 31 years ago.
For 11 of these companies DoL has no estimate of their black
lung liability. For companies that DoL did have liability
estimates for, in some cases the collateral was tens of
millions less than their estimated liability.
In 2015, DoL stopped monitoring these self-insured coal
companies. Over the past 4 years, DoL has been developing new
procedures for regulating self-insurance, but these procedures
have not yet been put into action.
In conclusion, the future solvency of the Trust Fund
remains bleak and DoL's oversight challenges have left the
Trust Fund vulnerable and exposed to additional financial risks
from insolvent coal mine operators without adequate collateral.
Our ongoing work will present opportunities for us to further
examine these issues.
Thank you. This concludes my prepared statement and I would
be happy to entertain any questions.
[The statement of Ms. Brown Barnes follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you very much.
Under Committee Rule 8, we will now question witnesses
under the 5 minute rule.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Dr. Howard, in 1974 NIOSH recommended reducing the
permissible exposure limit for silica to 50 milligrams per
cubic meter from 100 milligrams. Is that still the position?
Dr. HOWARD. Yes.
Chairwoman ADAMS. So are there any credible policy
justifications for reducing the standard at OSHA, as was done
in 2016? What is your response to that?
Dr. HOWARD. We stand by our recommendations that were made
many years ago. We were very fortunate that OSHA finally
accepted our recommendations and issued a silica rule. And we
work closely with MSHA if they so choose to develop a silica
rule.
Chairwoman ADAMS. So is there excessive risk to miners at
and below the current 100 micrograms per cubic meter threshold?
Dr. HOWARD. We certainly believe that any exposure to
quartz is not a healthful thing.
Chairwoman ADAMS. So what about 50?
Dr. HOWARD. Yes, ma'am. Yes.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Okay.
Mr. Secretary, what about that? Is there any good reason
why OSHA should have one silica standard and MSHA should have
another that is half as protective?
Mr. ZATEZALO. Well, Madam Chairman, the laws are very
different. While OSHA's silica standard, for those of you that
are familiar with it, recognizes the use of personal protective
equipment, or PPE, MSHA's specifically does not allow it for
any terms of compliance. And additionally, the average
micrograms per cubic meter has been at just slightly over 25
micrograms. The standard is at 100 as it has been from the
inception of this legislation. The biggest issue in here is the
prohibition against counting personal protective equipment.
Chairwoman ADAMS. So are miners--
Mr. ZATEZALO. So OSHA--what I am trying to say is that
OSHA's standard, while it is lower, is achieved through the use
of PPE. MSHA's standard is not allowed to count PPE.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Okay. So are miners somehow less
susceptible to silica related disease than construction
workers?
Mr. ZATEZALO. I am sorry?
Chairwoman ADAMS. Are miners less susceptible to silica
related disease than construction workers?
Mr. ZATEZALO. They are not, and that is exactly why we
enforce that law very regularly, very rigidly. We are up 80
percent on quartz inspections and quartz sampling in the last
10 years. And I will tell you that every quartz sample is taken
by MSHA, not by the industry.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Okay. You have been quoted in the past as
saying that PMF cases are clearly silica problems, and other
times you said that you don't think the science of causation is
well-defined. Which is it?
Mr. ZATEZALO. I think PMF problems are largely contributed
to by quartz, of which silica is a component. Silica is a
component of quartz. What we actually measure is quartz.
Chairwoman ADAMS. So, okay.
Dr. Howard, do you agree with the Assistant Secretary's
statement? What is your view?
Dr. HOWARD. Well, I have said that in my testimony that
quartz is the most common form of crystalline silica.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Okay. Well, thank you very much.
I am going to now recognize the Ranking Member for the
purpose of questioning the witnesses.
You are recognized, Mr. Byrne.
Mr. BYRNE. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Secretary Zatezalo, I am glad to see you are moving forward
with a formal request for information on respirable crystalline
silica. As we have discussed here today, the National Institute
of Occupational Safety and Health is working on an end of shift
measuring device, and there is additional research under way,
on advanced lung diseases related to mine activities. What type
of information from the public do you hope to gain in the
request for information?
Mr. ZATEZALO. What I hope to gain from the public in this
RFI is some alternative means of using PPE to achieve a lower
compliance rate. Or, I am sorry, a lower threshold rate. The
people who make air stream helmets have now discontinued that.
I can tell you of mines today that are using air stream helmets
voluntarily that in the future will not be able to. There are a
number of different PPE providers, some of which we have been
aware of, some of which we have not.
So it is really the science of PPE and its current state is
very critical to achieving a lower standard as we go forward in
the future. As Cecil Roberts stated, not all miners can easily
wear PPE, depending on their job. So it is important that we
actually have some good definition around that.
What I hope to achieve in that is the segregation of a
quartz standard, as well as current information to enable us to
make informed decisions. And we have released that on May 22.
Mr. BYRNE. As we heard from Mr. Roberts earlier, there is
real concern about the issue of tampering with dust samples. As
MSHA is tasked with enforcing the laws and regulations
impacting mining operations, how does MSHA currently ensure
there is no tampering with the data collected from continuous
personal dust monitors?
Mr. ZATEZALO. CPTMs offer a lot of tamper-proof
improvements. For example, if the unit sits still too long, if
it is hung somewhere its functionality is obviated. It
immediately voids the sample. So it is very good from that
aspect. It can't be moved out of the way completely.
The second thing that we do is that data is transmitted
electronically from the unit directly to MSHA. So there is no
interpretation, there is no interference.
And, thirdly, one of the more important things is that
those units give people, machine operators, and miners real-
time data on what they are actually exposed to. And this is
critical to them being able to make adjustments in how they cut
and how they work throughout the shift.
Mr. BYRNE. You note in your testimony that the agency
recently examined injury and fatality data to determine the
most common causes of mining fatalities. Can you expand on the
findings in this area and the ongoing initiatives MSHA has
launched as a result?
Mr. ZATEZALO. Certainly, sir. The most common cause of
mining fatalities has been power haulage for the past several
years. Power haulage is especially onerous and it is one of
those events that whereas it is very low probability, it is
very high consequence. These large pieces of equipment are very
unforgiving when you collide with them or when you have an
interaction with them.
So we did an RFI to make sure that we knew what all the
best technologies were out there, because our laws are very
archaic in this regard, in that we essentially require when a
big truck goes into reverse that it emits a beep, beep, beep
sound and that is it. And that has not I don't think changed
since 1974-ish. And I could be wrong on that. Maybe it was '72,
but I think it was '74.
There are new technologies out there today, such as
proximity detection, such as alarms, sensors on your vehicles,
such as cameras, that enable operators to actually see what is
going on around them. That is the largest single cause and that
is what we are addressing.
Some other things that we had last year, we had a very
severe rash of fire incidents on large pieces of equipment.
Those incidents provoked us to go ahead and do a complete
inspection of all trucks in the mining industry. We inspected
over 4,000 trucks and went through all the fire suppression on
those, worked with operators to make sure that they were up to
speed. Several of them had been installed incorrectly. So we
are trying to do that in a lot of ways. There is a compliance
assistance program to make sure that people actually can
benefit from what we are doing rather than just receive
citations.
Mr. BYRNE. Thank you.
I yield back, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you very much.
I will now yield to the gentleman from California, Mr.
Takano for 5 minutes, sir.
Mr. TAKANO. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to our
witnesses for coming to this hearing today as we work towards
ensuring safety standards for miners.
As we all know, progressive massive fibrosis is a
debilitating and deadly disease. The levels of this disease
have increased over the past 25 years and do not show signs of
abating. This is a health epidemic and we need to act now. We
have got convincing scientific evidence to indicate that. The
lives of miners are at stake. We cannot wait another decade to
address silica exposure. We already have the data and
information available to us now.
Assistant Secretary Zatezalo, when you were before this
committee in 2018 you stated that you were waiting for a report
from the National Academy of Sciences and that report was
released a year ago. Please explain to members of this
committee and to the miners that MSHA is charged with
protecting why you have not updated the standards.
Mr. ZATEZALO. We have not updated the standards, sir,
because when I took this oath of office to come in here, I
promised that I would obey the laws, and part of them include
the Administrative Procedures Act, sir.
Mr. TAKANO. What does that have to do--you said that you
would--you would--after receiving the National Academy of
Sciences report--that was the key thing you were waiting for.
Mr. ZATEZALO. We--we are--we are--
Mr. TAKANO. What is this--
Mr. TAKANO.--working on the National Academy of Sciences
report, along with NIOSH and we have worked tirelessly on it
since we began. We have increased our sampling, we have lowered
the average exposure, and we continue to do that every day.
However, sir, I do have--
Mr. TAKANO. Well, we will get more--
Mr. ZATEZALO.--procedures I have to--
Mr. TAKANO.--into what that report says. I am reclaiming my
time, sir.
You know, you said that you were collecting data on quartz
and not silica. Dr. Howard, explain the difference between
quartz and silica to me.
Dr. HOWARD. Well, I am not a mineralogist, but silica,
crystalline silica is the most common form of quartz we find in
a coal mine.
Mr. TAKANO. So saying that he was collecting silica quartz
samples and not silica seems to me a distinction that doesn't
make a difference.
Dr. HOWARD. Potato, Potato.
Mr. TAKANO. Thank you. Thank you.
I find that testimony, you know, highly, highly deceptive
Mr. Zatezalo.
Mr. ZATEZALO. It is not deceptive at all, sir.
Mr. TAKANO. You think there is a difference between quartz
and silica?
Mr. ZATEZALO. There is a difference between quartz and
silica. Quartz is made up of--quartz is made up of anywhere
from 60-98 percent silica. Quartz and silica are two different
things.
Mr. TAKANO. I see, I see. Okay.
Mr. ZATEZALO. We use--we use measuring quartz--
Mr. TAKANO. Reclaiming my time, reclaiming my time. Sir,
let me ask my next question.
You know, the Mine and Safety and Health Administration is
failing miners. Inspecting underground mines only four times a
year does not help miners. I mean you talk about how you are
inspecting mines. Refusing to implement new technology does not
help miners. The slow walking and delaying of updating
standards does absolutely nothing to help miners. We are out of
time. MSHA needs to address the standards now.
Over a year ago the National Academy of Sciences
recommended the use of end of shift silica monitoring
technology, and Dr. Howard just described their development of
affordable technology that enables mines to conduct end of
shift monitoring of miners' silica exposure. What are your
plans to require that this technology be used?
Mr. ZATEZALO. Sir, that technology is not for compliance
and it will not withstand the scrutiny of a system that has to
be used for compliance and enforcement. It is an engineering
tool, not a compliance tool.
Mr. TAKANO. Okay. Well, let us switch--I want to know--
Mr. ZATEZALO. We do not prevent anyone from using it.
Mr. TAKANO. I want to know if you can explain with all the
work that NIOSH, OSHA, and the National Academy of Sciences and
MSHA have done regarding the hazards of silica over the last 40
years why you are starting the process with a request for
information, the RFI, the earliest baby step of the regulatory
process, rather than going directly to a formal proposal.
Mr. ZATEZALO. It is the process that I understand I am
required to follow, sir.
Mr. TAKANO. It is my understanding that you don't have to
start with an RFI, that you could go directly to a formal
proposal given all the information we already have.
Mr. ZATEZALO. Given that the average exposure is already
half of what OSHA's limit is, it would seem to me that an
emergency standard would be uncalled for.
Mr. TAKANO. Okay. All right. Well, I--it is a--I think that
we have an ample amount of information already as I cited.
Should Congress amend the Act to make a knowing violation
of mandatory safety and health standard, which recklessly
endangers the health of a--or safety of a miner a felony?
Mr. ZATEZALO. I do not understand your question.
Mr. TAKANO. Should Congress amend the Mine Act to make a
knowing violation of a mandatory safety and health standard,
which recklessly endangers the health or safety of a miner, a
felony?
Mr. ZATEZALO. As I have said to you last year, sir, that is
Congress' discretion.
Mr. TAKANO. Today, as you know, it is a mere misdemeanor.
Would that deter such conduct as we saw in the Upper Big Branch
mine where 29 miners were killed on April 5, 2010.
Mr. ZATEZALO. Difficult for me to say that, sir.
Mr. TAKANO. All right.
Well, thank you very much for your testimony. I yield back.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you very much.
The gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Cline is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. CLINE. Thank you, Madam Chair. I thank the witnesses
for being here.
The mining industry contributes greatly to our economy and
to our energy security, and as we know, miners have made many
sacrifices and it is important that we support them. Industry
has been making changes to better protect and monitor the
health of their miners and we should be looking for ways to
further encourage this.
In my home district, Washington and Lee School of Law has
an advanced administrative litigation clinic for black lung.
This clinic assists coal miners and survivors who are pursuing
Federal Black Lung benefits. The clinic has represented roughly
200 clients since being established in 1996 and has a success
rate of five times the national average. I am glad my district
and this committee are putting a focus on ways to better
protect miners.
I would first begin by asking Mr. Watzman, can you speak to
the technologies that are being used to better monitor dust?
Oh, I am sorry. Assistant secretary Zatezalo.
Mr. ZATEZALO. Zatezalo.
Mr. CLINE. I apologize.
Mr. ZATEZALO. It is all right.
Mr. CLINE. Can you please speak to the cross-training and
consolidation efforts on the coal mine safety and health
inspectors and the metal and nonmetal mine safety and health
inspectors? As this number of active mines has decreased over
the years, do these changes keep pace with what is needed and
has there been any input from industry on this consolidation?
Mr. ZATEZALO. The crossover inspections that we started
last year, sir, were entered into as a way to allow
inspectors--at inspectors' suggestion--allow inspectors to
spend more time at mines and less traveling in their vehicles.
I told you in my opening testimony that in the first 6 months
it has now saved about 41 percent of the time.
The question with it was really the crossover training. All
of these people who are inspectors in the classic sense, they
are experienced, they know what they are doing, but they need
to brush up on the laws and differences in them. So with that
regard, we put them through a 56 hour program. We went through
it with the union, we did a 24-hour site on site, boots on the
ground together transfers, and it seems to be going very
smoothly from an inspector standpoint and from the operator
standpoint.
Now, we have revised our training, we have taken some
points on board from our crossover inspectors and from our
NCFLL union folks. We have revised that. We are very fortunate
that we have our own Mine Safety and Health Academy, and we put
that training on ourselves. And I think it is going fairly well
right now. We are probably going to do a little wider swath on
that in the future. I will point out to you that we will not
reduce the role of specialists, and we have not crossed over
underground hazardous mines at all. We will not jeopardize
those. What we cross over on is primarily sand and gravel
operations, stone pits, that sort of stuff.
Mr. CLINE. You have gotten a pretty good--as you say, you
have gotten a pretty good feedback on that from the inspectors?
Mr. ZATEZALO. We have good feedback from the inspectors and
we have--I have specifically asked a number of operators about
it. We have had fair to medium impact. I will put it that way.
I am actually going to speak to a group in Indiana in a few
weeks and I am going to ask them those questions again.
Mr. CLINE. Great. Thank you very much.
Mr. ZATEZALO. Thank you.
Mr. CLINE. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you very much.
We will now yield 5 minutes to the gentlelady from
Pennsylvania, Miss Wild.
Ms. WILD. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Greetings and thank you for being here on this, what I
consider to be a very, very important issue.
By way of background, I represent a district in
Pennsylvania and I practiced law for 30-some years and often
saw clients who were victimized by lack of insurance by a party
on the other side or inadequate insurance. So this is something
that causes me a great deal of concern.
Ms. Barnes, you noted that many mine operators are
underinsured for black lung liability. And we know that a group
of mine operators recently filed for bankruptcy and were able
to shift over $300 million of liability to the Black Lung Trust
Fund. All of this is happening while the excise tax rate on
coal that funds the Black Lung Trust Fund was reduced.
In order to avoid purchasing workers' compensation
insurance, mine operators may self-insure if they demonstrate
to the Department of Labor that they have the necessary assets
to cover their black lung liabilities. Am I right about that?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. Yes, that is correct.
Ms. WILD. What documentation does the Department of Labor
require to confirm that mine operators have sufficient assets
to cover such liabilities so that they can self-insure?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. Well, this is what we have been trying to
get a clear answer on as part of our ongoing work. And they are
in the process now of revising those procedures, so we will
have a better answer once we complete our assessment.
Ms. WILD. Well, to date, what kind of documentation has
been required by the Department in order to ensure that a mine
operator can properly cover its liabilities in the event it
chooses to self-insure?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. Yeah, it is--it is varied and it has been
rather sketchy and there has been some difficulty obtaining
that documentation.
Ms. WILD. Okay. Are there any kind of audits done of the
documentation that is provided?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. That is part of what they are trying to
implement currently, to do some audits of that.
Ms. WILD. Okay. Well, as I said, this is--the self-insured
situation has caused me a great deal of concern. In the context
of the recent bankruptcies, particularly Alpha Natural
Resources, do you think the Department of Labor was unaware of
the disproportionate lack of reserves before approving it to
self-insure?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. In terms of whether they were aware or
unaware, one thing that we have noticed is that they have not
been overseeing it and that has been part of the problem,
monitoring it and looking--checking on it periodically to see
what is going on there.
Ms. WILD. So let me just shift to the Assistant Secretary,
if I may, on this same area.
Was the Department of Labor unaware of the disproportionate
lack of reserves before approving Alpha Natural to self-insure?
Mr. ZATEZALO. Ma'am, MSHA has no role in the Federal Black
Lung Trust Fund. It is my understanding that is guaranteed by
the U.S. Treasury. But MSHA actually has no role in the Federal
Black Lung Trust Fund.
Ms. WILD. So if we refuse to raise the excise tax rate back
to its 2008-2018 levels, and if the Black Lung Trust Fund goes
insolvent, the Department of Labor is going to have to borrow
money from the U.S. Treasury. Is that right? Either one of you.
Mr. ZATEZALO. That is the way I understand it.
Ms. WILD. And, Ms. Barnes, is that your understanding?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. Yes, that is correct.
Ms. WILD. So in effect, we would be shifting the cost of
the Black Lung Trust Fund away from the coal operators and to
the taxpayers, right?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. Yes.
Ms. WILD. It is my understanding also that according to SEC
filings, Alpha Natural Resources' CEO pocketed over $20 million
in the 3 years leading up to their bankruptcy. And after the
company exited bankruptcy in 2016 he was paid another $1.8
million in compensation. Is that your understanding as well?
Mr. ZATEZALO. I have no involvement in that, no knowledge
of it.
Ms. WILD. Are you aware of that, Ms. Barnes?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. I was not.
Ms. WILD. That is a pretty outrageous situation, wouldn't
you say?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. That--that is a cause for concern.
Ms. WILD. Thank you. That is all I have.
I yield back.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you.
I want to now recognize the Chair of the Education and
Labor Committee, Mr. Scott, from Virginia. Mr. Scott, you are
recognized.
Mr. SCOTT. Thank you.
Mr. Zatezalo, we sent you several oversight letters about
the situation where Affinity Mine had been put on a pattern of
violation sanctions and even after for serious violations,
including some that involved miners' deaths. And that sanction
was lifted. Our concern was it didn't appear to be consistent
with the statutory requirements that they have complete
inspections without serious violations.
Now, we sent you letters to kind of follow up to see what
had happened and we got responses, and I want to thank you for
the responses, but it didn't address the point we were trying
to get to, and that is how Affinity Mines could have been
relieved from sanctions.
And so I am asking you if we can get emails, memos, leading
up to the decision to remove Affinity Mine from the POV,
communications with external parties leading up to the
decision, and a list of meetings and copies of meetings or
memos summarizing meetings between MSHA and Pocahontas Coal,
the owner of Affinity Mines, regarding that decision.
Would that be a problem in getting that information from
you?
Mr. ZATEZALO. Sir, I believe that you are aware that has
been--that is the subject of a lawsuit between--that the UMWA
filed on us that is currently open in the fourth--in the
District Court in southern West Virginia.
We have sent to you, I believe, a 52 page response and I
think a 32--I am not completely--
Mr. SCOTT. I appreciate the response, but--
Mr. ZATEZALO. And further information--I will be happy to
make available to you any information that we file with the
Court. As such, sir, we are represented by the Department of
Justice and we will be happy to provide you everything that we
file with the Court.
Mr. SCOTT. And that is what we got was just court filings
and now copies of emails and other things that could have
helped us understand how they got relieved of those sanctions.
Mr. ZATEZALO. It is under litigation, sir. I am sorry that
I can't speak to you more frankly about it.
Mr. SCOTT. I understand. But we would like to get that
information.
Mr. Howard, we have heard about the difference between OSHA
and MSHA on the silica standard. When was the silica standard
first recommended by NIOSH?
Dr. HOWARD. Oh, I think it was 42 or 43 years ago, sometime
in the early '70s.
Mr. SCOTT. And finally in 2016 OSHA adopted that standard?
Dr. HOWARD. Yes. As the former secretary of labor said,
better late than never.
Mr. SCOTT. Well, is there any reason why MSHA cannot
implement the same standard?
Dr. HOWARD. Well, I don't speak for MSHA, sir.
Mr. SCOTT. Well, you have recommended it to--for MSHA?
Dr. HOWARD. Sir, I have made a recommendation to that
effect.
Mr. SCOTT. And you mentioned a monitor of retired mine
workers?
Dr. HOWARD. I did.
Mr. SCOTT. What did you mean there?
Dr. HOWARD. Sir, as you well know--and it is not just the
mining industry, but in any hazardous industry where there are
exposures that occur that could result in adverse health
effects, often times the workers will leave the workforce and
we lose the ability--although if we do a special study of
retired workers--but we often lose the ability to follow up in
these long latency diseases in which the manifestations or the
severity of the manifestations may not occur while the
individual is employed. And then they go and they leave and we
lose track of following the full picture, characteristics of
the disease.
So I think one of the recommendations that we think is
appropriate is to look at the medical surveillance, not just of
the worker who is working, but rather to follow them in
retirement, or in an abrupt type of retirement where they have
to leave because of illness.
Mr. SCOTT. Thank you.
Ms. Brown Barnes, the Ranking Member had expressed concerns
about the jurisdictional matters and whether we have
jurisdiction over the tax, but the fact of the matter is, if
the foreign trust fund goes broke or doesn't have sufficient
funds, that the general fund of the U.S. government will pay
the benefits. Is that right?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. SCOTT. And the problem is if the money is not there and
we don't--and we stop appropriating the money, then the workers
may be without benefits.
Who estimates the amount that the mine owners have to put
up as collateral?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. The Department of Labor does that, the
OWCP.
Mr. SCOTT. And as your written testimony points out,
several of those businesses are putting up way under 10 percent
of what the expected liability is. Is that right?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. Yes.
Mr. SCOTT. Do you have an estimate about how much potential
underfunding there is?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. I don't have a complete estimate because
the Department doesn't have an estimate. But we know from at
least our preliminary work that it is at least tens of millions
of dollars.
Mr. SCOTT. Tens of?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. Millions.
Mr. SCOTT. Millions or billions?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. Millions.
Mr. SCOTT. Okay. Now, but there are a lot of businesses,
many businesses for which you had no estimate at all for their
potential liability. Is that right?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. Yes.
Mr. SCOTT. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you very much.
Okay. We are going to hear now from Mr. Griffin of
Virginia. You have 5 minutes, sir.
Mr. GRIFFIN. Thank you very much; appreciate it. And as I
indicated earlier, I am not normally on this committee and I am
very appreciative of the committee for allowing me to
participate.
Let us pick up with the Fund, since that is where Chairman
Scott ended.
You indicated in your testimony that if we had no more
claims, the debt would continue to rise on this, and that is
because of old debt and interest payments. Is that correct?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. GRIFFIN. And you also said that one of the things we
might be able to do--because a lot of the companies that were
responsible did go bankrupt--one of the things you indicated we
might be able to do would be to forgive interest or part of the
debt. That might help stabilize the Fund as well. Is that
correct?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. Yeah. We did present options in our work
from last year and it did have some of those considerations
that we laid out.
Mr. GRIFFIN. Because one of the things that my current coal
operators tell me is that if they just had to pay for the
responsibilities of what they had now, as opposed to paying for
the mining companies that are no longer around, they believe
that a reasonable number could be achieved and reached without
a whole lot of gnashing of teeth and wailing going on. Do you
concur in that opinion, or do you have no opinion?
Ms. BROWN BARNES. It depends. And it depends on the
underlying assumptions that is based on.
Mr. GRIFFIN. Okay. And I appreciate that, but I do think it
is something we should continue to work on.
Assistant Secretary, we heard earlier from one of our
miners, and he is still here, and he said something about tape
at one point in his testimony. And I am wondering, you
indicated that the machines measuring the dust and so forth
were better today, but I have had miners tell me, even if they
were not asked to by the company, because they were afraid the
mine might go out of business, they would put tape over the
sensors on the monitors. Does the new equipment have the
ability to thwart those types of efforts?
Mr. ZATEZALO. Yes, sir. The new equipment senses any kind
of tampering, lack of movement, lower than expected dust, and
it will void the sample and communicate that electronically to
the end of the shift.
Mr. GRIFFIN. So if it was lower than expected, would that
be--how is that measured? Is that measured real-time or is over
like every hour?
Mr. ZATEZALO. Well, if you put--it is in real-time, it is a
continuous monitor. It provides, you know--and I am going to
tell you, NIOSH did a great job getting this developed and out
there and I hope they're successful with the quartz monitor.
But--
Mr. GRIFFIN. All right.
Mr. ZATEZALO.--the machine senses when somebody is trying
to tamper with it and it will void itself if it senses that.
Mr. GRIFFIN. All right.
Mr. ZATEZALO. And we also sample with a parallel system,
sir, that is a gravimetric system. Our samples are not tampered
with by anybody, they are under the supervision of MSHA.
Mr. GRIFFIN. All right. So we have gotten into this whole
controversy over OSHA standards, NIOSH, and MSHA. And you
indicated earlier that you all could not count the same way as
OSHA does because you weren't allowed to count PPEs as being
equipment that could be used. Why is that and how do I fix it?
Mr. ZATEZALO. It is a nuance, sir, of the mining law. PPE
is not allowed to count towards compliance.
Mr. GRIFFIN. So what you are saying to me is get a bill. Am
I correct in that?
Mr. ZATEZALO. Yes, sir.
Mr. GRIFFIN. All right.
Mr. ZATEZALO. There are people that use PPE, but it does
not count towards their compliance.
Mr. GRIFFIN. All right. And then is there something we need
to do to get more technology on the PPEs? Because if it is too
cumbersome to wear in certain parts of the mine, got to be ways
that we can make it less cumbersome with our space age
technology.
Mr. ZATEZALO. I think there is and that is why we are out
for an RFI on that very subject.
Mr. GRIFFIN. Okay. And explain that to me, what are you
doing in the RFI on that subject?
Mr. ZATEZALO. An RFI is just a request for information--
Mr. GRIFFIN. Yes, sir, I know, but what are you doing on
it? What--
Mr. ZATEZALO.--from all the providers. We are gathering
information from all the providers and we will see if there are
acceptable ways we can go about this.
Mr. GRIFFIN. Because it would seem to me we ought to be
able to make that a much simpler process. And, as I said
before, you know, we have got the silica problem we know about,
we have got the coal we know about, but there is also--every
mountain is a little different and we have got different
substances out there. And instead of trying to chase the
different substances, it seems to me if we give clean air to
the miners, we are solving a lot of problems and maybe even
reducing costs over time. Do you agree?
Mr. ZATEZALO. I think that is correct and I think that it
has been a wonderful thing that has been shown about CPDM is
that when you get that information on their actual exposures
into the hands of the operators and the people that are
actually there running machinery and doing the work, they will
manage that correctly. That is why we are plus 99 percent
compliant, sir.
So I think anytime, to the extent that people are educated
on that and that people have the immediacy of feedback, I think
they will manage that process very well.
Mr. GRIFFIN. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Chairwoman ADAMS. Thank you.
I want to yield now 5 minutes to Dr. Foxx of North
Carolina, who is Ranking Member from the committee.
Mrs. FOXX. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today.
Assistant Secretary Zatezalo, can you explain the
difference between the primary functions and mission of your
agency, the Mine Safety and Health Administration, and the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health?
Additionally, how do the agencies currently collaborate? And
how do you think they could better work together in the future
on eliminating black lung disease?
Mr. ZATEZALO. Yes, ma'am, thank you.
We are two disparate agencies. The MSHA agency is primarily
enforcement, education. Those are our primary goals. We also
have a tech support arm that does a lot of our laboratory work.
NIOSH, on the other hand--and Dr. Howard may wish to
clarify this--NIOSH is sort of the R&D side. MSHA does not do
R&D. We do not develop technologies. That is all done through
NIOSH. And we collaborate very well together. I have been to
NIOSH's facilities, they have been to ours, we meet frequently.
Several of his people are here with us today. I think our
working relationship is very good and I think we share a lot of
commonality in goals.
So I will ask Dr. Howard if he would care to add anything
to that.
Dr. HOWARD. Certainly I would echo that. I think our
collaboration is excellent, I thank the Assistant Secretary for
his enthusiasm to work with us. I think we work really well
together, both on the leadership level as well as the staff
level.
Mrs. FOXX. Well, thank you both.
Again, Assistant Secretary Zatezalo, the last time you
appeared before the Committee you indicated you were working on
visiting all of your agency's field offices, and it is good to
hear today that you were able to accomplish this goal.
What was your biggest takeaway from those visits?
Mr. ZATEZALO. My biggest takeaway is what a great group of
people that we have, what a great bunch we have at MSHA. We
have an--you know, these lung issues are things that we very
much care about. Almost all of MSHA's employees, inspectors and
people in the field, they are all miners, ex-miners. They live
this every day and they live in these communities. And I think
we have a really great group of people. A lot of them would
like to see more frequent communication. Several of them have
complained to me about specific things and I have tried to
alleviate those where we could.
But I guess the--you know, what I was most impressed with
was what a great group of serious people we have, how dedicated
they are.
Mrs. FOXX. Thank you for that.
One more question. I am glad to hear you recognize the
importance and benefits of compliance assistance visits,
especially for smaller mine operators. Under your leadership,
how are you encouraging more operators to take advantage of
this opportunity?
Mr. ZATEZALO. Well, what we are doing is building up our
program in certain areas. Unfortunately, over the years mining
tends to shift around to different parts of the country, and so
we found ourselves with areas where there were a lot of miners
and not enough EFSMS, or our field people on the education
side. We are moving some people in there. We have put some more
people in there and we will--our compliance visits and
compliance sessions last year were up over 8 percent. We
conduct a lot of training, especially on the CPDM. We conduct
all the training for certification on CPDM throughout the
industry. And we just have a lot of people that are out there
hustling, trying to get around as much as they can. The small
mine services group subset has been especially effective and I
am very pleased with what we are seeing out of those groups.
Mrs. FOXX. Thank you, and thank you all again. And thank
you, Madam Chairwoman.
I yield back. Or, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. SCOTT. Thank you. Thank you, Dr. Foxx.
The Chair head was called to vote in the Financial Services
Committee, and so I will close up.
I remind our colleagues that pursuant to committee
practice, materials for submission for the hearing must be
submitted to the committee clerk within 14 days following the
last day of the hearing, preferably in Microsoft Word format.
Materials must address the subject matter of the hearing. Only
a member of the committee or an invited witness may submit
materials for inclusion in the hearing record.
Documents have to be in the form--the record set form.
So I want to thank the witnesses for your participation
today. What we have heard today is extremely valuable. The
members of the committee may have some additional questions for
you and we ask the witnesses to please respond to those in
writing. The hearing record will be held open for 14 days in
order to receive those responses.
I remind my colleagues that pursuant to committee practice,
witness questions for the hearing must be submitted to the
majority committee staff within seven days. The questions
submitted must address the subject matter of the hearing.
I now recognize the distinguished Ranking Member for his
closing statement.
Mr. BYRNE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank you for being
an adequate substitute for Chairwoman Adams.
Mr. SCOTT. Thank you.
Mr. BYRNE. And I want to thank everybody on this panel and
the prior panel. I think we have had an excellent day
discussing these very, very important issues and the
information that you and the previous panel have supplied to us
will be very valuable as the committee makes its decisions
about what, if any, actions we need to take.
But what I would really like to do is address the miners
that are here today and perhaps miners that are looking at us
from other places.
Mining is a very important part of the American economy,
but mining doesn't happen without the people that do it. And
miners are important people because you help drive the American
economy. Now, it is a dangerous thing to mine. We know that.
And what we have been talking about today are things that
perhaps we can do, all of us working together, to make things
safer and healthier for our miners who are so important to our
economy and to our country.
I think everybody up here, regardless of party designation,
cares deeply for what we can do to make sure that we can make
people safe and keep them safe and healthy. That is in
everybody's interest.
I am also worried about preserving jobs in mining. We have
had a real downturn in jobs in mining. In the previous
Administration we almost had a war in a certain area of mining,
in coal mining. And we need to be all about trying to preserve
jobs, not kill jobs.
So I hope that we will be concerned about that too, and
understand just how valuable mining is and has been to America
for generations.
So I take our responsibility very seriously, our
responsibility to you and to future generations of miners. You
will continue to do what you do so very well, and that is a big
part of what makes America great.
So thank you for what you do. We are going to continue to
look out for you and those that follow you, because you are the
most important part of mining.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. SCOTT. Thank you. And I want to thank the witnesses for
providing us with their valuable expertise. I want to thank the
members of the subcommittee for your participation. And I note
the presence and interest of my colleague from Virginia, Mr.
Griffith. Thank you for being with us today.
I think I can speak for all of them and say we have learned
an enormous amount of valuable information from the witnesses
today. We have heard compelling evidence that the most serious
forms of black lung disease are again on the rise. We know what
can be done about it and we know that MSHA should be doing more
to save the lives of our Nation's miners from this terrible,
preventable disease.
We have also heard strong evidence about the growing
indebtedness of the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund and the
Labor Department's failure to oversee the self-insurance
program, shifting more and more of the liability for black lung
disease from the companies that cause the problem to the
taxpayers.
I think we can all agree that the work performed by our
Nation's courageous coal miners should not be cursed by the
scourge of this dreaded occupational disease that we know can
be prevented. They deserve safe working conditions and a long,
healthy retirement.
I finally ask unanimous consent to insert into the record a
letter from the United Mine Workers of America and the United
Steel Workers of America to the Assistant Secretary of Labor,
and correspondence to and from the Assistant Secretary in
request to information about the Pocahontas Coal Company
Affinity Mine being relieved of its sanction under the--
relieved of their sanctions. We will pursue that, Mr. Zatezalo,
and to get better answers than we have gotten. If there is no
further business, without objection, the committee stands
adjourned.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mine Safety and Health Administration: https://
www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CPRT-116HPRT40937/pdf/CPRT-
116HPRT40937.pdf
[Questions submitted for the record and their responses
follow:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
If there is no further business, without objection, the
committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:53 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]