- In the Best Interest of the Child: Best Practices for Keeping Families Safely Together
[Joint House and Senate Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
115th Congress
Printed for the use of the
2nd Session
Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
_____________________________________________________________________________
In the Best Interest of the Child:
Best Practices for Keeping
Families Safely Together
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
DECEMBER 14, 2018
Briefing of the
Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
_____________________________________________________________________________
Washington: 2019
Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
234 Ford House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515
202-225-1901
[email protected]
http://www.csce.gov
@HelsinkiComm
Legislative Branch Commissioners
HOUSE
SENATE
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi,
Co-Chairman
Chairman
ALCEE L. HASTINGS, Florida
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN. Maryland
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
MARCO RUBIO, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
JEANNE SHAHEEN, New Hampshire
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
THOM TILLIS, North Carolina
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
TOM UDALL, New Mexico
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
Executive Branch Commissioners
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
[II]
ABOUT THE ORGANIZATION FOR SECURITY AND COOPERATION IN EUROPE
The Helsinki process, formally titled the Conference on Security
and Cooperation in Europe, traces its origin to the signing of the
Helsinki Final Act in Finland on August 1, 1975, by the leaders of 33
European countries, the United States and Canada. As of January 1,
1995, the Helsinki process was renamed the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The membership of the OSCE has
expanded to 56 participating States, reflecting the breakup of the
Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia.
The OSCE Secretariat is in Vienna, Austria, where weekly meetings
of the participating States' permanent representatives are held. In
addition, specialized seminars and meetings are convened in various
locations. Periodic consultations are held among Senior Officials,
Ministers and Heads of State or Government.
Although the OSCE continues to engage in standard setting in the
fields of military security, economic and environmental cooperation,
and human rights and humanitarian concerns, the Organization is
primarily focused on initiatives designed to prevent, manage and
resolve conflict within and among the participating States. The
Organization deploys numerous missions and field activities located in
Southeastern and Eastern Europe, the Caucasus, and Central Asia. The
website of the OSCE is: .
ABOUT THE ORGANIZATION FOR SECURITY AND COOPERATION IN EUROPE
The Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe, also known as
the Helsinki Commission, is a U.S. Government agency created in 1976 to
monitor and encourage compliance by the participating States with their
OSCE commitments, with a particular emphasis on human rights.
The Commission consists of nine members from the United States
Senate, nine members from the House of Representatives, and one member
each from the Departments of State, Defense and Commerce. The positions
of Chair and Co-Chair rotate between the Senate and House every two
years, when a new Congress convenes. A professional staff assists the
Commissioners in their work.
In fulfilling its mandate, the Commission gathers and disseminates
relevant information to the U.S. Congress and the public by convening
hearings, issuing reports that reflect the views of Members of the
Commission and/or its staff, and providing details about the activities
of the Helsinki process and developments in OSCE participating States.
The Commission also contributes to the formulation and execution of
U.S. policy regarding the OSCE, including through Member and staff
participation on U.S. Delegations to OSCE meetings. Members of the
Commission have regular contact with parliamentarians, government
officials, representatives of non-governmental organizations, and
private individuals from participating States. The website of the
Commission is: .
In the Best Interest of the Child:
Best Practices for Keeping
Families Safely Together
_________
December 14, 2018
Page
PARTICIPANTS
Allison Hollabaugh Parker, General Counsel, Commission on
Security and Cooperation in Europe.......................
1
Maridel Sandberg, President and Executive Director, Together
for Good ...................................................
3
Jessica Foster, Executive Director of Strategic Partnerships,
Youth Villages .............................................
4
Christine Calpin, Managing Director for Public Policy, Casey
Family Programs ............................................
7
[IV]
In the Best Interest of the Child:
Best Practices for Keeping
Families Safely Together
----------
December 14, 2018
Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
Washington, DC
The briefing was held at 10:30 a.m. in room G-11, Dirksen Senate
Office Building, Washington, DC, Allison Hollabaugh Parker, General
Counsel, Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe, presiding.
Panelists present: Allison Hollabaugh Parker, General Counsel,
Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe; Maridel Sandberg,
President and Executive Director, Together for Good; Jessica Foster,
Executive Director of Strategic Partnerships, Youth Villages; and
Christine Calpin, Managing Director for Public Policy, Casey Family
Programs.
Ms. Parker. Good morning. On behalf of Chairman Roger Wicker and
Co-Chairman Chris Smith, I would like to welcome you to this briefing
of the Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe, also known as
the Helsinki Commission. My name is Allison Hollabaugh Parker. I'm
general counsel at the Commission. We are a bicameral, bipartisan,
independent Federal commission devoted to the promotion of human
rights, military security, and economic cooperation in the 57
participating States of the Organization of Security and Cooperation in
Europe. These states are composed of countries from North America,
Europe, and Eurasia.
The OSCE has a few commitments touching on our topic today. Some of
those commitments regard parental rights, primarily the right of
parents to direct the moral and religious education of their children
and to bring the children up in the culture of the parents. This comes
from the Vienna Declaration of the OSCE in 1989. OSCE commitments also
generally reaffirm the right to protection of private and family life,
which will be subject only to such restrictions as are prescribed by
law and are consistent with internationally recognized human rights
standards.
Some international human rights standards, to which most of the
OSCE participating States are subject, arguably allow broad state
interventions in families based on the state's conception of the best
interest of the child. For instance, in Sweden and Germany, State
education rather than home education by parents is believed to be in
the best interest of the child. These states believe it is better to
remove a child from its biological parents, rather than let the child
be educated at home. Other participating states, such as Norway,
regularly remove children from their homes because the parents, quote,
``lack parenting skills.'' Norway has an extremely high level of
children being removed from their parents, especially immigrant parents
living in Norway, even where there has been no evidence of violence or
drug abuse in the family.
Between 2008 and 2014, Norway doubled the number of children being
put into emergency care. The most common reason for such removals were,
quote, ``lack of parenting skills.'' In 2015, the situation of children
being removed from their parents in Norway was so dire that nearly 300
lawyers, psychologists, and social workers wrote a national notice of
concern to the government of Norway. They said that a long list of
children are exposed to serious failures of understanding and
infringement of their rights by the low level of evidence required for
removing these children from their homes. Several Norwegian families
have received asylum in Poland out of fear that their children would be
taken away in Norway. However, Norway's low threshold for removals was
influenced by a case in 2008 where a child should have been removed
from his home but was not and was subsequently killed by an unsafe
parent in the home.
The United States has also grappled with where the threshold should
be for removal of children from their parents. One major consideration
in this balancing of interests should be the potentially lifelong
suffering and even abuse faced by children who were removed from their
own families, and who remain without permanent families in the foster
care system. The statistics in the United States, for those who have
been removed permanently and not found new permanent families, are
sobering. While foster families can offer critical and timely emergency
care for children in need, studies show that children who stay in
foster care without permanent parents suffer lifelong emotional harms
and life skills underdevelopment. The extreme challenges faced by these
children put them at a high risk for homelessness, unemployment, human
trafficking, and even incarceration. More than 20,000 young people aged
out of foster care in the United States in 2016, deprived of the
support of their own or adoptive permanent families.
These children in the United States and Europe are perhaps saved
from an immediate emergency by government officials seeking to act in
their best interest, but then exposed to the lifelong harm of not
belonging to a functioning forever-family. What if these youths and
their families of origin had been given the support they needed to stay
together--such as mental health services, substance use treatment, in-
home parenting skill training, and supportive community? Today the
commission is hosting a panel of experts on the frontlines of best
practices to preserve families safely together.
Our first speaker this morning is Maridel Sandberg. She is the
president and executive director of Together for Good. She's spent the
last 36 years advocating for vulnerable children around the globe and
protecting social orphans domestically. In her work, she has helped
hundreds of families adopt children, and many others foster. She serves
as a founding board member of the Christian Alliance for Orphans, and
in 2017 launched Together for Good, which grew out of a vision to
better love neighbors based on Isaiah 1:17, ``Learn to do good, seek
justice, correct oppression, bring justice to the fatherless, and plead
the widows' cause.'' Maridel is the mother of eight children, three by
birth and five adopted, ages 15 through 38. Her greatest job is being
called grandma by 16 grandchildren, six of them adopted from the United
States, Ethiopia, and Uganda.
Ms. Sandberg.
Ms. Sandberg. Thank you. Together for Good is a network of
volunteers in the private sector and professional staff that come
alongside parents that are facing crisis and stress, and provide
ongoing social support--practical help--so that families are not left
alone in their time of crisis and children can be safe until stability
is established. We come alongside families in a multitude of ways. We
have crisis hosting of children. Approved families are hosting children
temporarily while parents have a safe option to clarify their issues.
We offer respite care, periodic pre-planned, daytime or overnight care,
to alleviate that parental stress. We want to pursue healthy relational
development.
We all know that everybody needs an extra friend, and so we offer
that once a week, or one time per month, and then also wraparound care
for families--both families that are hosting children, but also
families that are in those crises. Our best work is done in
collaboration with the community at large. Parents are empowered to ask
for help. Parents are empowered to not worry about whether they're
going to lose their children to foster care. Parents voluntarily ask
for help, and we voluntarily provide that help. We uphold and honor and
respect for the God-given role as a parent. And we volunteer to help as
they volunteer to ask for help. We believe that becomes the power for
change.
Just this week, I met with a woman named Yolanda. I said, let's
meet at McDonald's and play on the playground with the kids while we do
paperwork. And as I sat at McDonald's Yolanda said to me, I've never
done this before. And I said, What? She said, I've never sat across the
table with a mom at McDonald's having a Coke. And I said, What do you
mean? And she said, Well, Maridel, I have a professional who comes in
to make sure I take my meds. I have another professional who comes in
to make sure my kids are getting to school. And I have mental health
visits once a week with my therapist. But I don't have a friend like
this.
That's where the community needs to make a difference. Early
intervention, child abuse prevention. We believe that power of
relational support and the fundamental value of family preservation.
Children belong with their parents whenever possible, but sometimes
that's not possible. And then we do engage with the foster care system
and the children protection workers. But early intervention, giving
that opportunity to a family that just needs extra support--who doesn't
need a grandma? Who doesn't need a friend in their life? We all do.
This important work is going to be the change agent because we believe
that people don't know about what's happening in child welfare.
The outside world wants to help, but they don't know how. And so
how do we provide a large net of engagement to say: Faith community,
you have a place at the table here. Be a good neighbor. Love your
neighbor. Be a good friend. Be that person at school who notices the
child in crisis, and approach that mother and offer support. We have
host families that are approved through background check who will
temporarily host children, but also be a good friend to those families.
It's going to take a village. And as I said earlier, the village is
really large. And we're all needed to play a part.
Thank you.
Ms. Parker. Thank you, Ms. Sandberg. I appreciate Together for
Good's approach of standing in the gap between families in need and the
legal aspects of the foster care system, offering that intermediate
space to avoid crisis that would entangle the children in foster care
actually occurs.
Speaking next we have Jessica Foster, executive director of
strategic partnerships for Youth Villages. She works with their
partnering initiatives with a focus on building relationships and
agreements with partners and payers, supporting partners in managing
and operationalizing Youth Village programs, driving YVLifeSet growth
and other services through partners, and achieving the organization's
Federal policy goals.
Before joining Youth Villages in 2011, Foster was at the Boston
Consulting Group, where she supported the strategy and design of
multiple site implementation plans for global corporate merger and
acquisition projects. She evaluated and recommended improvements to
performance management of a large public school district, and developed
government advocacy strategies for a large consumer packaged goods
company.
Ms. Foster is also an alumna of the Hill. She served here as a
legislative aide for Senator Arlen Specter on foster care, adoption,
welfare, economic development, public housing, and nonprofit issues.
She holds an MBA in marketing from Wharton School and a bachelor's
degree in public policy from Brown University.
Ms. Foster.
Ms. Foster. Thank you. I'm going to stay here because I have some
slides. But good morning. Thank you for having me. And thank you
Helsinki Commission for inviting me and my colleagues here also
speaking today. I'm going to share a little bit about just what is
Youth Villages and, more importantly, through the history of Youth
Villages' work with children and families, what are some things that we
have learned to share with folks on the Hill, to share with the field
about what types of interventions and approaches are effective at
keeping children safe and stable in their families and in their
communities.
Youth Villages is a national organization in the U.S. And it's
been--I'm not very educated about what happens outside of the United
States. It was really interesting to hear about Norway and other
countries. And while we have a long way to go in the United States, we
have learned a lot and evolved a lot in the child welfare and foster
care system in the past several decades. Youth Villages was founded in
1986 with the merger of two residential programs. So there was a
program for children who were removed from their home, brought to a
residential facility, treated, and then returned to their home.
Over the 32-year history of Youth Villages as an organization,
through collecting data on the outcomes of how the children and
families that we serve are doing, we learned that a lot of these kids
didn't do very well when they went back home. And that was because you
really need to treat the whole family and serve children in their home
family if you want to have sustainable and lasting change. So with
that, over our history the organization has evolved to have a much more
significant focus on preventing children from being removed from their
homes in the first place. Or if they're removed and taken into custody,
providing them support when they return back to their home and into
their community so that they have a stable return and don't bounce back
and forth into the system.
Youth Villages can't serve every child in America that is at risk
of entering the foster care system. But we do believe that we have
learned from our experience, and through sharing what we have learned
we can have an impact on every child that is in the system in the
United States. This is just a quick snapshot of where Youth Villages
is, the states that we operate in. And as you can see, predominantly
the services being provided by Youth Villages, either by us or by other
public and private agencies that we train in best practices, is interim
family services and older youth services for young people aging out of
foster care.
I want to highlight five tenets of evidentiary family restoration.
That's a term we came up with at Youth Villages. And it was really in
our effort to crystallize what are the key elements of effective
service provision for keeping children safe and stable at home in their
communities. So these are approaches that we would recommend to other
organizations or other countries as they're thinking about how to
protect and preserve families.
The first is treating children and families simultaneously. So as I
mentioned at the beginning, we started as an organization really
treating children separate from their parents in residential programs.
But we learned very quickly through collecting data on outcomes that
the most effective approach is to be treating children and families
simultaneously. So primarily Youth Villages has staff in the field, in
families' homes, sitting on the sofa in the living room with a family
or going to McDonald's with the family--whatever is the most convenient
for the family, the time and location that works for them, to resolve
whatever issues that they may be having.
The next is requiring measurable, positive long-term outcomes.
There are a lot of organizations out there in the United States, and I
imagine internationally, that care a lot about the fate of children.
They don't necessarily know if what they're doing is actually making a
difference and making a sustainable difference. We are very committed
to tracking the outcomes of kids and families we serve up to 2 years
post to when they complete receiving services from us. And we strongly
encourage other organizations and government agencies to look at the
data post-completion of services to really know if what we're investing
public dollars in is making a difference.
The third is sustaining treatment in the community. A lot of
organizations--a lot of service providers require that families come to
them, come to their office. Public agencies require that too. We have a
strong belief in having workers go out into the field and meet children
and families where it is most convenient for them, where they are
comfortable, in their community.
The fourth is using highly intensive clinical protocols. Most of
the children that are in the child welfare and foster care system or at
risk of entering the system have experienced some sort of trauma in
their life, instability in their life that's leading to that
involvement. And it's really critical that the staff that are working
with children and families be trained clinically, be clinically
informed using evidence-based interventions and driving clinical
practice in how they're serving kids and families.
And then the last one is delivering accountability to the families
being served and the funders who are paying for services.
Accountability is something we take very seriously. One way, through
our service models, that we achieve accountability is that we have one
staff that is responsible for the success of the family. So rather than
saying, this person's working on school, this person's working on
housing, this person working on clinical support, we have one person
that builds deep trust and engagement with a family. And they are
trained to address the range of issues that that child and family is
facing and to, as an individual, be responsible for the success of that
family. And we believe that that type of program structure and
organizational structure drives lasting change and requires much less
coordination and time spent sharing information between workers, with
one person who's really dedicated to the success of a child and a
family.
How am I doing on time?
Ms. Parker. Great.
Ms. Foster. Okay. This next slide is just a quick snapshot. And I
took it to share--the takeaway here isn't just what has to happen in a
home with a family to be successful. It's also really how does an
organization have to be structured to be capable of achieving results.
And so not only do you have to have a good program model in place that
is designed to make a difference with kids and families, you have to
have a way of monitoring how that program is being implemented,
particularly if it's being implemented in different locations, and also
to track the outcomes of what is being achieved through those services.
Not only does Youth Villages have a defined program model of how we
work with kids and families, we're measuring how that program is being
implemented on a daily basis. Are workers visiting families? Are they
using intervention? How timely are their sessions? And then we're also
tracking the outcome of those services, and so trying to build an
infrastructure for good in-home family services in another country, not
only looking at what does the program look like, but what are the
agencies implementing that program, and how are they structured to
maintain quality and to track outcomes over time?
Just to give you a quick sense of some of the challenges of the
children that we work with, and these probably translate across country
lines, a range of things--from behavioral challenges, to trauma from
abandonment, different types of abuse, depression, self-esteem, running
away, drug and alcohol abuse, problems with sexual behavior--a range of
issues are what come to us when we're working with children and
families. And it is that clinically informed and individualized model
where a worker is providing very specific interventions to different
children in different families to support them that is critical,
because different kids come with different issues that they need to
work through.
Okay, I'm going to skip through the next couple slides. And what I
really just want to end on is through all of this work that we have
provided over the 32 years of Youth Villages' history, we've
crystallized a number of key principles that need to be in place for an
effective and well-functioning child welfare system. The first, which
is really the theme of this panel today, is that leaders are
philosophically aligned with the need to keep children and families
safely at home in their communities. And that philosophical alignment
from the top around what is the goal is essential. Another is that
children are systematically assessed when they're coming into the
system or being raised anywhere in the system, and that we're assessing
what's really going on. What are the underlying drivers and challenges?
You can't solve a problem until you understand what that
problem is.
The next that's very significant in the United States is
collaboration among agencies. A lot of these children and families
touch different agencies--they're touching the child welfare system,
the juvenile justice system, the education system, the health care
system. How do you share data across agencies and make sure that
there's coordination?
The fourth is community-based providers. Youth Village is a
provider. We contract with public agencies to implement services. But
they're held accountable for high quality and they're also selecting
contracts based on quality, as opposed to just whoever has the lowest-
cost proposal. The fifth is that public dollars are used wisely. The
sixth is that services are clinically informed and effective.
The seventh is that systems are in place to reunite children and
families as quickly as possible. I know Christine is going to be
talking about the Family First Prevention Services Act which has a very
strong program on trying to focus on preventing kids from entering
care. It's also very important to think about how you bring children
back into the community if they have been brought into custody.
And then the last is the importance of supporting young people who
emancipate or age out of a system in the United States. About 20,000
young people annually exit the foster care system having never achieved
a permanent family placement. And so it is a responsibility of us as a
country to help those young people successfully transition to
adulthood, since we failed them in providing them a safe family in
their childhood.
Ms. Parker. Thank you, Ms. Foster. I so appreciate Youth Villages'
focus on treating the whole family and serving the children within the
family to have sustainable change. We all want to see children reunited
with their families, but unless there are programs to help the families
change complicated dynamics that are preventing the child from thriving
it might be a revolving door back into the foster care system.
Up next we have Christine Calpin. She is the managing director of
public policy at Casey Family Programs, where she heads the
foundation's efforts to inform and education Federal policymakers about
the need for comprehensive child welfare finance reform. She also leads
the efforts to improve the child welfare public policy in states across
the United States. Calpin has been working in public policy for 10
years. Most recently she worked as an independent consultant on child
welfare, child care, and family support programs for states and tribes.
Prior to that, she worked for 2 years in the Administration for
Children and Families at the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.
She first served as an associate director of the Child Care Bureau,
and then as an associate commissioner for the Children's Bureau, where
she oversaw a $7.2 billion budget and 130 employees responsible for all
child abuse prevention, foster care, and adoption programs delivered by
state, local and tribal authorities.
Calpin is an alumna of the Hill as well. She has served here as a
congressional staffer--the lead one--for the Income Security and Family
Support Subcommittee of the House Ways and Means Committee. She worked
with Members of Congress there and with others on passing legislation
affecting programs including child welfare, child care, and the
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, also known as TANF, programs.
Ms. Calpin.
Ms. Calpin. Thank you very much. Good morning. My name is Christine
Calpin and I'm the managing director of public policy at Casey Family
Programs. And I'm pleased to be here with my colleagues and welcome the
opportunity today to introduce you to Casey Family Programs and
describe our vision for supporting children and families across the
United States. Founded in 1966 with headquarters in Seattle,
Washington, Casey Family Programs is the nation's largest operating
foundation focused on safely reducing the need for foster care and
building communities of hope for children and families across America.
We work directly with child welfare agencies in all 50 states, the
District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and
directly with 16 American Indian tribal nations to influence long-
lasting improvements to the safety and success of children, families
and communities where they live.
We also work hand-in-hand with birth parents, with foster parents,
and with an alumni of foster care, as we strongly believe their voice
and their stories must be included to inform policy and practice
change. This work, as well as the growing body of research on child
development, brain science, and the significant impact of adverse
childhood experiences has made clear that long-term foster care is not
good for children and families. We need a robust system of supports and
services, and a full continuum of care and for all of our communities
and individuals to work together.
Unfortunately, for the past several decades the Federal child
welfare funding that we've provided has not supported these efforts.
For every $7 available for children in foster care, only $1 was
available to invest in services that prevented the need for foster
care. Because of the national dialog, though, and all of the wonderful
efforts that have been done to date, Congress debated and enacted a
bipartisan and historic policy change regarding how Federal funding can
be used by States and tribes for foster care and child protection.
Known as the Family First Prevention Services Act, or what I'll call
Family First, the president signed this into law in February 2018.
Family First represents a fundamental shift in how the Federal
Government partners with states and tribes in their efforts to support
children and their families. Key facets of this law include unlimited
entitlement funding for states and tribes to support prevention
services for those at-risk children, their families, their parents,
their kin, caregivers, in evidence-based programs that address a number
of the challenges we've discussed today--substance abuse prevention and
treatment, mental health services, and in-home parent skills training.
The law also significantly increases the oversight and ensures that the
placement of children in group care settings is both appropriate and
necessary.
Why? Because we know that children do best in family-like settings.
Children who are raised in congregant care are almost two and a half
times more likely to become delinquent than their peers in foster care.
They have poorer educational outcomes and test scores. They're less
likely to graduate from high school. And they are at greater risk of
further physical abuse when they're placed in group homes. Fortunately,
we've seen a shift in placements resulting in a reduction in congregant
care. But we must continue to do more.
Family First also provides for increased opportunities and supports
for relatives who are the caregivers of their own family members. The
research on kinship foster care tell us that children who cannot remain
with their birth parents are more likely to have stable and safe
childhoods when raised by relatives. But frequently, relative
caregivers have told us that the supports they most often need include
respite care, treatment, financial support, and mental health services
for them, for their individual family members, and for others to really
help them cope. Because of Family First, Federal funding can now
support states in their efforts to allow children to safely remain with
their families and with their family members, while at the same time
continuing to support foster care placements when children absolutely
need this.
Family First makes it clear that our national child and family
wellbeing response systems will not operate as though it's fully
possible to help children without addressing the wellbeing of families
in their communities. We've always known that it's vitally important
that we intervene as early as possible. And Family First, through this
funding, will give states and tribes the ability to target existing
Federal resources in these important ways. It's a monumental shift
toward transforming the way we support families, but we know there's
more work that needs to be done. And we're looking forward to the
ongoing dialog and opportunities to discuss these challenges ahead.
So thank you very much and we look forward to any questions.
Ms. Parker. Thank you, Ms. Calpin. Thank you for Casey Family
Programs' work and Youth Villages' work; it was a huge lift to write
and to get the Family First Prevention Services Act through Congress.
We are eagerly awaiting its full implementation. And that would be my
first question: How are we doing at implementation? It passed in
February. It's been almost a year.
Ms. Calpin. Yes, thank you for the question. It has been almost a
year. A couple of pieces I would point out that I had in my testimony
is when we talk about Family First being such a monumental shift, the
legislation did envision a timeline for supporting states in really
thinking about the new investments. The prevention services that were
identified in the law first become available to states and to tribes on
October 1 of 2019. So we've been aggressively engaged with them and
with the administration in terms of getting the guidance and direction
that's necessary out to states to really think about how this can be a
tool in thinking about a new vision and system for supporting children
and families.
The administration has put a lot of really important direction and
guidance out. We do, however, continue to encourage a lot of community
stakeholders and a lot of other partners to really become involved in
working with their states and helping to envision and think about where
this could go and what could happen. So a lot of exciting direction. A
lot of exciting opportunity. There still remain challenges ahead. And
we're certainly looking for stakeholders and others to become engaged
in helping to really educate on all these new opportunities.
Ms. Parker. You mentioned in your comments that congregant care put
children at a doubled risk for physical abuse and other forms of abuse
and a doubled risk of being delinquent, risk of very low educational
attainment. Congregant care is a smaller form of an orphanage. We moved
away from the orphanage model to congregant care. It still operates
parallel in some cases with foster care in the United States, which is
family based. We're talking about failures of the foster care system
and trying to keep children out of foster care system. Would it also be
wise to fix the foster care system, or is that something that has a
fundamental flaw that can't fully be fixed?
Ms. Calpin. So I'm happy to start, and then would welcome my other
colleagues. Absolutely. I mean, the importance of maintaining the
safety and protection of children is fundamental. And a child
protection system that does that in terms of allowing for appropriate
foster care placements when absolutely necessary is one that we should
support. And we should continue to strive and expect the best quality,
the best care, and the most appropriate settings for these children.
The improvements in foster care, to that end, do need to focus more on
the upfront opportunities we have to do a much better job of
identifying family members and community members who can care for our
children at risk of foster care.
The placement instabilities and the movement of these children out
of your schools and out of their communities just continues to
exacerbate trauma. So there's a lot that needs to be done to improve
foster care. A piece of that, though, also needs to be a much better
understanding and direction toward really understanding what it means
for a child's safety to be at risk, and so what it means for a child to
need foster care. And all of that would help us get to a better place
of serving children in foster care.
Ms. Foster. And I'll just add to that--Youth Villages provide a
full continuum of care in a number of states, from prevention work in
families and also residential programs that do provide care to children
24/7, when they are removed from their families. And I would echo
Christine in saying that there will always be a need for a foster care
system. There will always be children who are serious risk of harm, and
the state needs to come in and provide immediate emergency support to
them. And so we very much agree that there's room for improvement in
supporting bio families, supporting kin families, preventing entry,
making entry into care as short as possible.
But there is absolutely an opportunity, and the Family First Act
addressed this as well, in elevating the quality of those residential
programs, ensuring that high-quality clinical services are being
provided while children are placed in those settings, that those
settings are utilized only when that's really what is necessary for the
child's physical, mental, and behavioral health, and that when that
type of setting isn't necessary for those purposes, children are
returned to a family-based setting. So we certainly believe that this
whole continuum is necessary.
There may very well need to be shifts in sort of where kids are and
how long they're staying in various placements. And the Federal
legislation took a significant stab at shifting how that looks across
the country. But that elevating what is best practice in every single
setting and trying to bring up the quality of care nationally in all
these different types of settings and arrangements will lead to a big
improvement in the system.
Ms. Parker. How receptive have the states been thus far to the
Family First Prevention Services Act? Because each state has--under our
Constitution, states generally have the lead on childcare issues. The
Federal Government backs them up. This is the Federal Government taking
a huge step into what's traditionally been a state area. Are the states
open to this? Are the social welfare societies within the state, are
they excited about it, or is it going to be an education process?
Ms. Calpin. It's both. There is a considerable excitement about
this. We've spent decades in this country with leaders discussing that
the biggest shortcoming that we had in partnering with states in the
protection of children was at the Federal level only starting that
partnership once they removed a child from their family, and not really
recognizing all of their efforts in keeping children in their
communities and supporting efforts to keep them with their families.
That said, doing that requires a robust package of services. Every
child in every family who comes to the attention of child welfare needs
a different response. It shouldn't be a one-size-fits-all approach.
Family First will be an incredible tool for these states. It will
fund evidence-based mental health services. It will fund evidence-based
substance abuse intervention, as well as evidence-based in-home parent
skills training. But some of the families who will come to the
attention of child welfare will need other services. So the excitement
right now is in trying to figure out how best to leverage what Family
First will do but build that into the system of what we know really
helps all the families at the state level. So that requires a lot of
challenges. It requires a lot of framework and planning. States are
very much engaged in this. But at the same time, Family First took a
very important and direct approach to making a policy statement about
the values in this country and the importance of children being with
families.
And the changes to the group policies and the types of placements--
as Jessica's talked about in terms of requiring high-level oversight,
high-level treatment services--basically say that if you place these
children in settings that aren't high quality and aren't appropriate,
you will do that at state cost. That created sort of a challenge,
because the states who may not be as far along as others in having
children in family life settings and who still have a lot of children
in these congregant care placements are wondering financially what this
means. And so seeing the value of prevention in a context of the
ongoing investment they have right now in group homecare has limited
some of the engagement in some state levels.
And so I think the excitement around this needs to really focus on
that this is really the chance to put our dollars where our values are,
and not to think about the goal being child welfare operating as it
currently does. Family First was about trying to say business as usual
is not what we believe works for children and families. And, as you can
imagine, not everyone is as receptive to that as you might like. But I
think everyone is really trying to learn and understand where the
opportunities are and how best to really take steps forward in this
space.
Ms. Parker. So just to talk practicalities, how much time are we
talking about for care for each family? Someone might say, oh, it's
much easier to take the child from the family and put them in care than
it is to fix a broken family system--whether it be the parents or the
extended family. In the experience of Youth Villages and Together for
Good, how long do these families need to have a high level of
concentrated care?
Ms. Foster. Well, I would say that in our experience you can more
economically serve children in families when you prevent them from
entering care in the first place, in terms of how much taxpayer dollars
are going into providing support. So if we are able to intervene before
a child is removed from their home, and work with the whole family,
anywhere from 3 to 6 months, or so, of intensive work in that family's
home can lead to a much more stable situation. Once a child is removed
from the home, first of all, typically the placements that they're in
cost more on a daily basis than they do if you're working with that
family.
And often they get caught up in the system for years. And then if
you want to return them to their biological family--which is the goal
for most children who are in the foster care system, it is eventually
to return to their biological family--the amount of time that family
needs support to stabilize from that return is more time than if you
had just provided services on the front end before bringing them into
the system. So to Christine's point, if we are able to get better, as a
country, at identifying these young people who are imminent risk of
coming into care, and intervening before they come into care, it will
lead to better outcomes, but it will also be a more economical approach
to services and intervention.
Ms. Sandberg. And I think that's where Together for Good, while
we're a brand-new organization and trying to think outside the box in
terms of what is best for children, that time is everything in the
context of a parent feeling empowered to do well. When the gun of
foster care is to their head at all times, it just changes the game in
terms of their ability to change--no one changes based on a gun being
put to their head. You better fix this or else. And so in our work, the
goal of building trust and trusting relationships has been phenomenal.
We've had women who have been in drug and alcohol treatment. Why
would children need to go to foster care just because mom needs
treatment? And so she voluntarily asks for help. And we provide that
hosting experience while she's in treatment. And during that time, the
parent-child relationship is committed and growing, and the services
around professional supervision of that case and our case management
when we're working with the drug treatment and our staff to come
alongside that family, over time trust is built and the family feels
empowered to move forward.
Once we've served kids who are--Child Protection is no longer
involved, and the case is closed, we're dealing with the same sorts of
trauma. And it takes longer. But in short, what's the beautiful thing
that we're doing is really if a child doesn't have to go to foster care
and can be hosted by a private individual, that brings a cost savings
to society as well, right?
Ms. Calpin. Yes. Yes, if I can just add, too. I think one of the
lesser-known facts about our foster care system is that the most likely
outcome for a child who enters foster care is to be reunified with
their parents. And the reunifications tend to happen within about 11
months. Some happen within 2 months. These children are the families
that we're trying to understand most about the opportunities in Family
First, because if you're bringing a child into care for such a short
window of time, after which you're reunifying, did you really need to
even remove that child from their family?
I think the answer's also a lot more complicated, because I think
there's also this perception in our foster care system that children
come into foster care for reasons of physical abuse, sexual abuse, et
cetera, which they do. But the data actually tell us that the largest
percentage of children who are removed are removed for reasons that are
categorized as neglect. And that spans the continuum of housing
stability to truancy at schools. Those are much different responses
that can be very quickly addressed. If we're talking about lack of
housing, again, in a world where housing is not so scarce for our
families, stabilizing housing is a much different response than
addressing abuse challenges for a child.
And so some of this also relates to the ability of understanding
how long a family needs to be formally involved and what is the child
protection system whose responsibilities should be mitigating risk and
safety for that child, versus the importance of making sure that every
family and child is connected in their community. You know, we've
talked a lot about the number of children who in this country,
unfortunately, take their own lives every day. And what we absolutely
do not want is for children to be safely reunified with their families
at home, but in communities where that level of despair also becomes
such an issue.
And so it's such a longer answer than just the notion of a program,
because it specifically beings to think about how we as a country work
with our space to design child protection programs that serve children
as long as necessary, but then make sure--as you said--when you have,
quote, ``closed'' a case, you haven't done that without making sure
there's a connection, or a community partner, or someone there who can
continue to assist that family, because as we all know--we've talked
about the moms in McDonald's, et cetera, we all look for those
supports. We all look for those people who can help us. And that's
something that a child protection system can't create, but that a
community can, right? And that's just going to be so important to our
long-term success.
Ms. Parker. So, Ms. Sandberg, how does Together for Good get
connected with parents and families that may need extra community
support? And how do they help build community for those families?
Ms. Sandberg. Yes. So, in Minnesota, 70 percent of the time when a
call is made to child protection it's screened out, which means then
there's opportunity for a child to fall through the cracks, or a
family. And so we have connections with either public health nurses and
school social workers who are sometimes the very first to notice a
child that's near or a family that's going through a temporary crisis.
But it is just that homelessness crisis. And then identify from there
those referrals that come to us.
So then we do the intake process, and them match them with an
approved family that would host the child temporarily and/or build
those community relationships for that family, becoming more of an
advocate/cheerleader for a family in the hybrid role, if you will, of
opportunity. What we found most exciting is that the community at large
truly does want to help and serve in ways that aren't necessarily about
the foster care system itself. But they see the needs and then are--
given the opportunities, they want to help.
We recruit people just through local churches. So we have teams
built out by accountability. Each church has its own coordinator of
care as well as the staff that oversees our cases. So we have about--
again, we're I think about 40 churches in the Minnesota area that are
willing to help with families in crisis. And each church has its own
coordinator. We monitor and train those people. So we provide that
professional oversight to a mobilization of the community at large,
connecting them with resources and skill sets.
Ms. Parker. So then you professionally screen the volunteer
families that come to you?
Ms. Sandberg. Yes, ma'am. We have a full background check, home
study experience, as well as references and training, especially on the
issues of trauma-informed care and the opportunities to have best
practice in that. It's really important we know.
Ms. Parker. And how long do the families that are referred to you
for assistance--how long do they stay connected with the communities
that you help build for them?
Ms. Sandberg. Now--I mean, it's over years. I mean, people build
relationships that don't really go away. That's been the beautiful
thing. But primarily the child is in care with us an average of about
50 days. So parents--[inaudible ]--that. But, again, during that time
it's continued parent-child visits, parent-child communication every
day. There's not a system separation time. And so parents are empowered
to then put the oxygen mask on first, while their child's safely being
cared for, and over time that relationship builds so there's an extra
adult in their life. Simple things like, what do I do if I run out of
formula in the middle of the night, I have someone to call, right? When
I call you, you're here for that.
So mobilizing people who care has been a really powerful
experience. There are 10 families that are hosting children, but there
are 45 families wrapping around those families, bringing support to the
host family, bringing support to that family in crisis. I mean, one of
the cries in Minnesota has been that foster parents feel unsupported in
terms of extra resources and extra wraparound care, that respite
becomes such a critical piece. And so while we grow this organization,
we've had the opportunity to intersect in meaningful ways in that way
as well to help support foster parents.
Ms. Parker. So you're offering not only families to take the
children in temporarily, but then families to give respite to the
families that have taken the children in temporarily.
Ms. Sandberg. Absolutely. Yes.
Ms. Parker. And do you have enough families coming forward to do
this? They're doing it for free, yes?
Ms. Sandberg. Yes. People volunteer to help. There's no money
exchanged. Which is another highlight for parents, because they truly
can understand, you're not getting paid to take care of my child. And
so that becomes just an opportunity for growth and expansion. People
want to help. And then we provide that extra resource of support.
Someone else is buying the diapers. Someone else is bringing you a
meal. You don't feel so weighted down by the experience of inviting
another person into your home. There's some phenomenal families out
there who truly just want to help if given the opportunity, knowing
then that they're actually building a wall, a hedge, a protection, if
you will, around the family.
Ms. Parker. And now is it different from the foster care system in
the sense of the relationship between the child and their biological
family during the period in which the child is in care?
Ms. Sandberg. Yes, it's really no different than me asking you to
watch my child for 2 weeks while we're away. So we're trying to do
every-day conversations, meeting up for playdates. We try as best
possible in the school systems to keep the kid in the same school, so
those relationships are still in place. In the State of Minnesota this
is allowed, because we have a statute that allows for power of
attorney, so that I have the opportunity to give you power of attorney
even for a temporary period of time, which then gives them the
freedom--that host family--the freedom to act as parent if necessary,
but then also engage mom in meaningful ways in terms of asking her
questions about how she parents and what she thinks is best for her
child.
So that relationship is very critical. And the importance--the
difference becomes when you and I meet and have a conversation, and I'm
going to tell you about my child and--he's allergic to peanut butter
and make sure he uses his nookie at bedtime--it's a whole different
experience than a stranger taking my child away from me, and the fear
that stranger is not caring for my child the way I want. That becomes a
powerful source of then hope, which then creates opportunity to say:
I'm going to wake up tomorrow morning and I'm going to go look for that
housing that seems impossible. So it's been a powerful thing, the story
of hope doing this.
Ms. Parker. Ms. Calpin, in the U.S. foster care system, what is--if
the child goes into official foster care, how does that affect the
parent-child relationship?
Ms. Calpin. Well--and I was as she was speaking about this in terms
of how it's different from foster care--we've talked with birth parents
about their experiences with the system, and what they found was
challenging I characterize as in the child protection system we view
our birth parents as a risk versus a strength. And what that
unfortunately does is really create a huge barrier for that child and
that parent to continue to develop, because I think every child expects
their parent to care for them and to protect them. And so children
can't understand when they're taken away from their parents why their
parents let it happen, right? And so developmentally what it impacts in
terms of a relationship is so hard.
And, again, as we've always said, for child protection reasons
there will be a number of children for whom that removal is necessary.
But the families and the children that Together for Good are serving
are those children where the risk of safety for that child is not one
that warrants removal. And so that allows a child protection system to
really work in a way that it can really think through: Is it best for
the child to remain with this parent? Is there truly a safety issue?
And work with those children where we very strongly and very surely
have safety concerns, because we've not created unnecessary trauma and
unnecessary removals of other children that could be served in a
different way.
And I think that's what we've tried so much to talk about--foster
care is traumatic. And a lot of these children have already suffered
trauma. And we're just continuing to exacerbate that.
And recognizing that we're going to eventually reunify and create
even more challenges has just allowed us to view that as a system we
can't continue to operate in this way.
Ms. Sandberg. And I would highly agree. I mean, there is an
absolute necessary place for child protection to do its work. And our
hope is that if we go upstream far enough, we catch it before it ever
gets to that place. And at the end of the day, numbers are everything
in this game. You can't have too many children coming in that
direction, because we're already overloaded. Our families--foster
families are overloaded themselves, and social workers are extremely
stressed. So we're trying to bear some of that burden upstream in terms
of prevention.
Ms. Calpin. Well, and I'll just--I think this is what we talk
about--is every family, every child deserves a unique approach, right?
And how do we best determine what that approach should be? And in a
system where we're able to really think and respond at different levels
and different tiers, based on engaging with them earlier, I think
that's exciting. And you know, child protection in a system driven by
courts and lawyers and judges. It's intended to be one that really
looks at a system differently than what you're doing in terms of trying
to engage with families in a supportive way. And the goal is to try to
think about how we move our system to better work in both ways.
Ms. Parker. Ms. Foster, you mentioned in your presentation that
Youth Villages does a high level of evaluation for what is working and
what's not working with the families in which you engage. How are you
being connected with your families, first of all? Is it from a call to
child protection services? Is it through schools? Is it in similar ways
as to how Together for Good is connected with families? And then what
are some of the overall statistics that you're seeing, and how has it
changed your approach?
Ms. Foster. Youth Villages finds out or is connected with children
primarily through child welfare agencies--a child welfare agency is
receiving a call about a child being at-risk. And that agency typically
does an initial investigation into the case and decides if it warrants
a higher level of intervention. And then states contract with--or,
counties--contract with Youth Villages, just like other community-based
service providers. And if a child needs a high level of support and
intervention that is beyond the kind of basic visitation that that
public agency provides, they will contract with Youth Villages to
provide services.
So that's typically how we're working. But a child that is in the
foster care system, we also provide services through mental health
Medicaid system. We provide services to older youth aging out of care,
and some of those other cases. Like, with older youth, they may self-
refer into our services. So there's some variety. But what I just
described is typically how we're finding out about a child. And in
terms of--you mentioned how we track outcomes and how that's impacted
the work.
Ms. Parker. And what are some of your outcomes?
Ms. Foster. So pretty early into Youth Villages' history, we
started collecting outcome data on, as I mentioned, at completion of
services, as well as 6, 12, and 24 months post-completion of services
delivered through us--where are the children? Are they at home with
their family? Where are they living? Have they come back into care,
whether it's through us or the child welfare system sent them to some
other placement? How stable are they? What has been their involvement,
if any, with the criminal justice system? Some states have integrated
child welfare and juvenile justice systems. Some states have separated.
So it looks differently in different parts of the United States. And
how are they doing in school?
And so we--as well as a lot of additional data--we capture that
data on all the children and families that we're working with. And that
gives us feedback on how are the services going? And when we initially
made the transition from being dominantly a residential provider to
being primarily in-home services providers, it's because we found out
that when we provide these intensive in-home services, that data looks
a lot better. Kids are much more likely to be safely stable at home
with their families 2 years after we worked with them than if we
provided residential and then that was it, and they got reunited with
their family without any sort of additional support.
We also work with third party research organizations, for instance
MDRC, that will look at not just the data of how children served by us
are faring, but how they're doing compared to a comparison group. So
what the Family First Act requires in terms of prevention services is
that services that receive Federal reimbursement have proven that they
are effective compared to what else that child might get. And typically
that requires a third-party research organization to be collecting that
data, because we have the data on the kids we serve. We don't have the
data on the kids we don't serve. The public agency has that data.
So one other thing that I think is important to take away related
to Family First Act and in general is that the public system, the child
protective system, has a huge, robust amount of data on what services
are being provided to kids, how those kids are doing, how they're doing
today, how they're doing 2 years later. And there is a huge opportunity
now to harness the power of that data for us to really know what is
working and to compare different interventions to each other and how
are kids doing 1, 2, 3 years down the line. And we have a lot of data
as a country. We don't always use that data to capture those insights
of what's really working. So we try to do it as best we can as an
agency, and also work with our public agency partners to capture a
fuller picture of the data about what works.
Ms. Parker. Well, this has been a tremendously encouraging
conversation as we work through different models of how best to care
for children, what is in their best interest. And what I'm hearing from
the panelists is that if they can be kept with the family, that is the
best interest. And we have some new best practices that we've developed
here to make that possible when the families are safe for the children.
Are there any closing remarks that any of the panelists would like
to make?
Ms. Foster. I'll just mention--and I think this has been a theme
today--but families really are the solution. I think, you know, in the
United States back--people have been talking about orphanages and also
talking about Norway and some other countries. And it's very easy to
pass judgment on other families as an outsider. And it's very easy to
pass judgment on other families when you are a government entity or a
private service provider. But almost all parents love their children
and want to do well by their children. And if they are given the
resources, and the skills, and the training to raise children safely,
that is what they want to do.
And so finding a way to empower those families to do what they want
to do anyway--and most kids want to be with their biological families.
They don't want to be taken away. They don't want to be taken away,
even if they're experiencing abuse. And so how do we equip these
families to do what they want to do anyway, instead of passing judgment
on what's happening and immediately traumatizing kids and parents by
removing them.
Ms. Calpin. I would second that. And when we talk with youth in
care, overwhelming when you ask them what you can do to help them, they
would always say: You can help my mom. You know, you could have helped
my mom. You could have served her differently.
That's why we're all so excited about what Congress and the
administration did with Family First, and why this really is a sea
change for states and for communities in how they've served children
and families. And working and really educating yourself on this
opportunity and becoming involved in sort of supporting child welfare
in this new direction is going to be so critical with that.
Ms. Sandberg. And I would echo as well that families are
everything. We are created to need each other and created to be in
relationship with each other. And my call would be to the public at
large and the communities around the country to say, what is your part?
Because this isn't just a government solution. This isn't a
programmatic solution. It's a good neighbor--like, how are we going to
love our neighbors and come alongside them? This isn't just for--
families everywhere in crisis, not just the poor. And maybe this would
do us all some good, to learn to love our neighbors better.
Ms. Parker. Thank you all so much for joining us today with your
incredibly well-informed insights. This briefing will be posted on the
Helsinki Commission website in video form, and there'll be a transcript
up as well. Thank you so much for joining us today. [Applause.]
[Whereupon, at 11:34 a.m., the briefing ended.]
[all]
This is an official publication of the Commission on
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
* * *
This publication is intended to document
developments and trends in participating
States of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
* * *
All Commission publications may be freely reproduced,
in any form, with appropriate credit. The Commission
encourages the widest possible dissemination of its
publications.
* * *
www.csce.gov
@HelsinkiComm
The Commission's Web site provides access
to the latest press releases and reports,
as well as hearings and briefings. Using the
Commission's electronic subscription service, readers are
able to receive press releases, articles, and other
materials by topic or countries of particular interest.
Please subscribe today.