- U.S. CYBER DIPLOMACY IN AN ERA OF GROWING THREATS
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
U.S. CYBER DIPLOMACY IN AN ERA OF
GROWING THREATS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
FEBRUARY 6, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-106
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
28-539 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas
KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama
AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
TED S. YOHO, Florida
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
NORMA J. TORRES, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
Wisconsin
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
Amy Porter, Chief of Staff
Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director
Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
WITNESSES
Mr. Christopher Painter, commissioner, Global Commission for the
Stability of Cyberspace (former Coordinator for Cyber Issues,
U.S. Department of State)......................................
4
Mr. John Miller, vice president for global policy and law,
CYbersecurity, and privacy, Information Technology Industry
Council........................................................
17
Michael Sulmeyer, Ph.D., director, Cyber Security Project, Belfer
Center for Science and International Affairs, John F. Kennedy
School of Government, Harvard University (former Director for
Plans and Operations for Cyber Policy, Office of the Secretary
of Defense, U.S. Department of Defense)........................
35
LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING
Mr. Christopher Painter: Prepared statement......................
7
Mr. John Miller: Prepared statement..............................
19
Michael Sulmeyer, Ph.D.: Prepared statement......................
37
APPENDIX
Hearing notice...................................................
74
Hearing minutes..................................................
75
The Honorable Edward R. Royce, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California, and chairman, Committee on Foreign
Affairs: Material submitted for the record.....................
77
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........
83
Written responses from the witnesses to questions submitted for
the record by the Honorable Ted Lieu, a Representative in
Congress from the State of California..........................
85
U.S. CYBER DIPLOMACY IN AN ERA OF GROWING THREATS
----------
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 6, 2018
House of Representatives,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:09 a.m. in
room 2172, Rayburn, House Office Building, Hon. Ed Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. We will call the hearing to order and ask
all the members to take their seats. This is on U.S. cyber
diplomacy. Cyberattacks and commercial espionage and ransomware
used by foreign governments, used by terrorists, used by
criminals, are a serious threat to our U.S. national security.
They are also a threat to our economic interests around the
globe, of course.
As the intelligence community made clear in the 2017
Worldwide Threat Assessment:
``Our adversaries are becoming more adept at using
cyberspace to threaten our interests and advance their
own. And despite improving our cyber defenses, nearly
all information, communication networks, and systems
will be at risk for years.''
Cyber threats have, of course, real-world impact. And in
2015, Chinese hackers stole the personnel files of 20 million
current and former Federal employees in a massive data breach.
And last year, North Korean hackers crippled hospitals in the
United Kingdom, and they also halted international shipping in
India. Russia exploits cyberspace to attack its neighbors,
including Estonia and Ukraine, and to attempt to undermine
Western democracies, including the United States. Yes, our
military does have some very unique offensive and defensive
capabilities in cyberspace, and other agencies to protect our
critical infrastructure have as well. But it is our diplomats
who work with our allies and partners to develop a common
response to these threats, and they do that while engaging our
adversaries to make clear that cyberattacks resulting in real-
world consequences will be viewed by us as a use of force.
The importance of the State Department's work cannot be
understated. Indeed, the Department's role becomes essential
when you consider that it is not just computer networks and
infrastructure that the United States needs to protect. The
open nature of the Internet is increasingly under assault by
authoritarian regimes, regimes like China, that aggressively
promote a vision of cyber sovereignty. And this vision
emphasizes State control over cyberspace. This, obviously,
could lead to a totalitarian dystopia. It obviously runs
counter to American values of individual and economic liberty.
And we know what that could mean, for example, to the people of
China or other countries.
We saw this recently in Iran. We saw the regime shut down
mobile Internet access, and saw them block and pressure
companies to cut off social media tools that were used by the
people of Iran to organize themselves and to publicize protests
among the people of Iran. Authoritarian regimes would love to
globalize this censorship. And that is the goal here, to
globalize censorship. That is the kind of censorship they have
long-imposed at home, and they would like to entice and empower
authoritarian regimes around the world to do the same thing.
So it falls to our diplomats to help ensure the world
rejects this limited version of cyberspace and that the
American vision of an open, secure, innovative Internet wins
out over George Orwell's premonitions.
Coordination among allies is critical in response to
different undertakings of privacy between--and understandings
between the United States and Europe. The State Department will
work with the Department of Commerce to successfully negotiate
the EU-U.S. privacy shield framework. And this ensures the data
and business continues to flow across the Atlantic. And just
yesterday, this House passed a bill strengthening our cyber
coordination with Ukraine. But there is much more to be done.
And that is why last month, the House passed the Cyber
Diplomacy Act. This bill, which I introduced, ensures that the
State Department has a senior diplomat charged with leading
this effort that brings together our security, human rights,
and economic priorities. And I am encouraged to hear that the
administration has heard our concerns and is working to elevate
this position.
So today, we are joined by three experts with experience in
cyber diplomacy, technology, and defense, including the
Department's former Coordinator for Cyber Issues.
We look forward to discussing how Congress can best support
strong cyber diplomacy. And with that, I turn to our ranking
member, Mr. Engel, for his opening statement.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for convening this
hearing. And to our witnesses, welcome to the Foreign Affairs
Committee. I look forward to hearing your thoughts on how the
United States should improve its cybersecurity policy and
address the cyber threats we face from overseas.
America's adversaries are becoming bolder and more
sophisticated as they pursue their aims in cyberspace. This is
a challenge for our technology community, a new frontier for
our diplomats, and a threat to our security. It is also an
economic hazard with American businesses standing to lose out
in the face of hostile and unscrupulous behavior in cyberspace.
Iran's attacks on America's infrastructure, including a dam
near my district in New York, and North Korea's attack on the
entertainment sector underscored troubling vulnerabilities to
this sort of tactic.
We reached a 2015 agreement with China to prevent cyber
theft of intellectual property. But Beijing still exerts more
and more state control over the Internet, denying its citizens
basic freedoms and hurting American business. The United States
is not working closely enough with like-minded governments to
deter adversaries from stealing secrets or undermining an open
and interoperable Internet. And, of course, Russia's
cyberattacks were the centerpiece of its attack on American
democracy during the 2016 Presidential election.
On this last point, frankly, I am stunned by the
administration's utter failure to respond to these attacks.
More than a year has gone by since the intelligence community
revealed the extent of Russian meddling. Congress
overwhelmingly passed new sanctions, new legislation to give
the White House tools to punish those responsible. The law
singles out those responsible for cyber crimes. It goes after
the military and intelligence sectors that drove this attack.
Yet the Trump administration has not imposed a single sanction
related to election interference mandated by the law. The
decision to completely ignore Congress' intent and blow up last
week's deadline for new sanctions has made that much worse by
what administration officials themselves admit, and that is,
Russia is at it again.
The CIA Director, a former Member of Congress, a former
colleague, Mike Pompeo, has said so repeatedly, which calls
into question the State Department's claim that just a threat
of sanctions alone will deter bad behavior. I am at a loss. We
are talking about the bedrock of American democracy, and the
administration seems intent on signaling to Russia and the rest
of the world that it is open season. Between the President's
constant denial of Russia's involvement and his constant
attacks on our own justice system, you would almost conclude
that he would be fine with a repeat of what we saw in 2016.
Well, I am not fine with it. The President won't take steps to
protect American democracy. It falls to us as lawmakers.
Last year I introduced a bill with Mr. Connolly, the SECURE
Our Democracy Act, which would specifically go after those who
interfere with an American election from overseas. When we
passed the sanctions package last summer, we put this bill
aside because we thought the President would use the tools we
gave him to push back against Russian aggression. He didn't, so
now I think it is time to reconsider this measure or something
similar.
Responding to Russia is just one piece of the puzzle when
it comes to our cyber policy. I also think we need to reverse
course on the administration's relentless assault on our
diplomacy and development. Mr. Painter, I am sorry that you
were one casualty of the administration's attempt to hollow out
the State Department when you were forced out of your role as
Coordinator for Cyber Issues. This was a major blow to American
leadership at a time when your expertise was needed the most. I
was speaking with Mr. Keating just before, and we were
lamenting about the fact about how the administration has
really not sent us the witnesses that we really feel that we
could use so they could give us the perspective from the
executive branch.
So I was glad to join Chairman Royce to introduce the Cyber
Diplomacy Act, which would reinstate and elevate the position,
your position, Mr. Painter. It passed the House a few weeks
ago, and I hope the Senate acts on it soon. And I hope it sends
a message to the administration that we need to ramp up our
diplomacy on cyber, not scale it back. We need to engage with
friendly governments facing the same threats. We need to push
back against countries that will exploit these tools to pilfer
our intellectual property to hack into our country's most
sensitive information and to derail international norms to keep
the Internet open and accessible.
So I hope that our witnesses can shed additional light on
these concerns and share with this committee their views on how
the United States can lead on this issue.
So I thank you again, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Engel.
So this morning we are pleased to be joined by a
distinguished panel, including Mr. Chris Painter. As you
mentioned, he serves as the Global Commissioner for the
Stability of Cyberspace, and previously was the first
Coordinator for Cyber Issues at the State Department. We also
have John Miller, Vice President for Global Policy and Law,
Cybersecurity, and Privacy at the Information Technology
Industry Council. And we have Dr. Michael Sulmeyer, Belfer
Center's Cybersecurity Project Director at the Harvard Kennedy
School. Previously, he served as the Director for Plans and
Operations for Cyber Policy in the Office of the Secretary of
Defense.
So without objection, the witnesses' full prepared
statements are going to be made part of the record, and all the
members here, you are going to have 5 calendar days to submit
any other statements or questions or extraneous material that
you want in the record.
We have been informed that votes may come earlier this
morning than we anticipated, so we want as many members as
possible to have a chance to ask their questions. And to that
end, members and witnesses, please respect the 5-minute time
limit.
So if you would, Mr. Painter, if you could summarize your
remarks, we will begin with you.
STATEMENT OF MR. CHRISTOPHER PAINTER, COMMISSIONER, GLOBAL
COMMISSION FOR THE STABILITY OF CYBERSPACE (FORMER COORDINATOR
FOR CYBER ISSUES, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE)
Mr. Painter. Chairman Royce, Ranking Member Engel, members
of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, it is a pleasure to be
here today to discuss the growing technical and policy threats
in cyberspace and the vital role of diplomacy in combating
those threats and shaping an international environment that
promotes an open, interoperable, secure, and reliable
information infrastructure.
For over 26 years, I have devoted my life to these issues
serving in senior roles in the Department of Justice, the
National Security Council, and, most recently, as the first
Coordinator for Cyber Issues at the State Department. I
continue to work on these issues after leaving government,
including serving as a Commissioner on the Global Commission
for the Stability of Cyberspace, and a board member for the
Center for Internet Security.
Over the course of my career, I have seen the technical
threats in cyberspace posed by state and non-state actors
dramatically increase in both sophistication and number, and
have seen the potential and actual impact of those threats grow
exponentially. I have also seen the rise of serious policy
threats to the very nature, structure, and governance of the
Internet as we know it. Unprecedented attempts to undermine
democratic processes, threats posed to economic prosperity, and
the increasing drive by repressive regimes to suppress and
control online discourse and undermine Internet freedom.
It is clear that responding to cyber threats and seizing
the many opportunities in cyberspace requires a whole-of-
government response leveraging the capabilities of agencies
across the Federal Government in working with the private
sector and civil society. It is also clear, given the
international nature of the threats and the technology itself,
that the State Department must play a leading role in that
effort, and that effective cyber diplomacy is paramount.
The United States has provided significant leadership in
this area in the past. Indeed, my former office, the Office of
the Coordinator for Cyber Issues, the first of its kind
anywhere in the world, literally created and advanced a whole
new area of foreign policy focus that simply did not exist
before, and made substantial progress in the number of policy
and operational fronts.
Over 25 countries have followed our example by establishing
high level positions in their foreign ministries. For the U.S.
to continue to lead as it must, cyber issues must be re-
prioritized and appropriately resourced at the State
Department. Among other things, effective cyber diplomacy
involves, one, building strategic partnerships with other
countries around the world and engaging the many, many
multilateral forms that are shaping cyber policy; two, using
diplomacy and diplomatic tools to directly respond to cyber
threats; and, three, working with other agencies to facilitate
law enforcement and technical cooperation and provide capacity
building so other countries can better work with us.
On a policy level, one of the most important issues is
avoiding cyber conflict by building a global consensus on a
framework for long-term cyber stability. My former office
spearheaded this frame comprised of the application of
international law to cyberspace, acceptance of voluntary norms
of state behavior, and implementation of confidence building
measures. It also includes working with the private sector in
civil society on these issues. For example, the Global
Commission that I serve on recently proposed a new
multistakeholder developed norm, entitled ``A Call to Protect
the Public Core of the Internet.''
U.S. work on stability is also the foundation of using
diplomatic and other tools and partnerships to better deter bad
actors. Norms of behaviors are irrelevant if there are no
consequences for those who violate those norms. For example,
the lack of a sufficiently strong, timely, and continuing
response to Russian interference with our electoral process
virtually guarantees that they will attempt to interfere again,
both in the U.S. and other democracies around the world. We
must do better.
And finally, cyber diplomacy involves promoting core
values, such as Internet freedom and fair market access.
My former office made a great deal of progress in all these
issues, but a tremendous amount of work lies ahead, and
sustained high-level diplomatic leadership is required. I was,
therefore, disappointed that the State Department, even if
temporarily, chose to downgrade my former office and constrict
its resources. This sends the wrong message to our adversaries
and allies alike. For the U.S. to lead and continue to make
significant progress in cyber diplomacy, organizational
structure and resources are important. Accordingly, I am
pleased that this committee proposed, and the House of
Representatives passed, the bipartisan Cyber Diplomacy Act of
2017. Over my career, I have found that these issues have
almost always been treated in a bipartisan manner, and I am
very happy to see that reflected in this important legislation.
The Cyber Diplomacy Act appropriately makes clear that
international cyber issues are a national policy priority, it
calls out the importance of norms and stability, and,
importantly, the Act sets out a strong and appropriate
organizational structure for these issues of the State
Department.
By creating a statutory office of cyber issues with a broad
scope of cross-cutting substantiative responsibilities at a
high level, and reporting through a neutral cross-cutting
reporting chain, they can give full voice to the important
security issues as well as human rights and economic ones. Of
course, as I noted, adequate resources are also important to
the success of this mission, and I hope Congress will address
this very important issue in the future.
Although much has been achieved over the last few years in
cyber diplomacy, there is a long road ahead. Much needs to be
done to continue to advance stability, norms, bolster
deterrence, respond to threats, build partnerships, uphold
human rights online, and advance fair economic access and
prosperity.
So I thank you for your interest and support of diplomacy
in cyberspace. And I thank you for the opportunity to testify
today on these important and timely issues, and I look forward
to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Painter follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Chairman Royce. Mr. Miller.
STATEMENT OF MR. JOHN MILLER, VICE PRESIDENT FOR GLOBAL POLICY
AND LAW, CYBERSECURITY, AND PRIVACY, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
INDUSTRY COUNCIL
Mr. Miller. Chairman Royce, Ranking Member Engel, and
distinguished members of the committee, on behalf of the
Information Technology Industry Council, or ITI, thank you for
the opportunity to testify today regarding the importance of
U.S. cyber diplomacy in a world of growing threats.
ITI is a global policy advocacy organization representing
over 60 leading technology and innovation companies from all
corners of the tech sector and beyond, all doing business
globally.
As we survey the global the cyber policy landscape, we see
a remarkable level of activity signifying both opportunity and
risk. A central element of ITI's global advocacy efforts
involves helping governments understand the critical importance
of cross-border data flows to the tech sector and the global
economy. Data is central to the cutting-edge technologies and
innovations that continue to extend the benefits of the
Internet, including cloud computing, the Internet of Things,
big data analytics, and artificial intelligence.
The ability to freely move data across borders is
essential, not only to every business that operates
internationally, but also to our ability to do everything from
securing global networks and the personal data of customers to
conducting international trade.
Unfortunately, policymakers globally are responding to the
expanding sophistication and capabilities of cyber adversaries,
as well as more frequent and severe cyber incidents, by
building virtual cyber policy walls at their borders, by
proposing cyber laws and policies that threaten to impede
cross-border data flows, create trade barriers for U.S.
companies, and undermine the trust and interoperability
necessary for the global digital economy to continue to thrive.
The trends we are most concerned about fall into four
categories: One, forced localization, which refers to a broad
set of policies designed to compel companies to relocate all or
part of their business operations within a country's borders,
including storing or processing data on servers or data centers
located in-country as a precondition for market access; two,
siloed or country-specific standards and regulations, such as
privacy-based transfer restrictions, or security-based testing
requirements which pose significant risk to interoperability
and data flows; three, efforts by policymakers to impose
cybersecurity audit assessment and testing requirements on
private entities, a potentially invasive practice that
contemplates testing conducted by government auditors, often
requiring access to companies' intellectual property; and four,
the application of legacy regulations to technology and
services innovations.
Two recent examples of this rising trend include subjecting
U.S. online services to so-called over-the-top regulations, and
expanding use of export controls, most notably in the context
of innovative cybersecurity technologies.
It is also important to understand that our global cyber
policy threats aren't isolated to a few countries, regions, or
economies; they are everywhere. It has been well-documented
that some countries, such as China and Russia, are taking
approaches that incorporate many of these troubling cyber
policy trends. But it is also critical to understand that
policymakers in major economies, including the European Union,
India, Brazil, and many others, are pursuing similar policies.
Now for the good news. On balance, recent cyber policy
activity in the U.S. embraces an approach that furthers global
data flows, interoperability, innovation, and trust, avoiding
many of these policy pitfalls. The Cyber Diplomacy Act of 2017
recounts many of these cyber policy achievements, as did Mr.
Painter. And to that list, we would add the Cybersecurity
Threat Information Sharing Act passed by Congress in 2016, as
well as the cybersecurity framework, a voluntary risk
management-based framework grounded in international standards
and best practices.
The Cyber Diplomacy Act will complement these efforts well
and provides a great encapsulation of the types of
international cyber policy approaches needed to support an
open, interoperable, and secure Internet that promotes data
flows, innovation, and economic prosperity. The bill provides a
roadmap for how the U.S. Government can translate this
expression of policy into action, including by securing and
implementing commitments based on accepted cyber policy norms,
holding the counter parties to those agreements accountable for
their implementation, and prioritizing and resourcing the State
Department's cyber function to maximize success.
To complement the Cyber Diplomacy Act's solid foundation,
we offer three additional recommendations designed to help the
U.S. Government maintain its leadership position in cyberspace,
while avoiding the potential that China's cybersecurity law
emerges as the dominant approach to cyber policy in the region,
or even globally.
First, to counter the trend of various countries
increasingly advocating for their own local standards, testing
protocols, and certifications, the U.S. needs a proactive and
adequately resourced national cyber standardization strategy.
Second, promoting the cybersecurity framework approach
internationally as a counterweight to the data-restrictive
policy approaches gaining prominence globally can help the U.S.
sustain its leadership position on cybersecurity policy around
the world.
And third, pursuing multilateral solutions in parallel with
bilateral agreements can be an important force multiplier to
drive scalable policy solutions across the digital economy.
We look forward to the opportunity to continue to work with
Congress and the administration on this important set of
issues. Thank you, again, for the opportunity to share our
perspective, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Miller.
Dr. Sulmeyer.
STATEMENT OF MICHAEL SULMEYER, PH.D., DIRECTOR, CYBER SECURITY
PROJECT, BELFER CENTER FOR SCIENCE AND INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS,
JOHN F. KENNEDY SCHOOL OF GOVERNMENT, HARVARD UNIVERSITY
(FORMER DIRECTOR FOR PLANS AND OPERATIONS FOR CYBER POLICY,
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE)
Mr. Sulmeyer. Chairman Royce, Ranking Member Engel, and
distinguished members of the Foreign Affairs Committee, it is
an honor to be with you today to discuss U.S. cyber diplomacy.
Thank you for bipartisan approach to cybersecurity. I will keep
my remarks brief. Three topics to focus on: The first, the
international environment for cyber diplomacy; the second, the
challenges of deterrence; and third, our elections.
First, we need diplomacy in cyberspace now more than ever.
Our adversaries continue to refine their capabilities to
conduct a range of cyber operations against us. We have
developed offensive cyber capabilities and hardened our
defenses, yet hackers keep hacking our systems.
Under Chris Painter's leadership, the State Department
pursued international efforts to promote norms of responsible
State behavior. This effort gained momentum, especially during
the latter years of the Obama administration, as did efforts to
negotiate bilateral arrangements, like the U.S.-China
agreement. The current administration has, thus far, for
pursued more bilateral arrangements, like the one it announced
with Israel last summer. Yet, my impression is that most state
behavior, not state rhetoric, reflects a perception in
international capitals that the benefits of unrestrained
hacking outweigh the costs.
For the time being, the United States will likely need to
focus on discrete, bilateral arrangements, while protecting
U.S. interests and existing international institutions. Having
a dedicated office at the State Department is crucial to
pursuing both objectives. But for diplomacy to be successful,
the United States needs to empower its diplomats with as much
leverage as possible. One approach to creating more leverage is
to improve our ability to deter adversaries from hacking us. In
an ideal world, it would be a tremendous help if these threats
could be deterred by one common approach. But the reality is
far more complicated. Not all hacks are the same, so we should
not expect a one-size-fits-all model of deterrence to be
successful.
Attacks against critical infrastructure certainly warrant
the threat of significant cost imposition. In some situations,
however, deterrence in the criminal law context, which aims to
minimize but not necessarily eliminate the incidence of the
crime, seems more applicable, especially to run-of-the-mill
hacking, than an analogy to nuclear weapons. I would not want
to bet the cybersecurity of the United States on a policy of
deterrence if I did not have to. Sometimes, like the prospect
of defending against thousands of nuclear-tipped missiles,
deterrence is the least bad option. But this is not the case in
cyberspace. We have other options, and we should employ them
alongside deterrence. But we must be realistic about just how
much we can expect from deterrence.
So what does this mean when it comes to dealing with
Russia, which launched a cyber-enabled influence campaign
against us in 2016? Deterring a repeat of this conduct must be
a priority for the entire U.S. Government, and indeed for all
nations whose elections are susceptible to Russian
interference. The need to impose cost is clear. But the
challenge is to impose it in ways that matter to the Russian
regime, not in ways that are projections of what would matter
to the United States.
However, we cannot rely on deterrence alone. We need to
ensure that the United States has capabilities on the shelf to
prevent and preempt this kind of behavior ahead of the
midterms, and we must make ourselves harder to hack through
improving our defenses and becoming more resilient.
I am proud to be part of a team at the Belfer Center that
is releasing a new report this morning, a playbook for State
and local officials to improve the cybersecurity of the systems
they administer. It represents the culmination of months of
fieldwork by the research team including some exceptionally
talented students which developed recommendations to prepare
for the upcoming elections. We also have a playbook to help
campaigns protect themselves from hackers. Both reports can be
helpful for our allies as well who face similar threats. Both
are available on our Web site.
There is every indication that foreign governments will try
to sow confusion ahead of and during the next election. This
should be of concern to every American, regardless of party.
Improving the cybersecurity of campaigns as well as at the
State and local level, both at home and abroad, needs to be a
core element of a broader strategy to push back against our
adversaries who seek to undermine the confidence we have in the
integrity of our elections.
Let me conclude my opening remarks by reiterating my
appreciation for this committee's bipartisan approach. I look
forward to taking your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sulmeyer follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
Thank you. Let me just begin by saying what we in the House
have advocated here in the legislation that we passed that I
authored, along with Mr. Engel, has been to call for a Cyber
Diplomacy Act, I think, is unique. We are not simply asking the
Department to maintain the cyber coordinator. What we are
asking for here is the creation of a cyber bureau headed by the
Senate-confirmed Assistant Secretary, and the Bureau and its
leaders, then, are empowered, as they must be, are empowered to
deal with a full range of cyber issues, including security,
including economy, including human rights. So that is the
approach the House is taking, and the Senate has been receptive
to that idea.
So let me go with my question here, Mr. Painter, if I
could, or Mr. Miller.
So China has emerged as a very aggressive power in
cyberspace. And in addition to China's articulation of this
idea of cyber sovereignty, Beijing is now aggressively pushing
U.S. companies to turn over its technological know-how as the
cost of assessing China's enormous market. Obviously, it is in
both our national security and economic interest to respond to
this technology grab there, and one proposal is to strengthen
CFIUS, the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United
States. This committee is looking at a complementary approach
of strengthening our export controls in tandem.
So, Mr. Miller, if I could start with you. How does the
technology industry see this threat, since they have got the
most to lose here, and how can Congress best respond?
Mr. Miller. Thank you for your question, Chairman Royce.
Well, in terms of the threat, the technology industry has
been consistent in advocating against any policies globally
that would require companies to turn over or provide access to
source code to governments anywhere. So, it is certainly very
concerning indeed.
You referenced the efforts that are underway to update,
modernize the CFIUS process. In terms of the underlying
national security concerns that are articulated in that bill
with respect to the transfers of technologies that are critical
to U.S. national security interests, you know, absolutely, the
tech sector agrees that that is a serious concern. As you
pointed out, it is highlighted in some of these approaches. You
know, the question is whether the bill is narrowly tailored to
address that goal, or whether it sweeps in all kinds of
ordinary business transactions that do not involve the transfer
of critical technology, or whether it involves--it might sweep
in transactions that are already adequately covered or should
be adequately covered by the export control regime.
From our perspective, what we are working to ensure is an
approach that addresses the underlying national security
concerns in a targeted fashion without negatively impacting
those daily business transactions or creating kind of a
parallel duplicative export control regime. From our
perspective, ultimately export controls and CFIUS should work
in a complementary, not a duplicative fashion. And we believe
there is a way to both update and optimize the current export
control system to cover emerging technologies, for instance,
and also to update CFIUS in a targeted way that makes sense and
helps supplement that.
Chairman Royce. Well, let me ask Mr. Painter, also, his
views on this.
Mr. Painter. Yeah. I think it is clear that China has
become much more aggressive on the world stage. Among other
things, one of the counterparts I had that was created after
our office was created was China. China and Russia created
counterparts. And they have their own international strategy
they put out about a year ago which champions this idea of
absolute sovereignty. And they also, as you noted, had been
passing laws in the guise of cybersecurity that are often more
about market protection. It is a difficult issue because I
think one of the things that we have seen is they become active
in working diplomatically with other countries and trying to,
quite frankly, build alliances with a developing world and
others to really further their own view of cyberspace.
On the company side, we have made some progress. As you
know, the agreement with China not to steal intellectual
property by cyber means, that was a landmark agreement. It took
a while to get us there and a lot of pressure to get us there.
That was very helpful.
Chairman Royce. How about on the enforcement side of that?
Mr. Painter. Well, I--no. I think what we said then, and
we--and this is still the policy as far as I know now, is all
tools are on the table. We didn't take anything off the table
to get that agreement. And sanctions and other tools are there,
and we have to think of other tools still.
I do worry that, you know, when I see U.S. companies faced
with this, and I have dealt with a number of them, they are
often unwilling individually to express these issues because
they are concerned about the market issues in China. Trade
associations, ITI and others, I think, have been very good
interlocutors about this. But that is one of the issues.
The other thing I worry about is even if you look at CFIUS
and other types of legislation, which are not exactly tailored
to this problem, there are things that China is doing in terms
of joint ventures and other things that really don't fall
within that rubric. So how do you really address this problem
in a broader sense? And I think it takes looking at a lot of
different tools including----
Chairman Royce. And that is why we will be consultation
with you on the export controls and on the----
Let's go to Dr. Sulmeyer.
Do you have any insights that you could share with us on
this?
Mr. Sulmeyer. On this particular topic, I agree with my
colleagues, but would emphasize the need to strengthen CFIUS. I
think that is a critical priority.
Chairman Royce. Very good.
We go to Mr. Engel.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, quickly, I would like to start by asking all of our
witnesses just a quick yes or no to set the record straight. We
can start with Mr. Painter.
Do any of you have any reason to doubt the intelligence
community's assessment that Russia interfered to influence our
2016 election?
Mr. Painter. None whatsoever.
Mr. Miller. No.
Mr. Sulmeyer. Nope.
Mr. Engel. Thank you.
Dr. Sulmeyer, the intelligence community reported that the
Kremlin interfered to aid Donald Trump and damage Hillary
Clinton's candidacy. The Trump administration's CIA Director
said that the Russians have been doing this in other countries
for years, and will do so again during our next election.
What is Russia's overall goal with this interference? What
should the United States do that it is not doing to become more
resilient and prepare itself for another round of Putin's
election interference?
Mr. Sulmeyer. Thank you. It is an important question, and
it is a good baseline way to express first that these Russian
activities form a broader part of a strategy that are not
limited to cyberspace. They are operating in areas below what
we would think of as war, but it is certainly not peace. And
they are very active and have no shame in what they are willing
to do and the tactics they are willing to employ in the so-
called gray zones.
I think you can discern sometimes three different motives
at times: One is very straightforward traditional espionage
collection in ways to help military and intelligence goals. We
have seen that against the United States in many different
situations against government networks; two, the spread of, and
sometimes, also, manufacture of disinformation. Here the
objective being the creation of chaos and confusion that
undermines their opponent's ability to actually discern the
truth. It is not just hacking. It is not just a cyber question.
It is the knowing introduction of false and fake information at
the right times, at the right place, on the right topics, to
make it so that it becomes much more difficult to get to the
bottom of what is going on. The example you can easily point to
is the shoot-down of the aircraft over Ukraine, and the
disinformation put out there.
The third topic I will just hit briefly is the increasing
desire on the part of the Russians to hold targets at risk. And
this is about being able to affect and manipulate critical
infrastructure targets when tensions get hot. And the example
here would be taking out power in the Ukraine for a little
while a couple years ago. We want to make sure that does not
happen here, not at all.
Mr. Engel. Thank you.
Mr. Painter, I was disappointed when I heard that the
administration downgraded the State Department cyber diplomacy
office. Hopefully, the Cyber Diplomacy Act will elevate this
office again. In the meantime, what do you think downgrading
this office will mean for American leadership on cybersecurity
and other critical issues?
Mr. Painter. So I very much hope that the trend reverses. I
think we had built up a lot of momentum, and especially, we are
in the midst of it, an Executive order on cyber dealing with
diplomacy and other issues, and we had established a leadership
position in the world, I think even if it was for a temporary
period, stepping--or seeming to stepping back from the world
stage really empowers our adversaries to try to exploit that
and work to advance their agenda, and really gives our allies
and partners a reason to question whether the U.S. is going to
continue to lead and continue to prioritize these issues.
So I think that that was just not the right approach. I
very much hope that between the act and other activities that
we can elevate this again at the State Department. I think it
is a key 21st century issue, and I hope that happens.
And if there is time, Congressman, I also would like to
address the question that you just asked Mr. Sulmeyer, too, in
terms of some of the things we can being doing. I agree we have
not done enough to deter this activity. This will, in fact,
happen again, as was stated by the Director of National
Intelligence in both administrations, including Mike Pompeo
recently. There is a number of things I think we can do
actively, including having a clear declarative statement that
this is something that we will not countenance. There will be
consequences for this activity coming from the administration.
I think you could set up, and this is not my ideas, but
talking to a lot of people in the community, including a lot of
former government people and present ones, but we could set up
a task force that will really deal with protecting our
elections, knowing this is going to happen in 2018 and beyond
that would involve dealing with social media and others, a real
interagency task force that would be focused on this issue. I
think we can enhance our deterrence tools. I think we do a bad
job in deterrence, as I said before, across the board.
And then finally, I think there is a number of pieces of
legislation, both in the Senate and the House side, that can
give us greater tools to protect election systems. And there is
a lot more that can be done there.
Mr. Engel. Mr. Painter, I want to ask you one final
question.
As I mentioned in my statement, the President has refused,
in my opinion, to hold Russia accountable for election
interference. He has refused to impose sanctions, which clearly
was in the legislation that we passed with over 400 votes on
the House floor. So he has refused to impose sanctions or
intensify efforts to prevent Putin from trying to undermine our
next election.
Let me ask you this: What do you think the President should
do in response to this last attack on our democracy and what
message does our lack of action send?
Mr. Painter. I outlined some of this just now, but I would
say that in deterrence, the classic parts of deterrence, other
than the deterrence by denial, is that you have a credible
response and you have a timely response. And consequences are
important.
When I was a prosecutor, if we didn't prosecute people,
they would be running around doing crimes every day, right? So
you need to have consequences for bad actors, both to deter
them and as a consequence of their actions. And if we don't
take any action, that, itself, sets a norm of inaction. That
makes the activity they are doing seem acceptable. And they
will do it again. And I think it is very likely they will.
So given all that, I think we need to really use all the
tools in our tool kit, including sanctions, to continue to send
a clear message this is unacceptable. This was a very, very big
deal. This is trying to undermine our democracy. Whatever side
of the political spectrum you are on, this is a huge deal in
the U.S. and around the world, and we have got to do everything
we can to try to thwart it. And I think if you don't do actions
and--to be sure, you can think of how you are strategically
going to approach it. But if you don't do actions, that sends a
clear message, Hey, this is okay. Or at least, Hey, this is a
costless enterprise.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. I couldn't agree with you more.
Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Dana Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for providing leadership in this area, making sure we
have a hearing and to a very important issue.
It is easy to see that we live in a different world than I
grew up in. There was no Internet, and when people wanted to
sabotage someone else's campaign, they didn't have to go onto
the Internet or use cyber warfare in order to do it. But now we
know that we have this vehicle. We are dependent on the
Internet to do business. And when we talk about cyberattacks,
we are talking about sometimes sabotaging someone, a system, so
they can't work, or we are talking about the theft of
information. And I don't know, frankly, these things were done
beforehand, but now we have a new threat, a new challenge,
because we have a new technology vehicle.
Mr. Miller, you just, in passing, noted that India and
China and other countries beside Russia are engaged in this
type of activity.
Mr. Miller. Sure. Thank you for the question Representative
Rohrabacher.
There are actually--if you look at some of the problematic
policy provisions that I mentioned at the outset broadly,
forced localization types of policies and requiring companies
to store their data in-country, or you look at some of the
potential requests for security testing to be conducted by
government auditors, those types of proposals do exist in India
specifically.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So we have a lot of hacking going on----
Mr. Miller. Right.
Mr. Rohrabacher [continuing]. In this arena, not just in
Russia, but throughout the world.
By the way, does our Government engage in using the
Internet to place false stories about people we consider our
adversaries?
Mr. Miller. I really have no personal knowledge of what the
government is doing in that regard.
Mr. Rohrabacher. What about you? Does the United States do
this?
Mr. Sulmeyer. I have no direct knowledge of that.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Oh, so we don't know. We know all about
the Russians doing it, but we don't know if our own Government
does the same thing?
I would suggest that maybe our Government does the same
thing quite often, and having direct knowledge of several
instances of that.
Now, with that said, let me just ask this----
Mr. Deutch. Will the gentleman yield for a second?
Mr. Rohrabacher. You know, I can't do it, because I have
limited time. But I will be happy to have the discussion with
you on your time.
Mr. Deutch. I appreciate that.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Let me ask you this: We have heard about
the Russians today. The most important issue that came out of
this whole, how do you say--this episode in American democracy
was that the Russians had hacked into our systems and
interfered with our election, and you all agreed that there was
something to that.
The most important example of that was, that we could all
understand, is that they hacked into the Democratic National
Committee and got out all of those emails and made public what
was in those emails. So the public had this information they
wouldn't have otherwise had.
But let me ask you this: From a lot of other experts that I
have read that they said it was impossible for the Russians to
have been the ones to have done that, that it was probably done
by an insider into the DNC, because the thumb drive that--where
this information was downloaded was downloaded from someone on
the inside rather than using the Internet, which would have
taken a lot longer to get that same information.
Have you read anything about that? You are the experts. Is
that an analysis that a group of retired intelligence officers
have claimed is true? Do you think that is true, meaning that
it was an inside job by what you can see with your expertise
into cyberattacks?
Mr. Painter. So I will start by saying that you are right,
hacking is not new. Influence operations are not new. However--
and even--there was hacking back in 2008 into both the
Republican and Democratic campaigns.
Mr. Rohrabacher. You know, I have only got 5 minutes. Do
you disagree with that?
Mr. Painter. The difference then was it was used to gather
intelligence and not weaponized to try to affect our elections.
You know, there are lots of----
Mr. Rohrabacher. I have got to ask you about this--look. I
am sorry. But it is my time right now. They are not going to
give me 1 extra minute to get your answer.
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent for 1 extra minute to
get them to answer.
Chairman Royce. No objection.
Mr. Rohrabacher. All right.
Mr. Chairman, I think it is appalling--I think that type of
camaraderie is appalling when we have a witness that is
refusing to go to----
Chairman Royce. Okay. We go to Mr. Albio Sires of New
Jersey.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for being
here today.
You know, I am one of those guys that is on a different
scale here. I think that while we sleep, countries like Russia,
China, North Korea, and Iran are plotting how to undermine this
country. Especially Russia. So has America really woken up to
the fact that this is a real danger to our country, or do we
still need to go a little ways more to recognize how dangerous
this is to our country?
Mr. Painter.
Mr. Painter. So, yes, I think we have not gone far enough.
I think it should have been a wake-up call. There has been a
lot of wake-up calls we have seen from a lot of different
threats. The Sony Pictures hack by North Korea, some of the big
data thefts. And the effect on our election. I think we need to
have a sustained focus on this. This is not a blip. This is
going to be repeated in the future. And so we absolutely have
to sustain the focus on this in the future.
Mr. Sires. Mr. Miller.
Mr. Miller. I agree that absolutely we need more focus on,
really, the full spectrum of cyber-related threats out there.
We have certainly heard a lot already today about many of the
very high profile hacks. And it is very important, a couple of
features of those that have been pointed out already, you do
have increasingly sophisticated threats and threat actors,
including nation states increasingly involved in this activity.
And then even when we do have bilateral agreements in some
instances to not do a specific thing like hack for commercial
purposes, the reality is, all these other cyber policies that
are problematic that we have been talking about can really
cause some of the very same issues, for instance, by just
requiring companies to turn over source code or things like
that. So it is a problem that we have to magnify.
Mr. Sires. Mr. Sulmeyer.
Mr. Sulmeyer. Yes, sir. It should be a wake-up call, not
just about cyber operations and cybersecurity, but also about
these information operations and the knowing introduction of
fake and false information. Others tend to view that as a full
spectrum activity to do in war and peace. We tend to think
about information operations more in a wartime context. That is
an important difference we should be conscientious of. Thank
you.
Mr. Sires. And in terms of places like Russia, they have
become so sophisticated that they don't have to have their
imprint in there, but they use hackers and criminal networks.
Is that accurate?
Mr. Painter. Yeah. I mean, I think one of the concerns we
have had for a long time is not just state actors on their own,
but state actors using proxies. And they do that because it is
more difficult to trace it to them, more difficult to attribute
to them. That is a real concern as well. And so as we look at
the spectrum of different threats, and it is the Annual Threat
Report, in 2017 and also in many years before that, Russia,
China North Korea, and Iran have been the key threat state
actors, and Russia has been one of the most sophisticated.
Mr. Sires. How do we respond to that?
Mr. Sulmeyer, how do----
Mr. Sulmeyer. Gone are the days when the non-state actors
were less capable. Non-state actors can be just as capable now
as state actors. So the distinction in my mind is now moot.
In a number of situations, we need to hold the state
accountable because the non-state actor is actually a proxy for
the state. And when our Justice Department indicted several
Russian criminals for the hack on Yahoo, there is a lot of good
information in that indictment about that situation.
Mr. Sires. So that tells me that diplomacy--they can easily
get around that, whatever arrangements we make.
Mr. Painter. No. I mean, diplomacy is one of the tools in
our tool set. I absolutely agree that law enforcement and
stronger enforcement and giving the tools for that is
important. That is what I used to do in one part of my career.
Diplomacy is pressing not just the state that is responsible,
but other states who are similarly victims of this conduct, to
take action against a state that is doing it. And that is one
of the things of deterrence we have to be much better at.
Mr. Sires. Mr. Miller, do you have any response to that?
Mr. Miller. Well, I think to go back to your previous
question that I didn't answer about the different types of
state actors. That is absolutely true that it is not just the
state-sponsored cyber activities that we need to----
Mr. Sires. And some states work with these hackers----
Mr. Miller. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. I think another
feature of this problem is that it is also--it is not just
economic rationales behind the hacking. Increasingly we see
political or activist types of hacking as well from WikiLeaks,
for instance, and others. And it is a really--it is a very
complicated environment in that regard.
Mr. Sires. My time ran out. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. We go to Joe Wilson, South Carolina.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank each of you
for being here today.
Mr. Painter, in the fiscal year 2017 National Defense
Authorization Act, Congress expanded the role of the Global
Engagement Center to include countering foreign, state, and
unsafe propaganda and disinformation efforts that threaten U.S.
national security interests as well as the security interest of
U.S. allied and partner nations.
With this expanded mission, could you please explain, or
describe the role of the Global Engagement Center and the
broader U.S. cyber diplomacy effort?
Mr. Painter. So the Global Engagement Center was a separate
part of the State Department from where I was. We did talk to
the Global Engagement Center. As I said previously, if we are
really taking this seriously, and we are trying to combat all
these threats, not just the terrorist threats, but also other
states who are trying to influence various operations around
the world, I think the Global Engagement Center can and should
play an important role. And I think that that legislation helps
ensure that, if it is properly resourced, if it is properly
doing all the things it needs to do.
Mr. Wilson. And that really is the next point. Is there
more that Congress can do to back up the Center?
Mr. Painter. I haven't been to the State Department now for
a few months, so I can't say how it is operating currently. I
would say that it is an important mission. It has got to be a
mission that is done strategically. I think one of the problems
we had in that space is if the government is simply saying it,
we are not doing the best job, we have to get other
interlocutors who have more credibility in the community doing
that. That is one of the things the Global Engagement Center
has and can continue to do. It is only part of the solution,
though. We also have to work with social media companies and
maybe create some sort of task force that I talked about before
to deal with these issues more generally.
Mr. Wilson. We look forward to your input.
And, Mr. Miller, a persistent problem that has presented
itself in cyberspace is attribution.
Could you please describe the process of attributing
malicious activity in cyberspace and the technical and
political challenges associated with attribution. What are the
benefits or pitfalls of international attribution organization,
and would all nations participate?
Mr. Miller. Thank you for the question, Representative
Wilson.
Absolutely, attribution is a really important piece of the
equation here. I am not a technical expert. But by all
accounts, we have gotten a lot better collectively at
attribution in cyberspace. However, at least based on my
knowledge, it is definitely not--it is still more--it is hard
to have absolute 100 percent certainty in all cases in terms of
attribution. As we have been describing, there is a whole host
of cyber threat actors involved. Oftentimes there are various
different ways to try to mask an IP address, or what have you,
on the Internet. But I think your question does highlight the
need for continuing to share cyber threat information and
vulnerabilities with our partners and on other information,
particularly partners internationally to really try to have as
much information as we can to try to get the best information
we can about tough issues, such as attribution.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you.
And, Dr. Sulmeyer, what is your view about attribution?
Mr. Sulmeyer. Yes, sir.
Sophisticated states and companies can and do attribute.
Just like anything, nothing is perfect. But gone are the days
when attribution as a sort of bumper sticker--gone are those
days when attribution was hard to do. It is a complicated
process. You use all source methods of intelligence. You don't
just rely on an IP address or cyber technical indicators. You
throw everything at the book in trying to figure out who did
it. And the critical part here is that now companies are in the
mix as well, not just governments. And that muddies the water
as well as for everyone.
Mr. Wilson. And, actually, Mr. Miller, you have already hit
on this. But--and both of you, the potential of Russia and
China working with us, and, of course, it seems inconceivable,
but DPRK, any level of attribution from those particular
countries?
Mr. Miller. Well, to the extent you are asking about
attribution from North Korea in particular, as I am sure you
know, the Department of Homeland Security did, in fact,
attribute the WannaCry attacks to North Korea right before the
holidays. And I certainly, as Mr. Sulmeyer says, I think the
U.S. or any nation state takes great pains before they publicly
attribute. But when they do, I have a high degree of confidence
that it is reliable information.
Mr. Wilson. Again, thank each of you for being here today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Wilson.
Before we go to Congresswoman Karen Bass, I think we want
her to get her full time, so might I suggest that we can--oh,
we can go now.
All right. We go now to you. Afterwards, we will recess
until the third vote, and come back immediately afterwards.
Okay?
Congresswoman Karen Bass.
Ms. Bass. I appreciate that. Mr. Painter, could you please
explain why the administration downgraded your office and what
is the status of the office today?
Mr. Painter. So I don't know. We had a very good, I think,
close working relationship with the people at the NSC with Rob
Joyce, Tom Bossert and others. This is something where we were
continuing to make progress on these issues.
Ms. Bass. So what were you told?
Mr. Painter. I think it was part of a larger reorganization
where they were trying to get rid of all the special envoys,
all the direct reports to the Secretary. I think, frankly,
there was maybe a lack of understanding of the importance of
this issue and how it fit into the----
Ms. Bass. Is it staffed today? Does the office exist?
Mr. Painter. So the office, as I understand it, my old
office still exists. They have kept it together, which I think
is critically important.
Ms. Bass. So who is staffing it?
Mr. Painter. My former deputy is still there, and several
of the people who were just a great team are still there, and
that is important.
Ms. Bass. So what are they doing?
Mr. Painter. They are working on some of these issues. They
are continuing to work on it, however, the level of the person
who is assigned over there is at a lower level, deputy
assistant secretary level. He is in an economic reporting
chain. As important as those issues are, it doesn't give full
voice to all these other issues around deterrence, around
incident response.
Ms. Bass. So what signal do you think that sends,
especially to Russians and Chinese and other actors?
Mr. Painter. Look, quite frankly--and I have talked to a
lot of our allies and others about this--I think it sends a
message, as I said before, to our adversaries that this is an
opportunity for them to flex their muscles and try to influence
even more than they have the international debate. If we are
not there in a leadership role, if it is a signal that this is
not as important an issue in the State Department, and----
Ms. Bass. So if you take that combined with what is going
on today in terms of the attacks on the FBI and the other
intelligence agencies, what do you think is happening in
preparation for our midterm?
Mr. Painter. I think we need to do everything we can,
because the Russians will be there. Other actors could be
there. If the goal is to sow chaos, which I think it is, you
don't know which party is going to be affected. It is going to
be something where they are going to come back, they are going
to try to create chaos.
Ms. Bass. Do you think they see what is going on here as
chaos today?
Mr. Painter. Well, I think what we see is that the people
that we need to defend those networks, the FBI, who I have
worked with and have tremendous respect for, the Department of
Justice, who I used to work for and I have tremendous respect
for, if we diminish their ability to fight these types of
issues and our intelligence community that is shooting
ourselves in the foot. We need to be able to deal with these
issues.
Ms. Bass. Do you think we are not vulnerable today in terms
of the midterm elections?
Mr. Painter. I can't make an assessment about the midterm
elections themselves, except for to say if we don't take
action, if we continue to not make this a high priority issue,
and not communicate that this is a high priority issue, one
that is really the top of the agenda and we will take action,
and I talked about some of the actions we could take, including
a clear declaratory statement and making sure we take actions--
--
Ms. Bass. So in addition to a declaratory statement, which
I don't think we have done, what type of consequences do you
think would stop, in particular, the Russians?
Mr. Painter. Look, it is hard to assess, but even if you
impose consequences on the Russians, whether that will stop
them, but it will at least make them think twice about it, and
you can do economic sanctions to even greater ones than we have
now. You can think about a whole range of options that we have
in deterrence, not just economic. We can think about, you know,
other law enforcement options. We can think about other options
that we can pursue, but we need to be able to communicate that,
too, saying we will do these things if you take these actions
to try to make----
Ms. Bass. And last question. I know we need to go to votes.
You made specific reference to legislation, and I was wondering
if you could be more specific than that in terms of what bills
you were talking about.
Mr. Painter. I know there are a bunch of bills, there are a
couple in the House dealing--I think there is one dealing with
sanctions; there is one with giving more tools to deter actions
on the Senate side. There is a bill that will help protect
election systems. So there are a lot of efforts out there. I
think the most important thing is we make sure that the people
who are trying to keep this from happening have the tools in
place, and that we give the resources and ability to help work
with local and state election officials to up their game and
have better cybersecurity.
Ms. Bass. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you very much, Congresswoman Bass,
and so at this point we will recess. We will resume immediately
following the third vote. We stand in recess.
[Recess.]
Chairman Royce. If I could have the attention of the
witnesses and the other members, we are going to reconvene at
this time, and we will go first to Mr. Ted Yoho of Florida and
then to Mr. Bill Keating of Massachusetts with their
questioning.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it and I
appreciate you holding this hearing at this moment. And I think
this is such a very important topic, the cybersecurity of the
United States of America and around the world. And I have lost
my note here. Hang on just a minute. Bear with me.
Chairman Royce. Well, as you search for that, I have just
received a letter, if I could.
Mr. Yoho. Go ahead.
Chairman Royce. If you could yield me some time----
Mr. Yoho. Yes, sir.
Chairman Royce [continuing]. From the Secretary of State
announcing that the Department is creating a Bureau for
Cyberspace and Digital Economy headed by an assistant
secretary. I ask unanimous consent that this be included in the
record. I think this is a positive step, but we are going to
continue to work with the Department and continue to work with
our colleagues over on the Senate side to pass the legislation
we have passed out of this committee to ensure that this
assistant secretary of the Bureau is empowered to engage on the
full range of cyber issues dealing with security and human
rights and the economy. And with that I would like to yield
back to the gentleman from Florida.
Mr. Yoho. Again, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have been here
for 6 years, and I remember some of the first meetings we had
here in this committee. We started talking about a
cybersecurity policy for the United States, and I found it
shocking that the United States did not have a definition of
what a cybersecurity threat was, how it was defined, if it was
amount of life lost, money lost, or infrastructure shut down,
like a power grid. And then we didn't have the response for
that, which I found that much more shocking to allow us to tell
other nations when they do something, what they can expect from
us. I am currently working on legislation that would complement
Chairman Royce's Cyber Diplomacy Act with a deterrent and
response mechanism.
One limitation of U.S. cyber deterrence is that the United
States, as I mentioned, does not have a formal process to name
and shame perpetrators when they are identifiable. We have seen
how effective naming and shaming can be in other contexts like
the Annual Trafficking in Persons Report, or the list of state
sponsors of terrorism. The goal here is not to shame people,
but the goal here is to get people to be honest actors in the
world we live in. And if people don't follow and respect other
nations' rules and laws, you get a breakdown of society.
So my question to all three of you is do you think it would
be helpful to create a designation for known malicious cyber
actors, or what should a designation process for known
malicious cyber actors look like? If you guys want to just kind
of go down the panel, and I have got one more follow-up
question if I have time.
Mr. Painter. I think it is an interesting idea. I think
there are some things you have to be careful about, though.
Even when the U.S. knows and can attribute the conduct,
sometimes they want to make that public, and that is useful, as
we did in the case of North Korea, as we recently did with
North Korea again, Russia and some others and China. Sometimes
you don't. Sometimes you want to use it as a tool to then go
back privately to that country and tell them basically this is
unacceptable as a predicate to doing more. So that is one
issue.
The other issue, I would say, is that if I don't know the
scope of the naming and shaming you are talking about, if it is
for non-state actors for, like, criminal activity that is
coming from their country, one of the challenges there is
sometimes those countries simply don't have the tools to deal
with it.
Mr. Yoho. Let me ask Mr. Miller that, because I think you
are the one that brought up that a lot of the proxy groups are
working with state actors, I think that was you.
Mr. Miller. Yes, sir.
Mr. Yoho. Your button, please.
Mr. Miller. Sorry. Yes, sir, I did bring that up. And I
think I would agree with that. We don't want to look at this
too narrowly to only focus on the state actors, because they
are working with a whole variety of others, so, to just amplify
what Mr. Painter was saying, I think it is definitely an
interesting idea, but we want to just proceed carefully because
we don't want to put the focus on one area, and then have
others kind of running free, if you will, and kind of leading
to a false sense of security in that regard.
Mr. Yoho. Right. Dr. Sulmeyer?
Mr. Sulmeyer. Congressman, I do agree. I find the idea
interesting. The trick for me would be to balance between
strategic ambiguity, and when you really want to articulate
precisely what actions will trigger what responses. It is
always a balance.
Mr. Yoho. And I think we need to do that, because right now
there is not, and so there is so much ambiguity and gray areas
that the obvious thing that countries are going to do is keep
expanding that and pushing that. And what sort of consequence
should the United States impose on groups that have committed
attributable cyberattacks on the United States? And we already
talked about the actors that are acting on their behalf. Mr.
Painter?
Mr. Painter. We have to have a menu of options. Right now
we have diplomatic options to bring pressure, not just by us,
but by our allies and partners; we have economic things, like
sanctions; we have law enforcement tools; we have cyber
operational tools, which I think are sometimes often overrated;
and we have kinetic tools, which we are unlikely to use in a
cyber event, but----
Mr. Yoho. Go ahead.
Mr. Painter. So I think what we need to do is really expand
our tool set, have more tools, work with partners to bring
these consequences and do it in a more timely fashion.
Mr. Yoho. All right. I am out of time, and I thank you
gentlemen for your patience.
Chairman Royce. We go to Mr. William Keating of
Massachusetts.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to say
again, thank our witnesses. It is great to have former
officials; it is great to have counsels and think tanks; it is
great to have people from facilities like the JFK School in my
home State. But I would say, again, it is important to have
actual members of the Trump administration here. It is
important for our committee, and I mean that as no criticism to
you, Mr. Chairman, because I know you have pushed for this,
too, but the continued lack of having these people here is, at
best, indifference, worst case, arrogance. So with that, I will
get the attention of our witnesses and thank them for being
here once again.
Mr. Painter, you have said that basically it is irrelevant,
if I had my notes, what we do without a deterrent response, and
you said that absent that response virtually it guarantees us a
recurrence of this behavior, and the norm of inaction is a big
deal. Now, the fact that we didn't move on the Russian
sanctions will have an impact in that regard. We can't go back
at their elections because in Russia, opponents either end up
imprisoned or poisoned or dead or missing, but in our country,
we are open to this.
I was very concerned, you know, with the public information
that in 29 States it has been reported publicly, that Russians
were actually in our voting apparatus. Can you tell us beyond
just the bots and everything they are doing from, you know, to
really change attitudes and use that kind of propaganda here,
what about actually being involved in the voting apparatus?
What dangers does that present? Any of you, but Mr. Painter,
if, you could start.
Mr. Painter. It presents a real danger. Now, in some sense,
the U.S. system has some resiliency because there are so many
different states and jurisdictions that have their own ways of
doing voting. On the other hand, you can imagine an attacker
getting in, either not just changing voting machines, but also,
doing things with respect to voter rolls and registrations and
all kinds of other things that could, at the very least, create
uncertainty and havoc during the election, and that is all you
need to do, right?
You don't need to actually change a result. Creating
uncertainty itself could delegitimize an election. So I think
that is a huge issue. That is why we need to do everything we
can also to work with the State and local authorities to
protect their systems.
Mr. Keating. Mr. Miller?
Mr. Miller. Thank you. Yes, I would agree with that.
Absolutely, on one of the other items. Potential threats to
voting machines and voting systems highlights is just how,
frankly, we are living in a world when we talk about the
Internet of Things and other connected cyber physical devices
where there are more and more attack vectors that we all need
to protect both industry and government working together, so
that further highlights the need for a well-functioning State
Department, but it is not just the State Department that we are
talking about here today. It is a bit of a cliche, but cyber is
a team sport, and the Department of Homeland Security, to their
credit, has been doing a lot of work on this topic.
Mr. Keating. Thank you. I am just--on that subject I will
interrupt, but I know Mr. Sulmeyer, his report is coming out in
that regard that will be helpful, but you just mentioned
homeland, and it is a whole of government approach to this. I
am concerned of the threats to the grid that are there. We
issued requirements that bolster our nuclear reactors, or
nuclear power plants to make them stronger, more resilient
against a cyberattack, yet the NRC alone, in my district,
waived that requirement.
Now, don't you think that the NRC by themselves shouldn't
be in that position? Shouldn't there be, if there is a whole-
of-government approach, shouldn't there be input from the
Department of Homeland Security, from State, from other
entities of government?
Mr. Painter. Look, it is a classic risk management issue,
right, and that is a high risk, very high impact if things
happen, and I would say you need to be extraordinarily careful
in how you do these things. And I think it would benefit from
the intelligence community, from other communities in our
Government that can pass on information so that can be a more
reasoned decision.
Mr. Keating. I have 30 seconds left, so I couldn't agree
more. The NRC alone being able to do that without the input of
our intelligence agencies makes no sense whatsoever, and I
know, Mr. Sulmeyer, you wanted to get to that other question.
Mr. Sulmeyer. Well, just to say, I think the principles are
the same, which is, I don't want to bet the farm or deterrence.
I would much rather make us much harder to hack and prevent the
bad guy from being able to act. You can look at our play books
for State and local officials to do that for elections. We
should also be having the same facilities you described. Thank
you.
Mr. Keating. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. We go to Mr. Tom Garrett of Virginia.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would ask first,
Mr. Miller, I presume, sir, you are an attorney?
Mr. Miller. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garrett. That is a yes-or-no question. Thank you. I
don't have a lot of time.
Let me ask you this, would foreign interference in
elections be easier if sensitive national security information
was kept on a private server? That is a yes-or-no question,
too, sir.
Mr. Miller. You know, I----
Mr. Garrett. Yes or no, sir. Mr. Painter, would foreign
interference in elections be more difficult or less if
sensitive information was kept on a private server?
Mr. Painter. It depends on the security of the server.
Mr. Garrett. Okay. If it were a private server kept in the
bathroom closet in a Denver loft, might that impact it? Would
that be a highly secure server based on your training and
experience? Mr. Sulmeyer, yes or no?
Mr. Sulmeyer. I'm sorry, it does depend on the security
setup of each server.
Mr. Garrett. Okay. You guys are absolutely correct. And it
shocks me, though, with your amazing credentials that when
asked, Mr. Miller and Mr. Sulmeyer, if you are familiar with
the United States interfering in foreign elections that you
went, ``Oh, I don't know,'' because the United States media has
covered this extensively. In fact, Nina Agrawal in The Los
Angeles Times December 21, 2016, wrote a story entitled, ``The
U.S. is no Stranger to Interfering in the Elections of Other
Countries.'' Are any of you familiar with the U.S. interfering
in the elections of other countries via open source
information? Any of you, yes or no?
Okay. I am running out of time, gentlemen.
If someone kept information that was sensitive of a
national security politically sensitive nature on a private
server and they were found to have done such acts, would it be
useful to punish that information to prohibit or prevent that
sort of behavior in the future?
Okay. No yes or no answers there?
Okay. And if you heard that somebody had reached out from
the United States Senate to a foreign power, say, I don't know,
the Russians, and said, Will you work with me, I will help you
get media opportunities, it is important to, and I quote,
``counter the policies of this administration,'' would that be
troubling?
Okay. No answers on that.
Would it be troubling if a member of this elected body had
reached out to a foreign government, say, I don't know, the
Russians, and said it is important to undermine his prospect
for reelections. I will help you get contacts with the U.S.
media, would that be troubling?
No answers.
Are any of you gentlemen familiar with the story in the
London papers from 1992 detailing Senator Ted Kennedy's
reaching out to the Russians to interfere in the 1984
elections? No? Okay.
Are any of you familiar with the nuclear freeze movement?
Any of you? No? Okay.
Are any of you familiar with the funding mechanisms of the
nuclear freeze movement and their activities in the United
States Presidential elections? Would you be shocked to learn
that the nuclear freeze movement was largely funded by the
Soviet Union and that they worked against the Reagan elections
in 1980 and 1984?
Crickets.
Mr. Chairman, I will yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Will the gentleman yield his time to----
Mr. Garrett. Mr. Chairman, I take that back. I yield the
balance of my time to my colleague, Mr. Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, and let me just note
for the record, we have witnesses who are unable to give direct
answers to things as important as this reflects on your
integrity and--or your knowledge base. I don't know which. We
will let whoever is looking at this decide.
Also let me know note that for 30 years, I have never
turned down a colleague when he asked for an extra minute in a
situation like we had earlier. That discourtesy is unfortunate,
Mr. Chairman, as you have tried to develop a bipartisan
camaraderie here, even when you ask tough questions like what
we just heard, and I think that should give us all a little
something to think about.
Let me note also for the record, Mr. Painter intentionally
used time that was allocated to finding a truth in order to
obscure the dissemination of information based on a question by
a Member of Congress.
Mr. Cicilline. Mr. Chairman, I would ask that order be
maintained in this committee that the integrity of these
witnesses not be impugned, and that Mr. Rohrabacher doesn't
speak for this committee when he makes that kind of assessment.
Mr. Garrett. Mr. Chairman, I yielded my time to Mr.
Rohrabacher, and I would ask that he be granted the time taken
by this gentleman to whom I did not yield time.
Chairman Royce. There are 50 seconds remaining in the time.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I also find it absolutely unforgivable
that another member would use limited time to interfere with a
member's right to ask a very pertinent question. Now, and we
have 30 seconds, so I will ask you the yes-or-no question that
you refused to answer before. Is it more likely when knowing
that as has been reported by people who are retired
intelligence officers, that it is highly unlikely that the
Russians could have been the ones who hacked into the
Democratic National Committee and made those emails public,
that instead, it was highly likely that it was an inside job,
yes or no?
Mr. Painter. Sir, I do not accept that.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. Fine. You won't--what about you?
Mr. Miller. I am not exactly sure about your question
honestly.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. What about you? So we have witnesses
today who can't say anything that would be damaging to the
Democratic Party or to one side of this argument. Shame on you.
Mr. Painter. Sir, to be clear, I am concerned about any
interference by----
Mr. Rohrabacher. You do not have the floor.
Chairman Royce. Time has expired. All time has expired. We
go now to Mr. David Cicilline of Rhode Island.
Mr. Cicilline. First of all, I want to apologize to these
witnesses that you were just subjected to that discourteous
behavior, and I certainly want to applaud you for your
integrity, your candor today, your service to our country. And
I would like to begin, it is one thing to be unwilling to
respond to foreign interference in our elections in
cyberattacks in particular, but it is quite another thing to
speak in a way, and to describe Russian interference in our
elections as a hoax, as fake news to discredit intelligence
agencies that have done this work, have fired the FBI Director
because of the Russia thing.
So my question is, how does the behavior like that
undermine our efforts to protect our democracy and protect us
from these kinds of cyberattacks? Does it enhance it, or does
it make it more difficult, Mr. Painter?
Mr. Painter. Look, as I said before, I think we have to be
very clear that this is a huge issue, and that we are not going
to countenance this happening again. I think some of the things
I outlined about what we should be doing about this needs to
focus on the future, too, because this is going to happen
again. I think we need to be clear and clear-eyed of how
important and how big an issue this was and that this is
something that is not acceptable. The intelligence community
has concluded this in both administrations.
Mr. Cicilline. And is it important to have a strong
declaration from the leader of the country that says this will
not be tolerated, we will make certain there are consequences
if you do this again, and create some national commitment to
protect our democracy and our electoral institutions?
Mr. Painter. Yes, that is the kind of declaratory statement
I was talking about earlier.
Mr. Cicilline. Mr. Miller, do you agree that that is
necessary?
Mr. Miller. I think I absolutely agree that the types of
policies that are expressed in the Cyber Diplomacy Act should
be loudly broadcast. You know, everything we have been talking
about, keeping the Internet open and free, secure, et cetera.
Mr. Cicilline. Dr. Sulmeyer?
Mr. Sulmeyer. Yes, I agree.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. So with respect to kind of what
we are doing to respond to this very real threat, CIA Director
Pompeo said there is no question the Russians are coming back
in another attempt to interfere with our democratic
institutions, which, as you say, should not be a Republican or
Democratic issue, it is an issue that is important to every
single American in our country.
When we had the Attorney General before us, he said, and I
quote, ``I have not followed through to see where we are on
that,'' referring to an effort to review our practices and our
policies and legislative infrastructure to support our
democratic institutions. And he said very candidly, ``Are we at
the level we need to be at? I don't think so.'' Are you aware
of any effort underway by our Government, by the
administration, to prevent a reoccurrence of foreign
interference by a foreign adversary in our elections in 2018?
Mr. Painter. I am not aware of any high-level effort. That
is why I am saying that time is running out, and this is an
issue that we need to take seriously. And I think there are
certainly a lot of professionals in the government that are
looking at this issue with the FBI and the intelligence
agencies, and really across the government. I think this needs
to be a top priority.
Mr. Cicilline. Mr. Miller, are you aware of any high-level
effort coordinated at the administration to respond to this
very real threat in the elections which are only 10 months
away?
Mr. Miller. It is difficult to comment on the level, per
se, sir, but I am aware, I do a lot of work with the Department
of Homeland Security. I do know the Department of Homeland
Security is very much focused on this threat and working
operationally, for instance, with the States and others to try
to help.
Mr. Painter. And I would agree with that. I have seen that,
too.
Mr. Cicilline. Dr. Sulmeyer?
Mr. Sulmeyer. I would reiterate Mr. Miller's point about
DHS, but no in a broader national coordinated level, no.
Mr. Cicilline. And I think I just would like to conclude by
making reference to what Mr. Keating said. It would be very
useful to actually hear from administration officials and allow
the world to hear in a very strong declarative statement, not
only that they acknowledge that this happened, but their
commitment to be certain that it never happens again, and that
they are working in an interagency way to ensure that that
happens. I would love to hear from members of the
administration before our committee to actually talk about
that.
The final thing I want to ask you about is, we passed the
Countering America's Adversaries Through Sanctions Act
recently, and we, of course, learned that the administration
has failed to implement the sanctions that we imposed as a
direct result of Russian aggression and Russian interference in
our elections.
Some people have tried to explain that away and just said,
well, just the threat of doing that has been a deterrent, but,
of course, it was also to punish them for interfering in
American elections. What is the impact of the failure of the
administration not to implement these sanctions against Russia,
both in terms of their behavior and what kind of message it
sends to the rest of the world?
Mr. Painter. So I don't discount that the threat could have
an effect, as it did with the Chinese in bringing them to the
table. However, this is a huge issue, and the fact that we
haven't done it yet, and I know there is some confusion about
whether we will do it in the future, we need to take action. We
need to make sure there are consequences. Without consequences,
there is not deterrence, and there is an invitation to do it
again.
Mr. Sulmeyer. I would just say it risks emboldening our
adversaries very much.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. We go now to Ann Wagner of Missouri.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your leadership
on the issue. I was disturbed last month when China's civil
aviation regulator demanded an apology from Delta Airline for
listing Taiwan as a country on the Delta Web site. Also last
month, China blocked Marriott Web sites and intimidated the
country into groveling and apologizing for listing both Taiwan
and Tibet as separate countries. China's actions are egregious
of violations of basic expressions and speech. They were also
part of coordinated efforts to undermine regional stability.
Just a couple weeks ago, China unilaterally announced that
it would open disputed air routes through the Taiwan Strait. My
colleagues and I wrote a letter to the Chinese Ambassador
calling on China to enter into a constructive dialogue with
Taiwan. It is entirely inappropriate for China to use cyber
retaliation against American companies to push its political
agenda and aggression against Taiwan, and the administration
should be responding to this, I believe, at the highest level.
Mr. Painter, in 2014, Congress authorized the
administration to sanction foreign persons that commit cyber
espionage. What progress has the administration made in
sanctioning Chinese actors that repeatedly steal American IP?
Mr. Painter. Thank you for that question. About that same
time, I think, the administration also came out with an
Executive order listing sanctions for the first time that would
apply to cyber activities, a range of cyber activities,
including the activities you described. And I think that the
fact that those sanctions were in place were indeed one of the
things, among others, that drove the Chinese to come to the
table and after for a long time, saying there was no difference
between normal intelligence gathering, and taking trade secrets
to benefit your commercial sector for a long time saying there
was no difference at all and they didn't do either of them
saying there was a difference and they agreed not to do the
latter. And I think that was a landmark thing that was then
replicated at the G20. Australia has reached an agreement with
them; Germany has reached an agreement; the U.K. reached an
agreement, that is important.
Now, I do agree with you----
Mrs. Wagner. But what progress has been made, I guess, is
what I am concerned about, because it is my sense, to be
perfectly honest, that both the Obama and the Trump
administrations have kind of shied away from using that
authority?
Mr. Painter. Look, I think that has to be a tool in your
tool kit. And I think you have to be ready and willing to use
it, and as I said earlier, sanctions were not taken off the
table when that agreement was reached. If there is a violation,
if that agreement is violated, that has to be one of the tools
and should be one of the tools that is used. I would say that
that sanctions order from back in 2014 or 2013 has been
underused. I think we need to use that as one of our tools more
aggressively and in the right circumstances, not just with
China, but with others, when we see conduct----
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you.
Mr. Painter [continuing]. That rises to a certain level.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you for that testimony, because I
believe it has been underutilized also.
Mr. Miller, 2 years ago Congress created a private right of
action for victims of trade secret theft in U.S. courts. Have
companies doing business in China begun taking advantage of
this cause of action?
Mr. Miller. Thank you for the question. I am actually
really not aware of whether or not there have been a number of
cases filed under that cause of action.
Mrs. Wagner. I was just wondering if there are examples of
companies bucking the trend of referring not to report or
remedy losses?
Mr. Miller. I do know that certainly, ITI's companies take
intellectual property rights very seriously and, as I mentioned
earlier, it is concerning that some of the government policies
that we see around the globe that put U.S. companies, or any
company's intellectual property----
Mrs. Wagner. Relatedly, would you recommend that the
Department of Justice direct additional resources toward
prosecuting trade secret theft?
Mr. Miller. Trade secret theft is--I mean, I think I would,
yes, sure.
Mrs. Wagner. Just they put forward this private right of
action 2 years ago, we did here in Congress, and I just don't
see it utilized, and I see harm coming to many of our
companies.
Mr. Sulmeyer, in my brief time left, I believe that Russia
issued a requirement that would force companies to submit the
locations of data centers and servers to Russia's ICT
regulators. Is this a security concern given that hackers and
other malintentioned actors might know where to look for
important data?
Mr. Sulmeyer. Thank you, Congresswoman. Yes, I do believe
that would be one among many security concerns that the
regulators there enforce on companies, yes.
Mrs. Wagner. Outrageous. Mr. Chairman, I believe my time
has expired. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Joaquin Castro of Texas.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chairman. Mr. Painter, as the
chairman noted, the State Department just announced it plans to
establish a new Bureau for Cyberspace and Digital Economy.
Although elevating the issue of cyber diplomacy is positive, it
strikes me as odd that the Bureau would report to the Under
Secretary for Economic Growth, Energy, and the Environment
rather than the Under Secretary for Political Affairs. Would
the new Assistant Secretary be able to focus on a full range of
cybersecurity and other critical issues under this arrangement?
Mr. Painter. I quite agree with you. I think that that is
not the ideal arrangement. I think the Under Secretary for
Economic Affairs, by their title and their responsibilities,
really has to have that economic perspective. That is an
important perspective to be sure, but if you look at all these
issues, as I talked about in my written testimony, that include
hard issues of security deterrence, incident response, issues
around cyber operations and military actions in cyberspace,
that does not fit close to in that substantive rubric. So you
really need something really broad-based. I think the
committee's recommendation to be under the Under Secretary of
Political Affairs makes a lot more sense. It is a neutral
reporting chain. They can deal with security issues, human
rights issues that also don't fit.
There are sometimes conflicts between human rights issues
and economic issues, for instance, and security issues and
economic issues. You want a place where you can have full voice
of all those issues, particularly the security issues that are
really facing us today. And so I would say that I applaud the
fact that they have taken action. I think it is great they are
elevating it. That is exactly what should be done, but it would
not put it under the Under Secretary for Economic Affairs. I
would put it, at a minimum, under the Under Secretary for
Political Affairs, where you can have full force of these
issues.
Mr. Castro. No, thank you. And let me ask you three
gentlemen, whoever wants to answer. Besides sitting on the
Foreign Affairs Committee, I am also on the Intelligence
Committee, so as you know, we have had, for over a year now, a
front row seat in understanding how Russian hacking and basic
cyber operations has affected our democracy. But the threats,
as we mentioned in the committee, come not only from them but
other nations, and non-state actors. So one of the issues that
I have been working on, and I know others have also, is the
eventual development of mutual cyber defense treaties.
Right now, you know, you think about the existence of NATO,
for example, which mostly involves mutual defense when there is
a physical intrusion of one country against another. You know,
in your vision of the future, what is the future for any kind
of mutual response to cyberattacks and cyber intrusions, if
there is one?
Mr. Painter. Look, I think that is paramount actually. I
think that as we look at sharpening our deterrence tools, one
of the things we need to do is work with like-minded partners
who can act together to sanction bad actors in cyberspace, and
whether it is done by a treaty or it is a loose arrangement,
which I think might be more flexible and valuable in this case,
like we did with, for instance, the Proliferation Security
Initiative, or in money laundering other areas, which I think
probably may have worked better in the short term; that is
important. I can also say that some bilateral arrangements,
like with Australia and others, on larger defense issues, we
have added cyber to that and said mutual defense treaties with
those organizations would also involve cyber, and NATO has
stepped up their game on cyber, including in the last summit,
declaring it our domain.
Mr. Sulmeyer. I would just say, I think it is a great idea,
Congressman, to be pushing those kinds of arrangements. I would
try to distinguish at times between when the treaty would come
into effect during a crisis, and in steady state, and I
wouldn't want to just reserve it for when things get hot. I
would want to make sure that the information sharing that is
happening on a steady-state basis, so you never have to really
invoke the ones in a crisis.
Mr. Miller. Just to briefly add to those comments of both
my fellow witnesses, which I agree with, I absolutely think it
is a good idea. It is clear we need all the tools in the tool
shed, as Mr. Painter testified earlier, and multilateral
agreements and vehicles are really important, and, you know, as
well as the work that has been done in NATO certainly at a
higher level. There have been some good agreements made in
these areas at the G7 and G20, and then also, if you look at
other tools like the Budapest Convention on Cyber Crime, for
instance, there are ways to work together on these issues.
Mr. Castro. And it just it strikes me right now as a big
gap or void in our defense, really, that this is not fully
fleshed out essentially, that there is no kind of comprehensive
agreement among friendly nations, at least, or even strong
bilateral agreements to take--on a mutual cyber response and
what exactly--when you would respond, and how you would
respond, whether that involves private companies, for example,
in the United States. So my time is up, but thank you,
gentlemen, for your testimony.
Chairman Royce. If the gentleman would yield, I want to
make it clear, we passed legislation to direct what Mr. Joaquin
has suggested here, to direct that change in law and that bill
is in the Senate, and we are going to continue to engage with
the Department on who this new Assistant Secretary reports to.
However, the Department has made clear that this position
will handle national security issues, so I want to point that
out, including national security level cyber incidents, and
promotion and adoption of a national process and programs that
enable foreign territorial cyber threat detention, prevention,
and response, and build foreign capacity to protect the global
network.
So I think that with respect to the legislation we have
moved into the Senate, we are starting to see a movement, and I
especially thank the members of this committee for their
engagement on this issue here today. We now go to Congresswoman
Norma Torres of California.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to begin
by thanking our panelists for being here. Although I wasn't
here during the earlier discussion, I want to tell you that
this committee really prides itself from working on a
bipartisan way, and we often truly enjoy the folks in the
dialogue we have with our guests, so I apologize. It is not
reflective of the entire committee. Certainly it is not
reflective of me, and I am eager to hear your feedback on the
issues that I am going to cover.
According to the Freedom House in 2017, freedom on the net
report, governments around the world have dramatically
increased their efforts to manipulate information on social
media. We have seen this in our own hemisphere, Guatemala, for
example, there are armies of paid trolls who are actually
working to discredit the fight against corruption in the
country.
I don't know if they are tied to the government or not, but
they are called net centers, and they are working to undermine
the work that we are doing in that country, and we have
significant U.S. assistance in that country in the northern
triangle of Central America. So how do you get more information
about these net centers and other paid trolls, and how do we
find out who is actually paying for them? And how do we push
back on those efforts?
Mr. Painter. I mean, I think that information involves, for
instance, working with our posts around the world in those
countries, and with the intelligence community as well, and the
law enforcement community. I think the way we push back is--I
am concerned. I follow Freedom House's reports, and I think
over time freedom online has been challenged around the world
and this is a huge issue, and we have seen it by repressive
regimes and we have seen it increasing in other places, as
well.
And so, there are a number of things I think we can do. Our
democracy and human rights part of the State Department does a
number of grants around the world to promote freedom online,
and also to protect dissidents and others and their own
cybersecurity. There is something called the Freedom Online
Coalition that the U.S. was a founding member of, which is I
forget how many states it is now, it is over 30 that are around
the world who value freedom online and deal with these issues
and mutually come up with really good policies on these issues,
and this is an issue I think is ripe for that. They have looked
at things like network shutdowns and other issues in this
space.
So I think we really--and one of the things that we used to
do in the State Department is that we would raise freedom
online in all of our bilateral discussions with other
countries. And we would have these all-of-government
discussions and I would have someone from our democracy and
human rights there to talk about these issues. We need to
continue to do that. This is a big deal. We need to make sure
security is not used as a proxy by countries to overtake basic
freedoms like freedom online, so that has to be part of our
policy.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Congresswoman. To that, I would add,
we have certainly appropriately talked a lot about the security
policy and security challenges here today, and during this
hearing. You know, and I think few would question, again, the
important economic element of a lot of what we are talking
about here today, particularly cross-border data flows, but I
think your question highlights another really key element of,
you know, frankly the Cyber Diplomacy Act, and also what we are
talking about, which is these norms and values that this
country supports of a free and open Internet, we have a First
Amendment, free speech, privacy. All these issues are really
important as well, and that is why it is so important to have
the State Department and other U.S. Government entities out
there internationally trying to influence the rest of the
global community toward that way of thinking, because it is
under assault in a lot of different ways.
Ms. Torres. All right. It is a free and open Internet, and
we absolutely want to continue to have that, but it is a free
and open Internet for people, not necessarily for trolls or
paid trolls.
Mr. Miller. Sure, absolutely I would agree with that.
Ms. Torres. I think my time is almost up, so I am not going
to go into the next question. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Congresswoman. We will go to
Brad Schneider of Illinois.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Chairman Royce. Thank you for
having this meeting, and I just want to take a moment to thank
you for your longstanding commitment and dedication to the
bipartisanship within this committee and the commitment to work
together, and I mention that in the context of what I feel was
an outrageous and unjustified attack on our witnesses.
I appreciate you being here and sharing with us your
perspectives. I am grateful for the work you have done and
continue to do, and I hope that we don't see what we saw again.
And thank you for talking about the increasingly important
topic of cybersecurity. I have said this before in this
committee, but it is too important not to repeat again. The
U.S. intelligence agencies found that Russia did, in fact,
interfere in the 2016 Presidential election, and there is no
doubt in my mind that they will do it again, but it is not just
me saying this. Last July, the Director of National
Intelligence, Daniel Coats, said there was no dissent, I will
repeat, no dissent inside the United States intelligence
agencies about the conclusion that Russia used hacking and fake
news to interfere in our election.
And just last month, the CIA Director Mike Pompeo stated,
he believes Russia would seek to do so again. I will quote him:
``I have every expectation they will continue to try and do
that.''
I share that, and just to lift two statements from the
prepared testimony that the witnesses shared with us, Mr.
Painter, you said, The U.S. did not foresee the hybrid threat
posed by Russia's cyber-enabled attempt to undermine and
influence the 2016 election that goes to the core of our
democracy. I think that is critical. This is the foundation of
our democracy, and every American should have the right to know
that their vote will be counted, and that the integrity of
their vote and the vote as a whole will be protected.
And, Dr. Sulmeyer, you noted that deterring a repeat of
this conduct must be a priority for the entire United States
Government, and, indeed, for all nations whose elections are
susceptible to Russian interference, and I couldn't agree more.
Unfortunately, this administration has not acted to secure our
election systems and has not acted to punish those responsible
for the 2016 meddling.
This administration is leaving the door open for Russia to
interfere again. This is not just horrifying, it is
unacceptable. Congress passed, and the President signed into
law, the Countering America's Adversaries Through Sanctions
Act, yet the administration has ignored the law by not imposing
the strong sanctions laid out by CAATSA.
That is why I continue to raise the alarm regarding the
seriousness of this situation, and why I join together with my
colleague, former chairman Ileana Ros-Lehtinen of this
committee, chairman of the subcommittee, to introduce the
Defending Elections from Threats By Establishing Redlines, or
the DETER Act. This bill would make clear that there will be
consequences for those who interfere in our elections, and
would ensure the United States Government had an actual
strategy to prevent such interference. So I would like to ask
the witnesses today a number of questions. First, what do you
believe Putin hopes to achieve by interfering in our democratic
process, and to what degree of certainty do you believe he will
seek to do so in the elections coming up in November?
Mr. Painter. My sense, and I think what the intelligence
community has said, too, is that to sow chaos, distrust, to
undermine democratic systems, both here and around the world.
That is, I think, the ultimate goal. And I think the likelihood
this is going to happen in 2018, and also around the world, is
incredibly high. There is no reason it wouldn't happen.
Mr. Schneider. Mr. Miller?
Mr. Miller. I don't see any evidence to suggest that it is
not likely to happen again for sure.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you. Dr. Sulmeyer?
Mr. Sulmeyer. I think the motive is for Putin to increase
his and Russia's relative power. That is why they are doing
what they are doing, and yes, it seems inevitable they will do
it again.
Mr. Schneider. And to some extent, do you have a sense that
the administration's failure to respond is likely to embolden
the Russians, and embolden Putin in their efforts to undermine
our democracy?
Mr. Painter. Yes. I think we need to be strong. We need to
be clear about what the consequences are. Whether that deters
them or not, I don't know, but we need to be as clear as we can
about that because it is likely to happen again.
Mr. Schneider. Dr. Sulmeyer, I think you were going to say
something.
Mr. Sulmeyer. Yes, we have to, but we can't rely on it, and
that is why my colleagues at the Belfer Center have tried to go
about helping state and local officials protect themselves as
much as possible.
Mr. Schneider. Okay. And we are 9 months away from the
election, 9 months from tomorrow. What should the
administration be doing, what more can we do to help make sure
that every vote will count, that every American knows that the
integrity of their vote will be protected?
Mr. Painter. So I outlined some of these earlier, but one
of them is exactly what Mr. Sulmeyer said. Working with the
State and local authorities and DHS is doing some of this, but
really upping that game to protect those systems to make sure
they are secure. That is a technical part. Convening an
interagency group at a high level to really focus on this;
wherever it is coming from, whether it is Russia or other
countries that we can really deal with this; enhancing our
deterrence posture and tools we can use for deterrence; and
coming up with a really strong declaratory message about what
the problems are, what the consequences will be for doing this.
And finally, I think working as has been happening, but working
with social media and others to make sure that we are trying to
cut off those areas of attack.
Mr. Schneider. Mr. Miller?
Mr. Miller. I would focus again on DHS and the role that
they play there. Again, as has been mentioned a few times, they
are working with local officials, and that is absolutely
important. It is also very important, DHS is kind of on the
front lines of the public-private partnership between industry
and working with industry partners and also, some of the things
that stretch beyond this issue, like sharing threat information
between the government and industry to try to figure out what
is happening, and avoid it is really important.
Mr. Schneider. I have gone well past my time. Thank you
again for your testimony today. Chairman, thank you for having
this hearing. I hope we will continue to focus on this very
important issue. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. And our last questioning comes
from Mr. Brad Sherman of California.
Mr. Sherman. I want to build on the gentleman from
Illinois' questioning. It is always nice to have an office,
give it importance, give it the highest possible title. But if
we are not serious about cybersecurity, it is just an office.
We know that Russia cyber hacked for the purpose of affecting
our election. And Congress acted. Congress passed CAATSA, and
every section of it that is mandatory is ignored. So one
wonders why create offices if the executive branch--I mean, why
are we here? It is much warmer back in California. I am here to
try to legislate. We pass laws and the President just ignores
them, so let's go through. CAATSA Section 225 says, ``The
President shall impose sections on those who invest in certain
deep or Arctic oil locations with Russia provided a September
1, 2017, deadline.'' Nothing was done.
Then we have the bank transactions with especially
designated nationals. No bank has been sanctioned for a
significant transaction with a Russian specially designated
national. That is Section 226 of CAATSA. But of greatest
concern is Section 231, because on this one, we know what the
administration is going to do. They have said officially we
refuse to follow the statute, because our oath to the
Constitution means nothing, and frankly, Congress means
nothing. Because that law says that there have to be sanctions
against those who do business with Russia's defense and intel
complexes.
Now, it does have a waiver provision, also ignored by the
administration. What do they do? They issue a press release
basically saying, Congress, thanks for passing the law that
says we shall do something. We have determined it is
unnecessary. We are not going to do it.
This is something that I think the Russians would
understand. Their Duma is pretty much an advisory body. When it
was initially created, it was an advisory body to the czar, and
I feel that perhaps we should adjust the pay here to be no
higher than that of the 1905 Duma, since our legislation has no
more effect or legislative actions.
And I will ask any of the witnesses, how are we going to
have an effective person in the State Department working on
cyber issues if we have a policy of not doing anything when the
most vital parts of our country are attacked through a cyber
hack? Mr. Painter?
Mr. Painter. So structure is important, but you are quite
right, structure alone doesn't solve the problem. You have to
have structure----
Mr. Sherman. Structure can actually make the problem worse
by disguising the fact that you are doing nothing about the
problem.
Mr. Painter. Structure is not the only thing. You need a
good structure to actually lead this and communicate to the
rest of the world it is important. However, you also need----
Mr. Sherman. I think we have communicated to the world that
is not important.
Mr. Painter. But you are quite right. You need strong
policies to actually enforce this and make sure that when you
have attacks on this--alleged attacks or other attacks too,
that there are consequences for those actors. And part of that
is deterrence, but part of that is responding to incidents, and
we need to do this. I hope this new Bureau actually does this,
and is empowered to do this and that is going to be important.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. Now, you served as the State
Department's Coordinator for Cyber Issues running an office
that was eliminated days before you were scheduled to testify
before the committee last summer. A lower level office was
created in its stead. What did we lose by actually going
backward on this rather than forward?
Mr. Painter. Look, I am heartened that the State Department
has seen to provide a higher level structure. That is great.
Again, I have problems about where it reports, given the range
of issues it involves, because people are prisoners of their
perspective, quite frankly, and someone who is an economic
Under Secretary is going to be in that perspective. However, we
had a lot of momentum going, and to say for a 6-month period or
longer, that this was not, or communicate this is not a high
priority, has an effect both with our adversaries and with our
friends, and I don't understand why we did that. I think when
we have a strategy in place to make even higher up, great, but
why interrupt that in the interim?
Mr. Sherman. Unless you want to signal to the world and to
Moscow that it isn't important. Look, I am a cosponsor of H.R.
3776, the Cyber Diplomacy Act. We passed this in the House. I
think it had overwhelming support. We need U.S. international
engagement on these cyber issues but just boxes in the State
Department chart don't accomplish anything if you are not
willing to take action. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Let me just clarify that the administration
has taken steps to implement CAATSA. They have briefed staff on
both sides of the aisle at this point. Let me just make this
point on their approach, which--and this is the point I want to
make. Instead of sanctioning our allies that buy Russian
weapons, what they are doing, at this point, is pressuring
those allies to wind down those sales. I just want that
understood.
Mr. Sherman. If the gentleman will yield.
Chairman Royce. But of course.
Mr. Sherman. First of all, law is law. You can't say we are
going to violate the law because we have got a better deal to
achieve your purpose.
Chairman Royce. I understand that in terms of their
briefing with our staff here, they understand, or they
articulate that this complies with the letter and spirit of the
law as they now implement--without going through a whole debate
in terms of what was laid out in the law and their methodology
I am just explaining.
Mr. Sherman. Well, Turkey is going to give $2.5 billion to
the military complex of Russia, and they are not going to be
sanctioned, and we are going to be told that the fact that you
have passed a law doesn't matter. We are not even going to even
look at the waiver provisions of the law. We are going to
ignore the law, and we have got a better idea and we are
smarter than Congress, and trust us, we are there on your side,
but we are going to ignore your legislation.
The fact is, I think Turkey fully understands they can send
$2.5 billion to the Russians and to their military complex, and
nothing will be done by this administration, except they will
tell us privately and publicly that they know better, and that
they are really on our side and they are really going to
achieve our purposes.
Chairman Royce. Let me just add--reclaiming my time--it is
up, the way it is written it is up to the administration to
determine what constitutes a significant transaction, but they
have also made clear to us in their discussions, that these
designations are forthcoming. So I am just, for the record,
clarifying those points.
I do know----
Mr. Sherman. If you will yield for just a second. If the
administration wants to go public and say $2.5 billion from
Turkey is not a significant transaction, let them have the guts
to do so in public. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. And with that, I think we should go to our
remaining member here with questions, and I am going to, at
this point, give Mike McCaul the chairman's chair here, since I
am supposed to be in the Financial Services Committee at this
moment with Secretary Mnuchin. I thank all of our witnesses for
their patience today especially given the votes that we had
across the building. Thank you.
Mr. McCaul [presiding]. Let me recognize myself. And I
chair the Homeland Security Committee, but I really enjoy being
on this committee. It is a great intersection of similar
issues, and cyber is really one of them, and I think I have
done a lot on Homeland in terms of legislation, and I think at
the State Department, and Chris Painter and I go way back at
DOJ.
Cyber is a mission I would like to see elevated at the
State Department. It is the only Department that can work with
other countries to establish rules of the road, if you will,
where we exist in a world where there are no, as you mentioned,
real consequences to a lot of these cyber events that we have
been discussing. And I just want to bring up one because I
think it involves probably all three of you and myself, and
that is the breach of 20 million security clearances at OPM
where they stole mine, and I am sure Mr. Painter's and our
fingerprints and all that. Were there any consequences to that
breach, Mr. Painter?
Mr. Painter. I think there were. There were a lot of things
said during that, after that. I think one of the problems there
is espionage every country around the world does intelligence
gathering. If that is classic espionage, if that is what that
was, that is harder to deter, quite frankly, because every
government other--you are not going to have an agreement not to
actually do intelligence gathering with other countries. But at
the same time, that doesn't change the fact that we need to
harden our targets as much as possible, and when that happens,
we don't have to like it either, we can do things in response
to it.
Mr. McCaul. I know in 2015, the--maybe one thing that there
was a meeting I think that was the only thing I saw take place
but between the United States and China, and China agreed to
refrain from conducting or supporting cyber-enabled theft of
intellectual property, including trade secrets and other
confidential business information, and I think I know the
answer to this question but is China abiding with that
agreement currently?
Mr. Painter. I think, to some extent, the jury is out. I
think a lot of the people who track this in the private sector
said there was a large diminution in that kind of activity. It
doesn't mean that intrusions from China stopped, by my means.
It means that kind of commercial espionage to benefit their
commercial sector, which is something we don't do, we don't
think any country should do, and they agreed not to do
diminished substantially.
Now, there are have been mixed reports recently about that.
I think if there is a breach of that agreement we have to take
it seriously and we have to make sure there are consequences
for that, but I think it did, at least, have an effect, and it
was then enshrined in the G20 statement and with other
countries around the world, so there was pressure not just from
us, but from other countries too because they were also victims
of this.
Mr. McCaul. Like in any agreement, I mean, what are the
penalties for violating that agreement?
Mr. Painter. Yes, I mean the penalties, like I said,
nothing was taken off the table. We didn't say, Hey, if you
agree to this, we are not going to sanction you. We didn't give
anything for that, right, so those are all still on the table.
If we see that happening the government can use sanctions. The
government can use, you know, other law enforcement actions
like they have before against the PLA officers. There is still
a range of things that the U.S. can do and the U.S. and its
allies can do in appropriate circumstances, and you want to
make sure you have the right factual basis to do that.
Mr. McCaul. In the----
Mr. Painter. I would submit, however, as I said before, I
think our tool set is still too slim. I any we need to develop
other tools to respond to these kinds of threats in cyberspace.
Mr. McCaul. Do you agree that if a NATO country was
attacked in an act of cyber warfare, that Article 5 would apply
and be invoked?
Mr. Painter. I absolutely do. In fact, NATO said that that
was a fact. I mean, Article 5 is a fact-specific, case-by-case
basis. It has been invoked once on 9/11, but I think if it is a
sufficient attack that causes the same kind of death and injury
that a physical one did, absolutely it could be involved in a
case-by-case basis.
Mr. McCaul. The Russian interference in our elections,
Congress passed sanctions on Russia for that. Were there any
other consequences taken by the administration for that, and I
got briefed by Jeh Johnson and DNI Clapper during the previous
administration on that around October before the elections
occurred. It was clear to me it was happening. The attribution
was clear. I didn't see--my advice was to call it out for what
it was, and that there should be consequences to bad behavior
like that.
Mr. Painter. I would agree that the consequences should be
imposed. There were a number of them in December at the end of
the administration. There was some economic sanctions. There
were throwing a number of diplomats out of the country and
closing compounds. There were a number of things done. But for
deterrence to actually work, it has to be timely, and 6 months
later is a long time, and that has to continue because the
threat is still there.
So I think the cyber community didn't really understand the
nature of this threat. We knew about attacks against
infrastructure. We knew about potential theft of intellectual
property. We weren't focused on this hybrid threat when it
happened.
Mr. McCaul. Well, I have been working on my committee,
Homeland. DHS will be--as we go into 2018 elections, there is
no question that they are going to try to do this again.
Mr. Painter. Yes.
Mr. McCaul. In fact, there is some evidence they are
already interfering in some U.S. Senate races. And--well, it is
a good question for all three of you. What role do you think
the Federal Government could play in the 2018 elections?
Mr. Painter. So, the things I have laid out, and I am not
the only one. Rick Ledgett and others have talked about this in
the past. You know, a strong, clear declaratory statement that
this is unacceptable and we will take action, a task force that
is an interagency task force to work on this and also to deal
with other parties, and particularly social media and others,
working as has been happened, but working with the State and
local election officials to actually secure their systems. I
know DHS is doing some of that, but really up our game
substantially there. Having the willingness to use tools to
deter this action and actually having more tools there. That is
just part of the response.
And then, frankly, working with other countries. Other
countries are facing the same problem, not in 2018 elections,
but in elections that they have. And maybe looking at some of
the things they have done to push back against this and try to
go after these disinformation campaigns.
The one thing I would say is this is not just a cyber
problem, right? This has to be a hybrid solution to a hybrid
threat. We have to have other players in the room, and not just
the cyber people.
Mr. McCaul. Well, I was in France right before Macron's
election. I don't think the French bought into the propaganda.
I was in Estonia and Ukraine. I mean, talk about a laboratory
for malicious behavior. And I think we are learning a lot from
that experience.
Mr. Painter. And I should mention that, as we stated
earlier, Michael Sulmeyer has been working--Belfer has been
working on some of these issues too, so I don't know if you
address this quickly. I have taken all the time.
Mr. McCaul. My time has expired, but I guess I am in the
chair, so----
Mr. Sulmeyer. Thank you for the opportunity to plug the
Belfer Center, Chris. But that is why we have devoted work over
the last year to try and help State and local officials and
also campaigns just protect themselves and be harder to hack in
the absence of Federal Government doing a lot over the last
year. So I would like to see, in terms of collection
priorities, threats to the election be at the top. I don't know
where they are. I am not in. But then I would like to make sure
that there is a willingness to neuter attackers before they
strike abroad. Then I would like to be able to see the
willingness to reducing classification or declassify
information that should get into the hands of those who can use
it, make it actionable, and defend themselves.
Mr. McCaul. That is very good.
Let me just say in closing that, first of all, Chris, you
did a fantastic job at State as the coordinator for cyber
since--I guess 2011 is when that was created. Secretary
Tillerson then tried to merge that office with the Bureau of
Economic and Business Affairs. And I--they are sort of an
interim step. But in my judgment, as I try to create a cyber
agency within DHS, it almost appeared as if it was not a
priority if you are merging it with another office like that. I
would like to see a cyber office that makes it a priority. And
I think that is what the Cyber Diplomacy Act that I worked with
the chairman on to codify the Office of Cyber issues led by a
Senate-confirmed Ambassador precisely what we are trying to do
here, is elevate the priority and the mission within the State
Department.
Do all three of you agree with this bill?
Mr. Painter. I completely agree with this. I think the
bill's formulation is absolutely correct. I know the State
Department just today sent a letter saying they were going to
create a Bureau dealing with some of these issues, which is
great. However, the way its reporting structure is through the
economic Under Secretary which, given the breadth of these
issues and the security issues, doesn't make a lot of sense. I
think the bill's statement should be through the political
Under Secretary or higher makes a lot more sense as a cross-
cutting issue. But I think that bill, frankly, helped motivate
some of these changes, and that is good. We need to really keep
the pressure on.
Mr. McCaul. That is good.
Mr. Miller.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Chairman McCaul, for now anyway,
right?
Yeah, I also--and we, ITI, agree with the stated objectives
of the Cyber Diplomacy Act. And those probably don't need any
repeating here. But also the proposed follow-through on
actually how you are going to keep the Internet open and free,
while also protecting security and promoting data flows.
One of the things that is really important about that is,
number one, having a State Department cyber coordinator's
office that really is focused on the cyber issues. And we have
heard that here today. But then also, the bill suggests the
necessary follow-through. As Mr. Painter mentioned earlier,
there was a lot of good progress made, both bilaterally and
multilaterally in recent years by State. But you need to hold
the counterparties accountable for the agreements that they are
signing. And we really need to keep furthering these types of
approaches, because these issues are not getting easier, they
are getting harder and we need to be working together on this
with our allies.
Mr. McCaul. I agree completely.
Dr. Sulmeyer.
Mr. Sulmeyer. Same answer but different reason, if I might
offer, which is that from an interagency or non-State
Department perspective, having a dedicated office like Chris
Painter ran, gives you the touch point. You know who to call
when you are at DOD or you are at a different part of the
government. And that is how policymaking works is not always at
the Secretary level but also at the lower levels of the
bureaucracy. So I am a big supporter of this for additional
reasons, because it helps the rest of the government come
together and play as a team.
Mr. McCaul. Yeah. I mean, it is just a point of contact, I
think, for other departments.
Well, anyway, I want to thank all of you for your testimony
and your expertise and leadership on this very important issue.
I think it is very often overlooked as some sort of technical
in-the-ether type thing. But in reality it is very real, and it
is a threat on many levels, so I appreciate your leadership on
this issue.
And with that, the committee now stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:58 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
Material Submitted for the Record
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Edward R. Royce, a
Representative in Congress from the State of California, and chairman,
Committee on Foreign Affairs
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]