- GAO REPORT ON TRIBAL ACCESS TO SPECTRUM: PROMOTING COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES IN INDIAN COUNTRY
[Senate Hearing 116-116]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-116
GAO REPORT ON TRIBAL ACCESS TO SPECTRUM: PROMOTING COMMUNICATIONS
SERVICES IN INDIAN COUNTRY
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON INDIAN AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
SEPTEMBER 18, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Indian Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-465 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON INDIAN AFFAIRS
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota, Chairman
TOM UDALL, New Mexico, Vice Chairman
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska
JON TESTER, Montana,
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
STEVE DAINES, Montana
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
T. Michael Andrews, Majority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Jennifer Romero, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hearing held on September 18, 2019...............................
1
Statement of Senator Cortez Masto................................
26
Statement of Senator Daines......................................
28
Statement of Senator Hoeven......................................
1
Statement of Senator Lankford....................................
35
Statement of Senator McSally.....................................
31
Statement of Senator Schatz......................................
29
Statement of Senator Smith.......................................
33
Statement of Senator Udall.......................................
2
Witnesses
Nelson, Belinda, Chairperson, Gila River Telecommunications, Inc.
20
Prepared statement...........................................
21
Sekaquaptewa, Kimball, Chief Technology Director, Santa Fe Indian
School.........................................................
15
Prepared statement...........................................
17
Stockdale, Jr., Donald K., Chief, Wireless Telecommunications
Bureau, Federal Communications Commission......................
11
Prepared statement...........................................
12
Von Ah, Andrew, Director, Physical Infrastructure Issues, U.S.
Government Accountability Office...............................
3
Prepared statement...........................................
5
Appendix
Ortiz, Raymond V., Board Member/Lead Tech, RediNet, prepared
statement......................................................
46
Taylor, Loris, President/CEO, Native Public Media, prepared
statement......................................................
41
Response to written questions submitted by Hon. Steve Daines to:
Donald K Stockdale...........................................
52
Andrew Von Ah................................................
48
Response to written questions submitted by Hon. Jon Tester to:
Belinda Nelson...............................................
56
Donald K Stockdale...........................................
53
Kimball Sekaquaptewa.........................................
54
Andrew Von Ah................................................
47
Response to written questions submitted by Hon. Tom Udall to
Donald K Stockdale.............................................
48
GAO REPORT ON TRIBAL ACCESS TO
SPECTRUM: PROMOTING COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES IN INDIAN COUNTRY
----------
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 18, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Indian Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:30 p.m. in room
124, U.S. Capitol Building, Hon. John Hoeven, Chairman of the
Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN HOEVEN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NORTH DAKOTA
The Chairman. Good afternoon. I will call this hearing to
order.
Good afternoon. Thank you to our witnesses for being here.
Today we will examine the last of three reports from the
Government Accountability Office regarding broadband, internet
and other telecommunications access on tribal land. Having the
ability to readily access broadband furthers economic
development, educational achievement and public health and
safety. Unfortunately, tribal populations have lower levels of
broadband access relative to others in the United States.
Recognizing the need to address this problem, in 2016,
Senators on this Committee sent a letter to the GAO Comptroller
General seeking research and analysis in response to questions
on the availability of high-speed internet access and other
advanced telecommunications services on tribal lands. In
particular, Senators asked for an analysis of three main
topics.
First, examine how the Federal Communications Commission
collects, validates and uses information on broadband
availability to create mapping data which is used to inform
Federal agencies on locations where the need for improvement is
the greatest.
Second, analyze the experience tribes have had with public-
private partnerships that increase high-speed internet
availability as well as funding barriers for programs
administered by Rural Utilities Service within the Department
of Agriculture.
And, third, research the availability of wireless spectrum
in Indian Country and the barriers tribes face in accessing
licensed spectrum across Indian Country.
The GAO has responded to the 2016 request letter in three
separate reports. Today, the Committee will receive testimony
on the content and recommendations in the third report on
tribal access to spectrum. This report, entitled FCC Should
Undertake Efforts to Better Promote Tribal Access to Spectrum,
discusses, among other things, the lack of availability of
licensed spectrum across Indian lands.
The Committee is interested to hear from the GAO on what
actions the FCC may take to prioritize tribal needs for
licensed spectrum across tribal lands. More specifically, the
Committee is eager to learn how the FCC can improve its
training, technical assistance and consultation with tribal
governments and organizations on spectrum-related matters.
Further, the Committee is concerned about the availability
of FCC data regarding unused licensed spectrum that exists over
tribal lands. Making this information public and readily
available would eliminate unnecessary steps tribes must take to
obtain spectrum licenses. And that is a key piece we want to
focus in on today.
With that, I want to say to the witnesses, welcome, thanks
for being here, thanks for testifying today. I want to thank
the FCC for working with the Committee to schedule so we can
have a meaningful hearing.
I will now turn to our Vice Chairman, Senator Udall.
STATEMENT OF HON. TOM UDALL,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NEW MEXICO
Senator Udall. Thank you so much, Chairman Hoeven, and
thank you for calling today's hearing on tribal access to
spectrum. I want to thank all the witnesses for being here and
give a special welcome to Kimball Sekaquaptewa, Chief
Technology Director at Santa Fe Indian School in my home State
of New Mexico. Welcome, Kimball, and I am pleased you were able
to join us today.
Telecommunications is at the heart of many changes our
Nation has seen in the last decade and access to fast, reliable
and affordable broadband has changed the way people live, work
and communicate. But too many tribal governments and their
communities lack access to affordable, reliable broadband
service, creating a barrier to participating in our modern
economy, a barrier to harnessing their economic development
potential.
For instance, this tribal digital divide hinders tribal
communities from developing online businesses, accessing
telemedicine services, and using online educational tools. So I
ask all of us today, are we doing enough? Let's start with some
data provided by the FCC.
In 2018, the FCC reported an estimated 35 percent of
Americans living in tribal lands lacked access to broadband
services. This compared to 8 percent of all Americans. In May
of this year, the FCC reported that just 46 percent of housing
units on rural tribal lands have access to fixed broadband
service. And in New Mexico, as of 2016, only about 24 percent
of residents living on tribal lands had broadband access.
These statistics, as concerning as they are, likely do not
capture the full scope of the tribal digital divide. We know
this because the FCC itself has acknowledged that it relies on
insufficient data, and is currently undergoing reforms to its
data collection process.
So it is inexplicable that the FCC's own broadband
deployment report issued in May of this year found that
broadband service is being provided to all Americans, including
residents located on tribal lands in a ``reasonable and timely
fashion.'' This finding not only closely misrepresents the
well-documented digital divide facing tribal communities, it
provides cover for the FCC to skirt its statutory obligation to
take immediate action to accelerate deployment of advanced
telecommunications capability in rural areas like much of
Indian Country.
Like many fellow members on this Committee, I co-sponsored
the Broadband Data Act, a bipartisan bill that requires the FCC
to improve its data collection relating to broadband. Because,
simply put, better data equals better access. And for Indian
Country in particular, that will result in better opportunities
to pursue economic development on tribal lands.
This Committee has examined the unique challenges to
economic development on tribal trust lands. With today's
hearing, we acknowledge that access to broadband is among those
challenges.
So in addressing the tribal digital divide, the FCC must
view Indian tribes as partners, not constituents or customers.
Yet, it appears, by its latest order scaling back tribal access
that the agency is not doing enough, even though its own
guidance expresses a commitment to promote a government-to-
government relationship with Indian tribes and engage in
meaningful tribal consultation.
After these orders were overturned on appeal, I am hopeful
that the FCC has started to reevaluate not only how it
interacts with Indian Tribes, but also how it listens to them.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Vice Chairman Udall.
Do other members have an opening statement? All right, then
we will proceed to our witnesses.
First, we will hear from Mr. Andrew Von Ah, Director of
physical Infrastructure Issues for the GAO. Thank you for being
here. Mr. Don Stockdale will be next, Chief, Wireless
Telecommunications Bureau, FCC. We appreciate your being here.
Then Ms. Belinda Nelson, Chairperson Gila River
Telecommunications, Chandler, Arizona. And Ms. Kimball
Sekaquaptewa. She is the Chief Technology Director, Santa Fe
Indian School, in Santa Fe, in the great State of New Mexico.
Senator Udall. That is very good.
The Chairman. Did I get that right?
Senator Udall. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Von Ah, thanks for being here. Please go ahead.
STATEMENT OF ANDREW VON AH, DIRECTOR, PHYSICAL
INFRASTRUCTURE ISSUES, U.S. GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
Mr. Von Ah. Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman Udall, members
of the Committee, thank you for having me, and thank you for
the opportunity to discuss our recent work on access to
spectrum to deliver wireless broadband service in tribal lands.
We have previously reported and testified on the
difficulties of bringing broadband service to tribal lands.
Where there is challenging terrain and low population
densities, there are increased costs and reducing census for
deployment of high-speed internet, particularly wireline
technologies, which can be costly to install.
Wireless technologies, however, can be cost effective in
such areas, but access to spectrum and in particular, licensed
spectrum, is key for tribal entities to be able to provide such
service.
My remarks today are based on our 2018 report for this
Committee, which examined tribal entities' ability to obtain
access to spectrum to provide broadband services, and FCC's
efforts to promote and support their efforts in doing so. With
respect to tribal entities' ability to obtain and access
licensed spectrum, we have found that very few have been able
to do so. A number of barriers hamper their efforts.
In our analysis, we identified just 18 tribal entities that
held active spectrum licenses and bands that can be used for
broadband. While several tribal entities also provide broadband
over unlicensed spectrum, there are limitations to using that
spectrum in terms of interference and speed, and such spectrum
is not an option for some tribal lands.
Licensed spectrum offers better technical performance, as
well as enhanced ability to deliver additional internet
service, the ability to sell or lease spectrum for profit,
additional opportunities to obtain Federal funding through the
Universal Service Fund, which requires carriers to have access
to licensed spectrum.
Barriers for tribal entities to obtain licensed spectrum
include the general lack of available licenses, the high cost
of acquiring such spectrum at auction, which can cost millions
of dollars, and difficulties obtaining license for unused
spectrum over tribal lands through the secondary market.
Specific challenges in access the secondary market include a
lack of willing sellers, trouble identifying existing license
holders, and a lack of clarity in how to pursue those
transactions.
To promote and support tribal access to licensed spectrum,
we have found that the effectiveness of FCCs' actions has been
somewhat limited. In particular, our report focused on
information that FCC could make available to tribal entities to
address some of the challenges associated with accessing those
secondary markets. We found that, for example, FCC does not
analyze the extent that unused licensed spectrum exists over
tribal lands, or communicate information to tribes that could
be beneficial to them in their efforts to obtain spectrum in
the secondary market, such as, quite simply, who owns the
unused spectrum.
Accordingly, we made recommendations to FCC to analyze data
to better understand the need for spectrum on tribal lands, and
the extent that unused spectrum license exists. We also
recommended that FCC make information on spectrum license
holders more accessible and easier to understand, to promote
tribal entities' ability to purchase or lease spectrum licenses
from other providers.
FCC agreed with our recommendations. In terms of collecting
data, FCC said they would take and analyze a sample of spectrum
licenses on tribal lands to inform its policies. FCC indicated
that this analysis would be completed by the end of this year.
FCC also pointed to a multi-year update of its universal
licensing system, which, if any of you have used it, can be a
little bit user unfriendly, that would provide easier access to
information on spectrum license holders to interested parties.
They have also highlighted recent and planned outreach to
tribes where access to licensed spectrum was discussed.
Also, in July of this year, as you well know, FCC finalized
an order changing the use of the 2.5 gigahertz band of
spectrum, which included a priority firing window for tribal
entities to obtain licenses for unused portions of the band.
While providing this priority access to the spectrum is
certainly a step forward, this spectrum may not be available
across some tribal lands, and there can be technical and other
limitations in using this band to provide broadband services.
Therefore, providing robust information to help enable
secondary market transactions and greater access to unused
spectrum over tribal lands remains a key challenge.
Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman Udall, members of the
Committee, thank you for this opportunity. I would be happy to
address any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Von Ah follows:]
Prepared Statement of Andrew Von Ah, Director, Physical Infrastructure
Issues, U.S. Government Accountability Office
Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman Udall, and Members of the Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss our November 2018 report
on tribal access to and use of spectrum for broadband services. \1\
Broadband service on tribal lands continues to lag behind the rest of
the country, especially on rural tribal lands. \2\ According to the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), this gap could hinder tribal
efforts to promote self-governance, economic opportunity, education,
public safety, and cultural preservation. In prior work, we found that
one barrier to increasing broadband access on tribal lands is the cost
of deploying infrastructure in areas with challenging terrain. \3\
However, broadband service can be delivered through wireless
technologies using radio frequency spectrum, and according to FCC, such
wireless technologies are more cost-effective for some remote and
sparsely populated areas, such as tribal lands. \4\ In 2010, FCC
reported that increasing tribal access to and use of spectrum would
create additional opportunities to expand broadband service on tribal
lands. \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ GAO, Tribal Broadband: FCC Should Undertake Efforts to Better
Promote Tribal Access to Spectrum, GAO-19-75 (Washington, D.C.: Nov.
14, 2018).
\2\ In this testimony, the term ``tribal lands'' refers to any
federally recognized Indian tribe's reservation, off-reservation trust
lands, pueblo, or colony; land held in trust by the federal government
for Indian(s); and Alaska Native regions established pursuant to the
Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, but do not include Oklahoma Tribal
Statistical Areas.
\3\ GAO, Telecommunications: Challenges to Assessing and Improving
Telecommunications for Native Americans on Tribal Lands, GAO-06-189
(Washington, D.C.: Jan. 11, 2006) and GAO, Telecommunications:
Additional Coordination and Performance Measurement Needed for High-
Speed Internet Access Programs on Tribal Lands, GAO-16-222 (Washington,
D.C.: Jan. 29, 2016).
\4\ Congress has delegated responsibility for regulating commercial
and other nonfederal spectrum use to FCC, and as part of its
responsibilities, FCC assigns spectrum licenses, such as through
auctions; oversees secondary market transactions; and promulgates
regulations for the use of licensed and unlicensed spectrum. Regarding
the secondary market, FCC's rules permit licensees to lease portions of
their licensed spectrum rights to others.
\5\ In March 2010, an FCC task force issued the National Broadband
Plan that included a centralized vision for achieving affordability and
maximizing use of high-speed Internet. See FCC, Connecting America: The
National Broadband Plan (Washington, D.C.: 2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
My remarks today are based on the November 2018 report and selected
updates and address (1) the ability of tribal governments and
telecommunications providers, which we refer to as ``tribal entities,''
to obtain and access spectrum to provide broadband services on tribal
lands and the reported barriers that may exist, and (2) the extent to
which FCC promotes and supports tribal efforts to obtain and access
spectrum for broadband services. For our report, we reviewed relevant
statutes and regulations, FCC documents, \6\ and academic and
government publications on spectrum-related issues on tribal lands. We
analyzed FCC data on spectrum auction applicants and license holders as
of September 6, 2018 and reviewed the list of federally recognized
tribes published in the Federal Register. To obtain stakeholder views,
we interviewed stakeholders, such as tribal associations, regional
consortiums, private providers that deliver Internet services to tribal
lands, industry associations, and companies that work with tribal
entities. In addition, we interviewed 24 tribal entities--16 of which
were using wireless technologies to provide Internet services--that we
selected to include variation in terms of geographic location, level of
broadband deployment, population size and density, and urban or rural
distinction. Stakeholders were selected to represent a range of views
and experience working with tribes and broadband service; their views
are not generalizable. To assess FCC's efforts, we interviewed FCC
officials and reviewed relevant FCC-rulemaking proceedings and related
public comments, and compared FCC's actions against recommendations
made in FCC's National Broadband Plan, \7\ FCC's current strategic
plan, \8\ and federal internal control standards related to using
quality information. \9\ For this testimony, we reviewed the status of
related FCC rulemakings and contacted FCC about action FCC has taken in
response to our recommendations. Further details on our scope and
methodology are included in our report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ These documents included the Statement of Policy on
Establishing a Government-to-Government Relationships with Indian
Tribes, Policy Statement, 16 FCC Rcd 4078 (2000).
\7\ FCC, Connecting America: The National Broadband Plan
(Washington, D.C.: 2010).
\8\ FCC, Strategic Plan 2018-2022 (Washington, D.C.).
\9\ GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government,
GAO-14-704G (Washington, D.C.: September 2014).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We conducted the work on which this statement is based in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
Background
Wireless broadband connects users to the Internet using spectrum to
transmit data between the customer's location and the service
provider's facility, and can be transmitted using fixed wireless and
mobile technologies, as shown in figure 1.
Fixed wireless broadband technologies establish an Internet
connection between fixed points--such as from a radio or antenna that
may be mounted on a tower, to a stationary wireless device located at a
home--and generally requires a direct line of sight. Mobile wireless
broadband technologies also establish an Internet connection that
requires the installation of antennas, but this technology provides
connectivity to customers wherever they are covered by service,
including while on the move, such as with a cell phone. Spectrum is the
resource that makes wireless broadband connections possible. Spectrum
frequency bands each have different characteristics that result in
different levels of ability to cover distances, penetrate physical
objects, and carry large amounts of information. Examples of some of
the frequency bands that can be used by commercial and nonfederal
entities for broadband services are shown in figure 2.
The frequency bands that can be used for broadband services are
either licensed or unlicensed. For licensed spectrum, FCC can assign
licenses through auctions, in which prospective users bid for the
exclusive rights to transmit on a specific frequency band within
geographic areas. Having exclusive rights ensures there will be no
interference from other spectrum users in that band. License holders
may sell or lease their license, in whole or in part, to another
provider, a process that is known as a secondary market transaction,
with FCC's approval. FCC has assigned licenses administratively in two
frequency bands that can be used for broadband services. \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Prior to 1996, FCC assigned licenses for exclusive use in the
Educational Broadband Service (2496-2690 MHz), which FCC allocated to
qualifying educational institutions and government organizations for
the transmission of educational materials. In addition, from 2005 to
2015, FCC assigned non-exclusive nationwide licenses in the 3650-3700
MHz band, where use of the band may be shared by other license holders.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
FCC also authorizes the use of unlicensed spectrum, where an
unlimited number of users can share frequencies without a license, such
as wireless microphones, baby monitors, and garage door openers. In
contrast to users of licensed spectrum, unlicensed users have no
regulatory protection from interference by other licensed or unlicensed
users in the bands. \11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ While there are no regulatory protections against interference
for users of unlicensed spectrum, FCC has certification rules and
standardized protocols that help to mitigate interference, and users
must accept any interference caused by all compliant devices in these
bands.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In March 2010, FCC issued the National Broadband Plan that included
a centralized vision for achieving affordability and maximizing use of
high-speed Internet. \12\ The plan made recommendations to FCC,
including that FCC should take into account the unique spectrum needs
of tribal communities when implementing spectrum policies and evaluate
its policies and rules to address obstacles to spectrum access by
tribal communities. With regard to tribal lands, the plan recommended
that FCC increase its commitment to government-to-government
consultation with tribal leaders and consider increasing tribal
representation in telecommunications planning. FCC established the
Office of Native Affairs and Policy in July 2010 to promote the
deployment and adoption of communication services and technologies to
all native communities, by, among other things, ensuring consultation
with tribal governments pursuant to FCC policy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ FCC, Connecting America: The National Broadband Plan
(Washington, D.C.: 2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Few Tribal Entities Had Obtained Licensed Spectrum and Face Barriers
Doing So
For our November 2018 report, we identified 18 tribal entities from
FCC's license data that held active spectrum licenses in bands that can
be used to provide broadband services as of September 2018. \13\ Of
those 18, 4 obtained the spectrum through a secondary market
transaction and 2 from an FCC spectrum auction. \14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ To identify tribal entities, we reviewed the list of federally
recognized tribes published in the Federal Register, identified search
terms related to these tribes, and manually matched these search terms
and FCC data on license holders. Because tribal entities may hold
spectrum licenses under names that did not include the search terms we
identified, there may be additional tribal entities that we did not
include in our analysis. As of September 2018, there were over 27,000
active spectrum licenses held by over 4,400 licensees.
\14\ We found 13 tribal entities had obtained a license through FCC
administrative assignment, which, as described above, FCC also has the
authority to do. One of these 13 tribal entities also held a license
obtained through a secondary market transaction.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We interviewed 16 tribal entities that were using wireless
technologies at the time to provide service, and 14 told us that they
were accessing unlicensed spectrum to do so. While representatives from
most of the 16 tribal entities reported some advantages of unlicensed
spectrum, such as the spectrum is available at no cost, they also
discussed their experiences with the limitations of unlicensed
spectrum, including issues with interference and speed or capacity.
Some of the stakeholders we contacted and FCC have highlighted the
importance of exclusive-use licensed spectrum for tribal entities. For
example, FCC's Office of Native Affairs and Policy reported in 2012
that unlicensed spectrum is not an option across all tribal lands and
that tribal access to robust licensed spectrum is a critical need. \15\
In addition, representatives from the stakeholders we interviewed told
us that there are non-technological benefits for tribal entities to
obtain greater access to licensed spectrum, including:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ FCC's Office of Native Affairs and Policy, 2012 Annual Report,
(Washington, D.C.).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
enhanced ability to deliver additional Internet services,
enhanced ability to sell or lease spectrum for profit, and
additional opportunities to obtain federal funding that
requires entities to hold or have access to licensed spectrum.
Furthermore, two tribal stakeholders and representatives from
several tribal entities told us that having access to licensed spectrum
would enable tribes to exercise their rights to sovereignty and self-
determination. For example, representatives from four of the tribal
entities told us that having access to licensed spectrum would ensure
that spectrum is being used in a way that aligns with tribal goals and
community needs, further supporting their rights to self-determination.
In our November 2018 report, we described barriers tribal entities
reported facing in accessing licensed spectrum. First, representatives
from tribal entities we contacted said that obtaining a spectrum
license through an auction was too expensive for many tribal entities.
Indeed, over 60 percent (983 of 1,611) of the winning bids from a 2015
spectrum auction were more than $1 million. Representatives from some
tribal entities told us they were unable to obtain financing to
participate in auctions because tribal governments cannot use tribal
lands as collateral to obtain loans and that participating in spectrum
auctions requires auction-specific expertise that tribal entities may
not have.
Second, tribal entities reported facing barriers obtaining spectrum
through secondary market transactions. Most of the spectrum allocated
for commercial use has already been assigned through spectrum auctions
and other mechanisms to private providers that may not be providing
service on tribal lands. As such, there may be tribal areas where
providers hold licenses for bands but are not using the spectrum to
provide Internet service. All three of the tribal associations we
contacted confirmed that there were unused spectrum licenses over
tribal lands, and representatives from a nationwide provider indicated
that they only deploy services if there is a business case to support
doing so. Accordingly, the secondary market is one of few avenues
available to tribal entities that would like to access licensed
spectrum. However, representatives from tribal entities we contacted
told us it could be challenging to participate in the secondary market
because there is a lack of willing sellers, license holders are not
easily identified, and tribal entities may not be aware of how to
pursue secondary market transactions. For example, representatives from
a tribal entity that had been successful in obtaining a license through
the secondary market told us that an Indian-owned telecommunications
consulting company was pivotal in identifying the license holder and
facilitating the transaction, and without such assistance, the
transaction would not have occurred.
FCC Had Taken Some Actions to Increase Access, but Does Not Collect or
Communicate Key Spectrum-Related Information to Tribal Entities
At the time of our November 2018 report, we found that FCC had
taken some actions to increase tribal access to spectrum. In
particular:
FCC issued a proposed rulemaking in March 2011 that sought
comments on three proposals to create new spectrum access
opportunities for tribal entities (see fig. 3). \16\ As of July
12, 2019, FCC had not adopted new rules or taken further action
on the 2011 rulemaking.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ In the Matter of Improving Communications Services for Native
Nations by Promoting Greater Utilization of Spectrum over Tribal Lands,
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking 26 FCC Rcd 2623 (2011). The 2011 proposed
rulemaking included other proposals not related to enhancing tribal
access to spectrum but rather to incentivize build-out in tribal areas
by license holders, such as making modifications to the Tribal Lands
Bidding Credit Program and creating Construction Safe Harbor
provisions.
FCC issued a proposed rulemaking in May 2018 \17\ that
sought comment on establishing a priority window for tribal
nations located in rural areas to obtain a license in the
Educational Broadband Service spectrum band (also known as the
2.5 GHz band). \18\ In the proposed rulemaking, FCC had found
that significant portions of this band were not being used,
primarily in rural areas. FCC had not finalized this rule at
the time of our November 2018 report, but published a draft
order in June 2019 that would establish a priority filing
window so that tribal entities could get access to unassigned
spectrum in the 2.5 GHz band on rural tribal lands prior to an
FCC auction. FCC adopted this order on July 10, 2019. \19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ In the Matter of Transforming the 2.5 GHz Band, Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking, WT Docket No. 18-120 (2018).
\18\ According to FCC, the tribal priority window will enable
tribal entities an opportunity to obtain unassigned 2.5 GHz licenses to
provide service on rural tribal lands; this window will be followed
immediately by a system of competitive bidding. As described above, FCC
previously assigned licenses for exclusive use in the Educational
Broadband Service band (2496-2690 MHz).
\19\ In the Matter of Transforming the 2.5 GHz Band, Report and
Order, FCC 19-62 (2019).
FCC's Office of Native Affairs and Policy conducts training,
consultation, and outreach to tribal entities on spectrum-
related issues, such as communicating with tribal entities
prior to FCC auctions or when FCC regulatory actions or
policies would affect tribal governments and spectrum over
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
their lands.
FCC's 2010 National Broadband Plan stated that ongoing measurement
of spectrum utilization should be developed to better understand how
spectrum resources are being used because some studies indicated that
spectrum goes unused in many places much of the time. The plan stated
that any spectrum utilization studies that FCC conducts should identify
tribal lands as distinct entities. The plan also stated that FCC should
make data available that would promote a robust secondary market for
spectrum licenses, such as information on how and to whom spectrum is
allocated on tribal lands. \20\ In FCC's 2018 strategic plan, FCC
stated that it will implement ongoing initiatives that will assist in
spectrum policy planning and decisionmaking, promote a robust secondary
market in spectrum, and improve communications services in all areas of
the United States, including tribal areas. \21\ Additionally, federal
internal control standards state that agencies should use quality
information, including information that is complete, to inform the
decisionmaking processes and communicate with external entities. \22\
Tribal governments are an example of such external entities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ FCC, Connecting America: The National Broadband Plan
(Washington, D.C.: 2010).
\21\ FCC, Strategic Plan 2018-2022 (Washington, D.C.).
\22\ GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government,
GAO-14-704G (Washington, D.C.: September 2014).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, in our 2018 report, we found that FCC had not consistently
collected data related to tribal access to spectrum or communicated
important information to tribes. In particular:
FCC did not collect data on whether spectrum license-holders
or auction applicants are tribal entities. Without this
information, FCC did not have a comprehensive understanding of
the extent that tribal entities are attempting to obtain or
access licensed spectrum or have been successful at obtaining
and accessing it.
FCC did not analyze the extent that unused licensed spectrum
exists over tribal lands, even though FCC had the information--
broadband availability data from providers and information on
geographic areas covered by spectrum licenses--needed for such
an analysis. Although FCC officials told us evaluating the
effectiveness of FCC's secondary market policies is a way to
increase the use of unused spectrum, FCC's approach did not
include an analysis of unused spectrum licenses on tribal
lands. As a result, FCC's evaluations of the secondary market
may not have accurately reflected how its policies affect
tribal entities. Because the secondary market is one of few
ways for tribal entities to access licensed spectrum, such an
assessment would enable FCC to better promote a robust
secondary market that provides opportunities for tribes to
access spectrum.
FCC did not communicate information to tribes that could
benefit them in their efforts to obtain spectrum in the
secondary market. As described earlier, the secondary market is
a significant mechanism for tribal entities to obtain spectrum
licenses, but representatives from the tribal entities we
interviewed reported challenges related to participating in the
secondary market, such as not knowing whom to contact should
they wish to engage in a secondary market transaction to obtain
a spectrum license.
We concluded that FCC's efforts to promote and support tribal
entities' access to spectrum had done little to increase tribal use of
spectrum. In particular, FCC lacked information that could help inform
its decision-making processes related to spectrum policy planning,
which is intended to improve communications services in all areas of
the United States, including tribal lands. By collecting data on the
extent that tribal entities are obtaining and accessing spectrum, FCC
could better understand tribal spectrum issues and use this information
as it implements ongoing spectrum initiatives. Furthermore, the ability
of tribal governments to make informed spectrum planning decisions and
to participate in secondary market transactions is diminished without
information from FCC on the spectrum transactions that occur over
tribal lands. Providing this information directly to tribal entities
could enable them to enter into leasing, partnership, or other
arrangements to obtain spectrum. In our November 2018 report, we
recommended that FCC (1) collect data on the extent that tribal
entities are obtaining and accessing spectrum and use this information
as FCC implements ongoing spectrum initiatives; (2) analyze data to
better understand the extent that unused spectrum licenses exist over
tribal lands, such as by analyzing the data for a sample of tribal
lands, and as appropriate use this information to inform its oversight
of the secondary market; and (3) make information on spectrum-license
holders more accessible and easy to understand for interested parties,
including tribal entities, to promote their ability to purchase or
lease spectrum licenses from other providers. FCC agreed with these
recommendations and described the actions it plans to take to implement
them. For example, according to FCC, it will consider ways to collect
data on the extent to which tribal entities are obtaining and accessing
spectrum; analyze data from a sample of spectrum licenses on tribal
lands to inform FCC's spectrum policies; and transition to a more user-
friendly system for its licensing data.
Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman Udall, and Members of the Committee,
this concludes my prepared statement. I would be pleased to respond to
any questions that you may have.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Stockdale?
STATEMENT OF DONALD K. STOCKDALE, JR., CHIEF,
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS BUREAU, FEDERAL
COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
Mr. Stockdale. Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman Udall, and
members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today regarding the GAO report on the FCC's efforts to
promote tribal access to spectrum.
Chairman Pai's top priority has been to close the digital
divide and bring the benefits of the internet to all Americans,
particularly those in rural areas and on rural tribal lands.
Because spectrum is critical those efforts, Chairman Pai has
made access to low-, mid-, and high-frequency spectrum a key
element of his 5G FAST Plan.
Tribal nations face unique and significant obstacles to
offering service in rural tribal areas. The commission
recognizes that it needs to work in close collaboration and
consultation with tribal nations to overcome these obstacles.
Making mid-band spectrum available for advanced wireless
services, including 5G, provides a critical opportunity to
address those challenges, because of its good coverage and
capacity characteristics. Chairman Pai has sought not only to
make mid-band spectrum available for advanced wireless services
generally, but also to identify specific opportunities for
rural tribal nations to obtain access to this spectrum.
That is why the commission recently took the unprecedented
action to prioritize access to the 2.5 gigahertz band for
tribal nations. In July, the commission adopted rules to make
this spectrum available for wireless use across the Country,
and particularly in rural tribal areas.
Specifically, the commission established its first ever
priority window for rural tribal nations to obtain flexible use
spectrum for free, before any auction takes place. We expect to
open the rural tribal priority window early next year and we
are planning a number of outreach efforts over the coming
months.
The commission also has adopted a novel dynamic sharing
framework for the 3.5 gigahertz band that will offer a key
opportunity for deployment on rural tribal lands. That
framework will provide tribal entities with two ways to access
the spectrum. They can bid on licenses at auction, or they can
rely on opportunistic access in areas where there is limited
commercial interest.
The commission additionally promotes deployment in tribal
areas by adopting tribal land bidding credits in its auction
rules, such as in its recent auctions of 24 and 28 gigahertz
bands, and its upcoming auctions of the 37, 39 and 47 gigahertz
bands and 2.5 and 3.5 gigahertz bands.
Yet, despite these efforts, the commission recognizes there
is more to be done. The commission is trying to respond to the
recommendations of the GAO report. First, the GAO recommended
that the FCC collect date on the extent to which tribal
entities are accessing spectrum, and to use this information in
its ongoing spectrum initiatives. The commission is analyzing
the extent to which bidding credit information provides insight
into tribal entities' access, and it also plans to use data
generated by the 2.5 gigahertz priority window.
Second, the GAO recommended the FCC analyze data to better
understand the extent that that unused spectrum licenses exist
over tribal lands. FCC staff, pursuant to the GAO
recommendation, are currently developing a sample of spectrum
licenses on tribal lands, which will then be analyzed to inform
ongoing spectrum policies. This report should be completed by
the end of the year.
Third, the GAO recommended that the FCC make information on
spectrum license holders more accessible and easier to
understand. The FCC's universal licensing system is currently
available to tribal entities and other members of the public,
but as the GAO noted, it may not be the most user-friendly. The
commission therefore is currently engaged in a multi-year
project to modernize its complex licensing systems which, among
other things, should make it more user-friendly. In the
meantime, commission staff are ready to help tribal nations
access and navigate ULS.
Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman Udall and members of the
Committee, thank you once again for the opportunity to testify,
and I look forward to the opportunity to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stockdale follows:]
Prepared Statement of Donald K. Stockdale, Jr., Chief, Wireless
Telecommunications Bureau, Federal Communications Commission
Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman Udall, and Members of the Committee,
thank you for the opportunity to testify today regarding the GAO report
on the Federal Communication Commission's (Commission or FCC) efforts
to promote Tribal access to spectrum.
Chairman Pai's top priority has been to close the digital divide
and bring the benefits of the Internet to all Americans, particularly
those in rural areas and on rural Tribal Lands. Radiofrequency (RF)
spectrum is crucial to narrowing the digital divide on Tribal Lands.
That's why a key component of the Chairman's 5G FAST Plan--a
comprehensive strategy to Facilitate America's Superiority in 5G
Technology--is making spectrum available in low-, mid-, and high-
frequency bands to facilitate deployment of advanced wireless services
to all Americans.
Tribal Nations face unique and significant obstacles to offering
service in rural Tribal areas, even when compared to rural non-Tribal
lands. Many Tribal areas have characteristics that increase the cost of
deployment and of providing service, including challenging terrain, low
population density, jurisdictional issues involving states and
sovereign Tribal governments, and the absence of necessary
infrastructure. At the same time, the expected revenues in Tribal areas
tend to be lower, in part due to a smaller number of business
customers. The Commission recognizes the need to work in close
collaboration with Tribal Nations as well as non-Tribal stakeholders,
to overcome these barriers and ensure that no one who lives in Indian
country is on the wrong side of the digital divide.
Making mid-band spectrum available for advanced wireless services,
including 5G, provides a critical opportunity to address the need for
wireless broadband in rural and Tribal areas. Mid-band spectrum offers
a desirable combination of coverage and capacity for wireless services.
In recent years, the demand for mid-band spectrum has increased
dramatically worldwide, as more countries have realized that this
spectrum has characteristics that will be useful for 5G deployments.
Under Chairman Pai's leadership, the Commission has sought not only to
make mid-band spectrum available for 5G generally, but also to identify
specific opportunities for rural Tribal Nations to obtain access to
this spectrum.
For example, the Commission recently took action to prioritize
access to the 2.5 GHz band for Tribal Nations to provide advanced
wireless services, including 5G, to rural Tribal Lands. The 2.5 GHz
band, the largest contiguous block of spectrum below 3 GHz, is
dramatically underused today, particularly in rural and Tribal areas.
Existing licenses cover only about half of the geography of the United
States, and much of the band is not even assigned across swaths of the
country west of the Mississippi River. The Commission, at its July 10,
2019 meeting, acted to change that by replacing an outdated regulatory
framework governing this band with new rules and procedures that will
make this spectrum available for advanced wireless services across the
country, and particularly in Tribal areas. Specifically, the
Commission, for the first time ever, established a priority window for
flexible-use licenses for rural Tribal Nations to obtain spectrum for
free--before any auction of the spectrum--to enable Tribal Nations to
address communication needs on rural Tribal Lands. This is a
groundbreaking measure that demonstrates the Commission's commitment to
expanding Tribal Nations' ability to access spectrum. The Commission
will open the priority window for 2.5 GHz spectrum early next year, and
Commission staff outreach to Tribes is already underway, including an
August 20 workshop in Billings, Montana and an upcoming panel at the
Department of the Interior's National Tribal Broadband Summit.
The Commission also has established a framework to access
additional mid-band spectrum, specifically in the 3.5 GHz band, which
should provide opportunities for a variety of rural and remote
communities, as well as wireless providers that seek to serve them. The
Citizens Broadband Radio Service is a novel, three-tiered access and
authorization framework to accommodate shared federal and non-federal
use of the 3550-3700 MHz band. Access and operations are managed by
automated frequency coordinators, known as Spectrum Access Systems. The
Commission will vote later this month to seek comment on bidding
procedures for an auction of Priority Access Licenses (PALs) in the
3550-3650 MHz band. PALs are 10-year, county-based licenses of 10-
megahertz channel blocks that receive protection from General
Authorized Access (GAA) users. The GAA tier, in turn, is licensed-by-
rule to permit access to the 3550-3700 MHz band, with at least 80
megahertz in any given license area available to potential GAA users
and not available to PAL users. The 3.5 GHz band's opportunistic access
regime and smaller geographic license areas provide low-cost entry
points to mid-band spectrum and another key opportunity for deployment
of advanced wireless services to Tribal entities.
Under this framework, Tribal entities will have two ways to access
this spectrum. They can gain GAA access to spectrum in areas where
there is no commercial buildout, or they can seek PAL licenses in the
auction, utilizing Tribal Land bidding credits and other bidding
credits.
Tribal Land bidding credits are another example of how the
Commission promotes the deployment of spectrum-based services to Tribal
Lands through its auction rules. The Commission has adopted Tribal Land
bidding credits for many spectrum auctions. For example, the Commission
awarded credits for 20 licenses in the 600 MHz auction, and winning
bidders have applied for Tribal Land bidding credits in the recent 24
GHz and 28 GHz auctions, in a total of 13 pending license applications.
Also, the Commission has adopted Tribal Land bidding credits in the
upcoming mid-band spectrum auctions of the 2.5 GHz and 3.5 GHz bands
and the high-band spectrum auction of 37 GHz, 39 GHz, and 47 GHz bands.
The Tribal Land bidding credit program provides the opportunity for
spectrum auction winners to obtain a discount (in the form of a refund)
for providing service to qualifying Tribal Lands. To qualify for the
credit, the winning bidder must demonstrate that it will serve
qualifying Tribal Lands, provide certifications from the applicable
Tribal government, and attest that it will construct and operate a
system capable of serving 75 percent of the qualifying Tribal Land
population within three years of license grant.
The Commission recognizes that many Tribal entities can benefit
from additional information, outreach, coordination, and assistance in
meeting the communications needs of their communities. The Commission's
Office of Native Affairs and Policy (ONAP) provides a home for
dedicated Commission staff with specialized experience to serve as
official Commission liaisons for ongoing consultation, engagement, and
outreach to the American Indian, Alaska Native Village, Hawaiian
Homelands, and other Native communities. Most importantly, ONAP fosters
Commission dialogue and engagement with Tribes, Tribal governments, and
inter-Tribal organizations, furthers the Commission's trust
relationship with Tribal Nations, and demonstrates the Commission's
ongoing commitment to its 2000 Tribal Policy Statement. \1\ In addition
to emails and calls to provide technical assistance to individual
Tribes, ONAP participated in 23 events and gatherings with tribes since
2018, with several more planned before the end of this year. Finally,
last year the FCC renewed its Native Nations Communications Task Force.
The Task Force is comprised of elected or appointed leaders from
federally recognized Tribal governments and senior Commission staff. It
provides the Commission with guidance on such matters as identifying
barriers to broadband deployment unique to Tribal Lands and ensuring
that Tribal concerns are considered in all Commission proceedings
related to broadband and other Commission undertakings that affect
Tribal interests. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Establishing a Government-to-Government Relationship with
Indian Tribes, Policy Statement, 16 FCC Rcd 4078 (2000).
\2\ Public Notice, FCC Seeks Nominations for Tribal Government
Representatives to Serve on Renewed FCC Native Nations Communications
Task Force (DA 18-127) (rel. Feb. 8, 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yet, despite our best efforts, we recognize there is more work to
be done. In November 2018, the GAO released a report on spectrum use by
Tribal entities. Even before the Commission's decision to adopt a
Tribal priority window for 2.5 GHz spectrum, that report noted that the
``FCC has taken steps to promote and support Tribal access to
spectrum,'' but nevertheless offered three recommendations to improve
access to spectrum on Tribal Lands. The Commission continues to work to
implement the report's recommendations.
First, GAO recommended that the FCC should collect data on the
extent to which Tribal entities are obtaining and accessing spectrum
and use this information as the FCC implements ongoing spectrum
initiatives. The FCC collects information on licensees to determine
eligibility to hold a particular license, but because eligibility
generally is not based on Tribal entity status, the FCC has not
required reporting of Tribal entity status for every license. The
Commission is analyzing the extent to which bidding credit information
provides insight into Tribal entities' access to, and use of, spectrum.
And, of course, the Commission will collect information on rural Tribal
entities in the context of the 2.5 GHz priority window. Further, as the
Commission creates new application forms or revises existing forms, it
will consider whether to add the option for the applicant to
voluntarily identify itself as a ``tribal entity.''
Second, GAO recommended that the FCC ``should analyze data to
better understand the extent that unused spectrum licenses exist over
Tribal Lands, such as by analyzing the data for a sample of Tribal
Lands, and as appropriate use this information to inform its oversight
of the secondary market.'' Staff from the FCC's Office of Economics and
Analytics and Wireless Telecommunications Bureau (WTB) are currently
developing a sample of spectrum licenses on Tribal Lands, which will
then be analyzed to inform ongoing spectrum policies.
Third, GAO recommended that the FCC make information on spectrum
license holders more accessible and easier to understand for interested
parties, including Tribal entities, to promote their ability to
purchase or lease spectrum licenses from other providers. The FCC's
Universal Licensing System (ULS) is available to Tribal entities and
other members of the public. The Commission is currently engaged in a
multi-year project to modernize ULS, transitioning to a new platform
that will provide more consistent performance, easier access to
information, and enhanced functionality. This modernization work will
take time, as ULS is a complex system that issues and maintains over
2.2 million wireless licenses and processes over 400,000 applications
annually. GAO's recommendation that the Commission make information on
spectrum license holders more accessible and understandable is in
alignment with the Commission's goals for a modernized ULS.
In the meantime, the Commission has provided Tribes with
information about, and assistance in, accessing ULS. The Commission
provided information about opportunities to access spectrum through new
licenses as well as through partitioning, disaggregating, and leasing
existing licenses. The Commission has provided this information at FCC
Tribal Workshops, and in presentations at inter-Tribal events. Examples
include inter-Tribal meetings and FCC workshops in Washington, DC in
February and March of 2019, in Mescalero, New Mexico in April 2019, in
Ada and Norman, Oklahoma in May and June 2019, respectively, in
Spokane, Washington in May 2019, and in Billings, Montana in August
2019. ONAP and WTB staff are also planning and conducting extensive
outreach regarding the Tribal Priority Window for access to 2.5 GHz
spectrum, including holding several Tribal workshops, proving on-line
tutorials, and providing assistance on how to complete the forms
necessary to apply for spectrum during the priority window. Both ONAP
and WTB staff are always available to assist any individual Tribe that
has questions or requests assistance accessing information through ULS.
Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman Udall, and the Members of the
Committee, thank you once again for the opportunity to testify this
afternoon, and I look forward to the opportunity to answer your
questions.
The Chairman. Thank you. I would like to turn to Senator
McSally for purposes of an introduction.
Senator McSally. Thank you, Chairman Hoeven. Our third
witness is Ms. Belinda Nelson, who is the Chairperson for the
Gila River Telecommunications, Inc., out of Arizona. It was
great to meet with her yesterday and visit with her a little
bit, and we are honored to have you here representing Arizona,
and representing Gila River.
The Chairman. Senator McSally, if you wouldn't mind,
because of the votes, the Vice Chairman is going to have to go
vote, and he would like to hear his New Mexico constituent
testify. Ms. Nelson, would you be willing to defer?
Ms. Nelson. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Okay, you can proceed, with your indulgence,
thank you.
STATEMENT OF KIMBALL SEKAQUAPTEWA, CHIEF TECHNOLOGY DIRECTOR,
SANTA FE INDIAN SCHOOL
Ms. Sekaquaptewa. My name is Kimball Sekaquaptewa. I come
here today from the Santa Fe Indian School, which is owned and
operated by the 19 Pueblos of New Mexico. As an off reservation
boarding school, maintaining community connections is
essential. How perfect would video conferencing be to connect
our students with their native language instructors back at
home? We thought so five years ago after we solved the digital
divide in Santa Fe by bringing high-speed internet to our
campus in the State capital.
However, we were quickly put in place when we realized that
the tribes were too slow to talk back, to communicate using
two-way video conferencing technology. In fact, at that time,
at Pueblo Cochiti, the entire government and the public library
were sharing a single copper T-1 line, a 1.5-megabit
connection, which is a fraction of my phone .
In the past four years, we have worked with six of our
Pueblo tribes to be their own solution to the digital divide.
Through the use of the FCC Schools and Libraries program, we
built two middle mile fiber optic networks, connecting two
tribal schools and six tribal libraries. The libraries serve as
computing centers in our communities, when the homes don't have
computers and when those computers don't have internet
connections.
Through our efforts, we cracked the code to connectivity by
learning how to construct a fiber optic network. Since then the
tribes have self-invested to build a second network that can
connect beyond schools and libraries. We have begun to
construct tribally owned cell towers. In the past, the tribes
were paid a small fee for the land lease. By owning the cell
tower, tribes can work directly with the carriers to realize
the profit from the device traffic and the fiber back-call,
resulting in a new income stream that has minimal environmental
impact on our natural resources.
Adding to new Native capabilities, tribally controlled
towers can result in access to the FirstNet public safety
network, which utilizes AT&T, which unfortunately is very
limited in the Pueblos. I give the shout-out to FirstNet to
come to us and to work with the tribes.
But the primary goal of the towers is to increase cell
phone coverage for tribal members. We can do this by providing
more choices of carriers, but we can also hang our own wireless
infrastructure, whether through traditional fixed wireless, or
as we have tested lately, the use of spectrum.
At the Santa Fe Indian School, seniors are assigned
tablets. We use an online portal to submit homework. However,
when those students return to their home communities, these
internet-dependent devices become paperweights. In fact, in a
meeting with graduating seniors this spring, we learned that
despite having a tablet, the number one choice for essay
writing was to use the notes app on their phone and essentially
text out a paper. They prefer their cell phones because they
have the internet to upload the assignments. And they are less
filtering from the school.
If we want our graduates to be on part with mainstream
America, there is an expectation to write a research paper
replete with citations. That is not possible when they are
writing with their thumbs. We must address home connectivity to
help our students, learn, grow and compete.
SFIS has been working with our tribes to test different
technologies. First, we set up the 4G LTE network in one of our
pueblos with the help of a non-profit and a higher education
institution, who agreed to let us use their EBS license to test
the viability of the spectrum. Our challenge is that almost all
of the EBS spectrum near Albuquerque and Santa Fe is already
licensed. We set up the LTE network from de-boxing to
connectivity in just a few hours. We spent the last 14 months
since then navigating the regulatory process.
Presently there are six attorneys working to license, sub-
lease or partner for connectivity. The network is currently
offline while we work through the legal. We appreciate the
strong education partners, but the institutions themselves have
long ago sub-leased to a national carrier and a spectrum
speculator who are not using it.
We will continue to try to use the EBS spectrum that is
within our reach. But it feels like drops from a faucet instead
of the opening of a floodgate.
Without the day to day support of the non-profit, we would
likely not be in the fight. They have provided financial
support for specialized EBS attorneys, engineers, and all that
is involved to navigate the FCC ULS data set.
Through those efforts, they provided maps, the short list
of license holders, and their holdings. It is only at that
point that we could pick up the telephone and know who to call
to gain access to the airwaves over our land.
We also learned that in addition to EBS, we need CBRS, also
a mid-range frequency. With the goal to serve every tribal
home, the multi-pronged strategy is required because of the
limitations of the different frequency types with respect to
range, speed and penetration.
The draft rules were proposed last week. Do we have the
bank to win against the highest bidder? Or might a different
tribal priority help us to serve on our own lands? Thus
participating in the FCC rulemaking, ideally through
government-to-government relations, will add to our work
effort.
Acquiring access to spectrum also brings ancillary
challenges with new opportunities with respect to the
reconnect. Because a provider bid on our census tracts under
the CAF II auction and was awarded our lands without our
knowledge, then as tribes we are not able to apply for
reconnect on our own. This winter, when we contacted them, they
told us that they plan to use CBRS but that our lands weren't
even on their scheduled network upgrade schedule. So while they
are not planning to build out, we are ready to build out, and
we are ready to use the same technology as them, yet the rules
prohibit us from doing so.
My question would be, and what I really want to know is,
why don't tribes have access, sovereign access, to the airwaves
over our lands, just as we do for other natural resources, such
as water? In the global digital economy, the airwaves are
essential elements to communicate, and frankly, to survive.
I come today as a newcomer to the spectrum landscape. The
pueblos that we worked with to build the LTE networks are not
gaming tribes, they are small, rural communities trying to do a
solid. And despite not having an IT department, we successfully
deployed a 4G LTE network. Our growing pains exist, but do not
negate the fact that we are crossing the digital divide through
our own capabilities that we have developed to self-govern in
the digital age.
Our people are students, nieces and nephews, traditional
ways of life, and the ability to thrive in our rural lands are
our return on investment.
Thank you, Chairman, Vice Chairman and members.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sekaquaptewa follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kimball Sekaquaptewa, Chief Technology Director,
Santa Fe Indian School
I come here today from the Santa Fe Indian School, which is owned
and operated by the 19 Pueblos of New Mexico. As an off-reservation
boarding school, maintaining community connections and providing
culturally-relevant curriculum requires close and constant contact with
our communities. How perfect is video-conferencing for distance
learning to connect students with their native language instructors
back at home? We thought so five years ago after SFIS was finally able
to bring fiber optic Internet to our campus in downtown Santa Fe, the
state capitol. However, we were quickly put in place, when we reached
out to the Pueblos and realized that the majority of their Internet
connections were too slow to talk back. At this time, the entire
government of Cochiti and the public library shared a 1.5 Mbps copper
T-1 line. And when you called the service provider for more slow
expensive Internet, we were told that all the copper was used up and
that there were no options. Five years later the copper is still
exhausted in our area--there is no change. Further challenging our
situation, is the fact that not all of the tribes have IT Departments
to install and maintain network equipment. Expensive managed service
contracts provide help desk but not strategic management. With the
epiphany that we are always stronger together, we rolled up our sleeves
to get to work.
For the past four years, we have worked with six of our Pueblo
tribes to be their own solution to the digital divide. Through the use
of the FCC Schools and Libraries E-rate program, we built two middle
mile fiber optic networks, connecting two tribal schools and six tribal
libraries. The tribal libraries are located in the heart of the
community and when most homes don't have computers and those computers
don't have Internet connections, the libraries serve as computing
centers for the community. So much so that after the library closes,
cars pull up in the parking lot to connect to the Wi-Fi that bleeds out
of the building. Post E-rate special construction, our schools and
libraries connect at speeds over 3000 percent faster and over 90
percent cheaper than before. These two projects were the largest E-rate
awards in New Mexico in 2016 and the only tribal projects of their kind
since the E-rate Modernization order.
Through our efforts, we cracked the code to connectivity by
learning how to construct a fiber optic network. To complete this
project, we were supported by our Governors and Tribal Councils, who
were educated along the way. Since then the tribes have self-invested
to build a second network that can connect beyond schools and
libraries. Admittedly, the learning curve was steep but now when we
meet, tribal leadership brings new ideas. For instance, we are
constructing tribally owned cell towers. In the past, the tribes were
paid a small fee for a land lease. By owning the cell tower, tribes can
work directly with the carriers to realize the profit from the device
traffic and fiber backhaul, resulting in a new income stream that has
minimal environmental impact on our natural resources. But the primary
goal of the towers is to first increase cell phone coverage for tribal
members given the poor service in heart of some communities. We can do
this by providing more choices from carriers but we also have the
potential to hang our own wireless infrastructure to provide Internet
access off our fiber optic backbone, whether through traditional fixed
wireless, or as we have tested lately--spectrum.
Adding new native capabilities, tribally controlled towers will
also result in increased access to the FirstNet public safety network,
which utilizes the AT&T network. Unfortunately, at this time AT&T
coverage is extremely limited in the Pueblos and thus it is unknown how
FirstNet can improve first responder communication--or our health in an
emergency. I give this shout out to FirstNet to reach out and work with
tribes.
Tribal leadership has also expressed a priority need to provide
residential Internet access. At the Santa Fe Indian School, seniors are
assigned tablets. We use an online portal for student email, group
collaborations, and to submit homework. However, when the students
return to their home communities, these Internet-dependent devices
become paperweights. At best, students can tether the Internet from
their cell phones but those are expensive connections with limited
data--and as much as we'd like to report that they save their data for
their homework, entertainment and social networking often win. In fact,
in a meeting with graduating seniors in the spring we learned that
despite having the tablets, the number one choice for essay writing was
to use the Notes application on their phones to essentially text out a
paper. The reason for cell phone preference has a lot to due to with
the availability of Internet access. They uploaded their assignments
from their phones. If we want our graduates to be on par with
mainstream America, the expectation to write a research paper replete
with citations is an important skill--that is not possible when they
are writing their papers with their thumbs! Our solution is provide
home or bus Internet, and fill the Homework Gap as we have learned to
know it, to help our student learn, grow and compete. And while we want
them to go to college, we also want them back. We want them to return
as professionals and skilled workers to bring economic security for
themselves, improve overall community well-being as participating
tribal members, and to retain vitality in the Pueblos and all rural
America. Skilled American workers with proud rural roots with a
commitment to stay, make small towns thrive. Instead of the urban
centers taking our talent resulting in a brain drain, let's bring the
digital economy to our hometowns.
To do this, the Santa Fe Indian School has been working with our
tribes to test ways to provide broadband connectivity for students. And
that brings me to what I can share about spectrum. We did it- we set up
a 4G LTE network in one of our Pueblos with the help of a non-profit
and the higher education institution who agreed to let us use their EBS
license to test the viability of the spectrum for educational access.
Our challenge is that almost of all the EBS spectrum near Albuquerque
and Santa Fe is already licensed. We set up the LTE network from de-
boxing to connectivity in a few hours. We have since spent fourteen
months, navigating the regulatory process. Presently, there are six
attorneys working to license, sublease, or partner for connectivity.
Today the network is down while work through legal issues. While we
appreciate the strong higher education partnerships willing to work
towards quid pro quo broadband benefits, our results utilizing EBS in
the 2.5 Mhz frequency will always be limited in our region. The higher
education institutions have long ago subleased to a national carrier
and a spectrum speculator. We continue to increase our access to the
EBS spectrum within our reach but it feels like drops from a faucet
instead of the opening of a flood gate.
In my experience deploying an 4G LTE network, the technology is not
the hard part. The hardest part to navigate the spectrum use. We do
have choice spectrum above us but it sub-leased to outside entities who
are not using it. So we work through the legal processes for rights of
use. Additionally, without the day-to-day support of the non-profit, we
would likely not still be in the fight. They have provided financial
support for specialized EBS attorneys, engineers, and all that is
involved to navigate the FCC ULS data set. Through those efforts, they
provided maps and the short list of license holder names, along with
their holdings. Only at that point could we pick up the phone and know
who to call. It should not be this hard to find out who is in control
of the airwaves over our own land.
I am happy that the FCC created the EBS Tribal Priority Window for
tribal governments and organizations to claim unlicensed EBS spectrum.
The use of spectrum for rural deployments offers great potential. I
worry that without the technical assistance to educate and help
navigate the licensing process that not enough tribes will succeed. The
Tribal Priority window, whose start date is not yet announced will only
provide sixty days to apply. And despite the priority window, tribes
have faster network buildout requirements than an auction winner. And
if we can't meet these buildout requirements? Perhaps they go back to
auction. Why do tribes have half the time to build out more of the
network than the carriers? I have to wonder if this is an oversight or
a system that is set up for tribal failure?
I come to you today as newcomer to the spectrum landscape. The
Pueblos that we work with to build LTE networks are not gaming tribes.
They are small rural communities trying to do a solid. And despite not
having an IT Department, we successfully deployed a 4G LTE network. In
this limited experience, I have learned that we need more than EBS to
meet our bandwidth goals. So then our plans shift to is to also use
CBRS, also a mid-range frequency. To do so we'll need to learn a new
set of complex rules--and work with a new set of specialized attorneys.
Draft rules were proposed last week for a 2020 auction for CBRS
Priority Access Licenses. Do we have the bank to win against higher
bidders or might a different tribal priority help us serve our own
lands? Thus, participating in FCC rulemaking, ideally in through
Government-to-Government relations is also added to the work effort.
With the goal to serve every tribal home, the multi-prong strategy
is required because of the limitations of the different frequency
types. Mid-range frequencies such as EBS and CBRS offer a balance
between total bandwidth throughput (speed), increased range, and the
ability do a better job penetrating walls or trees. The TV Whitespace
is a lower frequency technology and is often proposed in the most rural
of locations because it can travel long distance with high penetration
but only delivers limited speeds. The 5G revolution promises faster
speeds but currently requires fiber transport and small cell antennas
that are very close together--which can exacerbate the permitting
challenges to build on tribal land.
Acquiring access to spectrum also brings ancillary challenges with
FCC and USDA program rules. The USDA released the ReConnect opportunity
for rural connectivity. However, some of our tribes were not able to
apply for the USDA Reconnect program because there is a rule that if
the census tract was awarded in the FCC CAF II auction, then it is not
eligible for ReConnect support. Unfortunately, a provider was awarded
CAF II funding in many of the Pueblos but did so without consulting the
tribes. In communication with the provider, the future and yet
unscheduled deployment would utilize CBRS spectrum. I mentioned that we
built a fiber optic transport network. We are ready to deploy last mile
services but the ineligibility of our census tracts limits our tribal
efforts to build out the network. How can a third party get financial
support to connect tribal lands without ever consulting the tribal
government? Where is the integrity in the tribal engagement process? I
stress tribal engagement as the key to working in Indian Country.
Instead of making tribal lands barriers to long haul fiber routes,
engage the tribe to create partnerships to provide local access.
But what I really want to know why tribes don't have sovereign
access to the airwaves, just as we do for other natural resources on
our lands, such as water? In the global digital economy, the airwaves
are essential elements to communicate and frankly, to survive. Among
other things public safety, or lack thereof, transpires over the
availability of reliable, real-time communication. If tribes had
authority or safe harbor from legal suit to use the not used but
licensed by third party EBS spectrum on our lands, instead of fourteen
months in legal, we could be delivering enhanced public safety
capabilities, instead of still setting up the network.
If we speak are talking about real time, as I was writing these
comments, I receive a text from my sister-in-law in the Pueblo,
``Haleigh as swamped with homework but the Internet has been down here
at the house. Is it possible for her to use your Internet to get this
work done? Not sure what else to do besides dropping her off at
McDonald's to use WiFi''. We live forty minutes from a McDonalds. We
told our niece to seek a college degree, which she is trying to do in
Nursing. And then to encouraged her to bring those skills back to serve
the community. But without appropriate Internet access, why does she
become optional? An acceptable casualty on an inaccurate coverage map
that alleges that we are served when we are not? As we have learned
through our efforts, broadband connectivity is too big to solve as a
school, as a tribe, or as a rural community but that working as
collaborators, we can and have built the networks that the market said
didn't have the return on investment. Our growing pains exist but do
not negate the fact that we are crossing the digital divide through the
capacities that we have developed to self-govern in the digital age.
Our people, our students, our children, nieces and nephews, traditional
ways of life, and the ability to thrive in our rural lands is our
return on investment. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Sekaquaptewa.
Ms. Nelson, again, thanks for waiting.
STATEMENT OF BELINDA NELSON, CHAIRPERSON, GILA RIVER
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, INC.
Ms. Nelson. Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman Udall, we would
like to let the Vice Chairman know and members of the Committee
know that we appreciate the opportunity to testify on behalf of
Gila River Telecommunications on promoting better access to
spectrum on tribal lands.
I also want to thank, again, Vice Chairman Udall for his
work over the last 11 years to promote broadband access on
tribal lands. He has been a great advocate for us.
I want to focus today on a few areas GRTI believes could
help tribal residents gain greater access to wireless
broadband. These include greater access to licensed spectrum,
auctioning spectrum with smaller geographic license areas,
secondary market licensing, reforms to the Tribal Bidding
Credit, ``build or divest'' mechanisms, and tribal
consultation. All of these proposals demonstrate a need for
policy makers to redouble their efforts.
I have the honor of serving as the chairperson for GRTI,
which is wholly owned by the Gila River Indian Community, home
to the Akimel O'otham and the Pee-Posh Tribes. Our reservation
is approximately 372,000 acres and is home to almost 12,000 of
our more than 20,000 members.
When we first purchased the exchange from Mountain Bell in
1988, only 10 percent of our residents had access to basic
phone service. Those looking to get connected had to pay tens
of thousands of dollars for a party line connection.
Today, GRTI offers phone service to 100 percent of our
residents and 84 percent subscribe. We offer high quality
broadband service and continue to deploy our fixed network.
As this Committee is well aware, tribal lands are the least
served areas in our Country. The FCC is in the process of
updating the data collection use to understand where broadband
is not available. But current data shows that approximately 54
percent of tribal lands lack access to broadband speeds of 25/
3, compared to only 27 percent of non-tribal lands. More
accurate numbers would likely reveal an even greater gap.
The problems that make tribal lands generally uneconomic to
serve, such as low population density, high poverty, and rugged
terrain, are well-known by this Committee. These issues present
challenges regardless of the technology used, which is why it
is important for policy makers to consider tribal lands' unique
challenges when crafting policies.
Unlicensed spectrum is an essential part of the mix of
spectrum options. But given some of its limitations, such as
interference requirements, licensed spectrum must be made more
readily available to tribal entities. The GAO report
demonstrates there are very few tribal entities that currently
hold such licensed spectrum.
GRTI commends the FCC's decision to open a Tribal Priority
window in the 2.5 gigahertz spectrum band, though we believe
the opportunity could be better publicized. We also hope the
FCC considers this a pilot program and considers opening tribal
priority window and feature options.
Regarding geographic license, GRTI supports auctioning
spectrum with more discrete geographic areas, so more tribal
entities can participate. As it did in the 2.5 gigahertz
proceeding, the commission should identify service areas, like
reservations, as the licensed area. This encourages
participation by tribes and other tribal entities.
Secondary market opportunities could greatly enhance access
to licensed spectrum. Allowing for a more structured process by
which tribal areas are partitioned from the licensee service
area would allow underserved tribes an opportunity to meet
their broadband needs. This is currently allowed under the
FCC's rules, but as the GAO report demonstrates, the current
rules are not sufficient.
Another step the FCC could take is reforming its Tribal
Lands Bidding Credit policy, which provides a credit to the
amount bid if the winning bidder commits to building out on
tribal lands. Better coordination up front between the entity
bidding and the tribal government could help make this a more
utilized credit.
While it may seem radical at first, a build or divest
proposal is consistent with the longstanding FCC practice.
Licensees can often meet build-out obligations without serving
tribal lands within their licensed area. Instead of leaving
these lands stranded without service, the FCC should, as it
would with a failure to build out under any license, require
the licensee to either build our or begin a divestment
proceeding.
The FCC has authority to pursue all of these proposals
right now, but it seems to lack the will to pursue them. GAO
notes, ``FCC officials told us they have reviewed public
comments to the proposed rulemaking, but have no current plans
to take further action.'' This is a very disappointing dose of
reality.
Finally, consultation remains vital in getting policies for
tribal areas right. Over the years, GRTI has worked with the
FCC to address many concerns with its policies. At times, this
dialogue has been meaningful and engaging. At other times, it
has been after the fact and harmful.
I commend Chairman Pai and many of his fellow commissioners
who have taken steps to address our concerns. Congress charged
the agency with ensuring access to communication services for
all people. And robust consultation can help us all work
together to achieve that directive.
I appreciate the opportunity to speak with you today, and
look forward to your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Nelson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Belinda Nelson, Chairperson, Gila River
Telecommunications, Inc.
Chairman Hoeven, Vice Chairman Udall and members of the Committee
thank you for the opportunity to testify on behalf of the Gila River
Telecommunications on the important topic of promoting better access to
spectrum on Tribal lands by the FCC. Before I start, I also want to
thank Vice Chairman Udall for his work over the last 11 years to
promote broadband access on Tribal lands through his work on this
Committee and the Commerce Committee. You have been a great advocate
for addressing the needs of Indian Country and we very much appreciate
all you have done and continue to do. Chairman Hoeven and Vice Chairman
Udall and all members of the Committee, I also want to thank you for
requesting that the Government Accountability Office provide the
spectrum report that is the subject of this hearing.
In my testimony today, I want to focus on a few areas that GRTI
believes could help Tribal residents gain greater access to wireless
broadband. These include:
1. Greater access to licensed spectrum;
2. Auctioning spectrum with smaller geographic license areas;
3. Secondary market licensing;
4. Reforms to the Tribal Bidding Credit; and
5. ``Build or divest'' mechanisms.
There are other reforms that the FCC, the National Broadband Plan,
the GAO and others have acknowledged over the years that could be
helpful in closing the broadband canyon that exists on Tribal lands.
Underlying all of these proposals is a need for policymakers to re-
double their efforts, perform meaningful Tribal consultation, and adopt
changes.
GRTI
I want to briefly provide an overview of Gila River
Telecommunications, which we refer to as GRTI. I have the honor of
serving as the Chairperson for GRTI, which was founded in 1988 and is
wholly owned by the Gila River Indian Community. Our reservation is
approximately 372,000 acres. We have more than 20,000 members, and
almost 12,000 people living on our reservation. When we first purchased
the exchange from Mountain Bell in 1988, only 10 percent of our
residents had access to basic phone service and those looking to get
``connected'' had to pay tens of thousands of dollars before Mountain
Bell would install a party line connection.
Today, GRTI offers phone service to 100 percent of our residents
and 84 percent of the residents subscribe. We also offer high quality
broadband service and are continuing to deploy our fixed network. That
fixed network also offers backhaul connectivity for wireless services
that are available in the Community. We are very proud of GRTI's
success and work everyday to ensure it continues.
Challenges to Broadband Deployment on Tribal Lands
As this Committee is well aware, Tribal lands are the least served
areas in the country. How severe is the gap? That is currently unclear
as the Commission is in the process of updating that data collection
used to understand where broadband is not available. With that caveat,
what the FCC data shows is that approximately 54 percent of Tribal
lands lack access to broadband at speeds of 25/3, whereas only 27
percent of non-Tribal lands lack such access to broadband at those
speeds. That is a significant difference and more accurate numbers
would likely reveal an even greater gap.
The problems that make tribal lands generally ``uneconomic to
serve'' are well-known by this Committee: low population density, low
median income, high rates of poverty, rugged and difficult terrains,
and regulatory obstacles such as multi agency approval for constructing
communications facilities. These issues present challenges regardless
of the technology used, which is why it is important for policymakers
to consider the unique challenges on tribal lands when they are
crafting policies. And that is what I will now turn to.
Licensed Spectrum Opportunities
As the GAO rightly identifies, there is a difference between
licensed and unlicensed spectrum. Unlicensed spectrum is an essential
part of the mix of spectrum options, but given some of its limitations,
such as interference requirements, licensed spectrum must be made more
readily available to tribal entities. The GAO reports demonstrates
there are very few tribal entities that currently hold such licensed
spectrum. Based on their search of the FCC's licensing database, only
18 tribal entities hold such licenses, of which the Gila River Indian
Community is one. The data is shocking as there are 573 federally-
recognized tribes in the U.S. Even more staggering is the fact that
that there are 4,400 licensees, meaning tribal entities represent 0.4
percent of all licensees. These data point to a clear problem and
evidence that more must be done.
GRTI commends the FCC's decision this past summer to open a
``Tribal Priority'' window in the 2.5 GHz spectrum band. That decision
should provide a broad array of tribal entities an opportunity to
acquire licensed spectrum that can be used to provide their communities
5G broadband services. We look forward to the Commission providing
additional details on this opportunity in the coming months and we hope
that the FCC considers this a ``pilot program'' and gives consideration
to opening Tribal Priority windows in future auctions as well. But more
remains to be done.
Geographic License. Specifically, GRTI supports auctioning spectrum
with more discrete geographic areas so more tribal entities can
participate. As it did in the 2.5 GHz proceeding, the Commission should
identify service areas, like reservations, as the licensed area. This
will encourage greater participation as it will allow Tribes and other
tribal entities a more-tailored license area focused on meeting the
needs of their tribal community.
Secondary Markets. Additionally, GAO noted in its report that
respondents stated secondary market opportunities could greatly enhance
access to licensed spectrum. Allowing for a more structured process by
which tribal areas are partitioned from the licensee's service area
would allow unserved and underserved Tribes an opportunity to meet
their broadband needs. This is currently allowed under the FCC's rules,
but as the GAO Report demonstrates, the rules are not sufficient. GAO
reports that only four (4) tribal entities have entered into secondary
market agreements. This market-based solution needs rigorous backing by
the FCC to move forward and we would urge this Committee to encourage
the FCC to takes steps to promote and encourage negotiations between
licensees and tribal entities in unserved/underserved to advance these
agreements.
Tribal Lands Bidding Credit. Another step the FCC could take would
be reforming its Tribal Lands Bidding Credit policy. That policy
provides a credit to the amount bid if the winning bidder commits to
building out on tribal lands. The amount of the credits is tied to the
amount of the winning bid and the winning bidder must buildout to 75
percent of the tribal population within three years. Better
coordination upfront between the entity bidding and the tribal
government could help make this a more utilized credit.
Build or Divest. Another proposal that may at first seem radical
but is consistent with longstanding FCC practice is a ``build or
divest'' proposal. This proposal would require licensees to either
build out their network to serve the tribal communities within their
licensed area or divest that portion of their license. At the root of
this problem is the fact that licensees can often meet their buildout
obligations without serving the tribal lands within their licensed
area. Instead of leaving these tribal lands stranded without service
because the licensee has no need, no economic incentive, and no
interest in building out to the tribal area, the FCC should, as it
would with a failure to build out under any license, require the
licensee to either buildout or begin a divestment proceeding. The FCC
could establish safeguards to ensure the intent of the licensee is
fully understood, but those safeguards should also ensure that the
needs of the tribal community are met.
All of these proposals are ones that the FCC has the authority to
pursue right now. What seems lacking is a will to pursue them. In fact,
most of the above proposals are the subject of an open proceeding
initiated by the FCC in 2011. As GAO notes in its report on page 21
``FCC officials told us they have reviewed public comments to the
proposed rulemaking, but have no current plans to take further
action.'' This is a very disappointing dose of reality for our
communities and one this committee should take notice of, as it will
lead to tribal communities across the nation falling further behind in
achieving broadband, which only further exacerbates the economic and
cultural hardships we face.
Tribal Consultation. One final note on an always important
component of addressing tribal needs--consultation. Over the years GRTI
has worked with the FCC at all levels of the agency, including meeting
with the Chairman, the commissioners, the bureaus and with ONAP to
address many concerns it has had with Commission policies. At times the
dialogue with the agency has been meaningful and engaging. At other
times, it has been after-the-fact and harmful to our efforts to bring
communications services to our tribal community. I would say that
Chairman Pai and many of his fellow commissioners have heard our
concerns and have taken concrete steps to address them. We very much
appreciate their willingness to hear us, but consultation with tribes,
which the FCC committed to in 2001, remains vital to getting the
policies for tribal areas right. We trust the FCC will continue to
engage with all tribal communities to fix the broadband access canyons
that exist on tribal lands. Congress charged the agency with ensuring
access to communications services for all people. Robust consultation
can help us all work together to achieve that Congressional directive.
Conclusion
I appreciate the opportunity to speak with you today, and hope to
be an ongoing resource for the Committee. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Nelson.
We will start with questions. My first question to you, Mr.
Von Ah, is what is the number one thing that the FCC can do to
help tribes, help Indian Country with access to spectrum? What
is the number one thing they can do?
Mr. Von Ah. According to our report, we really focused on
the access to secondary markets. There is a lot of unused
spectrum out there. There is maybe unwilling sellers, there are
transaction costs, there are other things that hinder that
market from functioning well. Just simply knowing who has the
unused spectrum, how to go about those kinds of transactions.
So I think that is one area where more incentives for use
of the secondary markets, information about those markets, can
be a big help.
The Chairman. Mr. Stockdale, how do you accomplish that?
Mr. Stockdale. Mr. Chairman, one of the ways that we can
improve access to the secondary market is to improve
information. In that regard, we are currently in the process of
trying to modernize our universal licensing system, that is the
system that currently contains over 4 million licenses, and we
process about 400,000 licenses each year.
This is going to be a multi-year effort to modernize it,
but the goal is to come up with a more robust, more flexible
and more user-friendly system that will permit both tribal
nations and other members of the public to access the system
and identify who holds spectrum licenses.
The Chairman. That is good. That is to the benefit of
everybody, right?
Mr. Stockdale. It is.
The Chairman. What specifically are you doing in Indian
Country?
Mr. Stockdale. With respect to Indian Country, we have in
the past and continue to have a series of workshops and
meetings with tribal nations to help them navigate the ULS
system. And we have one to one contacts ready to answer any
questions they have concerning how to access the system and how
to identify current spectrum holders.
The Chairman. So I would ask Ms. Nelson, first, how can FCC
specifically help accomplish what they just described, enabling
you to understand how to access more spectrum? In simple terms.
Ms. Nelson. Senator, I believe first of all tribal
consultation and outreach is key. Because many tribes across
the Country do not receive this information in advance, in
order to know what opportunities are presented to them.
As I mentioned earlier, notification to tribes would allow
them to decide on their particular reservation what resources
they have, what training they have, sacred sites, there needs
to be consultation to that effect.
The Chairman. Mr. Stockdale, are you engaging in ways to do
that?
Mr. Stockdale. Through ONAP and with staff in our own
Wireless Bureau, we have consulted with and we are setting up
consultations with various tribal nations through workshops and
other means, in which we are trying to first, help them
navigate ULS, but also, and I think this is very important, we
are trying to prepare them for the upcoming tribal window for
2.5 gigahertz. We believe this provides a great opportunity for
tribal nations to gain access to mid-band spectrum, which is
particularly well-suited for advanced wireless services,
including 5G. We want to make sure that any tribe that is
interested in gaining some access knows how to do so.
The Chairman. Ms. SK, same question. Simple terms. How can
FCC be most helpful in accessing spectrum in Indian Country?
Ms. Sekaquaptewa. I go back to the information to give us a
report, maps, visualization, rather than the complicated
spreadsheet that we have to parse, showing us who owns it and
what they own, so then we can talk to them and seek a sublease
or access the secondary market.
However, I don't know that that that is the end of the
story, just in terms of what we would need to do then. With the
secondary market, what we found in our experience is, the
carrier will let us have it conditionally. The school let us
use it, if it doesn't infringe too much on what their
educational programs are. So then we take this big risk of
building out these networks or making these investments with
these terms that are uncertain for our future and for the
sustainability of the service or the sustainability of the
network.
The Chairman. Right. So, Mr. Von Ah, how much longer can
unlicensed spectrum continue to be used in Indian Country with
reliability, and do you have recommendations how to fix that or
address that, that goes to exactly what she just said?
Mr. Von Ah. I think unlicensed spectrum has limitations.
Certainly, we heard that from all of the tribal entities that
we spoke with. But they use what they can. Whatever is
available, if there is equipment available, we are going to try
to use it to create the best service that we can.
The Chairman. How can the FCC, in simple, direct terms, get
them the understanding so they know how to try to access
spectrum? What is the clearest path to get that done?
Mr. Von Ah. Part of it is perhaps some of the requirements
around using some of that unlicensed spectrum could be made
clear. Again, it is difficult to say exactly what they can do.
We have talked about a number of things.
The Chairman. So information on what is available, and then
maybe some information on how to access it, is that a fair
statement?
Mr. Von Ah. That would be a fair statement.
The Chairman. Mr. Stockdale, could you respond to that?
Mr. Stockdale. Mr. Chairman, as I indicated, we are trying
to modernize ULS so as to make it easier for tribal nations and
others to determine what is available. In the meantime, we have
staff ready to assist tribal nations and the public to identify
and learn who possesses licenses with respect to particular
bands in particular areas.
We also have staff ready to assist tribal nations in trying
to gain access to spectrum, whether it is through new licenses
or assisting them in learning the possibilities to obtain
licenses through the secondary market, through partitioning or
disaggregation, or through leasing.
The Chairman. Thank you. Senator Cortez Masto.
STATEMENT OF HON. CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NEVADA
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. Thank you all for being
here. This is such an important topic for all of us, including
in Nevada. We have many rural communities, particularly our
tribal communities, that are challenged just to get broadband
to our communities.
So let me open this up to the panel, because here is what I
am hearing and what I have seen. So there are various
government programs that are designed to bring broadband to our
underserved communities. There is the USDA programs, there is
the universal service program at the FCC. According to the GAO
report, USF has programs such as the mobility fund and the
tribal mobility fund.
Given that these opportunities are connected, I think it is
important that all of these resources are being effectively
coordinated by the Federal Government. That is why in April, I
introduced the Access Broadband Act. The Act itself will
establish a coordinating office at the NTIA for all Federal
broadband programs, because I think it is important, we are
here just for that reason, that we are not only recording it at
the Federal level, but we are getting that information into the
communities that need it most.
So can you talk about issues or any issues with current
levels of coordination that you see between spectrum allocation
in existing broadband programs and how do these issues play
into the broader broadband mapping issues we have? We are
hearing some of that. And also let me finally say, do you think
that type of coordination that I just talked about is necessary
and will be helpful to address all of the concerns that you
have identified? And then more of the concerns that we are
hearing today.
So let me open it up to the panel.
Mr. Von Ah. Also, we do have some ongoing work where we are
looking at those programs specifically, all of the programs
that are designed to get broadband out to rural and underserved
areas. We will be commenting on some of those coordination
issues in our forthcoming report.
As far as those funds that you mentioned related to tribal
lands, one thing I will mention is that tribal entities that
are trying to provide service on their lands are often not able
to access those funds, for particularly, the tribal mobility
fund. They need to be an eligible communications carrier. There
are only 11 tribes as of the time of our report that have that
designation. And even so, they may not actually get the bid. I
think there were two of the ETCs that were tribal entities who
bid for the tribal mobility fund phase one, and neither one of
them got the actual bid.
So there are challenges simply for the tribal entities to
access the funds that you mentioned.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
Mr. Stockdale. Senator, I think the idea of coordinating
information about various funds is extremely useful and
important. At the FCC, we recognize that one of the most
important roles is in terms of trying to consult with tribal
nations, so that they have the information they need to gain
access to spectrum, or alternatively, to seek support where
additional support is needed to construct deployment.
In that regard, I would like to mention that while there
have been, unlicensed spectrum has been mentioned today, and
some of the disadvantages identified, there is also the 3.5
gigahertz band, which is a licensed by rural band, which in
rural areas may provide significant opportunities to tribal
nations in part because it can be utilized at higher power
levels than unlicensed bands.
So this is one of the bands we also think that we need to
try to inform tribal nations about, so that they are aware of
the opportunities and can take advantage of it.
Senator Cortez Masto. And let me ask you, when you were
talking about that new band, the 3.5, are there going to be
barriers or challenges for tribal communities to access and be
able to utilize it? Because the concerns we are hearing are
there are still barriers.
Mr. Stockdale. Thank you for that question, Senator, it is
a very good one. The 3.5 gigahertz band is somewhat unique in
the sense that the commission adopted a hierarchical licensing
scheme in which there are three levels of priority.
The highest level is for the incumbent licensees, which are
primarily military radars. Then there will be priority access
licenses which will be auctioned off at county levels. And then
there is general authorized access, which can operate whenever
any of the higher priorities aren't operating, and moreover,
there will be 50 megahertz reserved for this GAA use at all
times.
Senator Cortez Masto. So where do our tribal communities
come in in all those categories you just identified?
Mr. Stockdale. They could come in and bid for a PAL
license, in which case they will be able to take advantage of
the tribal land bidding credit. And if they also qualify for
either the rural provider credit or the small entity provider
credit, they can get credit for that. Or alternatively, they
can try to provide service under GAA. And in rural, tribal
areas, where there is no commercial use, that might be a very
useful way to enter.
Senator Cortez Masto. So for purposes of our
representatives in tribal community, does that even make sense
to you? Is that helpful? I mean, what I am hearing now is just
that the user-friendliness is not there, and that is the
biggest challenge to access and knowing that the funds are even
available and accessing them.
I am just curious.
Ms. Nelson. Senator, thank you for the question, your
initial comment about some coordination among seemingly these
silos of Federal agencies and regulatory barriers that are
created as a result of the silos that tribes must navigate to
even get information. With regard to user-friendly websites,
that is a good start. I think tribes are faced with just even
getting basic information from any agency.
Working with the FCC, I believe that the Office of Native
Affairs and Policy, ONAP, is doing the best they can to
outreach to tribes. I would encourage them to go out to actual
Indian Country, rather than at conferences, where tribes travel
to them. But I know they are doing the best they can.
But regulatory barriers are something that is a tremendous
task to undertake, for tribes to even understand, much less on
the perspective of 573 federally recognized tribes. We have
approximately 11 tribal telcos. So that speaks to itself, that
there are tribes out there that are creating ways to provide
for their own. There are many tribes that are deploying fiber
to create broadband. By any means they can, they are very
creative and they are getting the job done. Not necessarily
becoming a recognized ETC through the Federal Communications
Commission.
So tribes are resourceful and they work with what
information they can. But it is very frustrating for them to
try to work within the regulatory barriers that are created by
agencies, and then the silos of agencies. So I think some type
of coordination, perhaps this Committee, other committees, some
statute to relieve some of those silos for better coordination.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
Senator Udall. [Presiding.] Thank you. Senator Daines?
STATEMENT OF HON. STEVE DAINES,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MONTANA
Senator Daines. Thank you, Ranking Member Udall.
Mr. Von Ah, I first want to thank you for including the
Fort Belknap Indian Community as part of the GAO report that we
are discussing here today. The FCC estimates that 45 percent of
Montana's tribal areas still lack broadband access. That is
unacceptable. Montana is often overlooked out here in a place
like D.C., and it is especially true of our rural areas and
tribal communities like Fort Belknap. We must take actionable
steps to improve opportunity for these very underserved areas
that are hamstrung by substandard wireless as well as broadband
connections.
I spent 12 years in the technology sector in Montana; saw
first-hand the ability, the power of technology to remove
geography as a constraint to opportunity. Access to broadband
is not a luxury anymore. It is essential for accessing, whether
it is a good-paying job, whether it is health care, whether it
is just tying into this global economy.
That is why I joined my colleagues here to urge GAO to
study this problem and identify solutions, so Congress can act,
and act in the right manner. While much work remains to be
done, these findings have identified areas for improvement, so
we can better connect to Indian Country.
According to this report, tribes are often excluded during
spectrum auctions because license sizes are too large, too
expensive for them to participate and to buy the spectrum. This
is an issue I have been very active on, including securing
smaller licenses for the 3.5 gigahertz spectrum auction. This
spectrum will be prime for 5G, and I hope that with the smaller
sizes, our rural and tribal carriers can buy spectrum, and
importantly, better connect Montana.
Mr. Von Ah and Mr. Stockdale, how do we continue promoting
small licenses for spectrum auctions, so that tribal entities
can participate in the 5G economy?
Mr. Von Ah. Well, certainly, smaller license sizes can help
get tribal entities into the game. And I just would reference
the 2.5 gigahertz order did have the tribal priority window. I
don't know if the 3.5 gigahertz will or not. That is yet to be
determined. But that is another sort of consideration, when you
are thinking of the ability for tribal entities to access the
spectrum.
I would also just mention that it is not just the size of
the area, but it is also the costs, what will the costs of
those licenses be. Will they be, when a tribal entity is trying
to figure out what to do, they need to build out, they need to
meet build-out requirements when they have that license, are
there radios or other things, is there other off the shelf
technology, what is the cost of that.
So there are a number of things that have to be considered
when you are making, when you are going to go in and say, yes,
I want that license, I want to put a bid in for it. So there
are a number of considerations, but certainly the size, and a
smaller size, like a county, is going to help them get in the
game.
Senator Daines. Thank you. Mr. Stockdale?
Mr. Stockdale. Senator, thank you for the question. Let me
start my answer by noting that while certain spectrum bands are
auctioned and are required to be under the statute, the
commission has tried to make available other bands that are not
subject to auction. The two that I mentioned earlier, the 2.5
gigahertz band, in which we are providing a tribal window, and
the possibility of gaining GAA access with respect to the 3.5
gigahertz band.
Now, with respect to auctioned bands, with respect to each
band, the commission tries to determine an efficient geographic
licensing size. That depends in part on the specific
characteristics of the band, but it involves such
considerations as the geographic complementarities between
different areas. And also, the sort of practical difficulty of
designing an auction software that can simultaneously auction
off all these bands.
I should note that for both the 2.5 gigahertz auction and
the 3.5 gigahertz auctions, we will be auctioning them off at a
smaller size than any other previous spectrum auction. We will
be auctioning it off at the county size.
Finally, I note that with respect to auctions of spectrum,
you still have the tribal lands bidding credit, which can
encourage bidders to actually try to build out on tribal lands,
so that they can gain access to that spectrum.
Senator Daines. Thank you.
Senator Udall. Senator Schatz.
STATEMENT OF HON. BRIAN SCHATZ,
U.S. SENATOR FROM HAWAII
Senator Schatz. Thank you very much.
Mr. Stockdale, how did the FCC determine whether the new
spectrum rules would be helpful to tribes?
Mr. Stockdale. Well, Senator, as we do in all our
rulemakings, we put out NPRMs in which we solicit comment and
then we review all the comments submitted by interested
parties, including by tribal nations.
Senator Schatz. Right, I get what the Administrative
Procedures Act calls for. I guess the question is, at the
commonsense level, on the ground, in tribal communities, did
you do any economic analysis, did you do any tribal
consultation? Did you have any conversations about what was
practicable, what was doable, what would actually help?
Mr. Stockdale. I think what we did in the 2.5 gigahertz
band, where we created the tribal window, was intended
specifically to help tribal nations. This was an issue that was
--
Senator Schatz. I get your intent. I get the public policy
here. We are all on the same page in terms of what we want to
accomplish. But the question is not, how does the
Administrative Procedure Act run. The question is, who did you
talk to to land at this process that seems so labyrinthine as
to be unworkable?
Mr. Stockdale. Well, we did conduct several tribal
workshops over the past year. I think we conducted seven in
which we discussed a number of different policies that were
before the commission, including spectrum policies. I am not
sure that I would agree with your characterization that our
orders resulted in labyrinthine policies. Spectrum policy is
complex. We do try to consider the comments of all interested
parties and come up with something that will work.
Senator Schatz. So, how many of the federally recognized
tribal nations are eligible currently to receive spectrum under
these new rules?
Mr. Stockdale. So, I believe that under the rules for the
--
Senator Schatz. Let's do it this way. You need a license,
right?
Mr. Stockdale. Well, no, not necessarily. So for the 3.5
gigahertz band, it is licensed by rule. So tribes could go in
as a GAA operator, build a network and start providing wireless
broadband service.
Senator Schatz. Is that a simple process, to become a GAA
operator?
Mr. Stockdale. Well, we just, this past week, issued a
public notice indicating that five SASs had passed their
laboratory testing and were starting initial commercial
deployments. These will be the systems that----
Senator Schatz. I am sorry, what was that word you used?
Mr. Stockdale. Spectrum Administrative Systems, SASs. And
these are the sort of dynamic spectrum coordinators that will
coordinate spectrum use between the incumbent users, priority
access licensees and GAA users.
In rural areas, such as rural tribal areas, where there may
be little interest in sort of commercial use of the spectrum,
the GAA access may----
Senator Schatz. So out of the 573 federally recognized
nations, how many are actively participating in this process?
Mr. Stockdale. We are just beginning a process for outreach
to these nations.
Senator Schatz. Do you think it would have made sense to do
the outreach before the NPRM?
Mr. Stockdale. Well, I think that, Senator, we have a
better idea now of exactly what is involved, and we are, we,
and by that I mean ONAP and the wireless staff, are planning a
number of workshops, we are beefing up our person to person
advisors, so that tribes can reach us.
The only qualification I would note is, any of those tribes
that have tribal lands that are qualified as rural are eligible
to participate.
Senator Schatz. Right, but this kind of goes, and there are
a couple of points to be made. First of all, tribal
consultation is not just a requirement of the law. It is not
just a requirement pursuant to our collective trust
responsibility. It is also just a smart way to do it, if you
actually want tribal lands to get access to this.
And so if you are a nation, and you find out about this FCC
process, but even GAO experts can't operate the online portal,
and then you are thinking, well, we have our schools and we
have our hospitals, and we have our roads, and we have
community service needs, and we have this need for additional
connectivity, but I have to get a license for that.
So the question becomes whether you are taking seriously
the proposition that you as a representative of the Federal
Government have a special trust responsibility to treat this
not just as rural broadband or a subset of rural broadband, but
an obligation that you have pursuant to a nation to nation
relationship.
Mr. Stockdale. Senator, you are absolutely correct that the
commission recognizes its special trust relationship we have
with tribal nations. And we recognize the importance of
consultation with the tribal nations.
One of the things that we try to do, with the 2.5 gigahertz
band, and the tribal window, is to target this relief to rural
tribal nations. We are expending significant resources trying
to set up outreach, so that all tribes will have the
information necessary to participate.
We are also trying to modify some of our software in our
ULS system to make it easier for tribes to participate in 2.5
gigahertz band.
Senator Schatz. Thank you.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Senator Schatz.
Senator McSally.
STATEMENT OF HON. MARTHA McSALLY,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ARIZONA
Senator McSally. Thank you, and I want to thank Chairman
Hoeven and Vice Chairman Udall for holding this really
important hearing today. I appreciate Belinda Nelson being here
representing the Gila River Indian Community, for your
testimony as well as the other witnesses.
In Arizona, we have 21 federally recognized tribes, more
than a quarter of the State covered by tribal land. This topic
is really important to my constituents. As the FCC has
estimated, about 65 percent of Native Americans on tribal land
have access to high speed internet, that probably is a little
too generous. A 2018 study by the Census Bureau said that just
53 percent of households on tribal lands with a computer have
access to high speed internet, compared to 82 percent
nationwide.
So what has been clear from this testimony, and what we
know in the facts that tribal lands are lagging way behind, and
this deficit has far-reaching effects. This isn't just about
being able to watch your favorite movie. Where we see
technology is now making such a difference for economic
opportunities, for entrepreneurship, for better health outcomes
and health care access using technology.
So it is across the board, education, you name it,
impacting negatively our tribal entities. So we have to do more
in order to address this issue. That is why I really appreciate
the hearing.
Ms. Nelson, it was great to see you yesterday and hear a
little bit about what is going on with the Gila River
Telecommunications, or GRTI, right, that is your acronym? So I
want to talk a little bit more about some of the topics in your
testimony and what we talked about yesterday. You mentioned the
recent decision to open up a tribal priority window in the 2.5
gigahertz band, and its ability to help tribal entities acquire
licensed spectrum.
Can you talk a little bit more about what practical effects
this has had? Do you think there is enough awareness about this
program among tribal entities? What else can be done to
increase awareness?
Ms. Nelson. Thank you for the question, Senator. A new
proceeding, a new opening was just ruled on in July. But the
effect will be very positive in Indian Country once the word
gets out. I think publicity from the tops of buildings yelling
to Indian Country, hey, this is available for you to apply for,
and let the citizens of Native America know that this is an
opportunity for them. A little more publicity on the
opportunity would be very helpful.
I think even navigating through the application process,
tribes in general don't have the technical education, the basic
knowledge on how to decipher or analyze what a particular band
of spectrum would do for them and what it would allow them to
do. Just general, basic information is needed for them to learn
how to use, take advantage of the 2.5 gigahertz spectrum.
I think to that end, GRTI and other tribal telcos can
assist the FCC, assist this Committee to get the word out of
how to use the spectrum and the opportunities that are
available, since we do have some knowledge of
telecommunications. I think that with us tribal telcos, when we
visited the FCC yesterday, we were asking questions about the
parameters and the application process for this 2.5 gigahertz
spectrum, and that information is not quite readily available.
We did ask for an extension of the application process,
because it is going to take tribes some time to know what the
application process will be, and to get their tribe applying
for this. In fact, it wouldn't be too crazy for every single
tribe in this Nation to apply for this and then just see how
they can use it. But they don't know about it right now, and
GRTI can assist in spreading that information.
Senator McSally. One thing about this hearing is maybe we
can pass the word as well, to provide more awareness of it.
Mr. Stockdale, what else could you do in order to make sure
that the tribes do know about this opportunity, and is there an
opening for an extension to the deadline in order to allow them
to navigate the process?
Mr. Stockdale. First of all, Senator, I agree with you that
it is important that we make tribes aware of this opportunity
and help them navigate ULS and make the applications. That is
the reason that we are launching an extensive outreach program
with multiple workshops. We will be also developing online
tutorials and online tools to help them identify whether
spectrum is available on their tribal lands. We will be ready
to answer any questions about how to apply.
With respect to the sort of timeline for the tribal window,
the commission delegated that decision to the Bureau, which has
not, I believe, decided that yet. What we are doing right now
is trying to get out the word as quickly as possible, so that
as many tribes as possible can take advantage of this
opportunity.
Senator McSally. Great. I would ask you both to keep us
informed on the timeline issue, and we will do whatever we can
in order to make sure that there is enough time available for
tribes to take advantage of this. Thank you.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Senator McSally.
Senator Smith.
STATEMENT OF HON. TINA SMITH,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MINNESOTA
Senator Smith. Thank you very much, and thanks to our panel
for being here today.
I have been working on broadband and expanding, especially
into rural areas, for quite a while. So I am used to being
confused. I am not a technical person, but I have come to
understand that this is incredibly complicated. I think about
the complexities, first, the special trust relationship that
the Federal Government has with our tribal nations, 11 in
Minnesota. Then I think about what it is like for some of the
more rural tribal nations in Minnesota that are small
governments, and with not a lot of resources. It just sort of
blows my mind, how you would ever figure out how to navigate
all this.
But one thing I have figured out, is that money matters.
You have to have money to do this. So I want to just start with
Mr. Stockdale. The FCC has proposed a cap on the Universal
Service Fund and the programs that it supports, like high costs
and lifeline and rural health care and schools and libraries.
It all provides fundamental resources for expanding broadband.
This is especially an issue, I would argue, on tribal
lands, that really depend on this funding to provide services
where it is, frankly, not economic, there is not a good
business model for providing broadband in such a dispersed
area.
So would you talk to me about this proposed cap on the
Universal Service Fund and what impact you think--I am going to
ask you and I would be interested in hearing from the rest of
the panel--on what impact you think this might have on the
money that we need in order to build this out?
Mr. Stockdale. Senator, I should note at the outset that is
the Wire Line Bureau, not mine, that is responsible for the
Universal Service Fund. So I don't claim to be an expert here.
Senator Smith. Yes, I am aware, and I am sorry that we
don't have somebody who could answer that question here today.
Mr. Stockdale. Well, I just don't want to end up
overstating my knowledge. But in any case, I do think that the
chairman has made clear that his top priority is to close the
digital divide, and to bring the benefits of the internet age
to all citizens in both rural and rural-tribal areas. At the
same time, there are problems with waste, fraud, and abuse in
certain USF programs. And the commission has been trying to
weed out and target those.
So I think what we are trying to do is achieve a balance,
to try to keep the fund at a reasonable size, but make it used
most effectively.
Would the other members of the panel like to comment on
what impact you think it would have if this cap were to take
place?
Ms. Nelson. Thank you, Senator, for that really important
question. This is currently on our minds as a tribal carrier
serving Indian Country. We are known as a legacy rate of return
carrier under the funding mechanisms of the FCC. The proposed
cap for the Universal Service Fund that you mentioned is going
to have a very negative effect on the way that we are serving
our communities.
Tribal rate of return carriers experience higher
operational costs, as you know, because we serve generally
larger areas with less population or low-density population.
And we have to deploy our networks through rugged terrain,
mountains, what have you, it is higher costs right then and
there. Any cap on high cost funding will be detrimental to our
ability to operate and much less maintain the networks that we
currently have deployed.
Also, because we are operating under Federal jurisdiction
as reservations, we have to comply with Federal mandates like
environmental mandates, NEPA, our archeological monitoring and
clearances of any dig that we might have. So we have to comply
with those, and that is additional cost.
So generally speaking, tribal carriers carry those costs.
So a cap to high costs or any of the other programs would be
very detrimental to us.
I do want to mention that we have been petitioning the FCC
for the last five years or so for an increased support for that
very reason. In recent offering of the Alternative-Connect
America Funding through the Universal Service Fund, additional
support was given to carriers but not to legacy rate of return
carriers, such as GRTI and other tribal carriers.
So we would like to have the recognition of receiving
additional support for legacy rate of return carriers that was
not offered to us, and it was offered to a different category
of carriers, which we don't understand.
Senator Smith. I am out of time, so I should probably not
pursue this. Let me just say, or do you want to answer quickly?
Ms. Sekaquaptewa. Just really quickly. In New Mexico, the
Universal Service Fund is doing amazing things for the tribal
telcos to expand their service and increase their speeds. Even
the small carriers, we can see the difference in the field, you
can tell they are spending money to upgrade their cabinet,
bring in new services and bring in new infrastructure.
But then you can also where, in my community, where we have
been trying, I told you we had one copper T-1 line five years
ago. And when you try to order another slow, expensive copper
T-1, you can't, because there is no copper. So we have also
seen that the investment is not happening. So if we talk about
waste, fraud, and abuse in these programs, we might also
consider the, not just lifeline, not just e-rate, but look at
the efficient use of the CAF and those funds as well.
Senator Smith. All right, thank you. I think this is
really, really important, and I think that it is not the time
to be talking about capping the Universal Service Fund when we
have such unmet need and such challenges in areas where you
might have two households per square mile versus whatever, 50
or 60. I realize, Mr. Stockdale, this is not in your specific
range of responsibility, but Mr. Chair, I would like to have
this question answered by the folks at the FCC who can answer
it, because I think it is really important. Thank you.
Mr. Stockdale. I am happy to take the question back.
Senator Udall. Thank you, and get an answer for us. Thank
you very much.
Thank you, Senator Smith. Senator Lankford.
STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES LANKFORD,
U.S. SENATOR FROM OKLAHOMA
Senator Lankford. Thank you. Thank you to all of you being
here. This is always extra preparation and things that have to
go on to prepare for this, so thanks for investing your time to
prepare beforehand and during this time period as well.
Mr. Stockdale, I have some questions for FCC. Do you have a
good estimate at this point, is the FCC able to figure out how
many tribes they expect to participate in the priority windows?
Just give me a ballpark guess.
Mr. Stockdale. I don't believe we have developed any
estimates yet. We are trying to develop our research project.
What I think is important is that any tribal nation whose
tribal lands lie in rural areas is eligible to participate. We
hope that as many as want to will do so.
Senator Lankford. But do you expect that to be 500, or do
you expect that to be 50, or 10? You have to have some kind of
ballpark on it.
Mr. Stockdale. I would not want to speculate at this point.
Senator Lankford. Okay. So give me a ballpark on the number
of licenses at the end of it, so not just participants in it,
but as far as how many licenses do you think will be actually
completed at the end?
Mr. Stockdale. I think that these licenses could occur
wherever a tribal nation that has rural-tribal lands seeks it.
So we could be talking in the hundreds, if this program is
successful.
Senator Lankford. Okay. So as I look at the program and try
to be able to figure out the outline of it, some tribes are in
extremely remote areas where there is a very low density of
population and it is exceptionally expensive to be able to get
to that area, and it is exceptionally important that there is a
good vehicle to be able to get good coverage in that area.
There are other tribes that there are multiple communities
that are either right around their reservation area or their
traditional areas, or they cover multiple towns that in that
area. If you are in Oklahoma, there are tribal areas that have
multiple communities that are there. Some under 25,000, some
over 50,000, some of all different sizes.
When you are trying to be able to balance out the threshold
of what rural area means, how do you hit that balance of what
is a rural area, what is not a rural area, and the effect of
other communities immediately around that could also be
affected as well? I am trying to give you just simple questions
today.
Mr. Stockdale. Well, you are testing my memory here as to
what we said in the order. I believe we defined a rural area as
an area that is not an urban area or an urban cluster with
greater than 50,000 people.
Senator Lankford. And that cluster being 50,000 total, or
50,000 in that immediate area?
Mr. Stockdale. I believe in that immediate area, but it was
a census definition and I have not personally gone back and
read the definition myself.
Let me just add one other point, Senator, though, which is,
you are absolutely right that there are going to be some areas
that are going to be extremely remote with very low population
density. One of the advantages and promises of this mid-band
spectrum is that it may make it more cost-effective to deploy
high-speed broadband in these areas where, for example,
deploying fiber would not be. And in fact where we have seen
already that tribes and others who have gotten STAs in these
band have been able to buy equipment, which is readily
available, deploy it quickly and then provide high speed
service to their customers or their citizens.
Senator Lankford. Could a, and this is the balance of
whether the tribe owns the company that is actually going to do
the communications, or is going to work with a secondary
market, has FCC made any kind of stipulation if a tribe gets
spectrum, purchases that spectrum, what they do with it there?
Can they sell it in a secondary market to anyone they choose?
Can they choose to use it in their own telecom companies?
Once you are the owner of spectrum, obviously, that is an
exceptionally valuable resource for many areas as well. While
there is not high competition for some of that space in
exceptionally rural areas, and more urban areas, or areas where
there are communities and towns that are nearby in close
proximity, that is a very high demand item, to be able to have
ownership of that spectrum.
Is there an FCC guidance for if they have to, if they are
buying spectrum, they have to use it with their own telecom
company, or if they can then sell it in a secondary market?
Mr. Stockdale. I guess there are a couple parts to your
question, Senator, and let me try to separate them out.
With respect to the 2.5, it won't be buying spectrum, this
would be spectrum they could obtain for free, but they would
have to meet the buildout requirements. With respect that they
obtain at auction, there will be buildout requirements
associated with that. We developed different buildout
requirements with respect to each band.
That doesn't prevent tribal nations from entering into
arrangements and partnerships with other entities to help them
build out that spectrum. The only thing they cannot do is, they
cannot particularly sell the spectrum before any buildout to a
third party. So we expect, particularly if they have taken
advantage of any of the bidding credits that are available to
tribal nations.
Senator Lankford. How long would they have to own that
then? How long would they have to keep possession of that?
There are separate concerns about buildout. What kind of time
period would you expect that would be?
Mr. Stockdale. Buildout requirements vary. In the case of
the 2.5, we have seen examples where carriers or tribes that
have received authorizations have built out LTE networks within
a matter of months. One of the reasons is because the equipment
for that spectrum band is readily available.
Now, I will make the point that was made by Belinda that,
in some case, there is technical expertise that is required.
But the point I am making is that the deployments can be
quickly made in many cases.
Senator Lankford. And then at that point, it could be sold?
Mr. Stockdale. Yes.
Senator Lankford. Okay. All right, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Senator Lankford.
Mr. Stockdale, the FCC's May 2019 report on broadband
deployment in Indian Country notes that just 46.6 percent of
housing units on rural tribal lands have access to fixed
broadband service, a nearly 27-point gap compared to non-tribal
rural communities. Yet the same report concluded that advanced
telecommunications capability is being deployed to all
Americans in a reasonable and timely fashion. That is a
critical finding there.
How did the FCC arrive at that conclusion, particularly in
light of the agency's own statistics that reveal tribal
communities are not being fully served, especially in rural
areas?
Mr. Stockdale. Senator, I will note, as you noted, the
figure you cited was for fixed broadband. The same report also
noted that for tribal lands, I believe that it is 96 point some
percent of households on tribal lands have access to LTE of
5.1. We don't think, I mean, certainly broadband can be
improved, but we think that we have made significant strides.
Senator Udall. The way I read this statute is that when
they are talking about deploying to all Americans in a
reasonable and timely fashion, your statute says if that
determination is negative, the FCC should take immediate action
to accelerate deployment of such capability by removing
barriers to infrastructure investment and by promoting
competition in the telecommunications market.
So they want you, if that isn't the case, tribal nations,
rural areas aren't getting the service, they want you to
aggressively move to correct that. And by making this finding,
you have then obviated your need to do that. I think you are
shirking your responsibility in terms of what you should be
doing for these tribal nations.
Mr. Stockdale. Senator, I take your point. I will note,
however, that Chairman Pai's top priority is to close the
digital divide, and he has made aggressive policy moves to do
so. I think particularly in the wireless context, we have made
significant progress. I also note that particularly for rural
high-cost areas, it may be wireless technology that proves a
cost-effective solution that enables us to connect all
Americans.
Senator Udall. Thank you.
Mr. Von Ah. the GAO report notes that having access to
licensed spectrum is one factor that would enable a tribe to
establish its own telecommunications company. But according to
the GAO, tribal service providers must hold, lease, or show
they have access to licensed spectrum to receive Federal
funding through two Universal Service Fund programs, the
Mobility Fund and the Tribal Mobility Fund.
FCC testified that its new tribal priority window would
provide opportunities for access to spectrum. In GAO's view, is
this new authority enough, particularly for tribes who may not
have the resources and expertise to stand up their own telecom
company?
Mr. Von Ah. Thank you, Senator, for the question. Whether
it is enough is certainly going to depend on the specific tribe
we are talking about. I would first of all point out that to
access that tribal priority window, they don't need to be a
telco, an eligible telecommunication carrier, an ETC, to access
the funds that they do. So certainly, for those that do not
have the expertise or the knowledge or if they don't have the
knowledge of how to build a telecommunications network, it is
going to be very difficult to access that spectrum. There is
going to be a priority window, it is going to be relatively
short, you need to build out, there may be equipment ready for
you to do so, but you do need the expertise and the capital
money available to pursue that opportunity.
Senator Udall. Thank you.
Kimball, the GAO report indicated that the FCC does not
analyze information on unused licensed spectrum over tribal
lands, even though the FCC has access to this data. The report
also indicated that tribes reported that unused spectrum
licenses over tribal lands could present opportunities through
the secondary market for tribal entities to obtain spectrum.
Do you have any recommendations on what the FCC should do
to ensure unused, assigned spectrum that covers tribal lands is
utilized to bridge the tribal digital divide?
Ms. Sekaquaptewa. They use it or lose it, if they are not
using it and they agreed to some rules, then they should give
it back so that somebody else can make better use of it.
Senator Udall. And you said earlier, in terms of you being
a tribal nation, and this is over your territory, you should
have access to it.
Ms. Sekaquaptewa. We should have access to it, and at the
very minimum, some protections that defend us in a legal
situation for us to use it, if it is not being used. There is a
great risk on us to try to move forward outside the parameters
of the regulatory framework.
I know we have been talking a lot about the tribal
opportunity and the 2.5 and the 3.5. I would just stress again
that the rules for tribes seem, I don't know what the word
would be, our opportunities, that we have to scrounge a little
bit more.
Like with the 2.5, where there is unused, unlicensed
opportunity, the tribal buildout is, they require that you
build out more of a network in a faster time. So, what if you
don't? Do you lose it, and then there is an auction and the
auction winner comes in? And why do they get more time to build
out less of a network? So I ask that.
Then with the 3.5, I appreciate the general access license,
the GALs, or general authorization, excuse me. And we are
probably going to participate in that space. We would like to
try to go for the PAL licenses. In Sandoval County, the bidding
credits are at 26,000, but it is a huge county, so that speaks
to the Senator's concern that our buildout requirement would be
more daunting, just because of the size of our territory.
So if we find ourselves just competing or setting up a
network where we don't have to have the license and we don't
have that protection, then we are going to be with everybody
else that is popping up and trying to put up towers on
mountains and bleeding from here or there to service our
territories, so interference is going to be a problem.
So again, where we put our money to invest in those
networks is at a smart play with the interference, where the
next person just coming in setting up shop next to us has as
much opportunity to fight for those airwaves, reducing the
performance of our networks.
Senator Udall. Thank you very much.
In February of this year, the D.C. Circuit struck down the
FCC's order limiting the tribal lifeline subsidy. The court
determined that the order's limitations were arbitrary and
capricious, citing a lack of reasoned explanation for this
change in policy. In August of this year, the same court
vacated the commission's order exempting most small cell
construction from historic preservation and environmental
review, again determining that the order was arbitrary and
capricious.
Notably, not a single tribe supported either final order,
which were split decisions. Belinda, FCC Commissioner
Rosenworcel noted in her dissent to one of the vacated orders
that the agency failed to uphold its longstanding duty to
consult with tribes in its own consultation policy. Do you
agree with Commissioner Rosenworcel and the D.C. Court of
Appeals that the FCC has fallen short on its tribal
consultation obligations?
Ms. Nelson. Thank you, Senator, Mr. Vice Chairman. I do
agree with Commissioner Rosenworcel's comment and sentiments. I
attended a lot of the hearings for what we call Section 106
topic in Indian Country, where discussion of placing towers on
sacred sites or not consulting with tribes for placement of
towers, in fact seemingly preferring to accelerate wireless
deployment for wireless carriers, seemed to be the order of the
day.
The FCC also held a meeting with many tribes at their
headquarters where many tribes spoke out against it, not
consulting with tribes. So with the Federal trust obligation, I
think that in that particular respect, the FCC did not adhere
to its trust responsibility, and now for GRTI, we filed
comments many times on the proceedings. We filed reply
comments. We are never told or given any response to our
concerns in the filings. So there is no dialogue from the FCC
or the agency itself as to our concerns.
So we would greatly appreciate even some acknowledgement or
some recognition of our concerns in our filings, as we adhere
to those administrative processes.
Senator Udall. Thank you so much for that answer. I want to
thank all of the witnesses for being here.
Mr. Stockdale. Mr. Chairman, make I make one comment?
Senator Udall. Mr. Stockdale, please.
Mr. Stockdale. I have one comment on the issue of
consultation. The FCC takes very seriously the trust
relationship that we have with tribal nations. We do try to
consult.
With respect to the small cell order, the commission in
their order listed all the instances in which the FCC staff
met, including the chairman and commissioners, met with and
consulted with tribes. That appeal, I would note that tribal
appellants claimed as one of the deficiencies of the order that
it was insufficient consultation and the D.C. Circuit Court of
Appeals rejected that claim.
Senator Udall. Thank you. Let me just thank all of the
witnesses today. You all realize what a very important subject
this is, and you have come, some of you have come from very
long distances to testify, and we very, very much appreciate
your input on this subject.
If there are no more questions for today, members may also
submit follow-up questions, written questions for the record.
We hope that you will answer those promptly when you get them.
The hearing record will remain open for two weeks. And once
again, I want to thank the witnesses for their time and
testimony.
The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:07 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
Prepared Statement of Loris Taylor, President/CEO, Native Public Media
Good afternoon Chairman Hoeven, Vice-Chairman Udall, and Members of
the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs. Thank you for allowing me to
submit the following statement on behalf of Native Public Media, an
organization I am proud to serve as its President and CEO, in today's
oversight hearing on the GAO Report on Tribal Access to Spectrum:
Promoting Communications Services in Indian Country. We are honored and
privileged by the opportunity to address you on this urgent and vital
topic. First, a word about who we are. Established in 2004, Native
Public Media (NPM) is a non-profit organization dedicated to serving
Tribal communities seeking to develop communications networks. NPM's
mission is to promote healthy, engaged, and independent Native
communities by expanding communications capacity on Tribal lands and by
empowering a strong, proud Native voice in the media. By applying the
spirit, law, and exercise of Tribal sovereignty to the development and
implementation of media and communications, NPM provides leadership,
designs programming, and engages on a proactive level in securing and
maintaining Tribal radio, television, and communications systems for
Indian Country. NPM currently serves as a coordinating entity for 57
Tribal radio stations, and 4 Tribal television stations, and for one
Tribal Educational Broadband Service licensee, providing centralized
resources and strategic services to assist in developing communications
systems in Indian Country that is, in part, dependent on spectrum
resources. We respectfully request this Committee and its Honorable
members, to consider the following:
I. FCC Has Long Recognized That Tribal Lands are Grossly
Underserved in Broadband Access and That Reliance on Market Forces is
Ineffective to Increase Access
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) is charged by Congress
in the Communications Act with allocating and administering
electromagnetic spectrum in the public interest, convenience, and
necessity. \1\ Congress also specifically charged the FCC to accelerate
the availability of affordable high speed broadband Internet service to
all Americans, including those living on rural and Tribal lands, and
since 2010 that mandate has been enshrined in formal FCC policy. \2\
Within its broad mandate, the FCC recognizes a special responsibility
to Tribal communities to implement policies and regulations promoting
their self-sufficiency and economic development, \3\ and that access to
quality broadband service is critical to achieve those goals. \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Communications Act of 1934, Pub. L. No. 73-416, 48 Stat. 1064
(1934), as amended by Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-
104,  706, 110 Stat. 53, 153 (1996) (codified as amended at 47 U.S.C.
 151, et seq.).
\2\ 47 U.S.C.  1302(b); FCC, Connecting America: The National
Broadband Plan (Washington, D.C.: 2010).
\3\ Statement of Policy on Establishing a Government-to-Government
Relationship with Indian Tribes, Policy Statement, 16 FCC Rcd 4078
(2000).
\4\ FCC, Connecting America: The National Broadband Plan (2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The FCC concedes that Tribal lands have been and are grossly
underserved. According to the Commission's 2018 Broadband Deployment
Report, an estimated 35 percent of residents of Tribal lands lacked
access to broadband speeds at 25 Mbps download and 3 Mbps upload (25
Mbps/3 Mbps), which is the U.S. standard. \5\ Comparatively, the
majority of the U.S. population has access to high-speed broadband at
or above the standard with just 8 percent without a broadband
connection. Since the early 2000's, Tribes have lagged behind the rest
of the U.S. in access to telecommunications services, both telephone
and Internet. The digital divide on Tribal lands is but the latest
example of that historic disparity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ FCC, 2018 Broadband Deployment Report, FCC No. 18-10 (Feb. 2,
2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It has long been recognized that reliance on private sector market
forces alone will not bring the benefits of affordable high-quality
broadband service to Tribal lands. Low population density, isolation,
poor roads and transportation infrastructure, lack of first responder
services and conventional physical addresses, and the difficult terrain
of Tribal lands contribute to unattractive private sector market
conditions for utilities or commercial broadband service providers to
build and operate systems there. \6\ Ironically, each and every one of
these same conditions also supports and makes the need for fast
reliable broadband service critical for the well-being, safety, self-
sufficiency and happiness of people living on Tribal lands in this day
and age, in which the Internet is the dominant and transformational
engine of communication and commerce. Compounding the failure of
private market forces, most Tribes, especially in rural areas, lack
sufficient resources to fund development and deployment on their own.
The reality of most tribes is that no broadband infrastructure will get
built in Indian country without some form of federal assistance to
support it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ GAO, Telecommunications: Additional Coordination and
Performance Measurement Needed for High-Speed Internet Access Programs
on Tribal Lands, GAO-16-222 (Jan. 29, 2016).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
But at the end of the day, bridging the Tribal digital divide is
not just about infrastructure. It is about bringing the same affordable
high speed broadband resources most Americans enjoy to people living on
Tribal lands. It's about the child that is required to complete
homework using the Internet, about the individual who wants to apply
for a loan online, about the student who wants to access library
resources around the globe, or an app developer who wants to create a
way to sustain tribal language use among his peers. This is a story
about 573 diverse nations, rich in culture, history, and experience to
dream and innovate answers to challenges of broadband disparities on
their own terms, and to participate fully in self-determined Internet
governance that addresses how technology can benefit and sustain
strong, healthy, and robust tribal communities in new and innovative
ways. This is not only a quality of life issue, but an issue that gives
life to the spirit of the law that mandates a right of all Americans to
connect and to communicate. Real lives are at stake.
II. September 2018 GAO Reports: Regulatory Barriers Restrict Tribes'
Access to Federal Broadband Development Funding; and FCC
Underreporting, Market Failure and Lack of Meaningful
Engagement Among FCC, Tribes and Service Providers Contribute
to Those Barriers and Failures
In September 2018, the GAO issued a report finding what Tribes
already know from bitter experience--few have been successful in
obtaining federal funding under the FCC's Universal Service Fund and
the Rural Utilities Service broadband development grant programs, which
purport to be designed to improve access in underserved areas where
deployment costs are high. \7\ The GAO also found limited opportunities
for Tribes to partner with various non-Tribal entities, including
federal grant and subsidy recipients, to improve broadband access on
Tribal lands, and that such partnerships (where they exist) enjoyed
uneven success. These findings are accurate in NPM's experience.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ GAO, Tribal Broadband: Few Partnerships Exist and the Rural
Utilities Service Needs to Identify and Address Any Funding Barriers
Tribes Face, GAO-18-682, Sept., 2018 (``2018 GAO, Few Partnerships'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The GAO also found that significant regulatory barriers inhibit
Tribes' ability to take advantage of federal broadband development
funding to provide broadband systems and service in their own
communities, without depending on others. These barriers include
federal statutory and FCC regulatory requirements that Tribal
applicants must qualify as ``eligible telecommunications carriers''
(ETCs) to obtain FCC USF Connect America Funding (CAF). A criteria
designed for massive telephone companies that dominated the
telecommunications industry decades ago, is exacerbated by the FCC's
glacial pace in ruling on the ETC eligibility of the few Tribes who
have applied for that designation. \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ For example, the Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe applied to FCC for
ETC status in 2013, and incurred massive costs to stand up a broadband
service through its own tribally-charted telecommunications company, on
the assumption that CAF funding would be available to offset those
costs. Five years later, the band was still awaiting FCC action, and is
in danger of having to shut down the service. 2018 GAO, Few
Partnerships, at 19.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further, the FCC's grants of billions of dollars in CAF funding did
not stimulate non-Tribal ETCs to improve broadband access on Tribal
lands. As the GAO found, non-tribal ETCs given CAF funding to improve
broadband access in underserved areas simply do not deploy service in
the Tribal parts of those areas. In our view, this is the result of the
FCC's failed quasi-market-based approach to administering USF grants
and subsidies. Further, the complexity and up-front expense of
navigating the RUS grant application process and difficulty meeting
eligibility requirements deters many Tribes from obtaining funding from
that source. Specifically, as the GAO found, the RUS grant process
requires: preparing complex existing and planned network design
documents; demonstrating financial sustainability (essentially, a
return on investment) within 5 years, a very unrealistic expectation
for the Tribal areas in question; and matching funding from non-federal
sources, which cannot be in the form of in-kind contributions of
equipment or services. As a practical matter, these requirements make
RUS funding unattainable for many Tribes.
In its other September 2018 report, the GAO found that the FCC
continues to overstate the actual level of broadband access on Tribal
lands, in reliance on incomplete and inaccurate penetration data. \9\
The primary method the FCC uses to collect availability data across the
U.S. is through its Form 477. ETC funding recipients are required to
submit data annually to the FCC on Census blocks to which they provide
service. However, the GAO found ETC-reported Form 477 data ``[d]oes not
accurately or completely capture broadband access on tribal lands
because it (1) captures nationwide broadband availability data--areas
where providers may have broadband infrastructure--but does so in a way
that leads to overstatements of availability, and (2) does not capture
information on factors that the FCC and tribal stakeholders have stated
can affect broadband access on tribal lands, such as affordability,
service quality, and denials of service.'' In reporting Form 477 data,
a carrier reporting coverage in a Census block may base that report on
only a single household in that block actually receiving such service.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ GAO, Tribal Broadband: FCC's Data Overstate Access, and Tribes
Face Barriers Accessing Funding, GAO-19-134T (Sept. 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These overstatements of service availability could lead to Census
blocks on Tribal lands being deemed ineligible for federal broadband
infrastructure funds. They also contribute to the FCC's apparent false
sense that its policies and regulations to improve Tribal broadband
access are effective. For instance, the GAO found that some of the
Tribes interviewed specifically stated that they were unable to obtain
federal funds to deploy broadband infrastructure due to their
reservation lands being listed as `served' by other broadband
providers. The GAO also found that there was no formal process at the
FCC for Tribes to challenge broadband availability data on Tribal
lands. Additionally, when Tribes attempt to dispute reported data, they
are often unsuccessful. This systemic ``bad data'' problem exacerbates
other problems that all converge to obstruct real progress toward
closing the Tribal digital divide.
Better and more meaningful Tribal engagement, consultation, and
accurate information-sharing between and among FCC service providers
and Tribes might improve broadband access data, but existing FCC
regulations and policies do little to encourage either. In fairness,
some providers have actively engaged with Tribes to develop needs
assessments and deployment, feasibility, and sustainability planning
for infrastructure deployment, and there have been some success
stories. However, many Tribes experience a general lack of engagement
from non-Tribal service providers and report that they simply receive a
template letter once a year as a way for the provider to `check the
box' on reporting they've engaged with Tribal governments in their
service area. Moreover, information provided by providers to Tribes is
often heavily redacted or withheld unless the Tribe signs a restrictive
non-disclosure agreement. There are no FCC rules that regulate or
prohibit this practice. Lack of access to detailed and accurate
information about broadband availability inhibits the practical ability
of Tribes to challenge before the FCC data reported by the providers,
upon which the Tribes eligibility for federal grant funding may depend.
Under existing rules and policies, service providers have no reason or
incentive to report richer, accurate Tribal area broadband access data
than the inaccurate and incomplete data the FCC collects, and every
reason not to.
The two September 2018 GAO reports culminated in an Oversight
Hearing before this Committee in October 2018. Those studies and
testimony from Tribal stakeholders before this Committee last Fall
chronicle the barriers discussed in our testimony today, and the utter
failure of market forces and the FCC to meaningfully address those
barriers documented by GAO and multiple witnesses. We refer the
Committee to that record. Very little has changed for the better since
then.
III. November 2018 GAO Report: Tribes Lack the Ability to Obtain
Licensed Wireless Spectrum in Competitive Auctions; Market
Failure and FCC's Policies Inhibit Expansion of Broadband
Services on Tribal Land by Non-Tribal Wireless Licensees
Since the Committee's last oversight hearing, GAO released in
November 2018 yet another report, this one highlighting issues with
Tribal access to wireless spectrum. \10\ We agree that the difficulty
Tribes face in obtaining licensed wireless spectrum suitable for
affordable broadband service is a major barrier to progress in
improving Tribal broadband access. The November 2018 GAO Report
identified the FCC's current auction-based method of assigning and
licensing wireless spectrum to the highest bidder, and Tribes' lack of
access to capital, as factors that converge to deny Tribes' the ability
to establish their own primary broadband services and infrastructure as
licensees. \11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ GAO, Tribal Broadband: FCC Should Undertake Efforts to Better
Promote Tribal Access to Spectrum, GAO-19-75 (November 2018) (``2018
GAO-Tribal Access to Spectrum'').
\11\ The experience of the most isolated tribe in America and the
traditional guardians of the Grand Canyon, the Havasupai, is
instructive. For that Tribe, the primary bottleneck in deploying
wireless broadband was not infrastructure cost. Rather, regulatory
obstructions caused by FCC policy were the primary source of delay and
costs. It took lawyers, and four months to get special temporary
authority, and then, over another year for the FCC to grant a waiver of
its long-standing ``freeze'' on applications for assignment of
unlicensed 2.5 GHz spectrum (which was specifically set aside for
educational not-profit and tribal use), and a permanent license. Now,
the Havasupai report that their desire to expand and upgrade the power
on its modest wireless network to bring service to the entire village,
and the bandwidth needed to offer 911 service, tele-learning, and
telemedicine, may be frustrated because a non-Tribal provider in 2015
proposed service in the area through the FCC's ``prior coordination
notification'' process, which may give the provider's later-filed
application for 6 GHz spectrum priority over the Tribe's partner's
earlier-filed application. The Tribe apparently must now fight yet
another battle with the FCC. NPM urges the Committee to consider and
place in the record the following article and the July 16, 2019, House
testimony of Ms. Mariel Triggs: https://www.npr.org/2019/09/16/
759908026/most-isolated-tribe-in-continental-u-s-gets-broadband https:/
/energycommerce.house.gov/sites/democrats.energycommerce.house.gov/
files/documents/2_Testimony_Triggs%20%28update%29_0.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the face of those obstacles, some Tribes try to muddle through
by cobbling together systems relying on unlicensed wireless spectrum
never intended and technically unsuitable for broadband use. Unlicensed
spectrum generally does not support reliably the bandwidth and low
latency needed to stream and exchange the volume of data and content
typically used in the modern Internet environment. Moreover, use of
unlicensed spectrum can be a crowded field, and subject to interference
from other users, with no legal or practical recourse. As the GAO
correctly concluded, unlicensed spectrum is no substitute for
interference-protected, exclusively licensed wireless spectrum in
building and deploying sustainable networks providing universal
broadband service.
But, as GAO also notes, although the Commission has proposed
adopting a Tribal priority for licensed broadband spectrum in Indian
country to promote primary interference-protected licensure to Tribal
entities, \12\ it has largely failed to follow through in most
frequency bands used for wireless broadband, and, where it has done so,
it has imposed unrealistically short deadlines on Tribal priority
applicants. \13\ The GAO also identified secondary market failures that
make Tribes' reliance on engagement and arrangements with other
wireless spectrum licensees and service providers, such as service
contracts or leases, an unreliable pathway to meaningful rapid progress
in bridging the Tribal digital divide. These failures are promoted by
the FCC's failure to collect and mandate sharing with Tribes accurate
and complete data as to the true state of broadband access on Tribal
lands and possible availability of unused spectrum over such lands that
would put Tribal entities in a far better and fairer bargaining
position with providers than they are now.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ In the Matter of Improving Communications Services for Native
Nations by Promoting Greater Utilization of Spectrum over Tribal Lands,
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking 26 FCC Rcd 2623 (2011).
\13\ 2018 GAO --Tribal Access to Spectrum, at 20-22. One exception
is that in the 2.5 GHz rulemaking, the FCC adopted in July 2019 a
Tribal priority filing window for currently unlicensed 2.5 GHz spectrum
on rural tribal lands in which the applicant tribe has a substantial
local presence. FCC, Report & Order, Transforming the 2.5 GHz Band, FCC
No. 19-62, Paragraphs 47-65 (July 11, 2019). That order also eliminated
restrictions limiting licensees of that spectrum only to educational
and tribal entities, and the ``educational use'' restrictions that
formerly applied, effectively ``commercializing'' the band. The
Commission will soon hold an ``overlay'' auction where currently
unlicensed EBS spectrum not assigned via a Tribal priority application
will be auctioned to the highest bidder on a county-by-county basis.
Id. Paragraphs 75-99. As a practical matter, underserved Tribes will
not be able to take advantage of the 2.5 GHz filing priority. NPM
believes that the short Tribal priority ``outreach'' and filing
``windows'' prescribed by the FCC, and its inexplicable decision to
require Tribal priority licensees to build out systems twice as fast as
non-Tribal auction-winner licensees, will limit Tribes' practical
abilities to solve complex technical challenges, obtain necessary grant
and other funding, form partnerships, and devise and implement
solutions in sufficient time to leverage the 2.5 GHz Tribal priority.
See also note 11 and references.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
IV. National Lifeline Assoc. v. FCC: FCC'S Policies are Sometimes
Worse Than Ineffective
We, Tribes and Tribal citizens alike, have reached the point where
a laissez-faire approach to enforcing meaningful engagement and
information-sharing by broadband service providers is just not good
enough. That approach has done little to incentivize or require non-
Tribal wireless licensees and USF funding recipients to deploy quality
broadband service in underserved Tribal areas. We are also past the
point where we can tolerate indifference to the known problem of
inadequate Tribal broadband access as not being ``bad enough'' to
galvanize real action. Further, the FCC can no longer take actions that
defy the ``facts on the ground,'' and make the problems worse.
For example, in 2017 the FCC altered its ``Tribal Lifeline program
regulations to limit the availability of subsidies only to services
provided by telecommunications carriers that utilize their own fixed or
mobile wireless facilities, excluding carriers that resell the service
of others, and to limit the subsidies only to persons residing on
``rural'' Tribal lands. These restrictions had the perverse effect of
discouraging, not promoting, greater broadband service availability in
Tribal communities.
Earlier this year, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia struck down these rules, holding that they were arbitrary and
capricious, in that the FCC failed to offer any reasoned explanation
for the policy change supported by evidence in the rulemaking record.
\14\ The Court explained that the FCC decision simply ignored evidence
of real-world market conditions facing Tribal broadband users:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ National Lifeline Association v. FCC, No. 18-1026 (D.C. Cir.
Feb. 1, 2019) https://www.cadc.uscourts.gov/Internet/opinions.nsf/
8E6B91FC5437D2D9852583940053BC87/$file/18-1026.pdf.
The Commission's decision evinces no consideration of the
exodus of facilities-based providers from the Tribal Lifeline
program. Neither does it point to evidence that banning
resellers from the Tribal Lifeline program would promote
network buildout. Nor does it analyze the impact of the
facilities requirement on Tribal residents who currently rely
on wireless resellers. Further, the Commission ignored that its
decision is a fundamental change that adversely affects the
access and affordability of service for residents of Tribal
lands. Similarly, in adopting the Tribal Rural Limitation, the
Commission's decision evinces no consideration of the impact on
service access and affordability. Its decision does not examine
wireless deployment data related to services to which most
Tribal Lifeline recipients subscribe. \15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Id., at 3.
V. The Way Forward--The Coming 5G Revoluton and Urgent Need for
Legislation
Currently, as a primary focus, the FCC is plunging headlong in a
race to free up and auction to the highest bidders, spectrum suitable
for next-generation 5G mobile telecommunications services. \16\ 5G
promises bandwidth and latency rates far superior to existing
technologies, and widespread deployment of mobile 5G service in Tribal
lands and communities would certainly help close the digital divide.
But unless the barriers and obstacles already recognized by this
Committee, GAO, and the FCC itself are addressed, Tribal communities
are unlikely to enjoy the benefits of this promising technology, and
the gap in availability and quality of service will only grow ever
wider. If the FCC's pattern of footdragging and neglect continues, it
is almost certain that Tribal communities will simply be left behind in
the rapidly-approaching 5G revolution. The FCC has displayed scant
regard for the interests of Tribes and Native peoples in its rush to
deploy 5G thus far, and there is little reason to think this will
change absent Congressional action. \17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ https://www.fcc.gov/5G.
\17\ On August 9, 2019, in United Keetoowha Bands of Cherokee
Indians in Oklahoma v. FCC, No. 18-1129 (D.C. Cir. Aug. 9, 2019) the
U.S. Court of Appeals overturned a 2018 FCC order designed to
accelerate wireless 5G broadband deployments by eliminating National
Historic Preservation Act and National Environmental Policy Act review
of proposed wireless broadband construction projects' impacts on sites
of environmental, religious and cultural importance to federally-
recognized Indian tribes. The Court found that FCC acted arbitrarily
and capriciously in failing to justify its conclusion that small cell
deployments pose little to no cognizable religious, cultural, or
environmental risk. https://www.narf.org/nill/documents/20190809fcc-
decision.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For these reasons, NPM strongly supports the efforts of Senator
Udall and other members of this Committee to introduce and press for
adoption of legislation to remove the barriers caused by broadband
service market failure and the FCC's inadequate efforts to mandate and
promote meaningful solutions. Such legislation should reflect and
implement GAO's recommendations in its 2018 reports. It should:
Mandate a dedicated Tribal Broadband Fund within the USF,
eliminate the ETC eligibility requirement for Tribal
applications and require the FCC to create a streamlined
application process;
Mandate dedicated Tribal Broadband funding within the RUS,
and require USDA to eliminate or reduce for Tribal entities
burdensome and impractical application and eligibility
requirements for RUS funding;
Require the FCC to improve data collection on Tribal lands,
develop a formal process for Tribal challenges to and review of
carrier reported data, and review and improve its Tribal
Government Engagement policies to remove existing barriers and
disincentives to meaningful engagement and information-sharing;
Require the FCC to implement Tribal priority application
filing windows for Tribal lands in all wireless spectrum
license auctions, with realistic application and build-out
deadlines;
Mandate a National Broadband Advisory Council designed to
set an agenda that ensures effective communication and
coordination among Federal agencies and to promote Tribal
participation in federal decisions and policies regarding
broadband deployment and adoption across Indian Country,
including (without limitation) in connection with:
--Proceedings related to the FCC National Broadband Plan
and the nation's digital divide;
--Identifying relevant federal funding information and
mechanisms in order to maximize Tribal opportunities for
broadband deployment and adoption;
--Taking actions necessary to fully implement Tribal
recommendations in the FCC National Broadband Plan and those
stemming from relevant GAO Reports;
--Identifying opportunities for Federal agencies, Tribes,
broadband service providers (tribal/non-tribal) to share
resources related to affordable broadband deployment and
adoption; and
--Strengthening, supporting and liaising with the continued
outreach and work of the FCC Office of Native Affairs and
Policy and the FCC's Native Nations Communications Task Force.
\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ NPM does not believe that the proposed National Broadband
Advisory Council would duplicate or be redundant of the work of the
FCC's OPNA or Native Nations Communications Task Force. The scope of
the new advisory body is different--focused on multiple federal
agencies and collaboration with Tribes to find solutions; with an
invitation to service providers to join the circle. Indian Country is
diverse and advisory bodies must embrace that this is not a one size
fits all approach to addressing the digital divide. This is also an
issue about affordability, not just infrastructure. The conversation
needs to bring into the circle all stakeholders, public and private,
that have the power to help close the digital divide in a substantive
and meaningful way.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
______
Prepared Statement of Raymond V. Ortiz, Board Member/Lead Tech, RediNet
redinet vs incumbents--a journey of self determination
From the onset of the BTOP Grant applications, the local incumbents
showed quite a bit of reticence against what would later become
RediNet.
The tact they undertook is now familiar to many Community Owned
Broadband organizations across the United States. In the beginning, it
largely took the form of lobbying local law makers with the end goal
being to have them speak to the Senate and Congressional delegations in
order to discourage support for RediNet BTOP/ARA application. In
addition, they have tried with moderate success to have laws enacted
which prohibit competition from a Community Broadband Network. In New
Mexico this took the form of introduction of bills which outright
attempted to create this prohibition and others in which the language
was couched to create disadvantages for entities such as RediNet
affecting funding availability.
On the federal level, they have lobbied the FCC and curried favor
via false reporting of service delivery and coverage. This affects
funding for smaller community owned broadband entities which do not
have the budget to lobby or have such small areas of coverage that they
are largely ignored in funding opportunities. This practice is starting
to finally be looked at more closely by lawmakers however, many of
these folks often lack the understanding of terminology and business
practices which are used to deceive both the end user and the
lawmakers. It is necessary to explain this process in a little more
detail so these statements make sense to the reader.
Provisioning is the term used for the fastest connection
possibility to an end user based on equipment configuration. This term
is deceiving because the end user thinks that what they are buying is
broadband service at those speeds. What they are actually paying for is
access to those speeds, not necessarily delivery of that speed,
particularly under load. The fine print in the service agreement
indicates ``up to'' the provisioned speed not sustained delivery of
those speeds. In essence the equipment can handle those speeds but the
final delivery depends on many factors such as backhaul speeds,
oversubscription rates and physical plant capability. The discrepancy
between provisioning and service delivery allows service providers to
maximize profit while minimizing expenses to the detriment of the
consumer who is paying for something they aren't getting. Incumbents
bait the offering by indicating a low price for a certain speed which
they cannot or do not deliver.
In our area this has historically been a chronic problem. So much
so that some communities have united and tried to sue the incumbent for
lack of or poor service.
Another long term problem is that the incumbents have made it
extremely difficult for organizations other than their own to access
the fiber paid for by federal and state dollars. This allows them to
monetize the asset and maximize profits. If the federal government is
investing in infrastructure, state and local governments should be
given priority access for transport of internal noncommercial traffic
on dark fiber. This would provide cost effective solutions for critical
traffic. Why should state and local governments pay for transport on
fiber paid for by tax dollars?
By keeping second party entities off the fiber networks, the
incumbents have in effect privatized public resources. This slows the
progress of fiber rollouts or stops new builds altogether in large
geographical areas which are rural in nature. This is contrary to the
national goal of fiberizing the nation.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Jon Tester to
Andrew Von Ah
Question 1. According to the GAO report, participating in the
secondary market is one of the few ways Tribes can access licensed
spectrum. How do we make sure that Tribes know about the licensed and
unlicensed spectrum on their lands? Who should be responsible for
educating Tribes about ways they can access spectrum?
Answer. In our November 2018 report, we recommended that the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) should make information on
spectrum-license holders more accessible and easy to understand for
interested parties, including tribal entities, to promote their ability
to purchase or lease spectrum licenses from other providers. \1\ Given
that most of the spectrum allocated for commercial use has already been
assigned through spectrum auctions and other mechanisms to private
providers, it is important for tribes to know who owns the spectrum
licenses over their lands. All of the tribal associations we contacted
for our review confirmed that there are unused spectrum licenses over
tribal lands that could present opportunities for tribal entities to
obtain spectrum through the secondary market. However, the tribal
entities we contacted stated that it is difficult to determine who
holds spectrum licenses and many tribal entities were unaware of the
possibility of accessing licensed spectrum through a secondary market
transaction prior to our contacting them. In response to our
recommendation, FCC's Chairman noted that FCC is currently engaged in a
multi-year project to modernize the Universal Licensing System (ULS),
transitioning to a new platform that will provide more consistent
performance, easier access to information, and enhanced functionality.
The Chairman said the Office of Native Affairs and Policy will continue
its outreach and educational efforts with tribal entities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ GAO, Tribal Broadband: FCC Should Undertake Efforts to Better
Promote Tribal Access to Spectrum, GAO-19-75 (Washington, D.C.: Nov.
14, 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As the expert agency for commercial and nonfederal spectrum use,
FCC should be responsible for educating tribes about ways they can
access spectrum. Congress has delegated responsibility for regulating
commercial and nonfederal spectrum use to FCC, and FCC has asserted
that its authority to regulate nonfederal spectrum use applies to the
spectrum over tribal lands. Furthermore, FCC has recognized its own
general responsibility to tribes. In FCC's policy statement on
establishing its relationship with tribes, FCC stated that it
recognizes that the federal government has a fiduciary responsibility
in its dealings with tribes and has a longstanding policy of promoting
tribal self-sufficiency and economic development. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Statement of Policy on Establishing a Government-to-Government
Relationship with Indian Tribes, Policy Statement, 16 FCC Rcd 4078
(2000).
Question 2. Is the Office of Native Affairs and Policy adequately
staffed to track and communicate data on spectrum to Tribes?
Answer. Although we did not assess the adequacy of the Office of
Native Affairs and Policy's (ONAP) staffing, we did review ONAP's
efforts and ask tribal representatives about their views of ONAP. At
the time of our review in November 2018, ONAP officials told us that
they had conducted 21 training and consultation workshops for tribal
entities on broadband and telecommunications issues since 2012, where
spectrum had been discussed. These officials also told us that they
communicate with tribal entities prior to when FCC holds auctions or
when implementing regulatory actions or policies that will affect
tribal governments and spectrum over their lands. However, it is not
clear that ONAP has a systematic approach for tracking and
communicating spectrum data to tribes. We found that only 9 of the 16
tribal entities we interviewed that were using wireless technologies
had received outreach from FCC on spectrum-related issues. Furthermore,
10 of the 16 tribal entities said that more outreach or training would
be useful and 2 told us they had not received any outreach from FCC.
We also found that ONAP issued a report in 2012 to provide FCC with
a review of its work with tribal governments and organizations,
including information on its tribal broadband efforts, priorities, and
tribal consultations. Among other things, the report included case-
study information on tribal entities' efforts to access spectrum.
Although the report stated that this would be the first of such annual
reporting, this is the only report that ONAP has issued on tribal
issues.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Steve Daines to
Andrew Von Ah
Question 1. Mr. Von Ah your report mentions that unlicensed
spectrum can be effectively used by tribes to connect their community
members, but because they are unlicensed there can be drawbacks,
including interference. I recently helped secure a pilot program with
the Microsoft Airband Initiative for TV White Space technology in
Montana, and last year they announced they will be using this new tech
to connect the CSKT of the Flathead Nation in northwest Montana. How
can we better use this unlicensed spectrum to connect tribal areas
while also reducing interference?
Answer. The TV white space spectrum adds to the spectrum available
to tribal entities and has some technical advantages over other
unlicensed spectrum bands. For example, signals can travel greater
distance with less power and do not require direct line-of-sight.
However, TV white space spectrum is still unlicensed spectrum and
presents limitations that we noted in our November 2018 report,
including potential for interference and limited bandwidth capacity,
which causes lower speeds, high latency, and limits the number of
households that can be served. \1\ In addition, stakeholders we spoke
with said that equipment needed to access TV whitespace spectrum is
expensive and less available, which may prevent many tribal entities
from using the white space spectrum. At the time of our review, none of
the entities we interviewed said that they used TV white space
spectrum.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ GAO, Tribal Broadband: FCC Should Undertake Efforts to Better
Promote Tribal Access to Spectrum, GAO-19-75 (Washington, D.C.: Nov.
14, 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although we did not assess actions taken by FCC after our report
was issued in November 2018, we understand that FCC has adopted an
order in March 2019, to improve the accuracy and reliability of the
fixed white space device data recorded in its databases and to assure
that the potential for these devices to cause interference to protected
services is minimized. \2\ In the order, FCC increased the allowable
above ground antenna height and power for fixed white space devices in
less congested areas to help improve wireless broadband service in
rural and other underserved areas. In May 2019, Microsoft requested
that FCC make further improvements to its TV white space rules, such as
increasing the allowable power limits and antenna heights for fixed
white space devices in rural areas, to address what Microsoft called
``real-world barriers'' that companies face in trying to use white
space technologies in rural areas.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ FCC 19-24.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Tom Udall to
Donald K Stockdale
Question 1. The FCC maintains the Universal Licensing System (ULS)
to identify spectrum-license holders on Tribal lands for the public.
The GAO found, and the FCC agreed, that the ULS is ineffective and the
FCC needs to do more to help Tribes identify unused spectrum. The FCC
noted it is embarking on a multi-year project to modernize the ULS.
Tribes will be reliant on this ineffective system to identify unused
spectrum, while ensuring it meets the requirements of the Tribal
priority window for 2.5 GHz spectrum. Did the ineffectiveness of the
ULS tool factor into the FCC's planned time-line for accepting
applications for unlicensed 2.5 GHz spectrum?
Answer. I agree that the Universal Licensing System (ULS) could be
more user-friendly, and Chairman Pai has made modernization of the ULS
a priority. The FCC currently is engaged in a multi-year project to
modernize the ULS and make it more flexible, capable, reliable, and
user-friendly. Indeed, we have taken into account the challenges Tribal
entities identified in navigating the existing ULS tool and are
developing new Tribal entity-specific tools to assist Tribal entities
in navigating the application process, including mapping tools to help
Tribal entities in determining where there is available spectrum over
Rural Tribal Lands.
Question 2. In the ``Transforming the 2.5 GHz Band Report and Order
(FCC 19-62)'', the FCC noted that, ``most Tribal entities favor a
geographic license area that tracks reservation boundaries''. Several
Tribes also advocated for including off-reservation land in the Tribal
priority window. Ultimately, FCC rejected these recommendations and
instead opted to utilize the existing process because it ``would be
efficient and facilitate prompt processing of Tribal priority
applications''. Given the recognized Tribal digital divide, how did FCC
determine that the expediency of processing applications outweighed the
need to ensure greater broadband participation and access for Tribal
communities?
Answer. The Commission did not reject the recommendation to allow
Tribal entities to apply for licenses tracking reservation boundaries,
nor did the Commission reject the call for including off-reservation
land in the Tribal priority window. In the Report and Order, the
Commission adopted the broad definition of Tribal lands contained in
Part 54 of its rules and agreed with commenters to include off-
reservation lands in the Tribal priority window under certain
circumstances. (R&O para. 54). In fact, the Commission stated that it
will include in the Tribal priority window Rural Tribal Lands on-
reservation in all situations and off-reservation lands in certain
situations. (R&O para. 52). Moreover, under the Commission's decision,
the available license areas available in the Tribal window will track
the boundaries of individual Tribal lands that otherwise meet the
requirements of the Commission's rules. We note that the Commission
acknowledged the issue that licensing reservation-based Tribal lands
will, in some cases, result in irregularly shaped licenses that will
complicate the geographic landscape for other 2.5 GHz licensees. (R&O
para. 55). Nevertheless, the Commission stated, ``we do not see this
potential complication as a reason not to make all reservation lands
available for the Tribal Priority Window.'' (R&O para. 55).
Question 3. Please outline the Tribal consultation steps the FCC
has taken to determine what types of documentation Tribes must submit
in order to be granted 2.5 GHz spectrum under the Tribal priority
window.
Answer. The Commission conducted a robust notice and comment
process--including comments from 22 Tribal entities or organizations
associated with Tribes--and consulted with interested Tribal Entities
and stakeholders, such as Chairman Pai's May 28, 2019 meeting with
Governor Bill Anoatubby, Secretary of Commerce Bill Lance, and Under
Secretary Subsidiary Services and Support Clifford Agee at the
Chickasaw Nation Headquarters in Ada, Oklahoma. As a result, the
Commission adopted simplified documentation requirements for applicants
under the Tribal Priority Window. Under the Commission's rules,
applicants for the Tribal Priority Window must demonstrate: (1) that
the applicant is a federally recognized American Indian Tribe or Alaska
Native Village or an entity that is owned and controlled by a federally
recognized Tribal entity or a consortium of federally recognized Tribal
entities; (2) that the applicant is applying for a license on Rural
Tribal Land; and (3) that the applicant has a local presence on the
Rural Tribal Land for which it is applying.
Much of the information required to show that a Tribal entity is
eligible to participate in the Tribal Priority Window is readily
available to them. For instance, a Tribal entity must show that it is
on the list of Tribal entities recognized by and eligible for funding
and services from the U.S Bureau of Indian Affairs most recently
published in the Federal Register. Tribal entities that apply for a
license on their own Rural Tribal Land will be able to demonstrate both
that the land is Tribal Land and that they have a local presence in
that area. To show that the Tribal Land for which it seeks a license is
Rural, a Tribal entity may use U.S. Census Bureau data that can be
found at https://www2.census.gov/geo/maps.
Commission staff are engaged currently in nationwide outreach
regarding the Tribal Priority Window and the application process. Staff
also are developing tools to assist Tribal entities with both
identifying available spectrum and navigating the application process.
Commission staff also will be available to work with applicants
individually to ensure that they have submitted documentation necessary
to meet all of the required elements.
Question 4. Will Tribes be required to provide documentation about
their ability to meet substantial service requirements in order to be
granted 2.5 GHz spectrum under the Tribal priority window? If so,
please summarize the information FCC will require and outline steps the
FCC has taken to consult with Tribes.
Answer. No, Tribal entities will not be required to provide
documentation that they will be able to meet the performance
requirements when they apply for a license in the Tribal Priority
Window. Consistent with the Commission's normal practice, the
Commission will require Tribal licensees to demonstrate compliance with
the buildout requirements at the applicable deadlines.
Question 5. Please articulate the rationale the FCC used to justify
requesting the Office of Management and Budget grant an emergency
approval of the Paperwork Reduction Act, specifically in adherence to
written determination requirement of 5 CFR  1320.13.
Answer. The Commission requested expedited review to make valuable
mid-band spectrum available for the mobile services on which consumers
increasingly rely and which is critical to maintain American leadership
in the next generation of wireless connectivity. The Commission stated
that the spectrum will be available to members of federally recognized
American Indian Tribes and Alaska Native Villages on Rural Tribal
Lands, many of which have lacked meaningful access to wireless
communications services. The Commission indicated that it wanted to
auction spectrum in the 2.5 GHz band in 2020. Requiring the Commission
to seek OMB's approval for this collection under the regular PRA
processing procedures would significantly delay the provision of
service on Tribal lands. The Commission requested that OMB approve only
one public notice comment period of 30 days instead of the standard two
comment periods of 60 and 30 days for OMB Control Number 3060-1094. The
intent was to allow more time for the Tribal Priority Window.
Question 6. The FCC estimates that only eight Tribal entities will
file for access to 2.5 GHz EBS spectrum under the Tribal priority
window. This estimate is low and will not address the digital divide
within Indian Country. The FCC has stated on multiple occasions that
Tribal Nations and bridging that gap are a priority. How did FCC come
up with this number? Will FCC take this estimate in to consideration
and take aggressive steps to ensure greater Tribal participation?
Answer. In its Paperwork Reduction Act request, the Commission
estimated that 24 Tribal entities or consortia of Tribal entities would
apply during the Tribal Priority Window based on the number of Tribal
entities that commented in the rulemaking proceeding. In calculating
the number of ``annual'' filings, PRA rules require that federal
agencies divide the estimate over three years, for an estimate of eight
annual filings. The Commission is taking aggressive steps to encourage
greater participation in the Tribal Priority Window.
Question 7. Does the FCC have any plans, besides the multi-year
effort to update ULS, to produce easily accessible and understandable
maps of available 2.5 GHz spectrum?
Answer. Yes; the FCC is developing a Tribal Mapping Tool
specifically for the 2.5 GHz Tribal Priority Window application
process; this tool will present easily accessible and understandable
maps of Rural Tribal Lands and existing spectrum holdings over those
lands. The tool will include the ability to link to ULS records to
obtain more detailed information on any incumbent licensees over those
lands.
Question 7a. If so, will this be completed before the Tribal
priority window closes? If not, is FCC considering extending the Tribal
priority window?
Answer. The Tribal Mapping Tool will be completed before the Tribal
Priority Window OPENS, and FCC will provide training, tutorials, and
support for Tribal entities using this tool before and during the
application window.
Question 8. How many Tribes currently have 2.5 GHz spectrum
available over their lands? How did the FCC conduct its analysis?
Answer. 347 Tribes have some 2.5 GHz white space spectrum available
over the entire eligible area; 314 have at least 50 megahertz of
contiguous spectrum available over the entire eligible area. Our
initial analysis is part of the current development of a Tribal Mapping
Tool that will provide each of these Tribal entities with a view of
whether and to what extent spectrum is available in each of the three
channel bands over their respective Rural Tribal Land. This tool should
be available in early November, roughly 60 days before the opening of
the application window, and will remain available, along with other
information, support, tutorials, and tools being developed to assist
Tribal entities, throughout the application window.
Question 9. FCC 19-62 outlines a 90-day Tribal education process
and a 60-day window for applications. How will the FCC communicate with
the hundreds of Tribal Nations that may be eligible to apply,
especially those with limited or no Internet access?
How will the Commission ensure that all eligible rural Tribal
Nations are made aware of this opportunity? Please provide the specific
dates and locations of upcoming workshops.
Answer. In paragraph 62 of the Report and Order (FCC 19-62), the
Commission noted that it had received comments proposing a 90-day
notice period prior to the opening of the priority filing window with a
60-day window for the filing of applications. Rather than adopting the
suggestion of the commenters and limit the window to 60 days, the
Commission directed its Wireless Telecommunications Bureau to announce
procedures for the Tribal Priority Window through one or more Public
Notices and other appropriate outreach to potentially eligible Tribal
applicants. As noted above, emergency PRA approval was sought to
lengthen the period of the Tribal Priority Window.
WTB, in partnership with the FCC's Office of Native Affairs and
Policy (ONAP), currently is conducting outreach to Tribal entities and
is providing notice of the upcoming window. WTB and ONAP also are
working on the IT development necessary to provide Tribal entities with
additional tools to assist with navigating the Tribal Priority Window.
While the application window, which should open in early 2020, will be
announced via Public Notice, the FCC also will use a variety of
methods--email, phone calls, and/or direct mail--to contact Rural
Tribal Nations about this opportunity, to ensure that all eligible
Tribal entities receive this information, including those with limited
or no Internet access.
Commission staff also have participated in a number of workshops
recently to inform Tribal entities of this opportunity, including:
July 18--Midwest Alliance of Sovereign Tribes Conference
(Mt. Pleasant, MI)
July 31--Native American Development Corp. Annual Conference
(Billings, MT)
Aug. 21--22--Tribal Communications Workshop (Billings, MT)
Sept 23--FCC Intergovernmental Advisory Committee
Sept. 28--Department of the Interior Tribal Broadband Summit
(Washington D.C.)
Oct. 8--Affiliated Tribes of Northwest Indians Annual
Convention (Suquamish, WA)
Oct 9--Internet Society Indigenous Connectivity Webinar
Oct. 17-19--Alaska Federation of Natives
Oct. 20-FCC Tribal Communications Workshop (Albuquerque, NM)
Oct. 22--National Congress of American Indians Conference
(Albuquerque, NM)
Oct. 23--Alaska Telecom Association Tech Showcase--Board
Meeting (Anchorage, AK)
As of October 24, 2019, Commission staff are scheduled to
participate in the following upcoming workshops, and are actively
working with Tribal entities to schedule additional events:
Nov. 5--FCC Native Nations Communications Task Force
Nov. 12--TribalNet Conference (Nashville, TN)
Nov. 19-20--FCC Tribal Workshop (Blue Lake, CA)
Early December--Tribal focus groups on Tribal Mapping Tool
performance
December--Online webinar
In addition, Commission staff have also set up a special mailbox
for inquiries about the Tribal Priority window:
[emailprotected], and they have developed the attached
informational handout with references to helpful information and
contacts with the Commission to assist Tribal Entities. Commission
staff intend to update this handout periodically as new information and
tools become available.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Steve Daines to
Donald K Stockdale
Question 1. Chairman Pai has made it a priority to close the
digital divide and I share that passion with him. One way he can
continue making a major impact is having strong buildout requirements
on carriers. Recently, I helped secure unused spectrum for a large
national carrier with their promise that they will build a robust
network on the Fort Peck Reservation. According to recent maps, they
are honoring that commitment and I look forward to seeing Fort Peck and
Montana's other tribal areas continue to grow in 4G and 5G coverage.
How can the FCC better use buildout requirement to connect rural and
tribal communities in Montana?
Answer. Construction obligations have functioned as a core part of
the Commission's wireless policy for decades. The FCC's construction
obligations serve the important purpose of ensuring that scarce
spectrum resources are put to use and deployed in a manner that serves
all communities. Indeed, the Commission's construction obligations
promote the Commission's goal of making spectrum ``available, so far as
possible, to all the people of the United States'' regardless of where
they live. 47 U.S.C.  151.
As the Commission's rules specify, absent a specific provision in
our rules to the contrary, ``if a licensee fails to commence service or
operations by the expiration of its construction period or to meet its
coverage or substantial service obligations by the expiration of its
coverage period, its authorization terminates automatically (in whole
or in part as set forth in the service rules), without specific
Commission action, on the date the construction or coverage period
expires.'' 47 CFR  1.946(c).
The FCC has been clear that requests to extend construction
obligations will not be routinely granted. The Commission's rules and
case law impose limits on the types of arguments and factual
circumstances that would qualify a licensee for an extension. For
example, the Commission's rules do not contemplate extensions of
construction deadlines for licensees that fail to meet construction
obligations because of miscalculations or erroneous predictions about
such factors as costs, demand, developments in the market, or timing
and success in obtaining permissions that may be necessary for
construction. Rather, the Commission has always expected licensees to
factor in these considerations from the start because construction
obligations are the building blocks to making available service that
puts scarce spectrum resources to use. When a licensee fails to deploy
on a timely basis, the Commission holds the licensee accountable in
accordance with its rules. Specifically, under Section 1.946(e) of the
Commission's rules, extensions of the time period for meeting these
construction and service requirements are permitted only in two
situations--either ``involuntary loss of site'' or ``other causes
beyond [a licensee's] control.'' 47 CFR  1.946(e)(1).
Question 2. The FCC's Office of Native Affairs and Policy, or ONAP
(oh-nap) is supposed to be a resource for tribal nations, but I have
heard the FCC could be using the office in a much more effective way.
What is the FCC doing to better promote ONAP and how can this position
be better utilized to connect with tribes in Montana?
Answer. ONAP, together with the Wireless Telecommunications and
Wireline Competition Bureaus, have developed best practices regarding
the Tribal engagement process. Last updated in 2012, the Commission
anticipated that its Tribal engagement obligation and guidance would
evolve over time based on initial implementation experiences and
feedback of both Tribal governments and communications providers. On
October 21, the Commission's Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau
(CGB) released a Public Notice requesting comment on the effectiveness
of its Tribal engagement guidance. (DA 19-1055). CGB seeks to assess
the effectiveness of its Tribal engagement guidance based on the
practical experiences of Tribes and carriers, to ensure the effective
exchange of information that will lead to a common understanding
between Tribal governments and communications providers on issues such
as the deployment and improvement of communications services on Tribal
lands. The Commission recognized in the Public Notice that Commission
staff has heard of anecdotal problems with providers' efforts to
initiate engagement with Tribal leaders, and it sought comment on
specific steps the Commission can take or recommend, to assist parties
with their engagement efforts. Comments in response to the Public
Notice are due December 5, and reply comments are due January 6, 2020.
Moreover, WTB and ONAP currently are conducting outreach to Tribal
entities and providing notice not only of the upcoming Tribal Priority
Window for 2.5 GHz spectrum but also opportunities to use 3.5 GHz
spectrum. WTB and ONAP also are working on the IT development necessary
to provide Tribal entities with additional tools to assist with
navigating the 2.5 GHz Tribal Priority Window. While the application
window, which should open in early 2020, will be announced via Public
Notice, the FCC also will use a variety of methods--email, phone calls,
and/or direct mail--to contact Tribal entities about these
opportunities, in particular to ensure that all eligible Tribal
entities receive information about the 2.5 GHz Tribal Priority window,
including those with limited or no Internet access.
Commission staff also have participated in a number of workshops
recently to inform Tribal entities of this opportunity, including:
July 18--Midwest Alliance of Sovereign Tribes Conference
(Mt. Pleasant, MI)
July 31--Native American Development Corp. Annual Conference
(Billings, MT)
Aug. 21-22--Tribal Communications Workshop (Billings, MT)
Sept 23--FCC Intergovernmental Advisory Committee
Sept. 28--Department of the Interior Tribal Broadband Summit
(Washington D.C.)
Oct. 8--Affiliated Tribes of Northwest Indians Annual
Convention (Suquamish, WA)
Oct 9--Internet Society Indigenous Connectivity Webinar
Oct. 17-19--Alaska Federation of Natives
Oct. 20--FCC Tribal Communications Workshop (Albuquerque,
NM)
Oct. 22--National Congress of American Indians Conference
(Albuquerque, NM)
Oct. 23--Alaska Telecom Association Tech Showcase--Board
Meeting (Anchorage, AK)
As of October 24, 2019, Commission staff are scheduled to
participate in the following upcoming workshops during the remainder of
2019, and they are actively working with Tribal entities to schedule
additional events:
Nov. 5--FCC Native Nations Communications Task Force
Nov. 12--TribalNet Conference (Nashville, TN)
Nov. 19-20--FCC Tribal Workshop (Blue Lake, CA)
Early December--Tribal focus groups on Tribal Mapping Tool
performance
December--Online webinar
In addition, Commission staff have also set up a special mailbox
for inquiries about the Tribal Priority window:
[emailprotected], and they have developed the attached
informational handout with references to helpful information and
contacts with the Commission to assist Tribal Entities. Commission
staff intend to update this handout periodically as new information and
tools become available.
Commission staff is designing and developing a dedicated webpage
specifically to assist Tribal entities in applying for licenses in the
Tribal Priority Window; this webpage will provide information as well
as access to tools, including an interactive map to assist Tribal
entities in determining whether there is spectrum available over their
Rural Tribal Lands.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Jon Tester to
Donald K. Stockdale, Jr.
Question 1. In 2011, the FCC issued a proposed rulemaking that
would improve Tribal Access to spectrum and was supported by Tribal
stakeholders. Yet, the FCC still hasn't taken any steps to adopt this
rulemaking. Why hasn't any further action been taken?
Answer. A key proposal in the 2011 NPRM was for the FCC to create a
Tribal licensing priority for unassigned spectrum. Earlier this year,
the FCC established a priority filing window for Tribal Nations to
obtain licenses for unassigned 2.5 GHz spectrum on rural tribal lands.
This priority filing window will offer an opportunity for many Tribal
Nations to provide advanced wireless and broadband services in their
communities. Recently, the Wireless Telecommunications Bureau announced
that the priority window will be open from February 3, 2020, to August
3, 2020. The agency continues to work with Tribal Nations to facilitate
their participation in this 2.5 GHz priority window, as well as to
develop other opportunities for access to communications services.
Question 2. Is the Office of the Native Affairs and Policy
adequately staffed to track and communicate data on spectrum to Tribes?
Answer. Yes, we have sufficient staff within ONAP to handle tribal
consultations, as well as to coordinate agency-wide on a range of
issues central to our work in this area. ONAP has five full-time staff
working on Tribal consultations and related issues. In addition, ONAP
receives substantial daily support from an experienced Deputy Bureau
Chief charged with primary responsibility for overseeing the office, as
well as additional support from other Bureau-level legal advisors.
Within the Bureau, ONAP greatly benefits from the synergies with other
CGB offices, including routine coordination with intergovernmental
staff in the Office of Intergovernmental Affairs and other bureau-level
specialists. In addition, like other offices in a small agency of 1,448
FTEs, ONAP does not work in isolation, but rather coordinates on a
regular basis with subject-matter experts in WTB, WCB and MB, as well
as OET, OEA and OMD on items of significant Tribal interest. These
experts not only advise ONAP on an ongoing basis, they also partner
with ONAP to address and conduct Tribal consultations and related
matters. As currently structured, the office has the ability to be
flexible in its approach and work cross-agency to obtain the best
results for stakeholders. For example, ONAP and WTB subject-matter
experts jointly conducted consultations related to the Commission
proceeding that is transforming the way Educational Broadband Service
spectrum in the 2.5 GHz band is used, resulting in the creation of a
rural Tribal Priority Window for new licenses in this band.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Jon Tester to
Kimball Sekaquaptewa
Question 1. How has the FCC consulted with Tribes and how is their
feedback incorporated into improving spectrum availability on Tribal
lands?
Answer. To my knowledge, the FCC consults with tribes through
Notices of Proposed Rulemakings (NPRM) and has assigned the Office of
Native Affairs Policy, guided by the Native Nations Communications Task
Force (NNCTF), to advise on policy matters. If financially able, tribes
travel to Washington, D.C. to visit the FCC offices and submit ex parte
filings. There are annual, regional, FCC tribal consultations that can
be many states away. On occasion, the FCC Chairman and Commissioners
travel to Indian Country to listen to tribal experiences and experience
the landscape, which is an extremely powerful engagement for both
parties. While not an FCC communication directly, tribes are supposed
to hear about FCC subsidized deployments on their lands through the
obligation of Eligible Telecommunication Carriers to engage with the
Tribes they serve on an annual basis.
The FCC recently demonstrated positive Tribal engagement when it
established a Tribal Priority Window for licensing Educational
Broadband Service spectrum in the 2.5 GHz band. This has included a
substantial tribal training schedule in advance of the opening of the
Tribal Priority Window and an attempt to build useful data mining
tools. Additionally, the six-month window length reflects FCC
responsiveness to the tribes' recommendation for a longer window to
encourage increased tribal participation and success. My hope is that
this precedent permanently sets the norm for all future spectrum
auctions. Perhaps this could be codified through the rulemaking process
to include a Tribal Priority Window, tribal input on window lengths and
other process mechanics, custom data tools development, and tribal
outreach specifications.
Question 1a. What are ways you think this relationship can be
improved and more collaborative?
Answer. The FCC-Tribal relationship can be improved through a long
and consistent track record. To further develop this path, the FCC can
build on the positive engagement of the 2.5 GHz Tribal Priority Window
and to implement the recommendations issued on September 18, 2019 in
the NNCTF report titled, ``Improving and Increasing Broadband
Deployment on Tribal Land''. The report includes unique challenges and
nuanced approaches to working with tribes to deploy advanced
communication infrastructure.
Additionally, the FCC can demonstrate that the Office of Native
Affairs and Policy is fully staffed and financially supported to
complete the scope of its duties to develop policies to address the
lack of adequate communication services on tribal lands, plan and lead
outreach to increase awareness of, and participation in Commission
initiatives, and most importantly, ensuring that native voices are
included in the decisionmaking processes. Question the placement of
ONAP within the FCC to ascertain whether its current placement under
the Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau warrants enough authority
to complete its mission, or whether it should be elevated within the
FCC organizational chart.
In light of the fact that spectrum acquisition is a complex
regulatory process, it appears to me that success is greatly increased
with access to specialized attorneys, consultants, and knowledgeable
internal staff. This is an extremely high bar, and barrier to entry,
for Tribes with limited staff and financial resources. In lieu of a
one-time `trainings' perhaps a FCC program could be developed for
Tribal staff at various levels, policy for Tribal leaders and
attorneys, managing subsidies/reporting for Tribal accountants,
business development for Tribal planners and IT departments, etc.
The recommendations cited by the NNCTF in ``Improving and
Increasing Broadband Deployment of Tribal Land'' provide expert Tribal
feedback on many FCC matters. Several of the recommendations hinge on
tribal collaboration and engagement to resolve or prevent issues with
carriers that impinge on a tribe's ability to adequately self-govern or
to deploy their own communication services. FCC responsive to implement
the following recommendations acknowledge and affirm the Tribal effort
to work with Commission to improve outcomes on Tribal lands.
Recommendations: Spectrum
``Spectrum auctions are costly and, as discussed above, access to a
Line of Credit is extremely difficult for Tribes because a Tribe cannot
collateralize federal assets. Tribes want access to spectrum over their
lands, but simply cannot compete with commercial carriers in spectrum
auctions. Consistent with our recommendations about broader use of
Tribal Priorities, we recommend use of Tribal Priority windows in
future spectrum allocation decisions.''
``Partitioning licensed service areas through secondary markets
could also provide an opportunity for Tribes to gain access to
spectrum. Commission encouragement of negotiations between spectrum
license holders and Tribes would also be highly beneficial. Tribes also
have difficulty gaining information on who owns spectrum licenses,
which presents an obvious barrier to even beginning discussions. A
process needs to be established for federal oversight of spectrum
disaggregation and partitioning discussions or negotiations for
subleasing. There also should be a fair leasing option when spectrum
holders are not interested in building out but want to continue holding
the license or other approaches such as build-or-divest.''
''We also support establishment of Tribal Lands Bidding Credits for
use where spectrum is auctioned to encourage wireless carriers to serve
Tribal lands, and giving a credit to the bid amount during auctions as
an incentive to build out of a wireless network to underserved or
unserved Tribal lands. Going forward, we recommend that the Commission
include in any Tribal Bidding Credits specific, enforceable
requirements for the scale and timing of buildout on Tribal lands,
including giving Tribal entities more say in these matters.''
NNCTF Recommendations: Statutory Obstacles
ETC Status
Section 214 of the Communications Act should be amended to
open the role for designation of eligible telecommunications
carrier (ETC) status to include Tribes to better reflect the
sovereignty of the Tribe over Tribal lands. At the very least,
the ETC designation process should include consultation with
Tribal Nations regarding any plans to serve Tribal lands.
NNCTF Recommendations: Regulatory Barriers
Build-Out Requirements
Regulatory build-out requirements should be modified so that
Tribes are served earlier in the process rather than at the end
of the build-out period and build out to Tribal lands is
required.
The Commission should consider explicitly linking receipt of
Tribal bidding credits in USF reverse auctions by providers
serving Tribal lands to meeting deployment obligations on Those
Tribal lands.
Bidding Credits
Receipt of bidding credits in USF reverse auctions by all
providers serving Tribal lands should be explicitly linked to
meeting deployment obligations on those Tribal lands.
Going forward, we recommend that the Commission include in
any Tribal Bidding Credits specific, enforceable requirements
for the scale and timing of build-out on Tribal lands,
including giving Tribal entities more say in these matters.
Consistent with our earlier recommendation, we support equal
treatment of future build-out requirements for those who have
held spectrum for more than 10 years and have failed to build
out.
Finally, the FCC can proactively address on-going, lingering, or
non-action on issues that perpetuates notions of mistrust or neglect by
carriers receiving FCC subsides without noticeable network upgrades or
service improvements on Tribal lands. For instance, the FCC can
strengthen the integrity of the annual ETC tribal meeting obligation.
Enforcement should not allow an ETC to send a form letter to a tribe or
to send a 400-page retracted document that can only be fullyviewed by
signing a non-disclosure agreement. A subsidy period could begin with a
joint plan submitted by the Tribe and carrier that includes network
buildout timeframes and benchmarks. The annual meeting can review and
monitor the plan. As true partners, we can design better solutions
together.
As a relative newcomer to FCC spectrum acquisition, I am grateful
to have proven success and look forward to growing the number of Tribal
deployments that utilize spectrum. I have also seen success broadband
deployments on Tribal lands through FCC School and Libraries E-rate
programs. I believe that these are opportunities for Tribes and that
despite regulatory complexities forge ahead. Thank you for your
attention to this important topic and I hope that the dialogue
continues and the partnerships continue to grow.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Jon Tester to
Belinda Nelson
Question. Consultation with Tribes is critical to improving our
processes, and ultimately ensuring they are driving the bus on this
issue. This empowers tribes to engage in solutions that work best for
their communities. How has the FCC consulted with Tribes and how is
their feedback incorporated into improving spectrum availability on
Tribal lands? What are ways you think this relationship can be improved
and more collaborative?
Answer.
The Federal Communications Commission's Current Consultation with
Tribes
Native American tribes know their ancestral lands like the back of
their hands. Tribes have great affinity for certain areas that hold
sacredness in their history. Sacredness to tribes is loosely based on
or defined as ``where something happened''. If modern America could
define a piece of land as sacred, it might be the land where the Twin
Towers stood in New York City, or it could be the hallowed ground where
the plane crashed in Pennsylvania during the Sept. 11th attack on
America. Emotions are tied to these sites. For tribes, these sites are
held in reverence and are not removed from their memories over any
period of time. In the lives of Native Americans, events that made an
area sacred, remain very much alive today.
In practical terms, Native American tribes know the issues
pertaining to their respective tribes. They know their geographical
landscape and their economic conditions. They know what health issues
afflict them, they know the social ills affecting their citizens and
they know what methods they used to overcome their challenges and what
successes they had.
The consultation of the Federal Communications Commission, (FCC)
consists of outreach by the Office of Native Affairs and Policy,
(ONAP), to tribes on a regional basis. Information is presented on
various policies and programs, i.e., Lifeline, E-Rate, and Rural
Healthcare. Telecom 101 classes are usually part of the information
shared at the outreach. The format of the outreach is usually a
monologue and not a dialogue.
During the Accelerated Wireless Broadband Deployment NPRM, Chairman
Pai visited a minimal number of tribes and sought feedback on the
subject. During this consultation, tribes informed him of their
concerns of deployment over their respective lands, concern of trespass
of sacred sites, the lack of carriers for providing information on
deployment projects and the general lack of consultation by the FCC on
policy for tribal lands. The format of these meetings appeared to be
more in line with the true meaning of consultation. A dialogue was
established and information was exchanged, however it is unknown how
this was documented and incorporated into policy for the betterment of
tribes.
Establishing a Collaborative and Structured Process
The FCC has oversight of the policies over tribal lands and a more
structured process should be in place. In the case, where tribes were
``consulted'' by the FCC during the subject of accelerating wireless
broadband deployment over tribal lands, if an oversight structure was
in place, perhaps the broadband deployment would have been successful.
Carriers would have met their deployment objective and more
importantly, tribes may have obtained access to wireless broadband.
Currently, meaningful consultation does not appear to be the
practice of the FCC. Merely going through the motion to meet with
tribes has not served the FCC as the agency with regulatory oversight
nor has it served the tribes with meeting their needs for broadband
deployment. A meaningful dialogue with tribes is necessary to establish
a business relationship. This can be accomplished by utilizing ONAP.
Establishing a separate budget for ONAP will enable them to work with
carriers and tribes and coordinate with the Bureaus of the Federal
Communications Commission. ONAP can be mandated to produce annual
reports on their work with tribes on various issues. The report can be
derived from documentation of meetings with carriers and tribes, based
on a structured process.
My points are that tribes know firsthand of their respective issues
facing their citizens. Currently, there does not seem to be a dialogue
between the FCC and tribes. If there were a structured consultation
policy in place, that tribes' input could be put to productive use,
(within policies).
[all]