- BUSINESS MEETING
[Senate Hearing 116-18]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-18
BUSINESS MEETING
=======================================================================
MEETING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
APRIL 10, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Environment and Public Works
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-349 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming, Chairman
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware,
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
Ranking Member
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
MIKE BRAUN, Indiana
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
KIRSTEN GILLIBRAND, New York
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
RICHARD SHELBY, Alabama
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JONI ERNST, Iowa
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
Richard M. Russell, Majority Staff Director
Mary Frances Repko, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
APRIL 10, 2019
OPENING STATEMENTS
Barrasso, Hon. John, U.S. Senator from the State of Wyoming......
1
Carper, Hon. Thomas R., U.S. Senator from the State of Delaware..
3
LEGISLATION AND ADDITIONAL MATERIAL
Text of S. 383, the Utilizing Significant Emissions with
Innovative Technologies Act, or the USE IT Act.................
12
Text of S. 747, the Diesel Emissions Reduction Act of 2019.......
43
Text of S. 1061, the John F. Kennedy Center Reauthorization Act
of 2019........................................................
46
Committee Resolutions:
Lease, Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug
Administration, Jamaica, NY. PNY-01-QU19...................
50
Alteration, Major General Emmett J. Bean Federal Center,
Indianapolis, IN. PIN-1703-IN18............................
52
Alteration, James C. Corman Federal Building, Van Nuys, CA.
PCA-0007-LA18..............................................
53
Alteration, Federal Office Building, Seattle, WA. PWA-0036-
SE18.......................................................
54
Alteration, Pacific Highway U.S. Land Port of Entry, Blaine,
WA. PWA-00BN-BL18..........................................
55
Alteration, Anthony J. Celebrezze Federal Building,
Cleveland, OH. POH-0192-CL18...............................
56
Alteration, IRS Service Center, Ogden, UT. PUT-0036-OG18.....
57
Building Acquisition, Department of Transportation
Headquarters, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, Southeast,
Washington, DC. PDC-0689-WA19..............................
58
Letter to Senators Barrasso and Carper from the American Road and
Transportation Builders Association, April 24, 2019............
59
BUSINESS MEETING
----------
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 10, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Environment and Public Works,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m. in
room 406, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. John Barrasso
(Chairman of the Committee) presiding.
Present: Senators Barrasso, Carper, Inhofe, Capito, Braun,
Rounds, Sullivan, Boozman, Ernst, Cardin, Whitehouse, and Van
Hollen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN BARRASSO,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING
Senator Barrasso. Welcome to this large crowd of paid staff
and blood relatives. We are happy to have you here today.
[Laughter.]
Senator Barrasso. Good morning. I call this business
meeting to order. Today we are going to consider three bills
and eight General Services Administration resolutions.
Senator Carper and I have agreed that we will begin voting
at 10:15. At that time, I am going to call up the items on the
agenda. We will not debate the items on the agenda while we are
voting. Instead, we will debate the items on the agenda before
we begin voting at 10:15. I am also happy to recognize any
members who wish to make speeches or talk about the bills after
the voting concludes.
The first bill we will consider is S. 383, the Utilizing
Significant Emissions with Innovative Technologies Act, or the
USE IT Act. The USE IT Act is a bipartisan piece of legislation
to promote carbon capture technologies that take carbon out of
the air and to find productive uses for it.
Carbon capture, utilization, and sequestration are needed
to reduce the impacts of climate change, while also delivering
abundant and affordable energy to the Nation.
You don't have to take my word for it; across the board,
carbon capture is seen as a critically important technology.
State governments, industry stakeholders, labor organizations
like the Utility Workers Union of America, and environmental
groups like the Audubon Society or The Nature Conservancy all
recognize the importance of carbon capture.
At our hearing in February to consider the USE IT Act, we
heard about the critical role of carbon capture technologies in
addressing climate change. The Clean Air Task Force testified,
``Carbon capture, utilization, and storage and direct air
capture will play a crucial role in decarbonizing our global
energy system.''
Now, I have repeatedly said the best way to combat climate
change is through innovation, not Government taxation or
regulation. The USE IT Act will continue to cement the United
States as a global innovation leader in carbon capture. The
United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has
recognized the pivotal role that carbon capture can play in
meeting its climate targets.
My support for climate innovation does not rest on carbon
capture alone. We have worked together in a bipartisan manner
on this Committee to support the most reliable zero emission
source of energy that we have, which is nuclear energy. Last
year we passed the Nuclear Energy Innovation and Modernization
Act. We must continue to address fundamental issues to allow
nuclear energy to grow in the future, issues like the need to
properly manage and dispose of spent nuclear fuel at Yucca
Mountain.
The second bill we are going to consider today is another
important step forward in addressing emissions that contribute
to climate change, S. 747, the Diesel Emissions Reduction Act
of 2019, or DERA. Since Congress first created the program in
2005, it has enjoyed broad bipartisan support. This legislation
would reauthorize the Diesel Emissions Reduction Act through
fiscal year 2024.
I want to thank the Ranking Member and his staff for his
leadership on this program throughout the years. The program
has been one of the most cost efficient clean air programs.
Like the USE IT Act, the Diesel Emissions Reduction Act
supports innovation led solutions to environmental protection.
Upgrading diesel engines not only reduces nitrogen oxide,
but also emissions of both black carbon and carbon dioxide.
Black carbon is a component of particulate matter that has a
global warming potential that may be thousands of times higher
than carbon dioxide over a 20-year timeframe.
So, today we are moving two bipartisan bills out of this
Committee that are going to reduce emissions that contribute to
climate change, and there will be more to come. The USE IT Act
and the Diesel Emissions Reduction Act of 2019 each passed our
Committee by voice vote in the last Congress. I urge my
colleagues to once again support passage of these bills today,
as we work it across the full Senate and get signed into law.
When we work together, we have shown that we can promote
American leadership, grow our economy, and lower emissions.
The third bill we will consider is S. 1061, the John F.
Kennedy Center Reauthorization Act of 2019, which reauthorizes
funding for the Kennedy Center. Last Congress, this Committee
approved this legislation by a voice vote, and the Senate
passed it by unanimous consent.
We will also consider eight resolutions to approve
prospectuses providing for General Services Administration
lease acquisition and alteration.
After Ranking Member Carper gives his opening statement and
other members make remarks, at 10:15 we will proceed to vote on
the items on our agenda provided we have a reporting quorum.
After we finish voting, I will be happy to recognize other
members who wish to speak.
I would now like to turn to our Ranking Member for comments
that he might like to make.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. THOMAS R. CARPER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF DELAWARE
Senator Carper. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Walking up from the train station this morning, I came out
of Union Station and looked up Delaware Avenue to the Capitol,
and I saw sunshine, I saw blue skies. The Capitol was just
glistening in the sunlight. It was like what Christoph Toulouse
would say, a top 10 day. It is just a glorious day.
And at a time when there is a fair amount of diversity and
disagreement in our country, and frankly around the world, and
our Government, and to some extent, in this Senate, there is
something to celebrate, and that is when we can find common
ground and work together to address some big challenges that we
face on this planet, so I am happy to be here with all of you,
grateful to the Chairman for convening us today.
I want to follow up on his remarks with remarks of my own
about the two pieces of legislation that he was talking about
that he and I have collaborated on, along with Sheldon
Whitehouse, along with Jim Inhofe and others on this Committee,
and one of those is the Diesel Emissions Reduction Act, known
as DERA, and the Utilizing Significant Emissions with
Innovative Technologies, known as the USE IT Act.
Both of these bills are good for our environment; they are
also good for our economy, and they are important in our fight
against climate change.
Some of our newer colleagues on our Committee have not
heard this story before, so I am going to share it with you. I
think it was 2005. George Voinovich, from Ohio--Republican,
former Governor and Senator from Ohio, from Cleveland--came to
me one day. He said, I would like to share with you an idea, a
legislative idea that actually reduces emissions, harmful
emissions from diesel engines. I said, how big a problem is
that, and he said, well, there are millions of them. He said,
the old diesel engines, the good thing about them is they last
a long time; the bad thing about them is that they last a long
time, and they spew out all kinds of stuff.
We have all sat at a stop light before and had a big diesel
truck before us or besides us. When the light changes, the
trucks hits out all this black stuff that comes out of their
emissions. As the Chairman has mentioned, some of it is black
carbon, and whether you believe in climate change or not, it is
bad stuff. It can be as much as 1,000 times worse for our
environment, for our climate than regular carbon dioxide.
They used to ask Willie Sutton, why do you rob banks--back
in the Great Depression--and he said because that's where the
money is. Well, carbon emissions, diesel emissions are where a
lot of the bad stuff is coming from.
George said to me, he said, Tom, the nice thing about this
technology is you can actually put it on existing diesel
engines, boats, cars, trucks, locomotives, and he said it will
reduce emissions by as much as 90 percent. I said, well, that
is great. He said, not only that, the technology is developed
by Corning, up in New York, so it is American technology.
We can do good things for our environment, for our planet,
and we can create jobs using American technology and sell the
technology around the world, and this legislation has been,
with Jim Inhofe's strong support and leadership, we have taken
this up, we have reauthorized this every several years, and we
are prepared to do that again.
I would just say there are a number of our colleagues on
this Committee are cosponsors of this legislation. For those
who aren't, I would urge you to join us; it is one of those
great intersections between cleaner air, better environment,
and creating jobs, American jobs. For me, that is the Holy
Grail where we want to go to.
I want to thank all of our colleagues for being a big part
of not only reauthorizing the Diesel Emissions Reduction Act,
but actually making it better.
I was invited by Rob Portman to speak at a staff retreat
last week, staff here on Capitol Hill, and it includes a lot of
George Voinovich folks, alums, and I know that George is
looking down today, very excited and happy with what we are
doing.
The USE IT Act that we are voting on today, as the Chairman
mentioned, is intended to support widespread development and
deployment of carbon capture, utilization, and sequestration
technologies, also known as CCUS. This includes making smart
investments in direct air capture, which sucks carbon dioxide
right out of the air.
I know some of this technology is nascent. I think they are
doing more with it in Europe than we have been doing, but I
like to say there is no silver bullet as we try to address
these issues, but there are a lot of silver BBs, and a big one
can be figuring out how to suck carbon right out of the air,
and that is what we are pushing with this legislation in the
USE IT Act.
I hasten to add that DERA and the USE IT Act cannot be the
only climate actions that our Committee takes. We need broad,
bold climate action to protect our planet.
That said, I do appreciate that now, at a time when our
country is looking for ways to create jobs, achieve healthier
air, and a safer climate, cleaning up dirty diesel engines and
deploying CCUS are two of many ways we can achieve these goals.
That leads us to our third bipartisan bill, which would
reauthorize funding for the Kennedy Center. I want to thank our
Chairman for reintroducing this legislation. I am happy to co-
sponsor the bill along with Senators Capito and Cardin. This
bill is another excellent example of what we can accomplish
when we work together to get things done, and I look forward to
collaborating, Mr. Chairman, with you and all of our colleagues
on this Committee, as well as our friends in the House and
Senate to get it to the President's desk.
Today we are considering eight GSA prospectuses and
resolutions. These are not controversial prospectuses; they
have been identified as high priorities by the GSA.
I would ask for the opportunity just to enter into the
record the rest of my statement.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Barrasso. Without objection, we look forward to
entering that into the record.
[The prepared statement of Senator Carper was not received
at time of print.]
Senator Barrasso. Senator Inhofe.
Senator Inhofe. Just real briefly. I always relish the time
that Senator Carper and I can agree on something, and to have
three bills in one meeting, I am excited about it.
Now, where are your Democrats? We need a quorum.
[Laughter.]
Senator Barrasso. We had announced that we would vote at
10:15, and we are a little short of that number. A number of
Democrats were here, but right now the Attorney General is
testifying in another committee, as is the Secretary of State
in a different committee, so I know people have been running in
and out. We hope to be able to vote in a few seconds, when a
couple more members will show up, so we will just stand in
recess for a little while to wait for that.
Senator Carper. I have asked my staff to reach out far and
wide to get as many Democrats here as quickly as we can, so
thank you for your patience.
[Recess.]
Senator Barrasso. Well, now that members of the Committee
have arrived, we will vote on the items of today's agenda.
The Ranking Member and I have agreed to vote on the three
bills and eight General Services Administration resolutions en
bloc by voice vote. Members may choose to have their votes
recorded for a specific item in that bloc after the voice vote.
The Ranking Member and I have further agreed that S. 1061,
the John F. Kennedy Center Reauthorization Act of 2019, which
was introduced on April 8th, replaces the text that was
circulated with a notice on April 5th. This introduced bill is
identical to the text that was circulated.
I would now like to call up S. 383, the Utilizing
Significant Emissions with Innovative Technologies Act; S. 747,
the Diesel Emissions Reduction Act of 2019; S. 1061, the John
F. Kennedy Center Reauthorization Act of 2019; and eight
General Services Administration resolutions en bloc.
I move to approve and report S. 383, S. 747 and S. 1061
favorably to the Senate and approve eight GSA resolutions en
bloc.
Is there a second?
Senator Inhofe. Second.
Senator Carper. Second.
Senator Barrasso. All those in favor say aye.
[Chorus of ayes.]
Senator Barrasso. All those opposed, say nay.
[No audible response.]
Senator Barrasso. In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes
have it.
We have now approved S. 383, S. 747, S. 1061, which will be
reported favorably to the Senate. We have also approved eight
GSA resolutions.
The voting part of the meeting having finished, I am happy
to recognize any member who wishes to make a statement on any
of the legislation or resolutions we have just approved.
Seeing none, I have a number of letters of support for the
legislation and I ask unanimous consent to enter into the
record statements of support for the USE IT Act from the
National Mining Association and the National Wildlife
Federation.
[The referenced information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. I also ask unanimous consent to enter
into the record a letter of support of the Diesel Emissions
Reduction Act of 2019 from the U.S. Chamber of Congress.
Without objection, it is done.
[The referenced information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. I ask unanimous consent that the staff
have authority to make technical and conforming changes to each
of the matters approved today.
With that, our business meeting is concluded, and we are
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:25 a.m. the Committee was adjourned.]
[Text of legislation and additional material follow:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]